THE Learned Man Defended and Reformed.

A Discourse of singular Politeness, and Elocution; seasonably asserting the
Right of the Muses; in opposition to the many Enemies which in this Age
Learning meets with, and more especially those two IGNORANCE and VICE.

In two Parts.

Written in Italian by the happy Pen of P. Daniel BARTOLVS, S. J.

Englished by Thomas Salusbury.

Scientia est de numero bonorum honorabilium. Aristot. l. 1. De Anima. Scio
neminem posse been vivere sine Sapientia studio. Seneca Epist. ad Luci.
Pulchrum est in omni Artium genere excere. Sabellic. lib. 10. de cultu and
fructu Philos. With two Tables one General, the other Alphabetical.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, and are to be sold by Thomas Dring at
the George in Fleetstreet near St. Dunstans Church, 1660.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE MONK, Captain General of all the Armies of England,
Scotland and Ireland; one of the Generals of the Naval Forces of this Nation;
Major General of the City of London, and an Honorable Member of the Council of
State, etc.
Great SIR,
Grandeur of it self is Honorable, and Learning in it self Venerable; but
when they both con-center in one person they are highly Admirable. Dignity
single, says the Quanto grandior, tanto vanior. S. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
Father, The greater it is, the Vainer: Learning alone, experience proves to be
obnoctious, to every Calpestation: But in their happy Conjunction, this
receives Protection from that, and that derives Beatam vi^a^ sapientia
perfectem effecit S^o^^a Epist. ad ^^^ium. N^stus est, cui sapientia magis
conveniat, quj principi, cua^us doctrina omni^^^ debet pro^esse subjectis.
Vegetius praef. l. 1. de re militari.
Perfection from this. And as the Ancients did Honor to the one in Hercules,
so to the other in Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7. c 37.
Hypocrates; whom the Proto-Aristocratia of Athens worshipped as Hercules: Ego
eos amo (dixit Sig. sm. ^mp.) quos virtutibus and doct^ina caeteros antecell^re
video. Baptist. Ignat. In tota re militari nihil utilius, nihil clarius Duce
erudito. Guil. Salisburiensis lib. 15.
But never could we find a worthier Subject wherein to Honor both, than your
Excellency.

It Is you (Brave Sir) it is you I say that have Moraliz'd the Labors of the Poets
Hercules; strangling the Dragons of Tyranny, and Heresy, if not in your, yet
their Infancy. For your Glory, My Lord, was reserved the Decollating those
Hydra's, whose Heads, were but multiplied by the opposition of others:
Cauterizing their Courages by severe and seasonable Proclamations. You it is,
that (in this resembling also our other Champion of your Auspitious Name) have
removed that Dragon of Armed Villainy which watched our Hesperidean Garden of
Parliament, and kept that Golden Branch under Restraint, which promised us the
Elizean Joys of Peace. Your Heroic Arm has un-kennel'd those Cacus.
Sons of Vulcan, Men of Iron, whose sly and crafty conveyance rendered their
Footsteppes inscrutable, till your Excellency trace't them upon their
Retrogradatious. In short, your Lordships Valor has flayed the Nemean Lion,
slain the Erymanthean Boar, dislodged the Men-devouring Diomedes, strangled
Antheus; in their Morals of Usurpation, Cruelty, Oppression, and Covetousness,
which upon your Herculean Achievements have lost their strength: to conclude,
it is your invicible Fortitude, has rescued Theseus and Alcestes, Nobility and
Innocence, from Hell, in delivering many Gallant and unjustly-imprisoned
Gentlemen from their Chains: And assisted Atlas, in helping our Patriots to
support the Globe of Government. But yet, most Generous Hero, give me leave
humbly to remember you, that, if my Mythology can count twelve, the number of
your Labors are not complete, whilst the Such foreign Protestants call our
Churches as now abused. Dr. Bergier en Histoire Presbyt.
Augean Stables are uncleansed, and Hellish Cerberus holds on his yelping.
These two taken away, Mercury the Pindar. in 6. Olymp.
Rewarder of Hero's, and Patron of Scholars, shall Crown your Valiant Temples
with the Panegyricks of Learned Pens, taken from his Wing: and this being too
small a Compensation for your Complicated Conquests, you shall (as In Orat. pro
Muraen.
Cicero affirms of Alcides) by your Arms scale Heaven.

And if Hyppocrates had the Honor of an Hercules for clearing his Country of a
general Contagion, none will deny you the Honor of an Hyppocrates, whilst
your Prudence has retriv'd our Religion, and Learning, Liberties and
Proprieties from the most apparent Ruin that ever threatened them: Therein
showing that your Victorious Hand is as dexterous in Acts of Beneficence, as
terrible in Deeds of Justice.

This glorious One, of Redeeming your Country from the vilest of Slavery, that
ever a War undertaken for Freedom cajoul'd men into, is every way so
Stupendous, that, leaving the Story of it to Enrich Volumes, I shall only hint
that you Timed it, when we were on the point of Rivetting our Chains to
perpetuity, and when we were like those Wretches under the Tyranny of Marganore
divinely described by Ariosto.

Ariosto l. 37. Stanza 88 del suo Orlando.
Ma il popolo fac^a come e piufanno, Ch'vbediscon piu a quei, che piu in odio
hanno, etc.

In English thus. The Vulgar Rout, led by example, pay
Observance blind to such as most they hate;
And let the Tyrant at his pleasure stay,
Banish, Degrade of Honor, Sequestrate*
Cause none for fear dares to his friend impart
How much the common Ruin grieves his heart.
But vengeance though it in it is pace be slow,
Pays home at last with so much heavier blow.


And for the Manner, it is best represented by Loyal 1 Samuel 15. 32 etc. 17. 5.
Hushai, temporizing with Absalom; whereby you have happily frustrated the
Councils of Achitophel, who sullenly retired, deserting his Machivilianismes.

And so victorious has your Excellency been with a handful of Men (animated by
a Righteous Cause) against a Potent Enemy, that, as if their power had been
given them for an Accession to your Glory, you have most justly merited with
all sober Christians the great Title of Orthodox Athenasius; who was Theodoret.
Malleus Haeraeticorum, and are become Herculem Fannaticorum.

There rests no more, unless I may crave leave humbly to inculcate against
that common Salus populi suprema lex est. of which Doct. Sanderson has lately
writ at large.
Maxim, which mistaken, has wrought us so much confusion; That, in the great
work (you are upon) of settling our Peace, Toll jura Imperatornm, quis audet
dicere, haec villa est mea, meus est iste servus, mea est haec domus? D.
August. in S. Joannem.
Prerogative is the best securer of Propriety. And that Principatus, quem metus
extorsit, and si actibus, vel moribus non offendat: ipsius tamen i^^tii sui est
perni^iosus exemplo. Leo in De^ret.
Pope was herein infallible, who maintains (as also Greg. Magn. in Moral. Tho.
Aqvin. in lib. de Regimine Principum. Anton. in Sum. part. 3 Canon.
Ecclesiast. Distinct. 8. in cap quo jure.
all that speak thereof) that Authority cannot be Just, if Illicitly acquired.
And also humbly to beg, as your Defense of Boni Principi est ac religiose
ecclesias contritas atque concissas restaurare, novasque adificare, and Dei
sacerdotes hononorare atque tueri. Marcel. in Decret.
Religion; so your Countenance for Reges cum Phylosophos in honor habent, and
se, and illos ornant. Plutarch. ad Principem incrudit.
Learning; than which there cannot be a more Noble and certain way to Agrandize
you. And because some are persuaded that the Muses agree not with Mars; let me
only name unto you for a confutation of them, such Honorable Princes, and
great Captains, as Alexander, Hanibal, and Caesar abroad; Albinus, Beau-Clerk,
Edward 3d, Humph. D. of Gloucester, at home, whose Literature is as famous as
their Valor; and that as great, as can be paralleled in any who ever.

But herein to say more, would be to entrench upon the Design of my Author;
whose Vindication of Learning, as I have been able to Transcribe, it, I humbly
lay at your Lordships Feet: Promising to my Ambition no other in so high a
Dedication, than a welcome reception, with such whose Eyes greedily are drawn
by any thing, which is inscribed with your Honorable Name; which happily for any
desert of it is own in this Age (so uncharitable to Learning) it might not
otherwise find.

Now, My Lord, if I have herein been too Free with your Modesty, or too Saucy
with your Merits, I appeal to your Clemency, and plead that my Crime is an
Effect of your Lordships Virtues, of which no man is a more obsequious Admirer,
than

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Thomas Salusbury.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL WILLIAM PRINNE ESQUIRE, A Bencher of the Honorable Society
of Lincoln's Inn.
HONORED SIR,
IF the Roman Fortitude of Laberius who in a Syrian disguise, did in the than
Debauched Senate complain of Tyranny (Porto quirites libertatem perdidimus)
has merited such applauds of a worthy Patriot; what Englishman can without
unpardonable Ingratitude forget to Honor Mr. PRINNE as Pater Patriae for his
Courageous, Public, and Constant asserting of our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; and giving us in the blackest night of Tyranny a Dedalian Clue
whereby to extricate our selves when to most Men's thoughts we were irrevocably
lost? No, SIR, Your Numerous and Nervous, Large, and Learned Volumes (which who
can reckon) have been so succesful in their Refutation of Errors, Reformation
of Vice, Regulation of Disorders, Restoration of Parliaments, and Laws, that I
must in Justice join you with Renowned General MONK, as the two Worthiest
Subjects of all Honor: For if his Generosity speaks him Herculem Anglorum,
your Erudition proclaims you Alcidem Literarum: If he be our Daring Marcellus,
you are our Grave Fabius; if he, our Active Caesar, you are our Eloquent
Cicero; and what his Valiant Sword has effected, your Learned Pen had
frequently advised. So that to conclude with the Exordium which one bestowed
upon Varro sui seculi, and Cicero Germaniae; quod ad arcana cujusque doctrinae
infinita lectione, and inusitataque memoria penetravit. Gifianus.
Erasmus; Where could I have chosen a safer Asylum, or properer Patrociny for
my Learned Man, than with a Gentleman of so vast Learning?

Therefore He is come in an English Dress, to entreat your hospitable
Reception of him as a Stranger, desiring you would not charge on Him the Lapses
of his Interpreter, and

Worthy Sir, Your very humble Servant THOMAS SALUSBURY.

TO THE READER.
I Must once more detein thy Curiosity from passing on to the Book it self,
till I have prepared thee with thus much by way of an Account of the Author,
and my design in the Conversion.

This Treatise came to my hands some years since in the Italian Tongue, under
the Name of P. DANIELO BARTOLI a If it be not Tautology, where to onr shame
they are all such.
Learned Jesuit, which when I had read, I found so Replenisht with Eloquence,
and driving so close home to his Argument that I fell upon Englishing it,
hoping thereby in some measure to benefit my Countrymen; For if manyare brought
to a disesteem of Learning (as is to be shrewly suspected) even by Learned
Jesuits themselves; who are said in strange disguises, (contradicting the old
Assertion, That Learning has no Foe but Ignorance,) Scientiam non habet
inimicum preter ignorantem.
with a more than Phalerian Cruelty, towound Learning with her own Weapons; and
to show their greatest Art, in declaiming against the Arts: Then, I say, see
here the true and undesembled Pourtraict of a Jesuit, pleading for that same
Human Learning, which others of the same Order, do (with Designs aimed higher
than this Innocent Handmaid) with so much suhtlety in our Climat oppose: thus
Retaliating upon them, their Learned Suicide of Learning, with this Jesuitical
Refutation of English Jesuitism.

Thus for the first Part, the second, which tends to the Reformation of
Scholars, I shall not speak of, least I seem to question their Apprehension;
but only commend it to their Practice as well as Reading.

I am now too nearly related to the Book, to enter into any particular
commendation of it: yet such is its esteem in the Italian Tongue, that several
promised it in ours: more especially one, a Gentleman of known Parts, who at
his Recreative hours, during his Residence with the Character of a Public
Minister in Italy, had taught it English; but that being several years since,
and upon exact enquiry not hearing farther of it, I have at last set it before
thee: Not so quaintly dressed, perhaps, as it might have been; but with as much
conformity to the Origal Sense, as could be given to it, by

T. S.

Learned Men defended. PART I.
The Introduction Learned Men not less Happy for being disrespected by the
Grandees of the World. page 1 An Essay of Understanding exemplified for a Taste
of the other Sciences, in the only Contemplation of the Heavens 15
Wisdom Happy though in Misery.
The Wise-Poor-Man 30 The Wise Exile 42 The Wise Prisoner. 57 The Wise Infirm.
66
Ignorance Miserable though in Prosperity.
Ignorance and Sanctity. 79 Ignorance and Dignity. 90 Ignorance and Profession
of Arms. 101. Ignorance and Riches. 112. The confusion of Ignorance, being
silenced in presence of better Speakers. 120
Learned Men Reformd. PART II.
The Introduction.
PLAGIANISME.
Plagiaries that several ways Appropriate the pains of other Studies. page 130
That we ought not to Steal from others, but Invent new Arguments of our own.
143 How we may Honesty and Commendably Filch, from others Writings. 160
LASCIVIOUSNESS.
The Infamous Profession of Lascivious Poetry. 172 The weak Apologies of
Obscene Poets. 179 Of the Good use of Bad Books. 190 A Paranaesis to VVriters
of Immodest Poems. 202
DETRACTION.
The Inclination of the Genius, and abuse of the Wit to the Defaming of
others. 211 He that erred in VVriting should not resute his Confutation: And he
that is Ignorant himself should not undertake to correct, or condemn others.
219
SELF-CONCEIT.
The esteem of a Man's own Knowledge with dispraise of others. 243 Two great
evils of Misbelievers; To search matters of Faith with the curiosity of
Philosophy, and to believe matters of Philosophy with the certainty of Faith.
253
SELF-DECEIT.
The Folly of such, who pretend to study little, and know much.
IMPRUDENCE.
The unprofitable endeavors of him that studies against the Inclination of his
Genius. 274 Little credit to be given to the Signs of Ingenuity taken from the
Physiognomy. 284 The original cause of the Excellency and Diversity of Wits;
and the Various Inclinations of the Genius. 292
AMBITION.
The Folly of such, who out of a Desire to seem Learned, publish their
Ignorance in Print. 305 The unfortunate pains of such who Study, and Write
matters wholly unprofitable. 316
AVARICE.
That he is guilty of the Ignorance of many, who might benefit many by the
Press, and neglects it, 325 The incomparable Felicity of good Authors that
appear in Print. 333
OBSCURITY.
Ambition and Confusion two Principles of Obscurity, Affected, and Natural. 341
That the Argument ought to be elected adequate to the Wit of him that
discusseth it 349 Sub-division and Desection of the whole Discourse. 356 The
Methodizing of the matter, called Sylva. 359 The Discouragement of those that
encounter with Difficulties at the beginning. 366 That we should vary our
Style, according to the various Subject of the Discourse. 371 Of the Style
called the Modern-Affected. 379 When the Indiscretion to use too Elegant, and
Polite a Style. 387 Of the Examination and Correction of our own Composures.
395 The Conclusion 395
All works some fault derive from Adams first offense, And these in this
correct, as those that change the sense. ERRATA.
Page 3 l. 24 r. days it is, p: 6 l. 2 r. Lamp, p. 13 l. 18 r. have I, p. 20 l.
11 r. Sun, p. 21 l 17 r. interrogares, p 31 l 19 r. Diapente, p. 34 l 2 r.
neque, p. 34 l 8 r. pearls? p. 35 l 5 r. either, id. r. or, p. 37 l 10 r. those
p 39 l 9 r. it, l 13 r. and environed, p. 44 l 5 r. ran, l 24 r. pen-feather'd,
p. 46 l 19 r. Sapiens, p. 29 l 3 r. me, p. 52 l 4 r. the rout, p. 53 l 13 r.
where, p. 59 l 17 r. revolve, p. 69 l 17 r. lowers, p. 70 l 22 r. to an unison,
p. 74 l 9 r. li^e, p* 76 l 4 r. he beheld, p. 81 l 21 r. lutum, p. 83 l 20 r.
Magne, p. 85 l 1 r. favor, l 14 r. give her also, p. 88 l 23 r. has, p. 89 l
5 r. pu^^itia, p. 59 l ^ r. as a ^eren, p. 96 l 16 r. of a great, p. 98 l 17 r.
wherewith, p. 99 l 11 r. needed, p. 104 l 10 r. sordid, l 11 r. give, p. 107 l
3 r. it, l 5 r. prizes, p. 107 l. ult. r. n oras, p. 108 l 13 r. parts? l 14 r.
lose, p: 110 l 1 r. afford; apt, l 10 r. saria, id. r. decora, p. 112 l 14 r.
Asses, p. 112, l 16 r. chaseth, l 21 r. preciosus, p. 119 l 1 r. a suc-p. 124
lult. r. vix, p. 138 l 17 r. an, p. 141 l 12 r. silch. p. 143, l 5 r. Ar^osto,
p. 153 l 24 r. wise, for such, p. 156 ult r. rewards, p. 157 l 18 r. accipimus.
Major. p. 160 l 18 r. condemn, p. 165 l 17 beauty? p. 169 penult. r. Leocras,
p. 170 l 7 r. them, p. 171 l 1 r. of as many, p. 174 l 2 r. persolvit honor,
p. 178 l 24 r. woman, p. 180 l 11 r Tragoedy. But p. 181 l 8 r. too, p. 183 l
16 r. with true tears, p. 184 l 26 r. endu'd, p. 186 l 16 r. mysteries, l 17 r.
Sileni, p. 190 l 19 r. there, p. 19; l 2 r. circumspect, p. 195 l 1 r. this is,
p 198 l 10 r. Maculas, p. 207 l 16 r. it in* p. 211 l 19 r its, p. 221 l 26 r.
that it is, p. 225 l 6 r. with, p. 227 l 2 r. Emperor, p. 228 l ult. r. and, p
232 l 16 r. ^cussus sum, p 236 l 11 r. redunderet, p. 241 l 19 r. vinceremus,
p, 247 l 13 r couched, p. 251 l 21 r. it is, p. 253 l 16 r. lives, p. 260 l 11
r. leader, p, 261 l 3 r. clamantes, p. 279 l 16 r. fora^u, p. 280 l 8 r. to, p.
282 penult. r. capessere, p. 287 l 7 r. Plotinus, p. 288 ult. r. Nem^an, p. 311
l 4 r. machaeram, l 6 r. gestitem, p. 314 l 15 r. edideris, p. 316 l 13 r.
find, p 318 l 1 r. the, p. 319 l 17 r ineptias, p 324 l. 21, Promotheus, p. 329
l 18 r sortientur, p. 331 l 3 r her, p. 340 l 20 r. praedicatorem, p. 342 l 11
r. most, p. 353 l 16 r tuned, p 354 sub fin. r. ambition, p 359 l 9 r him, p
360 l 2 r and caution, l 13 r murmr, p 377 l 3 r of every, p 383 l 25 r they
say, p 385 marg. r. is altro, p 387 r and erect arches, p 390 l 17 r and
banished, p 394 l 10 r. un-observed, p 396 l 25 r which are, p 397 l 11 r
sterility, p 398 l 5 r superstuous, p 399 l 20 r seeds.

The Reader will be ere-long presented from the same hand with the following
pieces ready for the Press.
1 The Secretary; in four Parts. 1 The History of Letters, their Original,
Progress, and Perfection. 2 The Art of Writing all the known Characters of
Ancient, and Modern use, reduced to Mathematical Proportions, and
Demonstrations. 3 Twenty several Species of Occult Writing, called Cipher,
touching also on the exposition of the Egyptian Heiroglyphicks. 4 Advertisement
Grammatical, Rhetorical, Moral, and Polytical, necessary for an Accomplished
Secretary.

II. Mathema^ical Collections and Translations of some of the Choicest pieces
of Archimedes, Tartaglia, Gallileus, Castelli, and Cavalerius, etc. chiefly
intended for a Complete discusion of the Doctrine, De insidentibus humido;
necessary in all Aquatick Operations.

III. Count Gualdo Priorati, his Excellent History of the Regency of the
Present Queen Mother of France; giving an accurate Account of all the memorable
Actions of France, England, etc. from 1647, to 1656.

The Introduction.
THe Calumnies of the Ignorant, and the Vices of the Learned; these are the two
Clouds that Eclips the Glory of Learning, and bereave this bright Sun of the
World of its spendor. The Ignorant hate Learning and cannot comprehend it; and
because they cannot comprehend it, they therefore hate it: for if Owls had
eyes, with which to look steadfastly on the Sun, they would be no longer Owls
but Eagles.

The others, ill using Learning, like as certain Malignant Stars that employ
the light as a conveyor of mortal influences, they render odious to the World,
the most goodly and innocent thing of the World. Thus the integrity of Learning
appears not so amiable, as it might, whilst some Men's Judgments, without all
Judgment deem her Criminal, and others Faults, to such as have not good Eyes,
represent her Culpable.

Wherefore then may it not be lawful for a man, (I say not endued with Wit,
which is not so much required, but only with common Reason) for the
vindication of Innocent Learning, to do as that Great (...)

wise. The Walls, Foundations, and remains of the ruins of that famous Temple
of Honor, into which the entrance was only through the Door of Desert, are
now-a-dayes so demolished, and interred in rubbish, that there does not remain
to memory so much as the place where it stood; nor the hope of raising it from
the contempt of its present ruins, to the glory of its passed grandeur.
Therefore though now Virtue striveth to ascend, it does not increase at all:
like certain stars near the Antarctick Pole, which having had sixty ages of
continual revolution, yet have reaped so little profit from their tedious
travail, as that they have not atteined to so much as a visible Ascension
above our Horizon. The Mountains which are gravid with Golden Ore, use not to
afford either Groves for delight, or herbs for food: Naught appears upon them
but barren cinders, and sterile sands; through which as bones, they discover
huge stones, possessing a certain shameful nudity, so that it would reflect as
a disgrace upon other Hills embroidered with herbs, and beautified with trees,
to be put in competition with them. This is the miserable lot of Virtue in the
World. By its Golden veins enclosed in its bowels, it is rendered as poor
without, as it is rich within. And yet she proves this verity, that Virtue and
Nakedness are Twins, born together at one birth, in the Terrestial Paradise,
and were never since separated and divided from one another. The Garments of
the body are more honored than the virtuous habits of the mind; it pro^iteth
not to have Sapience and Goodness in the breast as orient pearls, for if your
poor clothes make you seem a contemptible shell of Mother pearl, there is few
will look on you, and fewer esteem you.

All this holds true as well in Learning as in Virtue; for it also, as born
under the same Ascendant, has it for its fate: To it all favors are
Retrograde, all Benefactors absent, all the Aspects full of disrespect; and the
course of Fortune every way unfortunate.

Now-a-dayes is reputed amongst Miracles, Aelian Lib. 4.
for a Dionysius to become Driver of his Royal Chariot, Var. Histor.
to carry Plato upon the high way into Syracusa, and pride himself in the glory
of the fact, as if he had guided the Chariot of the Moon, or carried the Sun
in triumph. An Alexander Severus to cover a Ulpian Professor of the Law with
his Royal Mantle, and to make his Imperial Purple a Robe to honor, and a
shield to defend him. A Justinian, a Sigismond Emperors, and some others like
them, to make their Courts Academies, and to frequent Academies as their
Courts; holding dear the mortal life of those, from whom they receive in
recompense, an immortal life of their Name and Glory to Posterity.

These once so fruitful trees, are now become barren; affording neither fruit
to feed them, nor shadow to comfort them, in the Courts of Princes, more than
in the Cave of Aeolus; there are kept under lock and key those Zephirusses
fathers of Fecundity, and Winds proper to the Golden age; nor only is the
Custom lost, that Penes Sapientis Regnum sit, which Possido^ius said, Seneca
Epist. 9. 0
had been used per illo saeculo, quod aur^um perhibetur; but moreover also,
that Penes Reges sint Sapientes. Nor because the Books of learned men chance
sometimes to be read of Grandees, and exact from them praise and commendation,
must it therefore follow that the civil entertainment and honors they meet
withal, should reflect on the Authors; which is just as Lactantius says in
another case: They adore the Images of the Gods, but care not for the
Arti^icers that engraved them, they offer gifts to the Statues, and exact
tribute of the Statuary's, they honor the Stones as Divinities, and tramle on
those that formed them, De Orig. error c. 2. ex Senec.
as if they were Stones: Simulachra Deorum venerantur, fabros qui illa facere
contemnunt. Quid inter se tam contrarium, quam statuarium despicere, statuam
adorare? and eum ne in convivium quidem admittere qui tibi Deos faciat?

Fortunate Princes (says a great Duke of Millan) have Nets of Gold and Purple,
wherewith they since for men of great wisdom and worth, which are the
preciousest pearls that Heaven can bestow on Mortals; they have wealth
wherewith to purchase Wits exellent in every Profession of Learning, a
Merchandise only worthy of Princes.

Famous is the foolishness of a poor rich man, who knowing himself to be an
Owl, and desiring to become an Eagle, gave a great sum of money for the
Lanthorn by whose divine light Epictetus watching, became a Sun of Moral
Prudence. A Lanthorn its true, might give light to the paper, but not to the
unstanding, might give light to the eyes, but with what profit to the Student
if the mind be blind? Living Scholars are living Lanthorns, by the beams of
whose radient luster are discovered the features of Pallas, Conservatrix of
States, and Patroness of Princes: These are the eyes of which that is
verified, which was falsely reported of those of the Gorgons, that they could
lend them to one another; and with these a blind Prince may become a
Hundred-eyed- Argos, all eye: Nor ought they to be less, if the Aphorism hold
true in peace, which is read in Vigetius, concerning matters of War. Neque
quenquam magis decet, Proem Lib. 1.
vel meliora scire, vel plura quam principem, cujus doctrina omnibus potest
prodesse subjectis.

Before that King Dionysius would understand this, more for scorn then
curiosity, he demanded of Aristippus whence it was that Philosophers went to
rich men's houses to beg a livelihood, and the rich went not to the houses of
Philosophers to get Wisdom; Laert. in Arist.
and had this no less true, then ready answer: Because poor Philosophers know
what they stand in need of, and ignorant rich men do not.

That men of great learning are not born, but only as the Phoenix, one in five
hundred years: that there are not some who enrich the World with new inventions
in Letters and Arts; is not because the Ages are grown barren, or the places
unfruitful in Wits: The fault lies in great part upon them who open not the
Port to them that would launch out, nor show the lure to him that flies; for
there wants not some Minds with great Wings, and Wits with large Sails. He had
proved the same who said, The Poets and the Studious are few; (lack,
And when these beasts both food and Covert
They then their place of feeding do renew.


That there are not some with the noise of whose great Wisdom, Fame should make
the World ring, and strike it into dumb astonishment, it is the fault of great
men, which contrive not their Theaters with that advice, Lib. 5. cap. 3.
which Vitruvius gave, where he counsels that above all things, they have
regard to the building of the Theater, where Comedies are acted, and Music
recited so, that it be not deaf, and by that means the Musicians and Comedians
unprofitably spend their voice and pains. O how many like to cold and livelesse
vapors, ascend not a foot from the earth, which if they should meet with a
beneficient Sun that might infuse heat into their labors and advance them,
would shine like so many Stars: For the Vines fruitfulness is in great part to
be acknowledged to proceed from the support of the elm on wihch it rests.

To pass the terms of ordinary in any profession, and to attein to those of
excellent, is a task hard enough to require, and long enough to take up our
whole lives; Now what wonder is it, if there be none that will spend so much to
gain nothing, consuming their lives, and yet to get no more than a sufficiency
wherewith to maintein them alive.

Well-rigged-vessels far excel others in velocity; and being well calked,
surpass themselves, so that those which before moved dully, and as it were
against their wills, are now so yarre, that they rather seem to fly, then
sail. Favors infuse wit even into the ingenious themselves; and where the
fraught is a Golden Fleece, the Oars, as it was with Argo, move alone.

Finally, for Students to be forced to dispute every day with poverty, to
contrast every hour with her miseries, to divide their thoughts into a thousand
several places, whither their necessities call them; these are thorns, in which
Learning makes not her nest. He that will have his bees gather honey, must not
expose them to the violence of the winds: for where these have too much power,
those have none at all. In their flight from their hive to the flowers, and
from one flower to an other, in their return with the prey the winds if
impetuous, drive them out of their way, and transport them elsewhere. Such are
the thoughts of Scholars, for where other cares distract them, they can perfect
no excellent work they undertake.

And to say the truth, how can these two consist together, to perplex the brain
about maintenance, and employ it in study? Therefore well said he who ever he
was, and it holds not true of Poets only, but of all the Learned.

Soft nests, sweet food, and temperate gales of air,
The Swans desire; And none with pinching care
Come near Pernassus, and who still do chant
On nothing but their destiny and want,
Lose time and speech, and so grow hoarse at last, etc.
Demosthenes told the Athenians that it was an indecent sight to see the sacred
Gally Paralos formerly used only in the interests of Religion, Plutar.
and to waft the Priests to the sacrifices of Delphos, now profaned with vile
employments, they using it to carry wood and beasts; at which the very winds
murmurre, that drive it against their wills; and the Seas sob to see it so
changed from what it formerly was, and now ought to be. But are there not
things now-a-dayes little less indecent, that a soul of a sublime
understanding, and elevated intellectuals, sent into the World for universal
benefit, and more reverenced by heaven, then known by the Earth, is forced to
employ himself in an unworthy Trade, to purchase a subsistence; spending his
nobler thoughts to make provision against nakedness, thirst, cold, and famine.

The thoughts of such wander so from the course of their begun speculations,
breaking off where necessity importunately calls them; that they either very
much lose the thread of their design, or else arrive not half way to their
Journeys end; like that nimble footed Atalanta, which by going too much out of
the way to take up Hippomanes Golden Balls, was cast so far behind, as that
she was far out-gone in the end.

Praeterita est virgo duxit suae praemia victor. Metam.
Hence the Satirical Poet was so displeased with the House of Numitor, and
under this name with all the Courts of his time, seeing that beasts had place
and being where men, and (if it be lawful to say it,) more than men found it
not; for there wanted not meat to fill the paunch of a voracious Lion day by
day; and yet there was not bread to satisfy the hunger of one meager Poet.

-- Non deficit illi. Juven.

Unde emeret multa pascendum carne Leonem
Jam domitum. Sat. 7.
Constat leviori bellua sumptu
Nimirum, and capiunt plus intestina Poetae.
That Courts become Temples where in Fools are adored, and Buffoons honored,
whiles the Learned in the meantime are banished; what is this but only to give
to beasts all the Stars from the more bright to the less clear, and to
distribute the ample Canopy of Heaven amongst them; thence burying the Elyzians
under ground, and make them border on Hell; So that a Scorpion, a Dog, a
Hydra, a Goat, a Bull, are advanced over the heads of all with names of
Celestial Signs, and an Achilles, an Orpheus, and all the Chorus of Demigods
are placed under feet; The Beasts to be gilded with the light of Sols rays,
the men to be smeared by the smoke of Pluto's Kingdom. Seeing the head, the
Seat of the understanding, and therefore only worthy of a Crown, was placed by
Nature above all the other members, that so they all as vassals should support
it their King: Now, how is it, that the feet are exalted aloft, and the head
laid in the dust? That there should be some who in a brave, as out of a
super-humane Virtue, bear like the famous Milo, a great Ox upon their
shoulders, whilst in the mean-time poor Cleanthes that he might live like a
man, was forced to labor like a beast?

But having designed to begin this Tractate from the peculiar felicity of a
Scholar, showing that even then when he wants all things, he is satisfied and
happy only in himself, and (as Seneca calls him) a little Jupiter; what I have
done hitherto exaggerating in the parsimonious unworthiness of such as do not
relieve and respect him, the need he stands in of relief and respect? Howbeit I
have thereby more discovered the crime of such who regard him not, then any
misery in him through his being disregarded. For (to conclude) Gold, although
dug from the dirt and stones, amongst which it lies buried in the mines,
would appear more splendid; yet he is infinitely more the loser, who does not
dig and make it his own, then it by being undiscovered and un-appropriated. And
again, in the crime of them that esteem not the Learned, their merit is proved,
since their advancement is demerited, and the not honoring them is a crime.

Now let us see how a learned man may find within himself the lively source of
that famous Nectar of the Gods, which having only in it self all other tastes,
he need not seek, nor enjoy any other. This is the Essay of Understanding, the
which how copious it is, although it may be manifested in the subject of all
the Sciences, (but you may esteem that too prolix and troublesome;) I have
thought good for a taste of the rest, to glance at it in one alone, not of the
best, but of the most familiar; and it is the knowledge and contemplation of
the Heavens, a part of Nature; if we stand upon the judgment of the Eye, the
most ample and amiable; if of the Mind, not the last amongst the best.

An Essay of Understanding Dissplayed for a taste of the other Sciences, in the
only Contemplation of the Heavens.
THe common Assertion of the two most renowned Schools of Pithagoras and Plato
is, Plutarc. de Musica.
That the Celestial Spheres increasing one above another with measures of
Harmonical proportion; in the revolutions tbat they make, compose the Con^ort
of a most perfect Music. Macrobius renderth the reason drawn from the natural
principles of Sound; Lib. 2. de Sam.
and thence he concludes: Ex his inexpugnabili ratione collectum est Musicos
sonos de Sphaerarum Coelestium conversione procedere, Scip. ca. 1.
quia and Sonum ex motu fieri necesse est, and Ratio quae divinis in est; fit
sono causa modulaminis. Nor because that our ears are not Judges of such
Music, ought we therefore to doubt, or to deny it; forasmuch as that melodious
sound in its arrival at the Elements, is by the noise of their discordant
jarring, lost and drowned, and there most, where the noise is loudest. And well
was it said elsewhere: The Heaven's not mute, as is believed by some,
But we are deaf; and to our ears does come
The Earths harsh croaking, which the same does stop,
Amongst whose dissonants in vain we hope
TO aspire to the Heavenly Harps sweet harmony,
Touched by the hand of Delos Diety.


If it were not as Philo advertiseth, that God reserving for us to a better
time, so sweet a gust of Music, had with a particular Providence, in such
manner by it deafned, and dislocated our audible faculties, otherwise
suspended, extacis'd, and ravished out of our selves by the harmony of those
most Regular Bodies, we should not only grow careless of cultivating the
earth, and remiss in the affairs of civil life, but in the end forget our
selves: Philo.
Coelum (says he) perpetuo con^entu suorum motuum reddit harmoniam
suavissimam; quae si posset ad nostras aures pervenire in nobis exitaret in
sanos sui amores, and desideria, quibus stimulati rerum ad victum necessariarum
oblivisceremur, non pasti cibo potuque, sed velut immortalitatis candidati.

But to say the truth, to comprehend in the Heavens, the melody of a ravishing
harmony, and to enjoy therewith above: a delight able to make one almost
Angelical, it is not necessary to desire that the Music of those harmonical
Spheres (Spheres they are called by them who will not grant that they be, as
notwithstanding they are all one sole and liquid Heaven) do approach the ears.
Nevertheless our mind may be thereby blessed, following with the flight of its
thoughts, not as some do Poetry, a lying inventor of fables, which leading us
through the vasts of Heaven, says to us, here Phaeto^ more bold then cautions.

Ausus aeternos agitare currus, Seneca^.

Immemor meta ju^e is paternae,
Quos polo spa^sit furiosus ignos,
Ipse recepit.
Here fell Vulcan, and the measuring with one irregular step all the voyage
from heaven to earth, by great chance, cost him no more then the wrenching of a
foot. This slippery part of Heaven, is the great breach which the Giants of
Fl^gra did make in the battery they gave to the stars, when the earth of
thunder-stricken became thunder-striker. Here is Hercules, here Prometheus,
here Bellerophon, and I know not who: But that part of the more Noble Sciences,
(which is the true Interpreter of mysteries, and Secretary of the most hidden
things of the heavens;) which does unvail the eyes, and make them see how they
be in a mass so vast, and yet so light in motion; in influences so discordant,
and yet in the maintenance of nature so united; in the revolutions they make
some so slow, and others so swift, and yet all to the time, and almost in one
and the same dance accord, in obedience to the first mover so strict, and in
the liberty of their proper motions so free, so splendid, and so profound; so
uniform, and so various; so majestic, and so amiable. Violent with so many
Laws, busied with so much quietness; in the measure of times, in the
succession of days, in the changes of seasons, so consortial, He who has eyes
to see so much, he it is that knows how to make a Ladder to climb to the sight
of much more; He who by the long chain of these celestial natures (of which
the last link is fastened to the foot of the Throne of Jove) can climb even to
the Archetype forms, and to the Idea's of the first mind, from whose invariable
design are took the weights, numbers and measures, as instruments of the work
of this great order of Nature: He which knows how to understand the high Wisdom
of him, who in such variety of mutations, keeps steadfast the course of an
immutable Providence, while he knew how to give an occult order to the manifest
disorder of so many effects, concatinating them with indissoluble knots to his
intended ends: So that those which seem casual events of chance, are executions
of a most regular Providence; he that has a sight for objects of so high a
cognition, is he not with it alone more blessed then others in all their
sensual enjoyments? That great Platonic Philo Alexandrinus gave credit to it,
when he said for proof of it. In Cosmopaeia.
Vagata (meus) circa stellarum turn sixarum, tum erraticarum cursus, and
choreas juxta Musicae praecepta absolutissimas, trahitur amore sapientiae se
deducentis, atque ita emergens super omnem sensibilem essentiam, demum
intelligibilis desiderio corripitur. Illic conspicata exemplaria, ideas que
rerum, quas vidit, sensibilium, ad eximi^s illas pulchritudines, aebrietate
quadam sobria capta, tanquam Corybantes lymphatur, alio plena amore long
meliore, quo ad summum fastigium ad ducta rerum intelligibilium, ad ipsum
Magnum Regem tendere videtur.

To whom these shall seem rather flourishes of art, then real verity, and being
un-experienced, should be so much the less credible. I know not how to give a
better answer then that which was merited from Nicostratus, by a man little
knowing, and less credulous of the beauty of a picture. Aelian.
Zeuxis that Son of Painters, which did not give so much light to the picture
illustrating it, as shadow to the picturers his emulators, obscuring them, drew
in a thin vail the face of an Helen, with so noble workmanship, that the
exemplar was outdone by the copy, and true Helen seemed to yield to her self
painted; for if the real one drew a Paris from Troy to ravish her, the
counterfeit drew all Greece to admire her. Nicostratus meeting with this
picture (he himself also being a Painter of no mean rank) at the first look as
if he had beheld not the head of Helen, but of Medusa, was metamorphiz'd into a
stone, and with mutual deceit, Helen seemed to be as much alive in her picture,
as Nicostratus seemed dead in his amazement; insomuch as a simple clown, a
blunt dolt, a man wanting eyes looking upon Nicostratus, which engraven in an
act of astonishment seemed a Statue looking on a picture, accosted him, and
almost shaking him out of his dumps, asked him, Quid tantum in Helena illa
stuperet. He asked too many questions in one word. But as he had not good eyes
to see Helen, so he had no docile ears to hear Nicostratus: Therefore the
Painter turning himself, and between compassionating it, and disdaining him,
looking on him; This says he, Is not a picture for Owls. Pluck out those
ignorant eyes you have, and I will lend you mine; and if now you be an Owl
without eyes, you will then desire to be an Argus all eyes. Non in terrogares
me, si meos oculos haberes.

Behold, the very same falls out to him who wondereth, how in beholding that
goodly face of Nature, the Heavens, in which God, as much as the matter was
capable, did design, (copying them from himself,) lineaments of so rare
beauties; we can find matter of such delight, as to swallow our wits, extacise
our thoughts, and bless our minds. All behold Heaven, but all understand it
not; and between him that understands it, and him that does not, there is the
same difference that is between two, of which one, in a writing in Arabic,
ruled with gold, and written with azure, sees nothing but the workmanship of
well-composed characters; the other moreover does read the periods, and
understand the sense, so that the least of the pleasure that he enjoyes, is
that of the eyes.

But although the gust of the understanding is as the sweetness of honey,
which to persuade, the endeavors of a long discourse are not so efficacious,
as the simple proof of tasting one drop; nevertheless, I think good to make
you hear most moral Seneca, where he declares, what was the content which he
found in contemplating the Heavens, whilst he conceives there above spirits,
contemners of the world; spirits more than humane. Hear him:

Imagine (says he) that you were ascended to the highest sphere of the
Heavens, Prae^at. l. 1. not. quaest.
so that you saw Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, turn themselves in their several
Revolutions, and under them each of the other Planets to run their periods.
There you behold the immensurable mass of bodies, the unparalled velocity of
their course, the numberless number of the stars, which here scarce seems
sparks to you; and there, are worlds of light, and no less then so many Suns.
Thence with eyes sated with the greatness of those spaces, and of the mass of
those vast bodies, look down to this center of the World, and seek about it for
the earth. If you were able to see it, it would appear so little to one that
looks upon it from the stars, that it would be necessary that you sharpen your
quickest eye, and you would desire that some Syderial Nuntio would help your
sight. What from hence below seemed the smallest of the stars, so that the
dubious eye knew not if he saw it, or thought he saw it: such from thence above
the earth appears to you; so that at such a sight you would say, That then
below, which I scarce perceive, which I scarce discern with my eye, is that the
earth? Is that that point divided into so many Provinces, subdivided into so
many Kingdoms, for which we rob one another, for to get which, are invented in
so great abundance, both Arts and Arms to kill one another? sieges, assaults,
conflagrations, batteries, pitched fields, subversions of whole Nations made in
a little time, which so often has made Widowed Nature weep, infecting the air
with the stench of the putrified carcasses, and sometimes damming up rivers,
sometimes vermiliating the Sea with great numbers of dead men, with great
abundance of humane blood.

Hear ye the incredible wonders of humane madness? Our vastest desires are
lost in a point. What, said I in a point? in the least particle of a point.
What would the Ants do more if they had reason? Would not also they sub-divide
a handful of earth into many Provinces? Would they not set their obstinate
bounds so, that they would not yield in the least to thundering Jupiter himself?
Would they not found in a spot of ground a Kingdom, in a little field a great
Monarchy; a little rivolet of water would be to them a Nile, a ditch they would
call an Ocean, a stone as big as ones hand, they would style a great rock, a
Farm would be no less than a World: They would also raise Bulwarks and
Curtains to secure their States, they would leavy Armies in hopes of new
conquests, and we should see in the space of two foot of ground, squadrons
march in order, with colors displayed against the black Ants, as enemies,
charging them with boldness, justling them, routing them, and some to return,
the day being won, victorious; others either to surrender upon articles, or
flying, hide themselves, or dying, bide the fury of their enraged enemies, and
become booty. Such a war between twenty or more thousands of Ants, undertaken
to dispute the pretentions to a handful of earth, only to think of it would
make us laugh; and we, what other do, we do, sub-dividing a point into so many
Kingdoms, and destroying one another to enlarge them? Let the Ister be the
confines of ^acia, Strimon of Thracia, the Rhene of Germany, the Parthians, let
them be bounded by Euphrates, the Sarmatians by Da^ubius, let the Pirrenean
Mountains divide France and Spain, the Alps Italy. Formicarum isle discursus
est in angusto laborantium.

You chalk out Kingdoms, and assign them bounds,
And measures, by the marks of blood and wounds;
And yet herein you greatest ^olly show,
In that by griping much, you let all go.
The whole worlds every man's, and who so cares
TO appropriate any part, divides and shares
What all was his. All men one household be:
All Is but one house, from the Center to the Sky,
And in this house we have all propriety.
Come and see from hence above your earth, look out for your Kingdoms, and
measure how much that is from whence you take the titles of Grandees. See you
your small particle of a point, if a point may admit of being seen? And is this
that which makes you go so stately? Come up to the stars, not to see only,
but to possess, if you will, a Kingdom equal to your desire of reigning: Nor
shall you have any to strive with about bounds, possessing all; nor shall you
need to fear that any will thrust you out of it, since that being possessed by
many, yet it can be taken from none. Thus, Juvat inter sydera vagantem divitum
pavimenta ridere, and totum cum auro suo terram. What greater enjoyment, then
to gain so generous spirits, and so noble intelligences? Alexander accustomed
to the great victories of Asia, when he received advice from Greece of some
Martial act, or conquest, (which was at most of a Castle, or of some petty
City) he was wont to say, That he thought he heard the news of the military
successes between the frogs and the mice of Homer. O how much less do things
appear that are beheld from a high place! How do they abate, which here below
seem so great, if they be beheld from the stars! And how much do we enjoy,
perceiving the thoughts to enlarge, and the mind increase, even to make us
contemn that, which others like slaves adore!

That which the good Seneca teaches us to do, the great Anaxagoras had done
long before, who desiring only to see the heavens, for the contemplation of
which he was said to be born, left his country, as a Sepulcher of living men;
and because the earth should not take away the sight of the heavens, he lived
in the fields poor, and without covert. What said he, Poor and Harbourlesse? He
enjoyed more, in seeing over his head the beautiful Canopy of the serene Azures
of heaven, in seeing himself crowned with a world of stars, which did revolve
about him, and in that the Sun gilded with his light, the raggedness of his
poor garments; and in that the heavens sent him advice of all news, than if he
had been clad in purple, and his head crowned, and he attended with the
vassalage of all the earth. And therefore: Seneca. Ibid.
Hic coetus astrorum, quibus immensi corporis, pulchritudo distinguitur,
populum non convocat, his Clasomeneans scorned him, as ridiculous, and rejected
him, as savage; but he opposed the honors of the heavens to the derisions of
the vulgar, he cared not so much to be seen in the earth by men, as he did
rejoice to see the sta^res in heaven, and to be interchangeably seen by them,
with that courteous eye, with which Sinesius said of himself; Epis. 100 a l.
101.
Me stellae etiam ipse benign, identidem de spectare videntur, Phylemon.
quem in vastissima regione solum cum scientia sui inspectorem intuentur.

That which I have hitherto spoke of the contemplation of heaven, an object of
a part of the Natural Sciences, to prove that Understanding is a certain be
atitude of so excellent a taste, that it inchanteth the senses, and takes away
what ever desires are of an order inferior to the mind; I would have to be
understood of the other so numerous, so noble, and so vast subjects, of most
pleasant cognitions, of which the ingenuity of the learned is capable, brought
into the world (says Pythagoras recited by Sinesius) as Spectators in a
Theater of always new, Sine (...) Provi subin.
and wholly noble wonders. Ita Pathagoras Samius, Sapientem nihil aliud esse
ait, quam eorum, quae sunt, si^ntque spectatorem. Proinde enim in Mundum, ac in
sacrum quoddam certamen introductum esse, ut iis quae ibidem fiunt, spectator
intersit.

But if from the gust of speculation the use of learning be called back to the
practice of living, Scholars would be much more severe and grave; and I
confess (as all the wise are of opinion) to term that learned man wise, whose
mind a long and right understanding has refined, and whose reason it has
purged from the filth of those sensual basenesses, and terrene vilenesses of
those affections which in us savor of brutish, so that prosperous or adverse
that occurrences be, he weighs them in the balance of reason for what they
are; it would be no hard matter for me, leading you through some of the more
dreaded miseries, to make you see such a man superior to them, then to show
the loftiest stars to be as far from eclipses, as they are distant from the
shadows of the earth.

Sapience happy, although in misery. The Wise poor man.
POverty is a single name, but not a single misery, and one that is
understanding in ciphers, in this only word knows how to read a whole Iliad of
evils. The Poet with the title of Turpis Egestus, placed it together with other
monsters at the gate of hell; nor did he any injury to it, forasmuch as it
brings with it sufficient matter for a whole hell of misery, to those houses of
which it keeps the door. Famine within, earts the bowels alive; Nakedness
without, ignominiously discovers the flesh; Shame suffers it not to appear in
public; Necessity permits it not to keep in secret: if bashfulnesse makes it
silent, it endures a thousand hardships; if it beg an alms, as vile, it finds
no credit. The evils it suffers are so much the greater, by how much the
less others commiserate them. But of as many griefs as this complicated misery
is pregnant with, there is not a worse specially to a man of sublime wit, or
noble extraction, than the becoming Subjects of scorn and derision.

Nil habet infoelix paupertas durius in se
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
This is the blackest shadow that follows it, this is the heaviest chain it
drags after it: And how many which appeared as trees without leaves,
un-beseemingly naked, have made choice of obscurity, judging death less
insufferable than ignominy?

Now this tormenting and deformed Hangman, (that might there be so many Furies
in hell, would make the fourth) who would believe it, when its joined with
Learning and Sapience; The 4, which with the 5 makes an 8.
like a dissonant Diatesseron, which united to the Diapence, rendereth the
sweetest of all harmonies, becomes lovely and pleasing beyond measure.

Poverty with Sapience (says the Stoic Philosophying, is a divine
composition, which has all, and has nothing, yea, can only give that, without
which nothing is possessed, therefore alone is all things, I mean Sapience. And
is not this the condition of the gods?

Respice enim mundum: Seneca de tranquil. c. 8.
Nudos videtis Deos,
Omnia dantes, nihil habentes.
What can he desire more in the world, who phylosophying, better than
possessing, has made the world his patrimony? The things which are so much
ours as Fortune and chance left them us, are more others than our own, more
lent than possessed, and make us no more happy than the image of a man makes the
Statue. To know the world, says Manilius, this is to possess it: in such
sort, that to every Demetrius which shall ask us, Quid capta Patria superfuerit
nobis? We may with the same Megarensis answer, Nullum vidi qui res meas
anferret.

To Pilgrims, not only a little suffices, but much is troublesome. To a man
whose thoughts are not confined between his own walls, as the center is
included in the circumference, but always with the Wings of the Mind
displayed, and addressed thither where the desire of knowing new things calls
him, whereby he becomes a stranger, not only to his home, but also to himself,
and is rather where he is not, than where he dwells; Can it be a dishonor or
prejudice to him to want that, which, as a Pilgrim, would be as well of
impediment, as of weight? From whence Seneca forms the Aphorism: Epist. 17
Si vis vacare animo, aut pauper sis oportet, aut pauperi similis.

But behold an Eloquent Platonic, who, Apuleius
whether by way of reproof or derision, I know not, Apol. 1^ prose.
was opposed with a public accusation, how that Poverty was either
dishonorable, or culpable. If thou (answered he to the Accuser) were as much a
Philosopher as thou art a rich man, thou would understand that I being poor
am the rich man, and thou being rich art the poor man. Namque is plurimum habet
qui minimum desiderat: habet enim q^ antum vult qui vult minimum, and idcirco
divitiae non melius in su^do, and in ^oenore, quam in ipso hominis aes^imantur
animo. In the Sea of this life the tempests and billows contrast not those that
are full freight, to keep them from their Port, but them that sail unladen.
This simple coat that covers me, or this plain staff I lean on, render they me
contemptible? Tell me what more had Hercules, son of Jove, Conqueror of the
World, and a Demigod? Ipse Hercules illustrator; Orbis, purgator ^erar^m,
gentium domit^r* is idquam Deus cum terras peragraret, paulo prius quam in
Coelum ob virtutes adscitus est, ne que una pelle uestitior fuit, neque uno
baculo comitatior. Yea, even the Supreme Gods themselves, what have they in
their Kingdom, with which they are rich? Large veins of metals from which
they extract gold and silver? Oceans in which they fish for pearls, Couchyla's,
out of which they press purple? Kingdoms, vassals, and liege people, from
whom they extract tribute? Or else without having other than themselves, but
being in themselves alone blessed, do they not seem poor, because they have
nothing, Ibid.
and are rich, forasmuch as they have need of nothing? Igitur ex nobis cui quam
minimis opus sit, is erit Deo similior.

Let therefore Socrates the poor, but Socrates the Learned, go through all the
Marts and Ports of the World, beholding particularly the immense abundance of
those goods, of which riches and honors make vaunt, ^^ertius in Socre.
blessed with that which he knows, not careful for what he has not; and let
him say, and all his Compeers repeat it with him, Quam multo ipse non egeo!

Alexander lamented with brinish tears, when he heard the Philosopher
Anaxagoras assert, that Nature, either as avaritious, would not, or as sterril,
could not produce more then one World, it having neither measure to its power,
nor (...) to its will; so that in the spaces of its immensity, it has not
produced the numbers of infinite, and equalled its being to its utmost power,
and answered to the ^dea's of immensurable Worlds, with the workmanship of
each of them. Alexander possessed not one alone of so many (...) was, and
therefore exclaimed (...) Immanium ferarum modo, quae (...) git fames, mordent.
(...)
Yet (...) Grecia, Persia, of the India's ((...) Regnum multa Regna conjecit)
but (...) his poverty by his want, and so much he wanted as he did desire. (...)
Quid euim interest quot cripuerit Regna, quot dederit? Quantum terrarum
tributo premat? Tantum illi de^st quantum cupit. Alexander therefore is poor,
and in the riches of half the World has nothing, because half the World is
nothing in comparison of the infinite Worlds which he desired. But in the
mean-time, Crates, a learned man, which had no more but himself, and a tattered
Phylosophical mantle, with which he covered himself, more to conceal his
nakedness, then to reveal himself to be a Philosopher, lived in the earth like
a Jupiter in heaven, more rich with the much he had not, then Alexander with
that all which he possessed. Plutar. de tranquil. animi.
Flet Alexander propter insinitos mundos ab Anaxagoras auditos, cum Crates,
pera, and palliolo instructus vitam ta, quam festivitatem quandam per jocum,
and risum ageret.

Would you know justly how to describe that famous Diogenes, which drew to him
(not so much to visit as to admire him) Alexander, by whom he was sought to,
and for whom he did not care. Sanecae de benef. l. 5. c. q.
Supra enim eminere visus est, infra quem omnia jacebant, You shall take from
Claudian a symbolical image, but which more livelily will defigure him, then if
Apelles himself had drawn him.

Lapis est cognomine Magnes,
Discolor, obscurtis, vilis. Non ille reperam
Caesariem regum, Claudio (...) Mag^^te.
non candida virginis ornat
Colla, nec insigni splendet per ci^gula morsu
Sed nova si nigri videas miracula Saxi,
Tunc superat pulchros cultus, and quidquid Eois,
Indus littoribus rubra scrutatur arena.
His hispid beard, uncombed hair, his deformed visage, his ragged clothes, his
rude and clownish manners, his extreme poverty, did they not make him seem like
a naked, black, heavy, ill-shapt piece of stone? More over, a Tub was his
house; yea, was to him as if he had all the world, because of all the world he
would have no more then that. He turned it at his pleasure, scoffing at the
celestial Sp^eres, and Fortunes wheel, became neither these with their periods,
nor this with its praecipices could oppose the revolutions o^ his Tub, nor
either the heavens give any good to him that covers nothing, or fortune take it
from him that being naked can be spoiled of nothing. But in a man so ill
accoutred, and so ill lodged, whence such virtue, and one so potent, (I will
say) magnetisme, that he, obscure and be^garly, could draw to him the most
illu^trious and most wealthy Monarch of the World, thanks Philosophy, that in
Diogenes, as a Sun covered with a cloud, or a Venus clothed like a Satyr,
shined ^orth so, as to be able to allure such a King, and wrap him into
admiration, and obsequ^e of a ragged beggar.

What though (...) be a beggar? Let his riches be put in balance to counter
poise that of the richest Alexander. Diogenes of all that the Macedon offered
him, accepted nothing, because he needed nothing. Alexander, who wanted even
that which he had, because he wanted what he would, desired to be transformed
into, and to become Diogenes. Therefore Diogenes, Multo potentior multo
lucupletior fuit, ^^^eca ^^b.
omniae tunc possidente Alexandro. Plus enim erat quod hic no^et accipere quam
quod hic posset dare.

Therefore Learning and contented poverty, in whom they do unite, compose that
happy temper of the Golden Age, when free from all fear of loss, every one
lived pleased with that which was his; namely, content with himself, and so far
rich as he needed nothing; namely, desired not riches. Thus Palemon and Crates,
two friends, two Philosophers, two beggars, were by Archesilaus for their
honor called Relics of the Golden Age. And between others riches and their
own poverty, they lived like that friend of Seneca: Non tanquam contempsissent
omnia, sed tanquam aliis habenda, permisissent.

The rich are not so blinded with the splendour of their gold, that they see not
at least in part the worth of these goods. A poor learned man appears among
rich idiots, as rags among silks, frieze amongst purple, the meagernesse of a
face consumed by study, and made pale with looks, amongst plump and ruddy
faces; Those look on themselves as sheep covered with golden wool, and the
other as a great god among the ancients, graven in a homely stone, or imprinted
in clay; but therefore no less honorable, than if they were cast in gold, and
in-laid with pearl.

That adventurous Ship, which first of all past the large Straights of
Megallanes, which steered it, environed all the earth, whence it was called
Victory: returning into Europe, and drawn into the Port, was beheld by all as
the second Argo of the World. Those ribs which had been of proof against the
batteries of storms, of till-then-unseen Oceans, those faithful sails at the
encounter of strange winds, that rudder, that mast, those sail-yards, in fine,
all its parts were judged worthy of the noblest stars in heaven: since she had
overcome the elements, and made conquest not of a fleece, but world of gold.
Nor did her being in part defaced with weakened mast, dislocated yards, disarmed
sides, tattered sails, fallen poup, render her less valuable and beautiful.

The other ships well rigged, beheld her with a certain envy, and those
impressions which the tempests and the long voyage had made in her, as scars in
a Martial Captain, they esteemed more honorable, then that beauty with which
they were adorned. To her they struck sail, veiled yards, bowed Ancients, they
full of merchandise, and rich with gold, the Victory empty, shattered,
disfigured, they adored as their Mistress. Behold, the condition of a poor
Scholar in the midst of many rich Ignorants; they have, although many times
they know not that they have it, an Envy of the internal riches, of which they
are wholly wanting, and do look on that poor man as rich. Ullane autem tam
ingentium opum, tam magnae Potentiae voluptas, quam spectare homines veteres,
and senes, and totius orbis gratia subnixos, in summa omnium rerum abundantia
confitentes, id quod optimum sit, se non habere? Now if the rich be trees, with
a great grove of branches dispersed in every part, comely, and lea^ie: a poor
learned man is a leafless trunk, and half naked; but what then?

Qualis frugifero quercus sublimis in agro
Eximias veteres populi, sacrata is gestans
Dona ducum, nec jam vallidis radicibus haerens
Pondere fixo suo est, nudosque per era ramos
Effundens, trunco, non frondibus efficit umbram.
Sed quamvis primo nutet casura sub Euro,
Tot circum sylvae firmo se robore tollant
Sola tamen colitur.
The Wise Exile.
THose Ancient Sages, Masters of Sapience, which alive, had Greece dead, had
all the World for Auditors, left us for an infallible maxim, to the end the
mind learn to Phylosophate, and not err; it is needful, the feet go wandering
through many Lands: We may attein to the riches of Sapience, but no other way
but by going to the Sages, in many places, and begging it. Truth (said they) a
Native of Heaven, is a Pilgrim on Earth, and is found no way but by
Peregrination: He that seeks it, does as the rivers, which increase the more,
the further they go; so that they which at their fountains were scarce little
brooks, in dilating themselves, become little less than Seas. The vapors of
the earth, would they ever assume the form of stars, if leaving the country
where they were all dirt, they should not run after the Sun, and make
themselves much more happy in being Pilgrims in heaven, than if they were
Citizens on earth? Men are not as Planets, which have the greatest virtue then,
when they are in their own houses; yea, it happens many times, that ones own
country proves a stepmother, and a foreign land the mother, in fashion of
certain plants, which from their Native Soil, where they were nourished with
venomous humors, transported to a strange climate, in the remove they lose
their power of hurting, and find together with a harmless relish, the virtue
of wholesome aliment. A man's own country ought to be to a wise man, as the
Horizon to the stars, for birth, not for Sepulcher; to take thence the first
light, and as the Aurora of Sapience, after to climb to other places, even to
find the most high and splendid noontide which it makes on earth.

Thus those Sages understood it, and according to their knowledge practicing,
seemed just of the nature of the Heavens, which have rest in motion: whence
with tedious voyages, they ran where in some new Academy of the learned they
might discover the gain of Wisdom. Their life was, as Sinesius speaks, a
perpetual going a hunting, sometimes in Greece, sometimes in Egypt, sometimes
in Persia, sometimes in the Indies, where the hope of the best prey inviting
drew them. Thus Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Democritus, Dioge^es, Anaxagoras,
and a hundred others came through un-frequented climates, and gathered the
quintessence of every one like to certain fortunate fountains, which in the
peregrination they make through the bowels of the earth, pass through the
middle of precious veins, some of gold, or silver; some of Emeralds or
Sapphires, and imbibe, and carry away the best of their wholesome qualities.

And see how the relish of Learning rendereth absence from ones country, not
only sufferable, but beyond measure sweet, whence to him who wishes it, when
banishment comes, Exile has no other pain then the name. To him who has not,
to him who knows not other goods, then those which the ignorant vulgar call
gifts of Fortune, leaving his country, I deny not is to him as to a scarce
imfeathered fowl to be thrown from his nest, whose going out is his fall, and
his fall his ruin, but he that has strong feathers, and expert wings,
changes a nest of straw in which he lived buried, for the ample spaces, and
open air of all the heavens, which is so much his, as is the liberty of flight
which brought him thither.

Who took thee from thy country? (says a Shepherd to Tytirus) Who made thee
turn Pilgrim, and live a stranger in foreign parts?

Et quae tanta fuit Roman tibi causa videndi? Weariness of servitude, replied
Tytirus, thrust me out of my native nest; love of liberty brought me to live in
strange places.

Libertas; l. 2. ep. 4.
quae sera, tamen respexit inertem,
Candidior post quam tondenti barba cadebat.
Ille (Petrach sagely replyeth) in Sermon Pastorio ut libertatem inveniret,
Patriam se reliquisse gloriatur, tu Phylosophos defles?

Let the Moors of Spain weep, Boter. in relat.
whilst they are thrust from thence to their Africa, a Land fit for such
monsters; let them go not as such as change places, but as such who are thrown
down from heaven; and turning their eyes behind them at every step, let them
weeping behold Granada, and swear, that Paradise stands perpendicular over that
Kingdom. This is the language either of Sibarites, which love their country as
a stable, because they lead the lives of animals, or of fools; like to that
simple Athenian, which said the Moon of Athens was fuller then that of Corinth:
Whereas it was not that the Moon was more full, but his head more empty. Et hoc
idem (I shall say with Plutarch) accidit nobis, De exilio.
cum extra Patriam constituti mare, aerem, coelum dubii consideramus, quasi
aliquid eis desit eorum, quibus, in Patria fruebamur.

Ruin the country of Stilpone, in common tears he alone is merry, and in a
universal loss secure: And going thence alone, and naked, carries with him
all that is his, because he carries himself; but himself wise and learned.
Sapie autem, Laert. in Antist.
says Antisthenes, etiam si omnia desint; solus sufficit sibi.

Let the Clasomeneans, as we said above, banish the great Anaxagoras, and as
unworthy of the name of Citizen, forbid him the City. He grieves not, as if his
departure were from his country, but his prison, and excluded from a corner of
the earth, which was too narrow for his great soul, he pointed at heaven for
his country, and the stars for his Fellow-Citizens. Where ever he goes he is
covered with the same roof of heaven, so that he seems not to have lost his
house, but to have only changed rooms. Quid enim re^ert quam diversa part
consistat? Petrarch ibid.
Valles quidem, and lacus, and flumina, and colles alios videt. Coelum unum
est. Illuc aninum exigit, eo cogitationes suas ex omni mundi part transmittit;
nec aliud quam sub tecti unius amplexu ex alio in alium thalamum transivisse
cogitat. Let the Athenians mock Antisthenes, because he has never a house in
the World, but all the World is his Inn, and he shall laugh at them: Quia
quasi cochleae sine domibus nunquam sunt. He shall live in the champain, as the
Semi-gods in the Elysium fields, in which Nulli certa domus.

Let Diogenes be thrust out of Sinope, he will be as thankful to his banishers,
as Theseus to Hercules his Deliverer, when he fetched him by force from that
unhappy stone, on which his punishment was engraven: Sedet, aeternumque Sedebit.

And from that loathsome idleness, which alone sufficed to him for a great
Hell, instating him in his Primitive Liberty: Let the scoffers jeer his Exile,
he will answer, My Citizens have condemned me to go out of Sinope, and I have
condemned them to stay there. The Wise man knew, that they were more Exiles,
because banished from all the rest of the World, they were confined to one
City, then he, which excluded from one City, had all the World for his country.
Being far from Sinope, he beheld it as he that cast away in a sudden tempest at
Sea, and driven by the waves to a rock, sees from those cliffs, others
shipwracks, and caling his misfortunes felicities, desires not the Ocean which
tosseth them, but abhors it; nor does he envy such who perish in it, but
pittieth them.

Would you see a picture, or rather only a rough draught of the hand of the
worthiest Seneca, which sets out to the life the state, the employments, the
ordinary pastimes of the greatest part of men in their Cities?

Behold, a world of people, which though they be continually busied, yet doing
nothing, and that are less idle while they sleep then while they labor. De
tranquilit animi c. 12
Horum si aliquem exeuntem domo interrogaveris, Quo tu? Quid cogitas?
Respondebit tibi; Non in^ae Hercule, scio. Si aliquos videbo aliquid agum. Sine
proposito and agantur quaerentes negotia, nec quae destina verunt agunt, sed in
quae incurrerunt. Did you never observe a long rabble of Ants, one after
another busily clime up a stump, till they got to the top, as if they would
have touched the very heavens, and saluted the stars, and then dismount
themselves by the other part, and so return to the earth? Ibid.
His plerumque similem vitam agunt, quorum non immerito quis inquietum inertiam
dixerit. Hi deinde d^mum tum supervacua redeuntes Lassitudine, jurant, nescisse
se ipsos quare exierint, ubi fuerint: postero dic erraturi per eadem illa
vestigia. And can it be matter of grief or sorrow to one who has eyes of
Sapience in his head, just esteemers of truth, to be excluded from such a
place^ And would not he rather say to those that stay there behind, that which
Stratonicus, (lodging in Zerif) said to his Host; who asking, what crimes they
punished with banishment, and understanding that false dealers were punished
with exile: And why, said he, do not you all turn Cheats, to be delivered from
hence?

But when afterward in leaving ones a mattock, his rams into plows, horses
into oxen, trenches into fences, ditches into furrows, the ranging of
squadrons, to martialling of trees, to routing of armies, to rooting up of
thorns: in fine, combats into labors, and victory into harvest. Yet he made
not the fences about his farm so thick, but that the troubles of Rome might
penetrate them. Nor did his rusticity so di^guise him, that public cares knew
him not, to torment him. The voluntary banishment which he took against his
will, from his ungrateful Country, going thence that he might not be thrust
from thence, so retained against them, in-kindled in his heart ever after a
disdain, that it extinguished not with the expiration of his life, but the flame
perpetualliz'd it self in his ashes, buried far from his ungrateful Country.

Behold, here the advantage of a great mind above a great heart. A man of high
knowledge: and of as hardy a wit, as Scipio was of his hands, abandoned and
bereft of Rome, would have said as Socrates, when turned out of Athens. Mihi
omnis terra eadem matter, omne coelum idem tectum, totus mundus est patria. Apud
Stob. de exil.
He would have cheerfully left the City of Romulus, and entered (as Musonius
said) that of Jove, not environed with a circle of walls, but enclosed with the
vast unequal of the Heavens; so ample that there all Languages are spoken,
because it comprehends all the Nations of every Climate; and so noble that its
Senators are the gods of Heaven, and its people are even the Senators of the
Earth. He would have got out of Rome, as the little Rivolets which from the
narrow banks, between whose confines they ran miserably straightned through the
earth: in their falling into the Sea (were they lose not themselves as the
Vulgars believe) of rillets that they were before, scarce having one small
stream of water, they themselves become Seas, and distending as far as it
inlargeth, may be said to touch the ends of the one and the other World. But
virtue will have us possess a great Mind, that should eface the sordidness of
loving more the servitude of one corner of the earth, than the liberty of
thoughts and affects, which makes it Mistress of tho World.

He that is separated from his Country, let him imitate the Moon, which the
farther it is from the Sun, the fuller it is of light: and seeing the
increasements and acquist's of new knowledge, which he makes in the Domestic use
of Men greater than himself; he can do no less than say as Alcibiades, cast
out his Country, and received by a foreign King, with the offer of three great
Cities at his first reception, Perieramus, nisi periissemus. Oh how much is
Wisdom obliged to voluntary and compulsive exilements! Pallas with this has
made other manner of acquist's, than when she sailed in the Argonautick ship to
the conquest of the Golden Fleece.

Before the Art of Navigation was in use, the World was half unknown, half
un-cultivated, all barbarous.

Sua quisque piger littora norat, Seneca.

Patrioque Senex factus in arvo
Parvo dives, nisi quas tulerat
Natale solum, non norat opes.
Who then had, or knew what it was to have all the World? The Sea was idle, the
Winds unprofitable; Heaven, few were there that did behold it, none that made
use of it.

Nondum quisquam sydera norat,
Stellisque quibus pingiter ether,
Non erat usus. --
Now all the World is made one only Kingdom, whereas before every Kingdom
seemed a World. Each place is neither deprived of others, nor covetous of her
own; whilst that each transporteth into another, that wherein it self abounds:
making all the earth but one body, where one part readily succoureth the
necessities of an other. Now the whole heaven is but one Roof, and all Men do
know themselves to be but one and the same Family, and may with more verity,
than he that they were said by, Lib. 4. Astr.
sing, the verses of Manilius

Jam nusquam Natura latet: pervidimus omnem,
Et capto potimur mundo: nostrum que parentum
Pars sua conspicimus. --
What would the Gymnosophists, the Greeks, the Chaldeans have had, if content
with that only, which they were born with, they had not gone out of their
Country to seek, as Ulisses in his fortunate wanderings, that Sapience from
others, which they themselves did want? Look how much better a seeing eye is,
than a blind, Lib. de Abraham.
says Philo Alexandrinus, so much more excellent is a man whom desire of
knowledge had led, a Pilgrim and voluntary exile, Epictetus.
through many Nations: then he who is like a tree, that where it first
sproutes, there it takes root, there it lives, and there in the end it rots.

The Wise Prisoner.
THe Souls of Philosophers (said a Wise Ancient) have their bodies for houses:
those of the ignorant, for prisons. Because the first are retired in the body
as in Temples of sleep and repose, and go out freely at their pleasure
wheresoever their fancies carry them: and the second, shut up in the narrow
walls of their body, are tied with as many chains as they have members, without
seeing any other light then what comes to them through the little holes of two
pupils: and rest there shut up, in as much as they have no thoughts but what
their bodily necessities infuse. Thence it is that if the ignorant chance to be
prisoners they are double prisoners: The Sages not at all; the better part of
whom can no more be confined, than the wind may be imprisoned in a Net; or the
light shut up in Crystal. The Tullianum of Rome: the Cave of Syracuse, the
Lethe of Persia, the Ceramo of Cyprus, and of as many as there were, or there
are now a-dayes famous, or infamous prisons of the World, none are so deep,
that they bury, or so obscure that they blind, so narrow as to bind, so strong
with double walls, that they confine a mind truly Phylosophical. Thanks to
Sapience, which Plato calls the wing of the Soul, that carries it not only out
of its prison, but bears it up in its flight out of the World. Nam cogitatio
ejus (says the Stoic) circa omne coelum, and in omne praeteritum, futurumque
tempus emittitur. Corpusculum hoc custodia, ac vinculum animi, huc, atque illuc
jactatur. In hoc supplicia, in hoc latrocinia, in hoc morbi exercentur. Animis
quidem ipse sacer, and aeternus est, and cui non possit injici manus. Therefore
a prison to a wise man is no prison, but a house, since he is at liberty to go
out when he will. Totum autem hominem animus, circumfert (says Tertullian) and
quo velit transfert. Ad martyros c. 2.


It is of little importance to the Soul what becomes of the body, whilst its
thoughts are out of the body. Plinius lib. 27. cap. 52.
Thus Ermotimus, whose soul left his body at pleasure: and went travaling in
diverse places, even into the remotest Climes, to see what was done in the
World, felt so little, that he knew not in the least if he suffered, so that he
used to burn his body alive in one place, and his soul insensible of what was
done, enjoyed it in another.

A light remedy was that of Socrates, against the heavy vexations of the always
fastidious Zantippe, to get up to the top of the house, when she made the
bottom ring with her brawling. How much better would it be to avoid the sight
of the darkness, the feeling of the narrowness, the anoyance of the solitude of
a prison, to clime with the mind to the stars, to make it self splendid with
their light, and tracing out their periods, and measuring their magnitudes, to
make himself a companion of the intelligences which so expertly reveal them?
Tertull.
Nihil crus sentit in nervo, ibid.
cum animus in Coelo est.

A pleasant folly was that related by Horace of a Greek fool, who for many
hours of the day thought himself in a full Theater, and to see persons appear
in Scaenes, and to hear excellent Tragoedies recited by the bravest Actors!
There was not a man in all Argos more content then he.

Qui se credebat miros audire Tragoe do; Lib. 2. ep. 2. ad Florum.

In vacuo laetus sessor, plausorque Theatro.
His friends, going about, to comiserate him, were, without knowing it cruel to
him: for by the power of Helebore re-setling the brains in his head, they took
the joy from his heart: whereupon he, that would not have exchanged his folly
for all the wisdom in the World, being cured, condoled his unfortunate
discretion* and envied his fortunate folly; and to his friends, because
depriving him of an innocent content, they had restored him to the anoyance of
his former perplexities, and of a fained Spectator, had made him a real Actor
of Tragoedies, he makes grievous complaint.

-- Me occidistis amici
Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
Thus far a foolish imagination of an irregular fancy can cooperate to other
men's content, whilst ravishing them out of themselves, it fixes them upon
some pleasing object. And cannot Sapience do that in a head full of noble and
sublime notions, which folly can do in one devoid of understanding? Knows she
not how to present the mind with spectacles, the pleasure whereof may make a
man forget the place where he is; so that being confined in a Prison, he may
conceit himself, one while in the bowels of the earth, another, in the watery
abyss; sometimes on the Ocean, sometimes in the air, tossed too and fro by the
winds; now near the Sun, anon among the Stars; by and by in the utmost regions,
and even also in the immense vacuities above the World? These are the
speculations that transport our minds out of themselves, and make us happy in
their contemplation. True dreams of waking eyes, which at the same instant give
both rest, and delight. Sermon. 6.
Scis enim Philosophi spectaculum (says that excellent Platonic Maximus
Tyrius) cui maxim simile dico? In somnio nimirnm manifesto, and circumquaque
volitanti, cujus, integro corpore manente, animus tamen in universam terram
excurrit. Ex terra effertur in Coelum universum, mare pertransit, universum
pervolat aerem. Terram ambit cum Sole, cum Luna circumfertur, caeteroque
astrorum jungitur Choro, minimumque abest, quin una cum Jove universa gubernet,
and ordinet. O operationem beatam! O spectacula pulchra! O insomnia verissima!

He that can enter a Prison with such contemplation, may well say with
Tertullian, Auferamus carceris nomen, secessum vocemus. He changes place,
Supra.
but not fortune; he alters the entertainment of his body, but not the
employment of his mind: and as the Poet says of the Demigods, That they do
the very same things below in the Elisian fields, which we do living here
above.

-- Quae gratia currum,
Armorumque fuit vivis, Aeneid. 8.
quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
Thus the wise prisoner, has the same noble exercise of mind, and that either
sole, or principal care of soaring higher to new degrees of sublimer
speculations, which he had when free, eadem sequitur tellure repostum.
Wherewith he entered into prison, not to receive from thence obscurity and
infamy, but to bring thither light and glory; De consolat. ad Helu. cap. 13.
he enters it as the great Socrates, Ignominiam ipsi loco detracturus, says
Seneca; Neque etiam poterat carcer videri, in quo Socrates.

But this is not the only fruit of Learning in the Wise Prisoner, far greater
is that (which very often succeeds) of converting the Prison into a Lyceum, and
with feet fettered in shackles, to use the liberty of his hands in managing a
pen. So that he who lives in a Cell, known only to himself, like Silk-wormes in
their shells, Jam mutatus in alitem, flies with his books through every place,
becoming in the school of a prison, one of the Worlds Sages. Just like the Sun,
which when it has left our Hemisphere, and is sepultur'd under ground, gives
to the World a World of Stars, so that its loss is with gain, his absenting
himself is with honor. And what else do the Pearlfishes which imprisoned in
the bottom of the Sea, fettered and chained to a Rock, deprived of light, yea,
of eyes, work pearls, which released from that dungeon, and brought out of
darkness, into the light of the Sun, and inchased with gold, are put for the
ornaments of Crowns, upon Royal Temples, to the veneration of the World? Thus
Anaxagoras between the four walls of a narrow prison, Plut. de exilio.
invested the Quadrature of a Circle. Gell. l. 3. c. 2.
Thus Nevius the Poet, found in the bottom of a Tower, the top of Parnassus,
there composing a great part of his Poems. Id. l. 15. c. 20.
And because nobody would imprison Euripides, he shut up himself in the deep
dungeon of a Cave, and there wrote those Tragoedies, which afterward had the
world for their Theater and applauder. The Prisons wherein these famous men
were confined, hindered them not from being famous: But their writings more
displayed them to the world, then their faces could have done. And as of the
images of Brutus and Cassius which were not seen at a public funeral, Tacitus
said. Eo ipso praefulgebant, quod non visebantur. So likewise these emitted
more refulgent rays of glory, whilst obtenebrated by the obscurity of a
prison, then if they had been publicly manifested.

How aptly may that be applied to them which Tertullian speaks of the light of
the day, which taken hence by the Western Ocean, and as it were interred:
Rursus cum siuo cultu, De Resur. car. c. 12.
cum dote, cum Sole, eadem and integra, and tota universo orbi reviciscit;
intersiciens mortem suam noctem; rescindens sepulturam suam tenebras. These
Wise men went into prison, as seed falls among the clods, which buried, but not
dead; without coming out, fruitfully shoot out through the fertile mould, and
by the Ears it sends forth, makes it appear that where they appeared dead,
their they labored for the lives of many. They were shut up in Towers, and
there revolving their thoughts with indefatigable speculations, they became of
universal utility: just as the Town-clock imprisoned in some Tower with a
finger pointing without, to the hours, gives a rule to all the peoples actions.
They were hid in Caves of stone, but like that fabulous Echo of the Poets,
having lost all their other essence, they became all voice, which re-sounded,
and reverberated, by the stones of their prison, they made themselves heard
through all the World: so that it may be affirmed of one of them, what the
Author of Metamorphosis said of Echo.

-- Latet nullaque in luce videtur, Lib. 3.

Omnibus auditur. Sonus est qui vivit in illo.
Solitude, and silence the indivisible companions of Study; which to find,
others have buried themselves in the most private retirements of their houses,
woods, and caves; these have for their companions in prison, and are thereby
the less solitary, and with the mind contracted within itself, their wits are
as clear sighted in their profounditudes, to deserve the cleerer lights of all
the Sciences, as from the bottom of that famous well, the eyes were able to
discern the Stars at midday.

The Wise Infirm.
POetry had a Deucalion that of Stones could make men; Philosophy had a Zeno
that of men could make Stones.

Deucalion, restorer of the World, from the naked top of mount Parnassus, the
only Port of all the World submerg'd in a Deluge, and made one entire Sea; cast
over his head-stones, the bones of our Grandmother, and according to the
Oracle, Sexa (quis hoc credat, nisi sit pro test vetustas?)
Ponere duritiem caepere suumque rigorem.
Mollirique mora, mollitaque ducere formam.


On the other hand Zeno, transfused a vein of stone into those men that were
his Scholars, and made them become obdurate and insensible, by extirpating all
affections out of their hearts. So that his school was rather an Ingravers shop
where he wrought Statues than an Academy of Philosophy, where he molded
Philosophers. His first and last lesson was to learn to get the mind to the
pitch of Royal fortitude; so that neither the surprizals of Love, nor the
assaults of Malice, nor the seiges of Hope, nor the batteries of Desperation,
nor the scalado's Audacity: finally, that neither the arms nor arts of any
Affection should be able to force the heart to surrender it self, or yield
either at discretion, or upon articles. In the tempest of bodily insirmity, of
disturbed humors, of sickly constitutions, he would have the heart stand Velut
pelagi rupes immota, which assaulted but not moved by the waves, breaks them at
his feet, and makes them recoile in a foam. All the tortures of the World,
though with a painful wrack our members should be torn off, one by one, have
not in them any thing worthy to cause a fainting of paleness in our faces, or
feebleness of courage in our breasts: have not power to extort one interjection
from our mouths, nor one bare tear from our eyes. Yea, rather the more
torments increase, the more of cheerfulness should appear in the forehead;
like the Heavens which are then fullest of serenity when Boreas blows with
greatest frigidity and impetuosity. But what talk I of Zeno and the Stoics?
Epicurus himself, that animal, whose soul only served him for salt, to the end
he might not stink alive in pleasures; taught, not how to turn thorns into
flowers, to extract honey out of gall, to change his miseries into Jubilees, and
to convert misfortunes into felicities. Delight therefore being the fountain of
beatitude (says he) and that man not being able to call himself blessed, who
is not always so, it is necessary that he knew as well how to rejoice in
torments as in contents. Quare Sapiens (says Epicurus cited by Seneca) ^i in
Phalaridis tauro peruratur, exclamabit: Dulce est, ad me nihil pertinet.

But they desire too much, who will not infuse Wisdom into men, without
depriving them of humanity. Other Schools more prudently taught, that the
affections should not be pulled up by the roots as venomous plants, but as wild
and un-cultivated trees they should better themselves by transplanting and
grafting. Many sound, witout a skilful Artist to accord them, make a
displeasing discord; but if from Proportion they receive Time and Measure, they
compose the melody of a perfect Harmony. But those rigid Schools by the
imposition of so strict an injunction, of extirpating the passions from the
heart, have taught us thus much; that right Philosophy can give us such an
empire over our affections, that if it inchant not the senses at the undergoing
of affliction, nor yet render us so stupid as to be insensible of them; yet it
permits us not to be transported with desperation, not provoked with
impatience; nor in the many tempests arising from the miseries of the body, to
lose the tranquillity of the mind.

Now therefore behold a Wise Sick man: Behold him I say, not extended on a bed,
but imbarqued in a ship; not among the fevers and anguishes of a violent
infirmity, but amidst the waves and billows of a long and tedious tempest. See
how he lower sail, how the planks fly asunder, how the mast trembles, how each
part from poop to prow shivers, and the ship resents all this, as no peril of
wrack, but as the nature of the tide. The judgment of the Pilot, and dexterity
of the Marmers, steer it, I will not say quietly through so many tumults, but
securely through so many dangers. Sapience sits at the stern, to manage the
mind, and govern the affections, that in one, (though it may be violent)
tempest, wherein another would have sunk, a Wise sick man will sail, if not
with the serenity of a calm, yet with the security of a Port.

Yea, shall see in a body tottering, a mind so firm, in a body disordered a
mind so composed, that you would think you saw two persons in one man, one of a
Philosopher another of an Infirm. This like the sides of Olympus obnubulated
with clouds, bathed with mysts, and transfixed with thunder; that, like its
lofty top, always enjoyes the Heavens serene, always beholds either the Sun
or the Stars; That like a cloud which is melted and dissolved into rain; this
like a Rainbow, merry in melancholy, and laughing in the midst of tears.

Now if you would know how this comes to pass: tell me: Tranquillity of mind,
does it avail to the sanity of body? They are so united together, that the one
sympathizeth with the other, and (as it happens in the chords set to unison)
that the one being struck the other moves. The affections of the mind are the
winds, the humors of the body the sea; whilst the winds rore, the Sea grows
rough and tempestuous. On the contrary. Quidquid animum evexit, says S^neca,
etiam corpore prodest. So that if Philosophy did no other but only teach us to
esteem death to be that which it is (of which it has so noble, and so generous
expressions) how many and how violent paroxismes of fear, (assailants sometimes
more mortal than Fevers themselves) does it thereby expel from the heart? How
many, half-sound, wholly secure, at the least shocke of calamity die only out
of fear of death, and miserably expire for nothing: Epigr.
in like manner as Dyaphantes that hanged himself in a halter made of a
Spiders-web? Graec.


Aeneas coming to Hel-gates, had a terrible encounter of Centaures, Harpyes,
Chymera's, Gorgons, Hydra's, at which sight his blood retired to his heart for
fear, and his hand to his sword for defense.

Et ni dicta omnes tenues sine corpore vitas
Admoneat volitare cava sub imagine forma, Aeneid.

Irruat, and frustra ferro diverberet umbras.
Just in the same manner does the Wise Infirm. The fears of death which in
sundry frightful shapes, does make toward him from the gates of Hell, he knows
what they are. Ex epist. 24.
Tenues sine corpore vitae, and remembers that which that Roman Sage writ,
that Non hominibus tantum, sed and rebus personae demenda est, and reddenda
facies sua. Toll istam pompam sub qua lates, and stultos territas. Mors es
quam nuper servus meus, quam ancilla contempsit, etc. In so much that the fools
which seeking medicines for diseases, have no remedy for this of fear, in which
they freeze more than they burn in their fevers; will neither see any thing,
nor permit themselves to be seen of any thing, which may awaken in their
memories the remembrance of death. So that they imitate the simple Fellow, who
to hide himself from the fleas that bit him, put out the light; and Non me,
Epigr.
inquit, Graec.
cernent amplius hi pulices.

The fearful and timorous have but too good eyes, being accustomed to see
better in the dark than light.

If therefore the dispositions of the mind be of such efficacy in the
impressions of the body, what great advantage has the Wise Infirm, that he
maintains the soul in serenity, and the mind in tranquillity; that fear is not
able to cause the least transportment or palpitation of heart, and the
acerbitude it self of the disease, is thereby qualified, and remits of his
fury? Levem morbum (says Seneca) dum putas facies. Omnia ad opinionem suspensa
sunt. Non ambitio tantum ad illam respicit, aut luxuria, aut avaritia. Ad
opinionem dolemus. Tam miser est quisque quam credit.

But the misery is small if we do not augment it, and make it greater by
impatience, and so much the less, by how much the mind being otherwise
occupied, (a thing easy to the studious) is diverted from the sense of the
present pain, and takes its flight as the Hearn in time of a storm of Hail or
Rain, surmounting the clouds to enjoy the Heavens in their serenity.

Siracusa being taken by Marcellus, and full of the shouts of the victors, and
shrieks of the vanquished, whilst those overran, and these ran through the
streets, only Archimedes had his mind so intent upon the lines of certain
Mathematical figures which he was describing, that he neither saw, knew, nor
heard any thing, of all that past abroad, but had lost himself in his
contemplations, so that being slain by an impatient Soldier he perceived
himself dead before he was aware of his dying, and was more aggrieved that he
could not finish his Demonstration, than at the finishing of his life. And
Solon groaning in his last pangs, whilst he lay a dying, over-hearing some
Philosophers, which accidentally began a Dispute, near his bed, he forgot he
was a dying, and re-calling his fugitive soul to his head, as if he had awak't,
or risen from the dead, opened his eyes, and ears; nor did he end his live,
till they had finished their Dispute. Seneca, did not he once (as himself
relates) run from the ague that sought him, flying in the hour of its
accession to hide himself in the most secret speculations of Philosophy?
Angelical St. Thomas was not moved with the smart of a burn which he had
received casually, in that he prudently reflected with profound study, upon his
wonted lucubrations.

Your body is confined to a bed, let your mind preserve its liberty, and you
shall be the less present to your sufferings, by how much by this you are
absent. Seneca Ep. 78.
Illud est quod imperitos in vexatione corporis male habet. Non assueverunt
animo esse contenti. Multum illis cum corpore fuit. Ideo vir magnus, ac prudens
animum deducit a cor pore, and multum cum meliore, ac divina part versatur:
cum hac querula, ac fragili quantum necesse est. He would say (and he speaks
there of the Wise Infirm) that he is as a Compass, which if it has one of his
feet immoveably fixed, it with the other moves about, describing greater or
lesser Circles, according as it is more or less distant from the Center.

But, behold, in one only man the precepts of all these. In the beholding of
Possidonius a Wise sick-man, you will find what I have said to be authenticke,
that Learning and Wisdom, bear up the sickbed in an inundation of
infirmities, as the Crocodiles their nests upon that of Nilus.

This was a Philosopher, a long time un-healthy and laden with more diseases
than members, for in every part of the body he had many ails; and had he been
sub-divided into many men, he could have made a complete Hospital of all
Diseases, whereas being all summed up in him alone, they hardly made one sick
man. Thanks to the fortitude of his mind which supplied the imbecility of his
body; and the anguish of his crazy limbs did no more penetrate his heart, than
the dart transfixeth the bowels of an Eliphant, which is repulsed by his skin:
so that; Tot jaculis unam non explent vulnera mortem, Lucan. lib. 6.

Viscera tuta latent penitus.


That grand proof of Roman valor which Mutius Scevola gave to King Porsenna,
when more resenting the error he had committed than the burning of his hand,
beheld it un-dauntedly to burn in the fire, when as he could not endure without
impatience to err in his body, to the so great astonishment of the king his
enemy, that he was constrained not only to commend his murderer, in the
midst of his repentance for not having slain him; but to be also his champion
against himself, taking the fire from under that hand which merited light, and
was more worthy of a palm for his error than he would have been for his blow;
This I say, was one, only act, upon one only hand, for a short time, in a man
worthy of death, in a man bitterly offended with himself. Posidonius so many
years in his bed, as Anaxarchus in a mortar, tormented in one part after
another, and consumed by his dolours, surviveth the continual death, which he
endured only to be the longer dying, and beheld himself and his miseries, with
not only dry, but cheerful eyes; and took those very pains as subjects to
Phylosophate upon, methamorphosing his Chamber into a School, and his Bed into
a Chair. In a word, he did as the Moon, which though it be in eclips and lose
his light, yet it loses not the course of its revolution, but prosecuteth its
motion, although she be not so full of light as before.

Men flockt from all parts about Rhodes, to hear and see a man, which from his
own wounds took Balsome for others; and more admirers had he lying upon a bed,
than that famous Colossus of brass, erected upon the entrance of the Port, for
the glory of Rhodes, and miracle of the World. Pompey the Great passed into
Greece, and drawn by the Fame of Posidonius, desired to see him; and he came
just at the instant, when he was more than ever, under the anxions pangs of his
dolours. He came, he saw, and he was overcome. Pompey seemed the patient,
compassionating the torments of Posidonius; Posidonius seemed the healthful
man, discoursing amply with Pompey, and proving the verity of this argument.
Nihil bonum est, nisi quod honestum sit; and with such cheerfulness of face,
and constancy of mind did he do it, that lacerated with torments, instead of
groaning, he smiled, and when others would have played the beast, he said. Nihil
agis dolor, quamvis sis molestus nunquam te esse confitebor malum.

Thus Sapience which is the quintescence, of the noblest learning, can better
than the Stygian Lake did Achilles, render the mind impenetrable to the wounds
of the body, and hold it so far alienated from all sense of its sufferings, by
how much it knows how to employ the thoughts about more pleasing objects.

So that be the Wiseman poor, be he in prison, be he banished, be he sick;
behold, in two words, the remedy for each of these diseases. Pauper sia^? inter
plures ero. Exul fiam? Ibi me natum putabo quo mittar. Seneca epist. 24.
Aligabor? Quid enim? Nunc solutus sum? ad hoc me natura grave corporis mei
pondus abstrinxit. Moriar? Hoec dicis: Desinam aegrotare posse, desinam
alligari posse, desinam mori posse.

Thus have I glanced at the happiness of a Learned man, by what may be taken
from himself, but because this little light which I have been able to give to
so illustrious a matter, may appear yet cleerer. I will draw its shadow near
it: and if I have made you see Wisdom to be happy though in misery; now I will
prove Ignorance to be miserable though in felicity.

Ignorance miserable, although in Felicity.
Ignorance and Sanctity.
SAnctity is a pearl of so great a value and of so inestimable a price, that
then when it is not set in Gold, when it shines not among the lights of the
understanding, among the rays of the Sciences, it diminishes not at all in
worth nor is it less esteemed by that great Merchant, which gave all he had
for it.

In Gods balance is weighed, not the goodliness of the understanding, but the
goodness of the Will; nor is he taken with acute fancies, but with ardent
affections. Wretched Lucifer knows this, who having the flames and splendour of
Wit, but wanting the ardor of Love, ambitious to become the Sun of Paradise,
became the Prince of infernal darkness; and praecipitating with the other Stars
which fell from Heaven, manifested how far deeds excel knowledge, whilst the
ignorant men of the earth climb thither from whence the learned Angels from
Heaven fell.

God never desired any man's head, yet he desires every man's heart, nor does he,
dictating to the pen of the great Chronologer Moses, the Creation of the world,
take care to teach how many are the number of the Stars, how great is the mass
of the Heavens, what the virtue of their aspects; and whether they derive their
light from the Sun, or have the fountain of it in themselves; By what ways the
Planets move, whence come the spots of the Moon, and the causes of Eclipses; If
the Heavens be solid, if the Sun be hot; how the Rainbow is painted, how the
winds run through the air; Who moves the Sea with fluxes, and re-fluxes; who
makes the earth to quake. Lib. 6. Henam. cap. 2.
Quae nihil ad nos, says St. Ambrose, quasi nihil profutura praeteriit. He
said only so much as sufficed to infuse into the judgment the fundamentals of
Faith; he dictated only so much as was necessary to be known for the
accomplishment of his Law: the rest he omitted, as if, Marcescentis sapientiae
vanitates. Ibidem.


And the Wisdom of the Father, his living Word, the great exemplar of all the
Idea's, came he in the School of a stable, upon the chair of a Manger, in the
assembly of Oxen and Asses, to teach in the silence of midnight, with the
voice of his groans, the occult verities of humane Philosophy? Lived he in the
Liceum, a Professor of Learning, a Maintainer of Disputes, a Writer of
Sciences? Or yet did he discover the least letter, that may be pronounced, did
he in this (as said St. Augustine very finely) make so much as Jotaunum, which
is the least letter; yea or Unus apex, that is, less than the least of all the
Letters?

He came, its true, to convince the Philosophy of the Academi's and Liceum's of
Ignorance; and to make the Wisdom of the World to appear foolishness: but he
used not therefore, sublimness of style, nor quaintness of pelligrine
discourses. With the simple word of his mouth, Fecit latum de sputo, using
parables, and a manner of speech not only vulgar, but rude, and with this
restored sight to our but dim-sighted eyes.

And for Apostles, the Legislators of the World, the Oracles of true answers,
who did he elect? who did he call? The rude and ignorant, taught with no other
voices than of hoist the sails, weigh anchor, make to shore; learnt them in
the Mariners school; Yet, says Theodoret, with the Solecismes of these
illitrates he confounded the Syllogismes of the Philosophers. Vide S. Bernard.
sermon. 36. in Cant.


Thus God honored Sanctity without Learning, by how much the purer, by so much
the fairer: By how much the less exhaled by speculations, so much the more
plentiful, and abundant in affections.

He knows much, yea, knows all that knows no other than only God. He that
knows not this, howbeit he knows every thing else, knows nothing: whereupon
according to Origin, that bad Politician and worse Priest Caiphas spoke the
truth to the Hebrew Senators sworn enemies of Christ. Vos nescitis quidquam:
Vere enim nihil noverant, qui Jesum veritatem ignorabant.

Lord, give me the merits of so great a glory as that wherewith St. Gregory
honors that good Monk Steven, of whom he says, Erat hujus lingua rustica,
sed docta vita. Lord, teach me, and discover to me thy self, I desire to know
no other, and I will leave with the Samaritan the Well of humane Wisdom, that
springs from the earth, and also the pitcher of desire of ever any more
thirsting for it.

Hitherto I have spoken in others language, not with my own; and said that, not
which is absolutely true, but which some preach as true: some I say, qui ad
inscitiae praetextum, Orat. 27
faith Nazienzen, in alleding themselves to be the disciples of Fishermen,
condemn the Sciences in others, which they desire not, or indeed rather know
not how to have in themselves.

An Ecclesiastic that could read no other Books, understand no other
Philosophy then that of his revenue, and defended himself with this shield of
the Apostle, which says, 1. Corint.
Learning is a venom and p^st; litter a enim occidit (thus he interpreted that
text) moved Sir. Thom as Moore, either in derision, or for his correction to
write upon him this Epigram: but in him alone to how many does he speak?

Magna Pater, clamas. Occidit littera: In ore
Hoc unum, Occidit littera, semper habes,
Cavisti been tu, ne te ulla occidere poss it
Littera. Non ulla est littera nota tibi.
That Sanc^ity without Learning is very precious and excellent, there is none
will deny. That its better to be a holy man than a wise man, who doubts? but
that its not better to be a Saint and a Scholar than a Saint alone, I know no
man that can with reason question it.

To be, as Christ said of the great Baptist, Lucerna ardens, and lucens, in
whom the light is united with the fire, and the heat with the splendour; which
is that very Perfectum of S. Bernard, in whom both parts concur; Lucere, and
ardere. To have as the Holy Animals of Ezekiel, Manus sub pennis, namely, the
works of the hands, and the desires of the mind. To carry in the mouth as the
Spouse, the Honey combs, cultivated by Heaven, and of the Earth, with the Honey
of eternal life for himself, and with the Wax tapers of Sciences, Illuminators
of others. To unite as in the Ark the Law, and the Manna; as in Paradise the
Tree of Life, with that of Wisdom; finally, to Love and to Know: is not this
upon earth the type of the Beatitudes of Heaven? is it not worthy to be the
Throne of that great Monarch, and God, which sits upon the Cherubims, and rides
upon the Wings of the Wind?

One of the most signal honors God does bestow upon his favorites is the gift
of the Sciences. For if by giving to Abraham one letter of his name, he did him
so extraordinary a favors, Ut quemadmodum reges (says Chrysostom) praefectis
suis tabellas aureas tr adunt, signum videlicet principatus sic Deus justo
illi, in honor is argumentum, unam literam deder it: What shall we say, of him,
to whom Gods adds, not only a letter to the name, but great Sciences to the
mind, making him the liker to himself the perfecter he is in understanding? The
Spouse craved nothing before this beginning the Canticles with demanding a
kiss, which was in effect to require, that her Husband would be her Master, and
with his Love to give also Learning; that, in the union of the lips: this, in
the impressions of the speech; Petit osculum, says the Interpreter St.
Bernard, id est, Spiritum Sanctum invocat, per quem accipiat simul and
scientiae gustum, and gratiae condimentum. Et been scientiae quae in osculo
datur, cum amore recipitur; quia amoris indicium osculum est. Those that are
thus privileged, are the ^ilii Lucis, called, as Beda interprets it, by the
illustrious name of Day, In Ps. 19
in that place where the Prophet says, Dies Dei eructat verbum, per diem enim
accipimus limpidissimum, and lucidissimum ingenium ad divina contemplanda
habentes. And as according to the saying of St. Ambrose, Ser. ult.
Ipse est Dies filius, cui pater Dies Divinitates suae eructat arcanum, so to
these the said Dies filius principal fountain of all knowledge imparts his
splendors, enriching them with wisdom. These, says Origin, are the Golden
Candlesticks, by whose light the Ark is enlightened, and the Sanctuary
illuminated. These are Lillies; in the Truths they understand, Candid, and in
the Charity with which they love, Vermillion, These are the Grandees of the
kingdom of God that add the Docere to the Facere. The Stars splendid in
perpetuas eternitates; the precious stones, foundation of the Jerusalem of
Gold: For this title of honor the great Augustine gave to the most eloquent
St. Cyprian; And both these merited it, and with them the Areopagite,
Athanasius, Basil, Nazienzen, Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, Gregory, and many
others no less admirable in understanding than in conversation.

The Theologer calls one endowed with Sanctity, Orat. 20
and devoid of Learning, a man deprived of one eye; for even to know God,
whereby to be the more engaged to love him, the Sciences, to him who knows how
to use them as Guides, give a great light.

And here see under the type of a Solecism a secret mystery hinted by S.
Ambrose, glanced at by David; In Psalm. 119.
Defecerunt (says he oculi mei in eloquium tuum, dicentes, Quando consolaber
is me? How will you accord this with the laws of Grammar, OCULI dicentes, in
the plural number, with the other singular Consolaber is ME? if Perspective do
not teach you, that the Centrick lines of both the eyes, called the Axis's, do
concur to turn to one point, wherein both the eyes serve but for one, for
they see not the object doubly represented, but singly, as if there was no more
but one eye howbeit it must be confessed, that the sight as double is more
strong, more distinct and able to judge of distant objects. If to the knowledge
and vision of God the eyes of Faith and Science concur, (which happily is
that which the kingly Saint desired,) can any one doubt if such a sight be more
distinct and discerning? Therefore the Sciences are not prejudicial to
Sanctity, but rather assistant as companions, or at least subservient as
handmaids.

As (again) to the example of Christ, to see how little he favored the
ignorant Saint in comparison of the Wise; it suffices to remember, that where
he in recounting the list of our miseries, so generously extends his arms, he
only debarres ignorance, nor would he suffer her darkness to have any place in
the Light of the World. In poverty necessitous, in weakness drooping, in
sollitude abandoned, in contempts neglected, in nakedness abashed, in pains
tormented, on the cross murdered: satiated with opprobries, and from the crown
of the head to the soal of the foot abounding with dolours: amongst such a
multitude of maladies, he would not admit of Ignorance. Under the hairy skin of
the salvage Esau was retained the voice of Jacob, so that as being the Wisdom
of the Father he was not, and Master of the World, he would not be Ignorant.
For if that he spoke not more highly of what he did, it was because he would
not be a Sun to the eyes of Batts; condescending too much in being a Lamp. But
if he then was silent, he has spoken ever since for these sixteen Golden Ages,
which the Church has hitherto seen; he had spoke I say with tongues and pens
of so many and so illustrious Doctors of the World, that from him, as the
fountains from the Sea, have took all the splendour and all the profusion of
that Doctrine, wherewith, to the profit of Posterity, they have so copiously.
filled their voluminous labors.

Laudate igitur pueri Dominum, Psalm. 113
hoc est ( says St. Augustine) sit senectus vestra puerilis, and ^it queritia
senilis, ut nec Sapientia vestra sit cum superbia, nec humilitas sine
Sapientia: ut laudetis Dominum ex hoc nunc and usque in saeculum.

Ignorance, and Dignity.
MIserably simple are those Statuaries who know not how to form a Giant of
Terrible aspect, if in the posture of a mad man they make him not to distend
his arms, and il-favouredly stradle with his legs, as if he would measure the
World at a stride. The same, says Plutarch, befalls to those Princes, who
believe themselves to be most majestical, when they make themselves appear most
terrible. And therefore they assume an austere life, with an artificial
severity contracting their brows, and elevating their looks, so that beholding
them, you may properly apply to them what the Poet says of Pluto; -- Magna
pars Regni trucis
Est ipse Dominus, Seneca Her. fur.
cujus aspectum timet
Quid quid timetur. --


How aptly would it evene, if we might whisper into their ears, what a most
prudent Emperor told the Senate of Rome, when he understood the design they
had to degrade him, because being troubled with the Gout, he could not come
abroad in person to manage the public affairs; He caused himself to be
brought into the Senate House, showing with a long Oration, that he had as free
a mind, as deficient feet, and left them in a confusion with these words:
Nescitis caput imperare, non pedes?

The repute of being a man of great judgment: and not a frowning countenance,
makes the Grandees esteemed; nor is he the most Majestical that's the most
stately; He that knows most, and can do most; he who is all Eye and all Scepter
(which was the Hierogliphick, and Character with which the Egyptians expressed
the Idea of a King) he is most a Prince, he has most of Divine.

Nor can he be said to know sufficiently, who being an Arbitrator of public
and private interests, has not wit, and consequently a judgment informed by
those Sciences, which dictate to him what he ought, and what he may do as a
Prince, as a Judge, and as a Father. On the contrary a Prince loses so much of
his Dignity, as he wants of his Knowledge, being thereby necessitated to see
with another eyes, or to put others eyes into his head to see.

For if you have some, who not to prostitute their most worthy part, their
Understanding, and therein become subject to their servants; will by themselves
alone resolve that, which requires another balance, and other weights then
those of their defective discretions. Tum vero, says Xerxes, ignorantia
Principis, regninavim agit in syrtes. Therefore he that has not an
understanding of his own sufficient, is constrained either to err to the ruin
of himself and others; or else to avoid errors, he is compelled to share his
office and become a Demi-Prince, and the Property for to father the
mis-government of a corrupt and mercenary Counsel: whereas those only are
complete and absolute, in whom the scales of Power, and Policy, proportionably
to the State they govern, are suspended in aequilibrium.

John the Emperor therefore chose rather to die, than let his hand be cut off,
wounded by an envenomed dart, and gives this reason. Because having but one
hand we shall be no more than half an Emperor, nor can we by our self hold
the reigns of Sovereignity, to which both our hands are little enough; and he,
who together with prudence wants the half of the draught of a perfect Prince,
does not he seem, in being ignorant, to be but half a Prince?

What strange Capricio came into a certain man's head, to write and teach to the
World: That the most necessary quality of a Prince is Ignorance: that only line
sufficing him for an entire Encyclopaedia, which Lewis the XI, desired that
Charles the VIII, his son should only learn, Qui nescit dissimilare, nescit
regnare.

He held it for an insallible Maxim, that one man cannot be both Learned and
Prudent, opposing the speculation of Sciences to the practice of Government.
And thus into the hand of a King he puts the Scepter, to his side the Sword,
and to his Head the ears of King Midas. Mctam.
Aures lent gradientis aselli: Aures aptas grandioribus fabulis.

Thus Agrippina educated her Son, Tertul. de Pallio 2.
Husband, and Paricide Nero, taking him from his graver studies, lest that
turning Philosopher, he should lose the beastly life he led. Thus Licinius the
Emperor molded himself, who condemned Learning as guilty of high treason in a
high degree, although it never offended him, as having never entered into his
head, never come within his comprehension: having begun to be a beast from the
instant, he began to be a man.

Let us set up in opposition to this unworthy error, or folly, amongst an
hundred others, an Augustus, a Germanicus, a Titus, an Adrian, an Antoninus
Phylosophus, an Alexander, a Constantine, a Theodosius, an crowned with a
double Laurel, as Sages, and as Emperors. Let us range Augustus in the front
of this Celebrious Troop, who (upon the credit of Suetonius and Dion,) every
day though in the height of the importunate affairs of War, and under a
pavillion in the field, did set apart some time for his study; that so no day
might pass in the which he had not done some act of a man; and yet
nevertheless he reigned forty years, so wisely and happily over the whole
World. And against him let us rank the most illiterate Domitian, whose
employment for some hours of the day was to stick Flies, and for every one that
he slew, he boasted, as if he had been an Apollo, against a Python.

Compare Alexander Severus, reverenced as Terren Jupiter, not so much for the
Thunder which he held in his hand as Emperor, as for the Pallas he had in his
head as a Philosopher: with the simple Caligula, exposed to public view,
attired like Bacchus, crowned with Laurel, and a Tigers skin for a Mantle,
which represented him to be more like a beast than a god, and let us hear him
deliver his ebrious Oracles with a ridiculousness conformable to his garb.

Who taught that Thracian Consinga, Polyan. Stratag. 7.
to erect ladders toward Heaven upon the towering top of a mountain, feigning
to take on those acclivities from the mouth of Juno, the answers, which he gave
in the interests of the public good; but only Prudence; for that the laws and
edicts of great men are so much the more willingly accepted, when they are
presumed to come from a mind of more sublime Sapience, and more noble
understanding? Therefore in my judgment, the most Celebrious Schools of the
Philosophers did not assign the Heavens an Intelligible Mover, so much out of
the necessity of revolving them, being of themselves moveable, or if you will
not so, at least, mutable Spheres; as because the World should rest the better
satisfied with his Government, whilst they believed these to be most noble
spirits; that revolving the Stars, dispose the principles, and temper the
influences, upon which to their thinking the felicities and calamities of both
public and private fortunes depend.

Little Alexander whilst he spoke with the tongue of Aristotle, his Tutor, in a
solemn audience, which in the place of his Father Philip he gave to the
Ambassadors of the Persian King, satisfying to the curious demands, which they
put to him to try him; wan to himself the name and title of Great King, whilst
he was as yet but a little Prince, Iste puer (said the Ambassadors) Magnus est
Rex, noster autem Dives: by which act he begat in the Persian as great desire
to have him for their King, Plutar. Or. 2. de fort. Alexan.
as an extraordinary opinion of his wisdom. And doubtless, take from this Great
Monarch some few errors of youth, and excesses proceeding from his too violent
and Martial temper, if that part of his actions be considerably weighed (not
with the malice of Seneca (for in this he is rather a Cynick than Stoic) libet
with Sage Plutarch, Orat. 1. de fort. Alex.
ad singulis ejus actiones exclamare, Phylosophice.

But seeing that the Prince and his Court are like the Satue and its Neech which
mutually take one from the other, value and ornament, now what Neech has a
learned Prince? what Court? Nero was a Musician amongst Fiddlers, like an Apollo
amongst the Muses. Elius Verus was Emperor of the Wind, int he habit of Aeolus
amongst his Courtiers, who were clothed white like Auster, another like
Zephyrus, another like Boreas; A grave and prudent Prince amongst Sage
Courtiers, resembles the Sun amongst the Syrenes, that with their songs ravish
the Planets, called by Cleanthes their fidlestick, because the Harmony of their
Scepters accord with the rules of his beck.

For if Manilius of Heaven, as of a Court, finging said; Astron. ^
Sunt stellae Procerum similes, etc. And to the Emperor Julian the Sun seemed
to be a King, Orat. 4.
about which the Planets obsequiously moved; why may not I call the Court a
Heaven, a Prince in whom there is the light of understanding, and the heat of
power, a Sun in the midst of so many Stars, as he has about him Learned Men;
that from his wise discourses derive light, and that to him with semblable
illumination communicate it. Of a higher value, and nobler alloy is this than
the samed and Material Heaven of Cosroes the King of Persia, which painted in
the arched roof of a spacious Chamber, as in the serenity of a pure azure
bespangled with Stars of Gold, and distinguished with certain moveable Spheres,
orderly revolving one within another; and resembled the whole vast mass of the
universe; in the midst of which the Barbarian, more like a Spider in the center
of her self-spun-web, than like a Monarch in the midst of the World, did idely
sit.

Seneca had not a more lively conceit wherewith to express the Beatitude of his
Jupiter, than the placing him in the midst of the Gods of his Court, as a Sun
in a Circle of Mirrours of splendid Diamonds, therewith the mutual transfusion
of rays from him into all, and from all into him, the light of the private
knowledge of each became public to all, and that of all, became appropriate to
each. But if Jove should from on high cast his eyes down here below to the
discreet Court of a Learned Prince, he would say either out of the transports
of stupor, or pleasure; as he did when he saw all the World expressed in the
little Sphere of the Great Archimedes; where In parvo cum cerneret omnia vitr^
Risit, Claud.
and ad superos talia dicta dedit.
Huccine mortalis progressa potentia curae?
Jam meus in fragili luditur erbe labor.


The Syracusan Dionysius had a desire of studing Philosophy, and making himself
as prosperously a Tyrant over souls with his tongue, as he had preposterously
over bodies by his sword. He invited Plat^ therefore and conducted him from
Athens to Syracusa. There need no other Master, to polish that stone, on which
nevertheless he could not grave a Mercury: for as much as Plato might easily
make men Philosophers, but could not make beast men. He came with his mouth
full of his Attick honey, but that sponge steep't in humane blood could not
im-bibe a drop. Yet, notwithstanding, whilst Dionysius heard him, all the
Court changed Scene, as so many enchanted Castles, which at the shake of a
magic rod, are changed from one thing to another. The Royal Palace, Shambles
of Syracusa, and rather a Caucuses Den than a Princes Palace, suddenly was
transformed into a I yceum, or rather a Temple of Sapience in which not the men
only, but even the scenes of the pavement seemed to phylosophate; since there
was not so much as a Palm on the wall, which showed not the design of
Geometrical Demonstrations, or the computation of Phylosophical numbers. Now
Dionysius had buried the name of a public Carnifex in that of a Philosopher;
and those which till then had abhorred him as a Hellish Fury, began to respect
him as a Demi-God amongst Princes. So much can Learning do in a Prince, so
much can a Prince professing Learning do in a Court!

Ignorance and Profession of Arms.
I May possibly find some difficulty in my undertaking to demonstrate, that
learning in a Soldier, is not to hang a Chain of pearl about his neck, and to
make him liker a Bridegroom than a Warrior. Some are of an opinion, that
Learning weakens the courage, exhaling the spirits, from the heart, and
consuming them in the head, whereupon as it is profitable to such as use the
pen, so it becomes incommodious to such as manage the sword.

Scilicet ingenuas dedicisse sideliter arts
Emolit mores, Ovid.
nec sinit esse feros.
The most ingenious animals, say they; are the most timorous: and the most
salvage, and indomable, are the most strong and courageous. Philosophy, the
Laws, and Poetry, are no greater ornaments to a Soldier, than for a Poet to
handle his sword, for a Civilian to order a Musket, for a Philosopher to trail
a Pike. Hercules perceived this, and stands recorded as an example to others in
that act of his, when he broke his Lute upon the head of his master Linus, and
ran out of School; the fidle-stick not becoming that hand, which should use the
Club, nor the harmonious melody of Music suting with him that was to wont
himself to the bellowing of Bulls, the roaring of Lions, the hissing of Hydra's
and cries of Tyrants, for whose punishment he was born.

Its true, I pretend not to persuade, that a man of war ought to be a Plato, an
Archimedes, or a Homer: but that the splendour of some laudable study should
have a reflection upon the Genius, like the luster that darts from arms, or the
picture upon the shield, I see not who can with reason doubt.

An Eagle who has eyes so acute in the Sun, and tallons so strong for the
prey; An Hercules, which knows how to tame monsters with his hand, and to bear
the Heavens on his head; An Apollo, who hung at his side both his Harp and
Quiver; A Pallas, with a Pen in one hand, and a Pike in the other: Lastly, a
Soldier with a certain mixture of Learning; what indecorum is there in these?
Is the rustinesse of the wit a luster and beauty, when its so dishonorable, on
the sword and arms? Is there such enmity, between the Pike and the Pen; the
strength, and the judgment; the combating of a Soldier, and the discourse of a
Scholar?

It is controverced amongst Critics whether is the more preheminent felicity,
Facere scribenda, or else, Scribere facienda. Let every one please his fancy in
this, but there is none will question, but that they are Felicissimi quibus
contingit utrumque. That your hand with the sword know how to attempt works
meriting immortal memory, and the self-same hand to know how to transmit them
to eternity, faithfully writing, what it has courageously achieved, a history
of it self, doubly glorious, and like to the Sun, which to the appearing in its
true grandeur, needs not the assistance of any other light: is not this the
summity of that glory to which humane merit may attein?

So much the more, in regard that the relations of Historians, are slighted if
prolix, and suspected if short: there be some men found in our days, that in
writing others Battails, have their eye only upon the victory of their own
profit. I say, there are certain men that to keep themselves from starving of
famine, expose the immortality of fame to who gives most. Rapacious Ravens that
sing Victor Caesar, not to him that conquers, but to him that feeds them; So
did Glow-wormes, which by their bodies gives light to others, and seek food for
themselves; and like the flatterer of the Warrior Pirgopolinices in Plautus,
Artro. in Milite glor.
they make the stories by the smell of the Table, and bestow applauds in
proportion to their hunger. How much better is it to be a man's own Historian,
and to employ the pen as best suites with the Honor of Loyalty, that admits of
no spurious additions of fiction; and with the Love of Glory, which suffers no
injurious detractions from Truth?

Julius Caesar is more obliged to his pen than to his Sword; for that slew his
enemies, this preserves him alive in the World to this day, and preserved in
its flourishing verdure, the double glory he had purchased of an Historian and
of a Conqueror. Collenuc.
And if that brave Rogiero King of Cicily, Histor.
as if he would express himself a debtor to his Neap.
sword, or manifest his gratitude to it; as having opened him the way to more
than one Kingdom, cut thereon this ingenious inscription.

Apulus, and Calaber, Siculus, mihi servit, and Apher. Caesar might write upon
his style, rather than on his sword the Victories of so many Battails, the
glories of so many Triumphs; since that if his sword made him victorious in the
Fields where he did fight, the style he did write, gave him all the people of
all the World for a Theater, and the applauds of all succeeding ages for
Triumphs.

Who will not laugh at the vanity of that Grecian Statuary, that presented
himself in the habit of Hercules before Alexander. Plutarc.
My Liege, Stasicrat.
says he, Vitruvio Dinocrat.
the virtue of your heart, the valor of your sword have changed the World for
you into a Temple of Honor. It only remains that we have a Statue for you,
which ought to exceed the vulgar proportion of those erected for others. Your
Giantlike Virtue, which warreth with the Gods, ought not to be ranked among
Mortals. I being desirous to eternize my labors with your name, and not so
much to render you immortal in the sculpture, as to render the sculpture it
self honored in you; here I offer my self to grave you in the highest Mountain
of the World, and make you equal to Heaven, since you are already greater than
the Earth. Behold, hither as far as Thessaly, Athos King of Mountains, inclines
his stately top, and sueth to be transformed into You; I will so contrive to
cut it, that you shall set one foot on the Sea and the other on the Land, and
these two great Elements shall serve for your basis. I will make it, that in
one hand you shall pour out a falling River out of a great Vessel, in the other
you shall hold a City. Nor will it be any such great matter for you to hold a
City and a River, that have all the World in your hand.

Alexander with one and the same smile accepted and refused the profuse offer
of the Sculptor. He had, its true, as many more may, a passionate desire of
being Great in the World, and to eternize himself to the memory of posterity;
but he desired to be known by the World for a mighty Warrior, and not for a
huge Colossus. Whereupon refusing the tools of Stasicrates, he desired the pen
of Homer, and called Achilles fortunate, because from himself he had Valor;
and from Homer Encomiums: from himself merit, and from Homer glory. Alas,
wherefore was is not better, for one that ^bounding in innumerable Heroic
enterprise needed not the help of speech for his ^ngrandment, rather to have an
Historian, than a Poet? And if so, why should I envy ^n others the glory of
making me happy with making me immortal, if it be in my own power to obtein it,
making my self as famous by my pen, as my hand had made me by my sword?

I will omit the necessity of eloquence in the profession of Arms, to animate
to reprehend, and to reclaim the Soldiers: and of a perfect practice in
ancient and modern Stories, and of those parts of Geometry which pertein to the
Mechanics and to Fortification, and sometimes of Astornomy; that so he may not
lose a march, or cast away an army, as it has more than once unluckily even'd,
through the terror of a sudden Eclips of the Sun; so that he be forced to
alledg Ignorance for his excuse, and say as one of Romulus, who made the year
but of ten Months only.

Scilicet arma magis quam sydera Romule noras. Ovid.
Fast.
Of all this I speak not, as being a business belonging only to the Commanders
of War; It shall suffice me only to remember them for a conclusion:

That they are not to be always in the Field, and in arms, but that one while
times of Peace, and another while the necessity of repose may call them to a
Civil life, wherein ought they not to have some of the rudiments of Learning,
at least he that is necessitated to the honorable conversation with persons of
quality, and of parts: ought he to resemble the Drums which in times of
quietness quite lost the sound with which they ratled in times of War? or in
imitation of the ancient custom of those good Roman Knights, the War being at
an end ought they not to fall to cultivating their Fields, as if a man of War
were a beast of rapine, which having gotten his prey in the populated Campaign,
returns to the forest and takes covert?

Paulus Aemilius having vanquished King Persius and subdued Macedonia, he
resolved with the Barons of that Kingdom to celebrate the Feast of Victory with
sumptuous Banquets, in which he used so ingenious a method in martialling the
Dishes that the Table seemed a pitched Field, in which the ^anks of Dishes
marched up against the Guests, who first began the skirmage, and gave the first
assault; making in time the empty and discharged to retreat, and giving way to
fresh recruits, which marched up to their succor; there were rarities, which
still kept their first postures on the Table; and there were some that seemed
to give orders who should retreat faster, and who more leasurely. Some came up
covertly, and in Ambascado's as if they were treacherous, others openly
discovered themselves: to conclude, the matter was no less delightful than the
manner of ranking the Napery: and all the invited bestowing their applauds on
Paulus Aemilius, he replied, Plutarc.
Ejusdem viri esse and armatam aciem quam maxim terribilem, Sympos. 11.
and convivium quam jucundissimum instruere.

But if the Knowledge of a Soldier extend no farther, so that the conversion
of War into Peace, is only a mutation of the annoyes of the Camp into the
delights of the City, and to becomes as Ajax, to day a great Warrior, to
morrow a Flower, this is a very mean Sapience, and even such that perhaps it
would be better being without it. How much more honorable and delightful
entertainment of the wit does Learning afford a part; moreover, to dulcorate
the ferocity of the nature, and to civilize that I know not what of salvage,
which is contracted in the sanguinous profession of Arms?

Arms are, Lib. 7. sermon. 18.
says Cassiodorus, In bello necessaria, in pace decora. Of Learning it may
with much more Justice be affirmed, if only the times be changed and you say,
In pace necessariae, in bello decorae. Achilles who every day learnt two
Lessons, one in the Desert where he grapled with Lions, another in the Cell of
Chiron, where he harmoniously played upon the Harp, and learnt the Secrets of
Natural Philosophy, instructed himself how to live both in Peace and War: in
Peace amiable to his friends, in War terrible to his foes. This also was the
glory of that Roman Achilles, Scipio Major, that in War was like Lightning all
fire with generous resolutions; and in Peace was all light with splendid wit;
nor was there less admiration to see him manage arms, than to hear him
discourse. Paterc. lib. 1. histor.
Semper enim, aut belli, aut pacis serviit artibus (says Velleius) semper
inter arma, ac studia versatus, aut corpus periculis, aut animum disciplinis,
exercuit.

These are very rare to be seen, and its almost a miracle to find ears,
accustomed to the sound of Trumpet, and noise of Drum, and yet not so deafned,
but that Wisdoms voice may by them be distinctly understood, Rare are the
Martial Hercules's that having consummated their labors, consecrate to Mercury
the Olive-club taken from Pallas; but the merit of those few that there are, be
inhanced by their rarity having those two incomparable qualities that
questionless render the person divine in whom they are united, Terrorem
pariter, and decorem, which aggrees with what Cassiodorus says of a Squadron
of armed Galleys, that whether they sported they could not be more goodly, or
whether they fought they could not be more terrible.

Ignorance and Riches.
HE that uses Learning for gain, and makes use of Mercury, as the Goldsmiths
do of Quicksilver, to separate Gold from others, and atract it to himself;
understands not what a malady Ignorance is in a Rich man. For so the hand be
full, they never empty their head, nor limbick their brains, since they have
already found the quintescense of Fortune, which they say is Money. Does it
suffice to be of Gold? then it matters not if they afterward be as that
beastial Philosopher, Golden Ass.

Now a-dayes, money is that which purchased Love and Honor: therefore you have
not betet letters of recommendation than letters of exchange, nor can you tell
how to write with better ink than that of Bankers.

Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro, Ovid.

At nunc barbaria est grandis habere Nihil.
And again; to what end serves such Philosophy and such Sciences in the head,
if they are only a means to break it, and let out the brains? Behold, the
ancient Philosophers and you will rather desire the hand of Midas to make Gold,
than the heads of these fools to make you such. Who shut their eyes to see
better in the dark, and to make themselves Eagles become Owls: Who threw their
wealth into the Sea, and made themselves Beggars, that they might not become
poor: Who chose to live in places shaking with continual totterings, and
conceited they lived best, when they were every hour in danger of death, and
that they lived most secure; whilst their house was continually ready to become
their grave: Who lived in Tubs more like to Dogs in their Kennels, than to men
in their houses: Who flung themselves into the Sea, and threw themselves into
Aetna; the one because he understood not the causes of those fluctuations, the
other because he could not trace out the original of those flames. Pythagoras
transformed himself into twenty Beasts; Socrates standing all a whole day in
one thought, and resting upon one leg, resembled a Crane; Anaxagoras steadfastly
beholding the Sun as an Eagle; Zenocrates was a marble without sense; Zeno a
stock without passion; Diogenes a Dog; Epicurus, a bruit; Democritus a fool,
that always laughed; Heraclitus a diserted fellow, that always wept. O curas
hominum! Is it not beter to have no head, than to have one with all these
fooleries? Is this to be a Philosopher? with this do the learned acquire
credit? The pearls that are round and plump (two properties of Rich Idiots)
are the most precious and most esteemed things of the World. Make me of Gold,
for then being but a Calf I shall be adored as a God: begun to be Canonized of
old by the Israelites in the Desert, and followed even to these our days, as
it also shall be to the end of the world.

This is the Philosophy of many Divise's which they broach in contempt of the
Learned, especially if they see them poor; illfurnished to resist hunger, and
ragged, or it may be naked.

But I wish on the other side that I had so good a faculty with my pen, that I
knew how to express to the life the deformed features of an Ignorant Miser:
and he should appear with the same Horror that Orgogna a famous Limner of his
times, occasioned in many friends of his, by discovering unto them a most
misshapen Medusa's head; for delineating which, he had sought and collected all
of hideous, and monstrous that he could find dispersed in a hundred ugly and
dreadful animals, that he had assembled together for that purpose.

The Spartans to represent abominable the vices of Idleness and Luxury; the
enemies of that severe Republic; called all the people to a general assembly,
and made them to see Nauclides, from a high place; a man so fat, that from head
to foot, he seemed all paunch. Aelian. lib. 4. var. hist.
Other examination, other process they made not against him. His corpulency
convinced him of Idleness: whereupon he was banished that City as
unprofitable; in who^ they punished as prejudicial to all; him that was only
profitable to himself. Now set before your eyes a Wealthy Ilitterate, you shall
see in him, not a man, but in the resemblance of a man, a living piece of
Touchstone, which knows how to distinguish Gold and Silver, and at the only
tact knows and discernes them; but yet after all is a stone: you shall see a
Sponge, that for what he can suck is all eyes; but for the rest is void of
sense; yea, is not to be accounted animal.

Clothe him with the subtilest webs, with the whitest linnens, with the noblest
silks; vest him with the purest wool that ever blushed with its double scarlet
dye; if he be accosted by a Demonax, you shall hear the blunt Philosopher tell
him as he did such another: Sir, this Wool a Sheep wore before you, Lucian. in
Demon.
therefore does it sit so well, and so voluntarily fit and become you; because
it is not of opinion it has lost, but only exchanged masters. And as the
color into which it is did, hinders not but that it contin^es Wool, although
more glorious, so the shape of Man that you have, hinders not but that you are
a Sheep, howbeit of a fairer skin, and goodlier presence.

Put him into a house ornified with the best garnishes, with all the noblest
furnitures, and what have you done? Who so passes by, and understands the
conditions of its master, that inhabits it, will say as the acquaintance of a
certain slothful Vatia, retired unto a country seat, passing by, Vatia hic
situs est. Seneca epist. 55. ld. ep. 60
Hear Seneca give a reason of the same: Vivit is, qui se utitur; not he who
makes his belly a slave to his head, but that consumes the thoughts of that, to
find means to cram this: the belly being bound to serve the head, by providing
it with spirits; necessary instruments for humane operations: otherwise
(pursues he) qui latitent, and torpent, sic in domo sunt tanquam in conditivo.
Horum licet in lumine ipso, nomen marmori inscribas, mortem suam antecesserunt.

These conditions of men ignorant, and rich Themistocles that Sapient Athenian
knew very well; that seeking a Husband for his Daughter poor as himself; and
one offering to have her; rich its true; but that knew not any thing more than
to tell money: whereas others would have run to this Golden hook, and have
expressed their gratitude to Fortune, with the Hecatombes of Pythagoras: he
retired with that Golden sentence, which was worth more than all the wealth of
that Illiterate; Quaero virum qui indigeat Pecunia, non Pecuniam, quae indigeat
viro.

And here, before I conclude this particular, I can do no less than suffer my
self to be transported and to bestow my congratulations upon certain happy
Families, in which not so much the riches or the patrimony of their Ancestors,
as Learning has been transmitted from Father to Son in continual succession,
as to Feoffees; so that like as amongst the Chickins of the Eagle, Degener est
qui luminatorsit, he that cannot endure the sight of the Sun, his extraction is
suspected amongst them, and he that at his birth produces not signs of the
same vivacity of wit, and love of Learning, is accounted spurious. Oh! Stock of
families truly happy; in whom there is always some Golden branch; nor only uno
avulso non deficit alter Aureus, but in them there is in every age, such who
bud, who flourish, and who germinate, answering with the degrees of age those
of wisdom, which are, to Learn, to Possess, and to Teach.

Excellent was that custom of the Spartans, Plutarc.
which divided into three Quiers, according to the three ages of Man; Old,
Viril, and Youthful; went singing in certain public processive solemnities.
The Aged, Nos fuimus fortes; those of Midle-age answered, Et nos modo sumus; to
which the Young replied; Et nos erimus aliquando. What Melody like to this?
when it falls out that in one house the Grandfather, Son, and Grandchild, the
first, deserving well for his Learning, recounting the degrees of his Honors,
pronounces that glorious Fui; The second displaying his Colors, and enjoying
his splendors, says Sum; the last giving hopes, and assuring himself in his
promising towardliness, says Ero; to be able one day himself also to say Sum,
and at last Fui? This is to concatinate a precious descent of Children, as
Jewels with a Ring of Gold: This is to make an incession of Heirs, like to a
rich vein of Diamonds, of which every one by it self is a Patrimony; all
together are an Exchequer.

The confusion of the Ignorant, being silenced in the presence of better
Speakers.
TO the Gust which we have above said to be proved by the Learned in the
exercise of ingenuity, and detection of verity, I will now oppose in the last
place the Disgust of Ignorance, condemned to silence where any man of Learning
is present; for as much as he that knows not, either how to keep silence, or to
speak, finds matter of shame in both, as being for his silence accused, and
for his speech condemned for a Novice. Thus Alexander, Pluta^c. megabi.
which ill instructed in Limning; in the School of Apelles, praising faults for
pieces of Art, spots for shadows, and errors for beauty; was by the Scholars
themselves derided. O miserable Ignorants put to a non plus at the meeting of
the Learned, and either stand like Consonants amongst Vowels mute, and with out
any sound, of their own; or the false amongst the strings of a Gittern, which
can reverberate none but discordant sounds. Thanks, that they have not their
ears on their heads, but as the Tyrant Dionysius in their heels; and capable
only of base and sordid things, wear not in their heads fancies proportionate
to a matter of noble intelligence.

And because it naturally evenes, that as vessels, the emptier they be, they
are the more sonorous; so he that has his brain worst furnished has the
greatest verbosity: hence it is, that these more ambitious to seem Learned,
than cautelous of discovering themselves Ignorant; whilst they talk freely
upon that which they understand not; gain in the opinion of their Auditors the
very same reward with that ambitious Neanthes; which persuading himself to be a
Son of Urania, thievishly filcht from the Temple of Apollo the Harp of Orpheus;
and getting into an open place, at the dead time of night, to have the greater
attention; there began to finger that luckless Instrument, which had not a
chord, which at the touch of so rude a hand sent not forth in answer a dolorous
Groan; as if it bewailed in its own dialect, its being rather tormented, than
played upon: So that if ever it was true that the Harp of Orpheus merited to
move Trees and Stones, it was at this time, when it was so unskilfully fingred
by Neanthes. But what was not done by them, was done by beasts; for the
discordant jarring rousing some brave mastiffs, and they judging of the Harper
more by his Music than by his countenance, Asinumad Lyram, tore him in pieces.
Whereby if he resembled not Orpheus in the grace of his harmony; yet at least
to his ill fortune, he followed him in his tragical kind of dying.

More mildly, its true, but withal more publicly, and by more mouths is
lacerated the Ignorance of the discrepant divulger of impertinencies;
recounting in derision the fooleries he spoke, the security wherewith he
defined them, the confidence wherewith he defended them.

Have you ever heard two of these, more round than the Circle of A famous
Painter who being required to do something to manisest his skill; only with
his pen made an O so exactly round as gave sufficient testimony of his rare
command of hand; and occasion of this proverbial speech.
Giotto; dispute a Question amongst themselves, or (as sometimes they will)
resolve a Problem? Lucian in Demon.
It will bring to mind the words, and into the mouth the laughter of Demonax;
which over-hearing two dispute aloud, one propounding, and the other answering
things to no purpose. Thou (says he to one of them) milkest a Goat, (and to
the other) thou instead of a Pale hold a Sieve.

It is a thing really, that moves, I know not whether more to compassion or
laughter, accidentally sometimes to hear read, or recited by such people, upon
subjects, although of noble argument, tedious discourses, and yet not one of so
many lines touch the center, or hit the mark, that the argument prefixed. So
that the matter that there is treated off might do to these, Laert.
as Diogenes did to an Ignorant Archer; who seeing in a hundred shoots he never
so much as once hit the white; ran and placed himself just before the But,
assured, that he would hit every thing, but what he aimed at.

If at least you will not grant, that it was the character of a singular wit to
be able to talk away the time, and speaking of every thing else, not so much
as once lightly to touch upon what he would have said. Thus judged the Emperor
Gallien in a solemn hunting; awarding the victory to one, that flinging against
a Bull from a little distance ten Darts, never touch him with any of them: And
presently sent him the Crown; saying, to such as wondered at the sentence; This
man is expert above you all. For to cast ten Darts so little a way, against so
great a mark and not to hit it, is a thing which none knows how to do besides
himself. And these are the merits, these the rewards of the sons of Ignorance,
when they affect Theaters, and beg applauds.

But if by misfortune they do encounter with deserved scorn, instead of
applause, you shall presently hear some of the most pertenatious assume these
bitter complaints. Envy is fatal to Virtue. From the splendors of glory arise
the shadows of malice. Detraction makes it self partner in the merits of the
worthy, like a slave intruding into the Chariot of his Triumphant Conqueror.

Again, from the more modest are heard those ordinary excuses, applied upon the
slightest occasions: That the difficulty of the matter, and the sublimity of
the argument (fit only for an Atlas' es wit) is above their abilities. And
sometimes their comes into their heads the excuse of that famous Faustulus
which dismounted by an Ant upon which be rode, and seeing the bystanders
laugh; remembered them, that he had Phaeton for his companion in that fatal
disgrace. Hear the story.

Faustulus insidens Formicae, Probinus inter opera Ausonii.
ut magno Elephanto,
Decidit, and terrae tergasupina dedit.
Noxque idem ad mortem est multatus calcibus ejus.
Perditus, ut posset viae reperare animam.
Vixtamen est fatus. Quid rides improbe livor.
Quodcecidis? Cecidit non aliter Phaeton.
The disgraces of such who not knowing how to speak, yet, as a fruit of their
ignorance attract to themselves others laughter ought not to go disjunct from
the scorns, which certain mutes also demerit that have the garb of Scholars,
but are indeed without any habit of true Litterature: with titles sometimes of
more than Scholars, but vox praetereaque nihil.

The skin of the Nemean Lion honored by the shoulders of the great Hercules,
that did wear it, never was more undervalued than when it covered a Woman.
Credo and jubas pectinem passas, ne cervicem enervem inureret stiria leonina;
Hiatus crinibus infartos, genuinos inter antias adumbratos. Tota oris,
contumelia mugiret si posset. Nemea certe (si quis loci Genius) ingemebat:
Tertul. de Pallio.
tunc enim se circumspexit leonem perdidisse. No otherwise do the dresses and
the titles; the ensigns and characters proper to the Learned, born by people
without Learning or Civility, bewail their Mishap, seeing themselves condemned
to be liars perpetually, in that they proclaim to as many as see them; him to
be a Lion who was but an Ass; him to be a Doctor, who is like certain Books
(as Lucian told such another) gilded gloriously and painted curiously without,
and within void of all Learning, being blank paper.

How many of these are seen to stalk along so proud and stately, that they
resemble that perfect Globe of the Mathematicians, that touches not the Earth
but only with one foot? Looking on what they seem, they forget what they are;
and like Bucephalus in his trappings, they vouchsafe that none shall touch or
behold them but the greatest King of the World.

Such was that Demi-man, Adversus Indoctum.
against whom Lucian so bravely whets his wits. He, as many also now a-dayes,
measured his knowledge by the Learning, that he had not in his head, but in
other men's writings; As if the Wisdom of Philosophers, shut up in their Books,
as it were in a glass, were like that of Orlando; and they could with only
smelling to it, draw it all into their brain; and thereby make themselves
living Libraries of as many Authors, as they have Books in their studies. Sic
apud desidiosissimos videbis (says Seneca) quidquid orationum, De tranquil.
an. 5. 9.
histori arumqne est; and tecto tenus extructa loculamenta. But to multiply
Books in this manner, and to wipe the dust off of them every day, not employing
them to take the rust from their brains; this is in the judgment of Sydonius,
Lib. 4.
Membranas potius amare quam literas. This is to make the house more
considerable, Epist.
than its Master, as succeeded to that Archelaus, Aelian. lib. 12. var. hist
to see whose Palace (in regard it was painted by Zeuxis) people slocked from
all parts; whilst in the mean space (says Socrates) there was not any man that
stirred a foot to see the owner of it. At quid dulcius libero, Quint. in Dialog.
and ingenuo animo, and ad voluptates honestas nato, quam videre plenam semper,
and frequentem domum concursu splendidissimo hominum, idque scire non pecuniae,
non orbitati, neque officii alicujus administrationi, sed sibi ipsi dari.

THE SECOND PART.
IT is not reasonable that the defects of the Learned should prejudice
Learning. Nor ought we to believe that to be a natural quality, which is a
vicious custom. The Horizon obscures the Sun with the fogs of the Atmosphere,
The reflections of the Earth (if their error be true who hold the same) appear
in the Moon as so many spots: The Aerial Vapors make the Stars seem unfixed
with a perpetual trepidation: Is therefore the Sun contaminated? Is therefore
the Moon maculated? Are therefore the Stars inconstant?

There is not that thing in the World so innocent, that is not culpable, if the
wickedness of such as abuse it can render it criminal. Arms, are perverted to
be the executioners of Cruelty; Scepters, the supporters of Ambition; Beauty,
the formenter of Lust, Riches, ministers of Luxury. Honors, the sustainers of
Pride, Nobility is often Counselour of Disdain. But what do I examining one by
one by one the better things, if to be short Sanctity be subservient to
Hypocrisy, and Religion to Policy? Therefore the abuses of Learning by some,
does no more condemn it, than flowers lose their innocence, or beauty, because
Spiders feed on them or suck venom from them.

For if it be, as indeed it is, the light of the Intellect, so also it has
this immutable property of light, that issuing from the center of the Sun it
carries with it together with his being, rectitude; so that it neither knows
nor can diffuse it self otherwise than by right lines: thus Learning coming
from the glorious Father of Lights, whose gift it is; should it have the beams
of its understanding inflexible from the Rules of Verity, and Reason: how far
happier would it be? how much more happy would the World be with it?

But seeing that onley the desire of it is little, and the pretense to it to
great; it seemed reasonable to me to produce some particulars, wherein
Learning is worst used, not only to the prejudice of others, but also to the
deceit of who so knows not how to use it (for from these two originals I have
took them) to imprint them on the minds of such, who together with the
knowledge of their errors, require some instigation to amendment.

PLAGIANISME.
Plagiaries that in several manners appropriate the fruits of others Studies.
THe ancient Art of Thievery Natural Daughter of Necessity, although since
become the Adoptive of profit, is as well committed upon Learning as upon
Money. Clemens Alexandrinus speaks of the original of those ancient times,
when it might be said, that the treasures of the Ingenious, no sooner were made
public to the eye of the World, than they became subject to the purloinings of
Plagiaries; and the Hellens of excellent Composures no sooner came to light,
than they found a hundred Menelaus's, a hundred Paris's to ravish them.

Some think (I will in a way of mirth wrest to my purpose the sense of that
Ancient saying of the Comic) that only, Homo trium litterarum makes Fur;
namely, that its only the Vice of the Illiterate to steal the labors of the
Learned, and with them to appear brave, and become rich. Howbeit the noblest
wits, and accutest pens have honored this Art, imping their own fancies with
the wings of others Muses: whereupon it holds true no less of the majestic
Lion, than of the feeble Ant, that Convictare juvat praedas, and vivere rapto.

The Writings of the great Aristotle, are famed to be a beautiful piece of
Marquetry, whereof the design is his own, but the matter for the most part
borrowed from others: And if Speusippus in the purchase of whose Books he
disburst three Tallents; if Democritus, if others like them, the labors of
whose Wits Alexander collected together for him, every one should challenge his
own, he that appeared a Phoenix in others Plumes, would appear but a Ja^k-daw
in his own.

Plato was taxed by a railing Fellow for a Thief, with an indictment made in
the name of Philolaus, as if he had (I will not say transcribed from him a
great part of his Timeus) but replenished it with subline juice sucked out of
Writings of that second Pythagoras; behold how Timon accuses him.

Exiguum ridimus grandi aere libellum. ^^ell. l. 3. 17.

Scribere per quem orsus per doctus ab inde fuisti.
And, doubtless, were there but an Archimedes, Vltr.
that knew how to distinguish of Books, praef fat. lib. 7.
as of mixtures of two metals, between the legitimate and the borrowed; Were
there but an Aristophanes, a Judge that could understand the language of the
dead when they speak by the mouths of the living; Were there but a Cratinus
that could put Books to the torture, and form the process of their thefts,
Gyrald. histor.
as he did of the Poems of Menander, of whose thieveries he composed six Books;
Poet.
you should see how true it is that Mercury god of the Learned is also god of
Thieves.

But in my judgment, the whole crew of such, who in their Books under their own
names publish the labors of others, may be distinguished into three orders,
one worse than another. The first are those who gathering from one, one thing;
and from another, another; and altering their titles, and inverting their
order, compose Books as they make Garlands, wherein many litles make a mickle,
many flowers make a Coronet. They have this discretion to steal from every one
a little, that so few should perceive and none complain of the theft; and (as I
may say) they do not embase, but only clip the Coin.

The names of these Authors sumptuously writ in Capital letters in the
Frontispice of their Books, stupifie them to behold themselves fathers of so
prodigious an issue; when as they are conscious that they were devoid of
productive virtue, or seed, that might enable them to the generation of so
admirable Births.

Miraturque novas frondes, and non sua poma. He perceives himself endowed with
such riches, and yet knows that he had neither stock nor revenues equivalent to
so great a purchase.

They hold it amongst them for a Law, never to mention the Authors out of which
they had filtch'd, least they should be detected for Plagiaries. Nor care they
for Pliny, In Pra oper.
that said, Obnoxii dnimi, and infelicis ingenii esse deprehend^ in furto
malle, quam mutud reddere; cumpraesertim sors fiat ex usura. Nor that ancient
custom related by M. Varro, to crown their Conduits once a year with
oderiferous Garlands of flowers, in grateful acknowledgement of the clear, and
wholesome water, that they drew from them.

But it happens many times (and this is the final end of all the Art of such
lik thieveries) that they take upon them to censure as Ignorant, and condemn as
shallow and superficial, those very persons from whom they borrowed all that
they had of good, insomuch as declaring themselves nice and critical in their
opinions, they are unsuspected of felonious filching. Just like to torrents,
which where they break down their banks with a high tide, diradiat, tear up,
and bear before them, all that stands in their way, but of that which their
impetuosity carries away, they ingorge the most solid, and show only the
stumps, sedg, and mud. This is an act proper to Harpies, to stisfie their
hunger at another Table, not contenting themselves with devouring that which
they carry away, unless, moreover, they spoil that which they leave behind.
This is to do with worthy Writers as the Caitiffe Dionysius did to his
friends, Laert. in Diogen.
which says, Diogenes, as vessels of preciou liquour he sucked and dreined till
he was full, and then broke them as being empty. This is to resemble the two
infamous Monsters in the Straights of Sicilia near to Pharos, Scilla, and
Carybdis, of which the first splits the ship, and wrecks the merchandise, the
other with his circulations devoureth them, and in a great gulf swallows them.
Te^tul. de Pal. c. 2.
They undervalue not others with an intent to reject them, but to ingorge them;
nec expuunt naufragia, sed devorant.

Wherefore let them hear as spoken to them alone what upon another subject the
Moral Plutarch records. In praec. ergoreip.
Non debemus suffurari gloriam eorum, qui nos in altum extulerunt, necesse ut
Regulis Aesopi, qui deseruit Aquilam cumea lassa ulterius non potuit volare.

Worse than these are the second, who finding, I know not how, the imperfect
works of Acute Doctors, charitably collecting them as the Ospray the unplum'd
Eaglets fallen from their Nests, take them home, and as Orphan and destitute
adopt them for their own legitimate issue. The shame of appearing Ignorant,
overcomes in them the infamy of being thieves, nor regard they Sinesius, Epist.
14
that said, Magis impium esse mortuorum lucubrationes, quam vestes furari, quod
sepulchra perfodere dicitur. Oh how many, if they might come forth of their
Graves, or but draw their heads out of their Tombs to see their labors
inherited by such as had no right to succeed them ab intestato, they would say
with that forlorn Mantuan Sheapherd.

Insere nunc Melibaee pyros, pone ordine vites. It was a most modest Law of
those no less brave than discreet Painters of Greece, observed in all ages, to
honor the memory of the worthy Masters in that Art; by not putting the pensil
to the pieces, which they, overtaken by death, should have left either without
the finishing touches, or else imperfect; whereby they in effect would tell us,
that those relics thus diminished; and unfinished were more excellent, than if
they had been by their hands exactly completed. Of this the Historian speaking,
Plinius l. 23. c. 11.
Illud per quam raram, (says he) ac memoria dignum, etiam suprema opera
Artisicum, imperfectasque tabulas, sicut Irin Aristidis, Tyndaridas Nichomachi,
Medeam Timomachi, and Venerem Apellis in majori admiratione esse, quam perfecta.

Now in Letters, amongst so many Laws there is not one of so good
determination, or so great fidelity, by reason every one has to great an
avidity to the applause of a man of ingenuity: therefore they put their hands
to another man's works, not to complete them for the Author, but to ingrosse,
against all the rules of equity, another Principal to their Use.

He that found a treasure in his field had it all to himself, Spart. in Adr.
as was enacted by Adrian the Emperor; but if in another, he divided it, and
the owner of the field had half: A law, if in monyes just, in the riches of wit
most just.

But the third sort are intolerable; namely, those who to another work prefix
their own names; Men of impudent Fronts, which having in a Book no more than a
Frontispice; as the Ass in the Fable that had nothing of a Lion but his skin;
appropriate all the rest to themselves. Just as if the patrozining of a Book
were the dedicating of a Temple to some god, wherein it was sufficient to Grave
his Name on the Front. What else did Caligula that Beast shrouded in an
Emperor, when he beheaded the Satue of Jupiter Olympius, and erected his own
in the place to beadored as Jupiter? Plutar. de vitando aere alieno.
The Persians believed that the greatest of all sins was to be Indebted, and
next to this, to be a Liar. These are both; for, what they are indebted for to
others, and they have nothing otherwise, than by the patronization of
shameless lies.

One of these being convicted of such a like theft, whilst it was expected,
that not being able to cover the fact with lies; he should at least wise have
covered his face with shame; he as impudent of forehead, as dexterous of hand,
put himself on his guard; and pleading in his defense the Sympathy, about which
some, called Philosophers, keep such a stir; boldly retorted: None could prove
him a violator of the writings of any man, till first he proved that there was
a disimilitude in their minds; in regard that two Wits, uniform and
consentaneous of genius, have by virtue of sympathetick union, and identity in
the motion of their minds, and order of their thoughts.

Now Keplerus, Kepler. lib. 3. har. prop. Mersen. in Genesis Galileus in dial.
nov. phil.
Mersenius, and Galileus go about to investigate the mysterious reason, why two
Chords tuned to an Unison, a Diapason, or a Diatessaron, so accord the one with
the other in sound, that the one touched the other not touched trembles, and
moves. But see here a Problem of more difficult solution, (if happily in uniform
wits there be, as they say there is in Musical Chords, those regular
vibratious, which incountring the Harmonical numbers of perfect consonants, do
occasion the like motions) how it can be, that two brains by way of
sympathetick consent should accord to select one and the same argument, to
display it with the same form of speech; never differing a word, no nor a
syllable: Yea, with so exact resemblance of stature, voice, and features, In
Prol.
that they are taken for the Menecmi of Plautus, howbeit.

Ita forma simili pueri, vel nutrix sua.
Non internosse posset, quae mammam dabat;
Neque matter adeo ipsa, quae illos pepererat.
From the dexterity, that many use in filching others writings; is occasioned,
the Jealousy for the preserving them; and the quarrels when they happen to be
feloniously stolen.

Even Nature herself has taught two animals, that produce two the preciousest,
and sweetest things; so much the more ingeniously to defend them from Thieves,
the more greedily they seek them. Thus the Cockles that gender the Pearls,
when the mornings light discovers them, close themselves; and if any one
chance sometimes to surprise them, whilst as yet they are open, though
otherwise blind; Cum manum videt, Plinius li. 9. c. 35
comprimit sese, operitque opes, gnara propter illas se peti; manumque, si
praeveniat, acie sua adscindit, nulla justiore poen^. Thus the Bees, with
bitterest combs, like a Dedalian Labyrinth, fill their hives, contra aliarum
bestiolarum aviditates: Id se facturas consciae, quod concupisci possit,
Plinius li. 11. c. 6
But because Nill est deterius latrone nudo;

and against these Thieves, Mart.
it is not sufficient for Mercury himself to stand Sentinel, with Argus's
hundred eyes: hence it is, that with the accusations of many Authors, so many
Books are crammed.

And doubtless in this case, patience is very difficult; and passion very
excusable. Even the Dead Statues of brass, says Casiodorus, if in the night
time they be struck by Thieves with an intent to break them; though they have
not sense to afflict themselves; yet they have voice to lament themselves, Lib.
7.
with which; Nec in toto mutaesunt, quando a furibus percussae, Ser. 22.
custodes videnture tinitibus admonere.

But, behold, in two short receipts, the remedy against the vicious avidity
after others labors. The first is, to persuade your selves that the World is
not a Judge of so little judgment, that it cannot from public fame, or rather
infamy; from indictments, and witnesses; when so thou art; find thee to be
guilty of felony: and by this means thou will never be got to do it, (although
occultly,) out of a hope that none can detect thee. You invert the order of
things; so that the method of those things seem yours, which you transfer
from others to your own use: yet howsoever though you should be a Cacus;
subtle in inverting upside down the traces of the feet of the prey, that you
filcht into your house; dragging them by the tail: there will not want a
Hercules; that by those very trails, will trace out the theft, and fraud; and
punish the Author. Yea, you your selves, will let slip from your mouth, or pen,
something; that may advert the discreet of the fact: and you shall in this
resemble the Raven; which never steals so subtlely, but with the sanguin'd
beak; and even with the prey in his mouth; he croaks: whereby, before he is
aware, he charms up the stones, that fly about his ^ares.

Nam tacitus pascit si posset corvus, Horat.
haberet
Plus dapis, and rixae minus, invidiaeque.
Nay, when you your selves are silent* your papers shall speak against you, and
your own Books shall form the process. In this confidence Martial; with whose
Epigrams many made themselves pass for Wits, and Poets, divulging them for
their own; spent no words in the accusation of Thieves, and the defense of his
own, Indice non opus est nostris, Lib. 1. cap. 54.
nec vindice libris.
Stat contra, dicitque tibi tua pagina, Fur es.


The second is; that you persuade your selves, that its a far less evil, not
to appear Learned; than to be proved Ignorant; having nothing of your own, and
yet fallaciously filching from others. If your head be bald for want of hairs
(the Emblem of the thoughts, the riches of the mind;) you will not take those
of the dead, and make of them an ill-shapt Perriwig.

Calvo turpius est nihil comato. Mart.
Better is it to be poor with my own, than rich in other men's speeches. To be
able to say, This is mine, although it be little; is much better: than to say;
This is much, but it is not mine.

The preciousest Verses that Manilius could read in his Poems, were those two:
Nostra loquar. Lib. 2.
Nulli vatum debebimur orsa,
Nec furtum, sed opus veniet.


So write, that upon all your labors you may ingrave that Distich, that the
Poet Aristo writ over the Portal of his Gate.

Parva, sed apta mihi, sed nulli obnoxia, sed non
Sordida parva, Meo sed tamen aere, domus.
That we ought not to assume another argument, but rather to invent new of our
own.
IF the desire to become immortal to posterity by the Press; did but as much
whet the wit unto invention of matter of ones own: as it sharpneth ones tallons
to prey upon that of another: many; who, as convicted for Plagiaries, have lost
their time, and been confiscated of their reputation; would have eternalized
the one and the other. And oh! how much more would Learning flourish? and in
how many better employments might we spend our time, our Studies, and our wits:
if leaving this sordid work of changing, Quadrata rotundis; and putting that in
the margent, which others insert in the body of their works: all the bent of
our thoughts should be set upon enriching the Arts, and Sciences, with some new
Discoveries; which being unknown to the Ancients, may be beneficial to
succeedings ages. One only such a Leaf, would suffice to merit that honor; to
which many times monstrous Volumes but vainly pretend.

Yea, the only inquisition after novel inventions; although we succeed not to
investigate them; Seneca li. 6. not. q. c. 5.
is not without its applause, as not being without benefit: Plurimum enim ad
inveniendum contulit, qui speravit posse reperire. And one that is agitated by
generous thoughts, had rather by himself trace ont a way to Heaven, than to
tread in others tracks on earth; so that he may say with the Poet.

Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps, Epist. 19

Non aliena meo pressi pede.
But in short; although its easier for him to fall, who attempteth to sore into
Heaven; than for him, that contents himself to pore on the Earth: yet that
Magnis tamen excidit ausis; has so much of glory: as that the honor of having
ascended, out weighs by far the disgrace of being precipitated. And even to
these our days, the generous andacity of young Icarus, that flying even
touched the Stars; has more admirers of his mounting, than scorners of his
fall: -- Stivaeque innixus arator
Vidit, Met. 8.
and obstupuit; quippe aethera carpere possit,
Credidit esse Deum. --


And for my part, considering, that without either fall, or trip, its hard
going in the high way; (since that in many things our judgment consists more in
believing, than knowing; more in not seeing, the errors which we have, than in
not having them:) I have the same resentment in Learning; which that friend of
Seneca had in another sense: Vagel. apud Seneca not. qu. lib. ^. c. ^.
Si cadendum est mihi, coelo cecidisse velim. I would have our wits do to our
thoughts, as the Eagle does with her Chickens; which before that as yet they
have distended their plumes, and fixed their wings for flight; throws them
from their nest, to shift for themselves: as if she should say. Ye are now well
feathered Eagles; and sit ye here idle hovering over your nest? Ye have
tallons, and beaks, and are ye not ashamed to be still fed like so many young
Swallows* Go for shame and dig your livings out of others bowels, for now you
are armed, for now you are Eagles.

Every thought, that had not atendency to the invention of new experiments in
Learning; Hyppocrates esteemed besides the mark, to which the Learned ought to
direct all the lines of their Studies. He allows not that we should piece
together the relics of dead Authors, quasi bona naufragantium; but, that we
should set sail to the acquist of new Merchandises; whereby we may enrich the
World, and gain glory to our selves. In art initio.
Mihi vero invenire aliquid eorum, quae nondum inventa sunt, quod ipsum notum
quam occultum esse praestat, scientiae votum, and opus esse videtur.

Oh, how many, seeking things not before found; have found things not before
sought! The only desire of converting some baser Metal into Gold, how has it
sharpened the conceit, and refined the wit; insomuch, that thereby those rare
miracles of Nature are found, which the Art of Chemistry knows how to produce?
And what mines of fundamental experiments, of a true natural Philosophy, are
there, that discover not themselves in them; till in times to come, there be
some, who know, how to work them; discoursing from the experiences of the
effects, to the first originals of their causes? And it falls out in this,
(says a brave Man) as to those recited by Aesop, that seeking Gold; which
their Father dying, said he had buried in a field; all fell of diging it;
whereby the field, of sterile that it was before, became fruitful: not yiedling
them Gold; but instead thereof, a very plentiful crop, Coluni. De re rust. in
fine.
equivalent to much Gold.

Truth is not now barren; although she was so prodigal in teaching our
Ancestors. Etiam quicunque sunt habiti mortalium sapientissimi, multa scisse
dicuntur non omnia. They studying have not fished all the pearls; speculating
have not discovered all the tracts of truth. Worthy and famous they were its
true: but not like Hercules, so, as that they have found, or prescribed bounds
to nature; beyond which as pillars, it is not lawful for men to pass. Epist. 33
Patet omnibus veritas, says the Moralist, nondum est occupata, multum ex illa
etiam futuris, relictum est. And as the Spartans said, that neither Rivers nor
Mountains assigned bounds to their Kingdom; but that it extended it self as far
as one could throw a dart: in like manner the Arts, and Sciences, distend
themselves as far as the acuteness of our wits can enlarge them. It is not
here as in the Ocean* In which Alexander the Sixth drew from Pole, to Pole, a
line; cross one of the Isles of Capo Verde; and assigned bounds to the
Navigations of the Castillians, thence to the West; and of the Portugals,
thence to the East. Patet omnibus veritas.

Some of the Ancients, would have drawn this line between the Greek and Latin
Poesy; whereupon Horace that would pass it, interweaving to himself in a
Crown; the Laurels of Athens with those of Rome: in that he made the Greek
Lyrick Poetry to be heard upon the Latin Gittern: was by the more part of the
Ancients reprehended, and his compositions rejected, as children of a Bastard
Muse; and Hermophroditical Monsters. This necessitated that Poet to commend his
own style, in the defense of his Muse; and under the pretense of his own
vindication, to publish the crimes of others envy, Lib. 2. epist. 1.
and malice, saying* That the opposition of his composures proceeded not so
much from the love of others ancient eligancy; as from the envy of his modern
grace. That they in his knowledge, condemned their own ignorance: being ashamed
to learn from him, a youngman, that; which they, being old, were notable to
find out. That this was the original of all his emulators malice.

Vel quia nil rectum, nisi quod placuit sibi, ducunt.
Vel quia turpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere senes perdenda fateri.
And, doubtless, we may say with him in Minutius. Minut.
Quid invidemus, si veritas nostri temporis aetate maturuit. Is elegance, and
inventive ingenuity, so intailed upon th'Ancients; that it may never be
renewed? Although, that which Arnobius writes of Religion, concerning the
truths which every day with new acquist's discover themselves, is true; Arnob*
Non quod sequimur novum est, sed nos sero didicimus quod nos sequi oportet.

Who then will prescribe bounds, and limits to the free flight of the
ingenions; confining them within the straights of the things already found; as
if there could not be any new Discoveries? If this Law had been known to
Antiquity, we should at this day have known nothing. Seneca epist. 33.
Nusquam enim invenietur, si contenti fuerimus inventis* Propterea qui alium
sequitur, nihil sequitur, nihil invenit, imo nec quaerit. And of these in my
opinion, we may say, as Dante very finely of the fearful Sheep that follow
their Leader. Cant. 3.


As silly sheep, Purgat.
when two or three more bold
And venturous than others leave the fold,
The rest, afraid, dejecting eyes and head,
Without inquiry, follow those that led:
And if one stay, the rest in heaps, bestride
Him, not knowing why, and simply there abide.
Quare ( to add to Dante Lactantius) cum sapere, De orig. error c. 8.
id est, veritatem quaerere, omnibus sit innatum, Sapientiam sibi adimunt, qui
sine ullo judicio inventa Majorum probant, and ab aliis, Pecudum more,
ducuntur. And most apt is that answer, that the Echo of Erasmus gave to that
wretched Ciceronian, who crying, December annos consumpsi in legendo Cicerone;
Heard this reply (One:) which was as much as to say, that desiring to become an
Ape of Cicero, he was become an Ass, by poring on Cicero.

But the courage to undertake, and the felicity to succeed in the discovery of
new and necessary things, I do grant is not for every one to expect; for such
as undertake this enterprise, do ordinarily find fears in themselves which
affright them, and persuasions from others that retard them.

The fixed Stars that move not of themselves, but are carried by the Heavens,
and born away by the Common Course; have not any that accuse them of
irregularity, or condemn them of error. On the contrary the Planets; which so
generously make a revolution by themselves; because a simple and most regular
motion; with an appearance of ascension and declination; of velocity and
slownesse; does variously contemperate them: are called by the vulgar,
irregular in their motions; confused in their revolutions; and believed not to
be errant, but erroneous; not to make Circles, but Labyrinths.

Alexander that had so great a Heart and so capacious, that he could conceive
within it, the desire of a World of Worlds; being come to the Eastern Ocean,
confessed himself to little for this one little one: and doubting to find the
fortune of the Sea, different from that at land; struck sail to his desires,
that carried him to seek, on the other side of that Ocean, new places to
conquer. He showed himself prudent in his fear; and to authorize his retreat
with others counsel; he made a show of compliance to the reasons of his
Counselors, who to dissuade him, said;

Great Monarch, Seneca Suas.
Little more than Greece sufficed to make Hercules a Demi-god: and will not all
the Earth suffice to make you a Hercules? Lose not this World whilst you are in
quest of an other. If there were more land on the other side the Ocean, your
enemies would have fled thither: who to hide themselves from your Arms, and
you; are gone to bury themselves in Hell. Content your self that the Confines
of your Kingdom, are those of Nature herself. This Shore will conserve the
print of your victorious Feet, eternally impressed; and in erecting the ultimate
limits of Humane Generosity; You shall be a Hercules in the East: as Hercules
was an Alexander in the West. With that Alexander Constitit, Lucan.
and magno se vinci passus ab orb est.

If that Generous Columbus, that involved in an Ocean, as in a Deluge of water,
discovered new Lands, and new Worlds; had nor done more than this, when in
despite of two Republiques, and one King; (following the advice of the Winds,
that blew to the West, and Whispered in his Ear; See yonder ample lands,
whence the exhalations rise in such great abundance,) he weighed Anchor, and
set sail, with a Frigot and two Carvals; and launched into the bosom of that
vast Ocean; without ever ceasing his course; or tacking about in this Voyage,
in a Sea never before used, or believed unnavigable; in the lenght of a course
of uncertain bounds: discouraged neither by the encounter of Monsters; not the
mutiny of his men; nor the want of victuals, in a place destitute of all
accommodation for strangers; nor the frequent tempests, that drove him upon
strange Climates; nor the long and excessive calmes that took him upon the
Confines of the Torrid Zone; where the Heavens for the excessive heat seem a
Hell: would Europe at this day have had those aromatic Spices, and Minerals,
or so much as the knowledge of that half World, America? Would Columbus himself
have gained, I say not only that privilege from the Kings of Castile, of
quartering the Arms of his House, with the addition of the new World that he
discovered; and with the Motto over bead, Por Castilla, y por Leon
Nuevo Mondo hallo Colon;


but those immortal merits whereby all ages come to acknowledge themselves
debitors to him; and by him to Genoa, and all Italy; for the entire value of a
World? No otherwise: such who in Learning essay to make the first way to the
discovery of new places; (which is nothing inferior to the sailing of
un-navigable Oceans;) is the necessary, that amongst the annoyances, and toils
of the long Voyage, of an un-practised study; amongst the familiar, and
frequent conspiracies of desperation; he conquer himself a thousand times:
attending, as those Glorious Heroes, Conquerours of the Golden Fleece; more to
the glory of the end, than to the trouble of the means.

Tu sola animos, Val. Fla. arg. 1.
mentemque peruris
Gloriae, te viridem videt immunemque senectae
Phasidos in ripa stantem juvenesqve vocantem.
Thus Homer; the first Poet Heroical and first Hero of Poets; is doubly great:
in that he had not any before him that he might imitate; nor after him that
has imitated him.

In the first, greater than his Predecessors, in the second, greater than his
Successors; which is the great Panegyric, that in two words has been
comprehended by Velleius; instead of all that which others have been scarce
able to express with many: Velleius li. 1. hist.
Neque ante illum quem imitaretur; neque post illum, qui eum imitari posset
inventus est, These, as long as Learning shall continue in the World, (and that
will be as long as the World lasts,) shall splendidly shine in the praise of
the Learned; as that adventurous Argo; that from the tempests of the Seas,
which it before all other ships did navigate; came to take port in Heaven:
where now its enriched with as many Stars, as before it did carry Heroes: --
Mari quod prima cucurrit
Emeritum magnis mundum tenet acta procellis, Manil. 1.

Servando Dea facta Deos. Astron.
--


Thus, after a thousand others, in this last age Gallileus, an Academick truly
Lincean: both for the eye of his wit, and for that of his Perspective Tube;
with which he has rendered the Commerce of Earth with the Heavens so familiar;
that the Stars which were before hid, no longer disdain to appear, and suffer
themselves to be seen; and those which were before seen, discover to us; not
only their beauties, but also their defects. At the foot of the Sepulcher of
this most acute Linx; might be engraven in lamentation; that which the Poet in
derision said of Argus; Arge jaces: Ovid.
quodque in tot lumina lumen habebas
Extinctum est, Meta.
centumque oculos nox occupat una.


Thus Christopher Scheiner, In Epist. sub ficto Apellis nomine.
which from the motions of the Faculae, and the Maculae of the Sun has found
by Astronomy and Philosophy Celestial Lights of so noble, rare, and authentic
verity; as are the double motion of the Sun, that in the fashion of a Top,
firmly revolves in it self; and on the Poles of his Axis: that moving at the
same instant in two Circles, ordinately curve it, whence arises the variety of
appearances that the Spots therein make. Moreover, and besides the rational
conjectures, which are drawn from the conception, birth, increase, return
sometimes, and decrease of the spots; to define what is the substance and
nature of the Sun it self. Wherewith he has so inrich't the World with
sublime experiments, that if every age should afford the like; few ages would
suffice to make Astronomy as absolutely Mistress of the Heavens: as at this day
Geography is of almost all the Earth. Plin. li. 2 cap. 12.
Macti ingenio este coeli Interpretes, rerumque naturae capaces: argumenti
repertores, quo Deos, Hominesque vicistis. Worthies; to whom, as to that
Ancient Meton, that left as a legacy to posterity, graven in a Column, with
lines of exact proportion; the various course of the Sun: should be erected as
reward, of eternal honor, Statues with tongues gilded, and underneath this
inscription; Plin. li. 7 cap. 37.
Ob divinas praedictiones. Worthies; to whom Heaven, should be given: not as
heretofore the Emperor Carolus Quintus gave only in picture the Stars of the
Crosier (a Constellation so called) to Oviedus the Historian of the American
affairs: but it self, for a reward; and her Stars, for a Crown. And well do
they deserve them, Admovere oculis distantia sydera nostris, Pastor. 1

Aethereaque Ingenio supposuere suo.


I have instanced only in these two, that so I might not overpass all; since I
could not speak of all. Only to us that succeed these, ought that of Seneca to
be inculcated that; Epist. 64
Agamus bonum patrem familiae: Faciamus ampliora quae accipimus Major ista
haereditas a me ad Posteros transeat. Multum ad huc restat operis; Multumque
restabit, nec ulli nato post mill secula praecluditur occasio aliquid adhuc
adjiciendi.

I shall only add thus much, that to become Inventors of new things, we must
not make our selves Masters of Novelties, wandering without reason (especially
in things that are merely Natural) from those ways; which beaten already so
many ages, by the best wits of the World, have upon their Confines for such as
pass them, Temerity and Error. Nor do as Diogenes, going contrary to the
current of all men; as if we alone, were the Sages; we alone dived to the
bottom of Heraclitus Well, to fetch up Truth. Should we esteem of the Sun of
the Wits of the World, not by the light of their greater knowledge of the
truth; but by our opposition to the course of all the World: and could we say
in a vaunt what Apollo spoke by way of advice to his Son Phae^ton; Nitor in
adversum, 2 Meta.
neque me, qui caetera, vincit
Impetus: and rapido contrarius evehor orbi;


we ought also from him to hear; that without peril of precipitation, we cannot
deviate from those direct paths, which, trodden by the Chariot of the Light,
are made no less obvious than clear: Hac sit iter: manifesta rotae vestigia
cernes.

That the Earth with an annual period revolves under the Ecliptic; and with a
daily motion turns from West to East. That the Moon, yea all the Planets, (no
other but voluble Earth) have inhabitants people of different nature: That the
World consists of infinite Masses or Chaoses, and in its immense Vasts
comprehendes innumerable Worlds: etc. These are Opinions, that some Moderns
have fondly raised from their Graves: calling them back, the first; from the
Sepulchers of Cleanthes and Phylolaus: the second of Pythagoras and of
Heraclitus: the third of Democritus and Methrodorus: with whose death they had
been so many ages buried in Silence, and Oblivion.

This is not to enrich the World with new cognitions, but with old errors; nor
to make ones self Master of those that follow us; but Disciple of those that
precede us; with this remuneration: that those very dreams of theirs, which
were not blindly received by the World; shall in like manner sleep with us, in
our Sepulchers.

How we may honestly and commendably steal from others Writings.
BUt I find I have enterprized too difficult a task; whilst I pretend to divert
our thoughts from the taking feloniously from others, with proposing to them
both the obligation of enriching Learning with new inventions; and the guerdon
that in so doing we acquire; Much better it were that I should teach, That we
may borrow with a good Conscience, and not only without necessity of
Restitution, but also with the Merit of Commendation.

All the thefts of light, made upon the wheels of Apollo's Chariot; which are
(if I do not ill augurate) the Books of the most celebrious Wits, upon which
Truth shines and triumphs; that condemn not the offender to the Rocks of
Caucasus, and the Eagle of Prometheus. There is an impunity of taking, provided
we take not as the Moon from the Sun; which when it most approches it, and most
replenisheth it self with his light, in perfect Novi-lunii; ingratefully
eclipseth it: but as he, that in a Mirror of pure Crystal receives a Sun
beam; and with that, does not only, not diminished it of light; but rather
renders it with the reflection, the more splendid, and glorious. Thus the Be,
equally ingenious, and discreet, Candida circum Lilia funduntur.

But so innocent is their Rapine, that without diminishing the odor; without
violating the beauty; without breaking the pods of the Flowers; they abundantly
gather Wax, and Honey, for themselves, and others.

The first way to Borrow with applause; is to Imitate with Judgment. He that is
not a Giant of high stature, let him climb to the top of a great turret; and
thence inform himself of the straightest ways, and securest paths. He, that
has not in his head a Theater of proper Idea's, and Idea's of good design:
let him take according to the ancient Custom of the first and rude painting;
the Circles of the shadows of regular bodies, and compile his work upon those
models.

Phrine, Clem.
whilst she lived, ( Phrine, the Athenian Venus, Alex. in Pr^tr^p.
since she was no less unchaste than fair) was the Samplar of Painters; from
whom they took the design and features of the face; to draw if they could more
beautiful, and withal more divine the Venus's that they painted. The only sight
of her was instruction: serving, not so much for a pattern to the copies which
they drew; as for a form of perfection, to the Idea's, which they comprehended
in their minds: of a most absolute proportion of parts, temper of colors, and
vivacity of Spirit. Such to the fancy, are the Composures of the brave Masters
of Learning: which beheld with intensenesse, imprint in the mind by little, and
little, a noble Idea of the like style; and we find by experience in him that
is accustomed to read with attention, works of noble sentiments, and lofty
style: that, as if drunk with the same spirits; it seems impossible for him to
express himself in any other manner, than nobly. Thus it even'd to the
Nightingales, that made their Nests upon the Sepulcher of Orpheus, that as if
from the ashes of that great Musician, and Poet, they had also took his Spirit:
they were incomparably more ingenious, and skilful Songsters, than the others:
so that the others seemed salvage Quirristers, these celestial Sirenes.

And from this, of reading intensely others Learned Labors, to imprint an
image in the mind conformable to them: may seem to arise those occult miracles
of the imaginative power; which has made us sometimes see, rustic mothers, of
deformed faces, and plebean proportion; to bring forth children of visage and
features Angelical; (like lovely Narcissus's growing upon ill-favored, and
sordid Leeks:) thanks to the form, which the mothers frequent beholding of
beautiful faces, and exquisite pictures, gave to the tender Babes in their
conception.

Nor because the Authors are excellent, and we stupid of wit; does it follow
that the reading them is of no avail, to make us with imitation to resemble
them. The Eagle before that she thrusts her little Chicks from the Nest, with
great circulations and turnings, soars and wheels over and about them,
striking them sometimes with her wings, and provoking them to fly: whereby the
Eaglets, although they are not a jot encouraged to follow their mother even
above the Clouds; whither at one distention of the wing she is transported: yet
nevertheless, it prompts them to abandon their Nest, put themselves on their
flight, and to try also themselves upon the wing. Therefore it naturally comes
to pass, that we follow that which pleases: especially, if the Genius of the
Nature, accord with the Election of the Will: and the toiles therein undergone,
either are not tedious; or else the bitterness of the trouble, losing it else
in the dulcity of the operation; they are not felt toilsome.

Seeing before us therefore, the sublime flights of an happy Wit; let us not
only rouse and provoke our desires to imitate them; but lets us add vigor to
our thoughts, and courage to our minds: that so we may find our selves able to
do more, than without such a sight we could ever have effected. Whereby, if we
come not to touch the Heavens, and soar above the Stars; at least, we may raise
our selves from the Earth, and dis-nest. If we attein not to express with
equal periods, the loftly circulations of the exemplar, which we proposed to
our imitation; yet we may do as the Sun-flower, which fixed in its root, and
moveable in its Flower, by continual looking on the Sun, learns to design in a
little Gire, that ample Circle; which he describes from another Horizon.

But of the writings of others to profit our selves with only the imitation,
Quintil.
in the judgment of Quintilian, Lib. 10. cap. 2.
which speaks at large of this matter, is to too little a benefit. Let therefore
the second manner of theft not only lawful but laudable be; To take what we
please of others; but so to improve it with our own, that it may not be mended
by any. In like manner as a Diamond receiving one single ray of light, that
penetrates to its center, is so beautified, that as if it was depainted with a
thousand varieties of colors; the Sun it self is not so glorious, and the
Stars eclips and in envy hide their heads there at. Is it not in the stealing
of knowledge, as to take a little light foame of the Sea, to mix it with the
celestial seed of his Wit; so that that which was unprofitable, and vile
matter, becomes no less than a Venus: forming to himself a composure of more
than ordinary beauty.

That famous Labor of Phydias, Jupiter Olympus; the miracle of Carving, and of
the World: was of whitest Ivory. But the Elephants could not therefore boast of
that divine Masterpiece as theirs: nor charge the Graver of stealing that
beautiful material, which rendered his Labor so famous. The exact proportion
of the members; the majestic features of the divine visage; and what else that
made that Statue the best in the World for beauty, and value; all was the Art
of the Carver, not the merit of the Elephant. De Resur. carn. cap. 6.
Phydiae manus (says Tertullian,) Jovem Olympum ex ebore molitur, and
adoratur. Nec jam bestiae, and quidem insulsissiam dens est, sed summum saeculi
Numen. Non quia Elephantus, sed quia Phydias tantus. He that takes in this
manner, rude and informed trunks to work them into Statues; Sordid glasses to
change them into Diamonds; drops of simple Dew to make them Pearls; is not a
Thief but an Artist. He is not indebted to others for the Matter* but the
Matter is obliged to him for the honor of so noble a form.

But this is yet more lively illustrated by the Artifices of the famous
Fountains of Rome, of Tivoly, of Frascati: where the waters sport in their
torments, and in their ingenious obedience change themselves into more shapes
then the Poets Proteus.

They are seen from the slime and gravel of vast niches so to distill drop by
drop into small rain, that the Clouds never did it more naturally upon the
Earth: To imitate as it were the Issuing of the winds out of the caverne of
Aeolus; the South with moist Aires; Zephyrus with pleasing Gales; Boreas with
blustering and cold Blasts: To diffuse themselves so subtlely, and dilate
themselves so equally: that they seem transparent vails displayed in the Air:
To sub-divide themselves into little drops, and form themselves as it were into
a dewy Cloud; which incountering with the Sun, becomes a Rainbow, painted with
perfect colors: To revive with motion dead Statues, and variously acting them
in diverse shapes: To start thievishly out of the ground, and to mount, and to
suspend in the Air with high spirtings: To sob, as if grieved: to roar, as if
enraged; to sing, as if delighted; not only to renew to the World that which
Tertullian calls Portentosissimum Archimedis munificentiam, De Resur. carnis.
the Hydraulick Organs; but in the murmr, Trils, Quavers, artificial Salts,
Divisions, and changes of melodious Voices, to imitate to the life the
Nightingales; as if by their mouth did not sing Spiritus qui illic de tormento
aquae anhelat, Ibid.
but those watery inhabitans, the S^rens themselves. By works of so ingenious
and admirable contrivance we take the waters of a common Fountain, which if Art
should not advance from their native baseness to nobler Use, transfusing as it
were, Souls and Wit into them: they would run vilely wandering on the Earth,
through miry bogs: not vouchsafed to be scarce tasted off by Beasts; where as
now they are the Delights of Princes, and the Glory of Gardens. Is not this to
superate the Matter with the Workmanship oblieging, and making it our own? The
same does he that borrows. He buries the theft of the matter in the Art of
working it: so that in the addition he makes of his own, that is wholly lost
which was another.

But this kind of mending things, so that they no more appear what before they
were, and by that means become ours: well known, but ill practiced by people
able indeed to change; but not to amend: has rendered them so much the more
culpable, by how much it is a greater fault to deform the beauty, and to deface
the comeliness of an exact composure, than singly to steal it. To ^lie the
infamy of Thieves; they become Homicides: bereaving the life of the beauty from
those things they take; whilst they dismember the entire, and disorder the
disjoynted; with so infelicitous a felicity in the doing it; that in a few
draughts of the Pen, they transform a Helen into a Hecuba; and an Achilles into
a Thirsites. They do by others works, against their wills; as the Athenians did
in despite of the three hundred Brazen Statues of the famous Demetrius; which
by way of disgrace and shame to his name, they melted; and transfound them into
Vessels of the vilest, and most sordid use. The Rod of Circes, and the Pen of
these strive in power: this, being able with ignorance to transform beautiful
composures, into deformed Monsters: as that with Magic could change Gallant
Heroes, into sordid Animals. The like treatment found the Verses of an
excellent Poet, with an illiterate Comoedian: which imitating with tumblings,
and with that which Cassiodorus calls the mute, and loquatious speech of the
hands; the ancient Mystery of the Mimmicks: so il-favoredly represented that by
Actions, which Poetry had expressed by Words; that in the Fables of Niobe, and of
Daphne; that changed into a stone, and this into a tree; in this he seemed a
tree, and in that a stone.

Saltavit Nioben, Epigr.
saltavit Daphnida Memphis.
Ligneus ut Daphnen, Graec.
saxeus ut Nioben.
When in stealing from others we use that caution and reverence, with which the
Eagle snatched, and carried the Idan Boy into Heaven, without hurting him with
his tallons or tearing his clothes; and which Leorcas with no less judgment
than Art expressed in Brass, Plinius li. 34. c. 8
Sentientem quid capiat in Ganymede, and cui ferat; parcentem unguibus etiam
pervestem; Yet this suffices not: for discretion in robbing mitigateth, but
does not remove the crime of theft. How much worse is it to deform, to
confound, to mangle others labors to make them our own? and make it in this
manner truly ours, namely, ill made, like that Fidentinus, of whom Martial Quem
recitas meus est, Lib. 1.
o Fidentine, libellus.
Sed male cum recitas incipit esse tuus. Epig. 39.



To the imbelishment we make, as it were with an alteration of more noble
Quality, whence the things are happily changed (which I have said is a manner
of robbing innocent and commendable ( I add in the last place the increase of
the Quantity; when a great mass is formed of a little seed, and a tree of a
shrub.

Many things proceed from the Pens of good writers, spoken some times only
incidentally, and as if pointed at by the finger; which by him that has not a
very apprehensive eye are easily over-look't: and yet they are Ciphers
pregnant, sometimes with lofty, sometimes with large conceits; and he that knows
how to unloose that which in them is knit up, of nothing makes much, and all
for himself, all his own.

The Heaven of many Stars as it has; to no more but seven has assigned proper
Spheres, and liberty and room to run wandering through that liquid and subtle
Air, which from here below diffuseth it self even to the Firmament. But if all
had been assigned their proper periods and revolutions; whereas now the World
to make room for seven only is so vast: what would it be, if so many millions
of Stars had been consigned their proper Circles, and proportionate Spheres?
The self-same do worthy VVriters, in composing Books. Determinate Matter is
that to which they give place, and as it were Sphere, and revolution, handling
and discussing it as they please, at large: But in as much as they permit it
not to dilate hither, and thither; I will call them in this respect, fixed
Stars of sublime thoughts, and lofty conceits; able to replenish as it were, a
great Heaven, a large Volume; when they find Spirits and Intelligences; that
know how to manage them as is requisite. He that in this manner robs from
others, theives happily, takes little, adds much, makes all his own. He hurts
not an Author that takes from him a spark to make it a Sun. It is with profit
nevertheless of him that took it, that of a little neglected seed he forms a
great and mighty Tree. And much to his Honor: since that its the Work of a
grand Wit, upon a few hints, of some naked words; to work double counterpoints
of sublime discourses. Upon the simple track of an Hercules's foot; to form, as
did Pythagoras; all the entire mass of a body, composed to the exact
proportion of all its parts.

LASCIVIOUSNESS.
The unworthy Profession of Lascivious Poetry.
SAint Jerome, that brave Lion; that from the Cave of Bethlehem made the
roarings of his voice to be heard through all the World; to the terror of
Heresy, and astonishment of Vice; omitted not to give a shake to the
licentious Lasciviousness of Poets; that masking the Stars with unchaste
Images; envious calumniators; and a thousand times worse than the Giants of
Phlegra: they have assaulted Heaven not with stones, but with the wickedness of
the Earth. In cap. 5 Amos.
Non debemus sequi fabulas Poetarum, ridicula, ac portentosa mendacia, quibus
etiam coelum infamare conantur, and mercedem stupori inter sydera collocare.

And to say the truth; those are worthy of the anger of Heaven, and Earth,
Quorum carminibus nihil est, Man.
nisi fabula coelum.

Were not the Lascivious thefts of Jupiter sufficiently manifested to the World
with other Lights; but that they must shine among the Stars? Did it not suffice
that they were published to all the Earth: in Marble, in Brass, in Pictures,
in public Scenes, unless also moreover they had given them the Heavens for a
Theater, the Stars for Representors, and the World for Auditors: And afterward
to tell you that Jupiter from Heaven sent his Thunderbolts against the Earth,
guilty of those vices, of which Heaven was the Master? An Adulterous Calista
has the Stars of the Pole; and makes a double guide, because in directs by
Sea, and shipwracks by Land; whilst shining from thence above; it seems to
teach the Chaste to be happily Lascivious; there being a Jupiter sound, that
remunerates Adultery with Stars.

Sic Ariadnaeus stellis Coelestibus ignis
Additur. Pruden. contra Cym l. 1
Hoc pretium noctis persolvit. Honor
Liber, ut aethereum meretrix illuminet axem.
From such Constellations of obscenity, what other influences, then Lascivious;
can redound to the Earth?

Architas, desiring to speak in public a word none of the modestest; in
calling it to his lips, it appears so unworthy to be engraven by the tongue
of a Man; that not to defile himself with it, he took for tongue a Cole: as
more agreeable to the matter, worthy of fire; and with it not so much writing,
as blotting, upon the surface of a wall; either expressed, or hinted it. Oh! the
golden Tongues of the Stars: whilst the night charms all the World to silence,
the better to attend: of what speak they? and what teach they? They publish
those misdeeds with the language of light in Heaven, which for shame would
conceal themselves with darkness on Earth.

But I wish that only the Ancient Poetry of Gentilisme was guilty of this; and
not exceeded by the modern of Christians; that not in depainting the Stars,
with imaginary figures, of dishonest memorials; but in expressing in paper and
which is worse, imprinting in the mind, the Acts themselves; so happily or
rather unhappily busieth it self.

There wants not to the Poetry of these times its Ovids; that subjecting
Parnassus to Ida; the Laurels to the Mirtles, the the Swans to the Doves; and
Apollo to Cupid: make the Virgin Muses public strumpets. So to these Ovids,
there should not want Augustus's for Mecaenas's; and for a refrigeration of
their too burning Loves; the Snows of Scythia, and the Ice of Pontus. And
herein now a-dayes the evil is so epidemical: that from the antecedent of being
a Poet, this consequence seems to follow of being Lascivious: as Antisthenes
from the profession of Ismenia, took that consequence; Si bonus Tibicen est,
ergo, malus homo est.

Who would not have sworn, that Poetry coming from the Gentiles, to Christians;
should have done, as the Spartan Venus; which passing the Eurotas, said to
them, that if they would have her company, they must break their
Looking-glasses, deface their Bracelets, divest the Whores; and not only
clothed herself with modesty; but armed herself with bravery: and seemed rather
a Warlick Pallas, than a Lascivious Venus? Yet, that which is yet worse; to
that liberty of Lascivious writing; to which heretofore was given banishment
for a punishment: honors are now conferred for a reward.

We advance as high as Heaven, and amongst the Stars adore those Lyres, of the
modern Orpheusses; that have opened Hell; not to draw thence a condemned
Euridice; but to couduct thither a world of innocents. Their Books go through
all the Earth: spread through every Climate; become Citizens of every place;
and are with great diligence translated, that they may speak in all Languages:
as if for fear the Virgin World should want Ravishers, they wonld disperse
through every Climate, incentives of Lust.

They bear in their Frontispices, the titles of the Grandees, to whose name
they were by the Authors dedicated: and by that means pass so much the more
freely; by how much the more they are defended. Thus many times, those come to
be the Protectors of Impurity, that should be its Judges; Ter. contra Marc. li.
1. c. 2.
prostrating their names, and authorities to unworthy Uses: as the Barbarians
of Scythia; that whilst they are Lasciviously employed in their Carts,
Suspendunt de jugo pharaetras indices, ne quis intercedat: Ita nec armis
erubescunt.

Were Hyppocrates now living, that complained of the Public Laws, which
assigning no punishment to Ignorant Physicians; In lege.
permitted them to be Homicides: Discunt enim (said that other) periculis
nostris, and experimenta per mortes agunt. Pinius li. 19. c. 2
Medicoque tantum hominum occidisse impunitas summa est. What would he say,
where the being a public compounder of poison; so much the more dangerous by
how much the more pleasant; makes him not to forfeit his head, but to merit a
Crown?

But if in like manner as Lucian, made the infamous tongue of the Pseudologist,
recount with anger and regret, the sordid offices, in which he was basely
employed; we might hear the murtherous Pens of so many Lascivious VVriters, to
relate one by one, the obscenities, by committing of which they were insentives,
in the hearts of such, who with too great an intensenesse read their venomous
writings: would there be a man that would enrich them with costly rewards; that
would honor them with these applauds; fit only for a super-humane excellence?
Sen. qu. not.


Less criminal was that libidinous Hostius that using his Mirrours in
abominable speculations, ea sibi osten^abat, quibus abscondendis nulla satis
alta nox est. But to conclude; Sibi osten^abat. The Dragons that being
poisonous, keep themselves secluded in their subteranean Dens, are not judged
so faulty; that we should therefore go hunt them out, and slay them. When they
come abroad, to infest the Air with their breath: there is none that being able
to slay them, will suffer them to live. To publish to the eyes of all the
World Ea, quibus abscondendis nulla satis alta nox est; and that so much the
worse, by how much the more exquisite is the Pen, that delineates it: and the
art seems of greater perfection, Plinius li. 34. c. 5
whilst according to the Ancient painting of the Greeks it is wrought, Nihil
velando: and to ^ind a reward of that, to which there cannot be found a
chastisement grievous enough; is not this a miracle of humane, (I know not
which to call the least evil) folly; or with more reason, malignity?

It is still infamous for a man to assume the habit and face of a woman? and to
transform a man's self, not into the habit, but into the profession of an
overgrown Hagge; Bawd to all the most closely contrived obscenities: is this
honorable? is this a life worthy of Statues, and Laurels?

The weak excuses of obscene Poets.
BUt let us hear, the Apologies that these make, in defense of their impure
Books they print; that pretend their Fury from the Torch of Cupid* showing
themselves more Fools, than Poets. Hear their first Apology.

That facetious and merry Poems; Minut. in Octav.
(thus apud eos tota impuritas vocatur Urbanitas) howbeit they only entertain
their Readers, with the delight of fiction, and the sweetness of Verse, in
thoughts of Love; yet in the end all is but in thought: whereupon the pleasure
they give the Reader, is more speculative, and of the mind; than practical, and
of the sense.

I would here have you by way of answer take notice of those two unfort^nate
Sisters; that the first time they read a famous Tragi-comoedy of the like
nature, newly published in print; became so good proficients in impurity, that
they presently set up School: converting their house into a Stews, and
divulging themselves for Whores. Of so many married people, as heard the said
pastoral recited, (and it is the authentic observation of many ages) whereas
they came chaste; there was none but went thence contaminated with dishonesty:
and practicing that loose liberty of Love in such as please them; (of which
they there heard the precepts, and saw the examples) discovered
unfaithfulness; and with the dead Adulterers, from the feigned insentives of a
Tragi-comoedy; bore away the true Exit of a Tragoedy but all Europe, and all
the World; as far as these Books have been dispersed; how many variations of
Scaenes, how many deplorable Catastrophies have they seen; while minds that
for the prize of Virgin purity warred in candidnesse with the Angels; having
drunk in sorcery and poison, from the golden Cup of inmodest Poetry; have for
ever after, had under humany shapes, brutish manners? In the first perusal they
lose the virginity of their eyes; De vitio epudos.
and as one whose name I know not said in Plutarch of the impudent: Verterunt
pupillas virgins in meretrices: next that of the mind, after which the flesh
as having lost the salt that should season it putrefies.

Saint Augustine complains of Homer, the first Patron of fabulous Poets; that
having feigned the gods, some Homicides, some Thieves, some Adulterers; he had
made Sin a Divine property, and thereby unawares insinuated it into the
approbation of the World: Lib. I.
seeing, Quisquis ea fecisset, non homines perditos, Confess. cap. 16.
sed coelestes Deos videbatur imitatus. But these, that putting their tongues
in the mouths of Poetic Persons; teach Nature to be two imperfect, which is
so inclinable to the pleasures of Love; whilst the Law inhibits the procuring
of them: or the Law to rigid and unjust, in interfering with Nature. These,
that to expugn the constant honesty of Virgins, put them in mind, That beauty
fades with years; and with the beauty all of amiable is lost for which others
court them: That its in vain ingray hairs to wish for that, which in youth is
refused: That to a life so short one Love is not sufficient: That honesty is
nothing else but an Art of appearing honest, etc. These pestilent Doctrines;
these poisons extracted from the wit, distilled from the hand, let fall from
the Pen of a Christian, Qui soli uxori suae masculus nascitur, says
Tertullian; and cupiditate procreandi aut unam scit, aut nullam, says Happy
Minutius: what other effect have they, but only to render sin so much the more
facile, by how much they persuade the belief, that this is rather a crime (not
to say Law) of nature, than a vice of the will? Age wills it; example teaches
it; occasion persuades it; weakness excuses it; let it suffice, that
circumspection act it. And is this only to delight the thoughts, and to incite
abstract and Platonic, not Epicurean Love? Would (I will not say an Elius
Verus, and Idolater of the writings of Ovid de art amandi; but) a Beast, say
any other; if he had the rules of Learning, and Art of Poetry?

Nor is that material which they alledg, that these lessons and examples are
given by feigned persons. That which persuades, is not the quality of the
Counselor, but his reason; not the person, but the fact. And besides, what are
the persons of Poetry, but only as the Caverns of Mountains; that reverberate
the Echo? The voice is the Authors, although others pronounce it; as the
writing is the hands, although the paper express it. Love disguized like
Ascanius did no less inflame the unhappy Queen; than if he had been in his
true shape, and not concealed under a foreign habit.

For, if we will be judged according to experience, great Mistress of Truth;
she by daily practice shows that in reading others Loves, we learn our own;
That com^assion to the misadventnres of such as are rejected; becomes a means
to facilitate our surrender at the like request. That that, which in feigned
persons is condemned as cruelty, and obduratnesse of a mind to averse to such
as love; in our selves is found to m^li^ie the heart upon the like occasion.
Whereby, the ^inder being applied to the Steel; there is no more wanting, but a
blow of an encounter, a salute, a glance; to strike fire.

We soften our own hearts, in others flames: we imprint in our minds the seal
of those affections, that others fictiously express in themselves: Lib. I.
there is only one Augustine, that has with tears bewailed the feigned
disasters of the forsaken Dido: Confess. cap. 13.
these are the ordinary effects, that Poetry daily accasioneth, with its
Scaenes, and Obcene Books. And though sometimes, when we are involved in Love,
we are ignorant of others affections; we love yet, an I know not what of
unknown in others: we love as that foolish Boy in the Fable; that from a vain
Image taking real love.

Quid videat nescit, Metam.
sed quod videt uritur illo. I blush with Clemens Alexandrinus, to remember
here the two Venus's of Cyprus, In protreptico Ad Gentes.
and Gnidos; that of Ivory; this of Marble: Statues dead in themselves, but for
others lust to lively. I only add the Epiphomena of this Author; for that is to
be understood of Poetry, which he says of the graving of such like Statues
lasciviously naked: Tantum ars valuit ad decipiendum, quae homines amori
deditos illexit in barathrum!

The other defense of Lascivious Composures is: That such Poems have no more of
evi but the appearance: That these are vizards of Allegories, that cover the
sense of most admirable moral Philosophy; sauced with the honey of fabulous
inventions; that they may for their savory cooking be the more easily
swallowed. Thus by ancient custom, the Laws in Candia ordained that they
should comprise their instructions, to their children, in Musical measures; and
a great part of the Divine Law, was put into verse by David, in the Poems of
the Psalms; (...) Ps. 1.
Ut dum suavitate carminis mulcitur auditus (said St. Augustine) divine
sermonis pariter utilitas inferatur. Werefore they may write in the
frontispiece of their Poems that Terzet of Dante, Ye souls induced with souud
intelligence,
Observe the hidden lessons that do lie
Veiled up in their mysterious Poetry:
and with these the Poets, Max. Tyr. ser. 29.
to such as well regard them, be Phylosophos, nomine Poetas, qui invidiosam rem
ad eam artem perduxerunt, quae maxim populum demulceat.

Now did you ever hear a fiction more Poetical, a lie more solemn than this?
The inverters of Morality would be taken for true masters of it.

Et simulant Curios cum Bacchanalia scribant. Such a lie might well have fitted
Pompey; when in his Theater, which he had erected for the representing of the
most Lascivious Spectacles; because he would not suppress it, Ter. d^ spect.
cap. 10.
Quasi morum lanienam, he there dedicated a Chapel to Venus; cui subjicimus,
inquit, gradus spectaculorum. Ita damnatum, and damnandum opus Templi titulo
praetexuit, ac disciplinam superstitione delusit. But now a-dayes the World is
not so deprived of judgment, but that they know, that certain Allegories, which
others, (thanks to her self) apply to this Poetry; (Allegories, which how ever
they are wyer-drawn, yet do they not attein to the covering of those
immodesties, which are read in them) were not the Model by which the Poem was
composed; nay, never entered into the Authors thought: Chimaera's are they, not
Allegories; and unprofitable endeavors of such, as would convert obscenity
into a mystery.

The Table of Cebes is one thing; to trace the intricate avenues of whose
Labyrinth, it requires the Clew of an Old Interpreter; that so a stranger not
understanding, as he said, the Aenigma'es of that Sphinx, meet not with death
where he expected benefit: The modern Poems another, which stand in need more
of a Sphinx, to put them into Aenigma; than of an Oedipus, to interpret them.

Yet, all this while I deny not, but that some Ancients, to conceal from the
eyes of the vulgar the miseries of their Theology: hid them, (as treasures
within the Sileny,) under the Fables, which they received for Verities.
Howbeit, as there remains nothing of the mysteries of the Egyptian Sages, but
only their Images; Bats, Apes, Owls: heretofore learned Hierogliphicks, now
unfortunate Relics; which alone are taken from the ancient Pyramids: so of
the ancient Theology of the Gentiles, there remains no more to the memory of
the World, but the Adulteries, Thefts, Homicides of the gods: Images two
unworthy of any subserviency, in the displaying the mysteries of Divinity. But
the Poets now a-dayes have no occasion for, or thought of this. And if they
should, they would be no less imprudent than impure: taking away directly
contrary to the end pretended: namely, reciting, to infuse good manners,
obscene Fables; apter far to extirpate virtue where it already has been
implanted: which would be (as says the Theologist Nazianzen) per scopulos
ducere a dlittus. Orat. 3. contra Julian.
Therefore it needs not that they clothe the Wolves like Sphepheards, and the
Lascivious Poets, like Moral Philosophers.

The third defense is that they say, they intend no man's hurt: in their
writings, but their own honor. Their Books bear in their frontispieces,
written in Capital letters, Praefat. Cent.
the saying of Ausonins, Cui hic ludus noster non placet, ne legerit: aut cum
legerit obliviscatur: aut non oblitus ignoscat. So that he who falls must
blame himself as weak, not the Poet; which composed not the Book, nor published
it, to offend the Reader. What harm is their in the stones, if such as are of
glass go to justle with them? He that cannot fight, let him not Arm himself:
he that is not well provided for a storm, let him not ingulfe himself in the
danger of it. The Reader should be a Be, that gathers the honey of ingenious
styles of writing, from the imitation of Poetical forms of speech; not a
Spider, that sucketh the poison of Lasciviousness. Even in Holy Scripture we
meet with the Incest of Ammon: the Adultery of David: the detestable
uncleanesse of Sodom. The finger of God writ them; nor are they culpable,
because some may draw thence examples of sinning; relishing the fact, more than
they respect the punishment. Therefore, that some decline in their Virtues, by
reading a Book, compiled only with an intent at the advancements of the Wit;
this is the crime, not of the innocent Author, but of the incautulous Reader.

Quam sapiens argumentatrix sibi videtur ignorantia humana! says Tertullian,
upon such another occasion. Did you ever see Sophismes, better couched in
Syllogismes? I thought at first, that I my self should have been persuaded by
them: For, (seeing that that which is not directly intended, cannot render
another culpable:) the sin is not a sin; we not intending in the least the
incommodity of the crime, but only the pleasure, or commodity of the action.
These are Masters of their profession. But do they not desire that, which they
say they desire not: whilst in the mean-time craftily they attempt all the
means, by which it is atteinable: so that if they intend not otherwise, why do
they attempt otherwise? Suppose this very thing were the Scope of some Poets:
to excite with the delectation of Fable, and Verse, the insentives to lust:
could they do it more handsomely, or more efficaicously? And when they indicted
were they either so stupid, or so blind, as not to perceive the same? And can
they be said not to desire that, which in so forceable manner they effectually
desire? Nor may that be applied to their purpose, which Tertullian speaks of
Women Lasciviously attired: Quid alteri periculo sumus? Quid alteri
concupiscentiam importamus? De cultu foem. c. 2.
Perit ille tua forma, si concupiscit; tua facta es gladius illi.

Even in the primitive ages of the Church certain Christians, which before
their Baptism were by profession Carvers: desired, it might be lawful for them
to make as before, and to sell Statu's of Jove, of Mars, of Venus; and they
defended the fact, saying: That they intended not others sin, but their own
profit: To keep themselves alive, not to make others offend. That their Statues
were worshipped: was the sin of the Idolatry, not the fault of the Sculpture.
We live according to the Laws of Christians; and labor according to the Rules
of Art; in what then do we sin? Our Poets, to defend themselves in a common
cause; would give sentence in favor of these. But these, and those, are
condemned, and that justly by Tertullian; and their hands convicted of being
Manus Idolorum matres, and declared to be Manus praecidendas. He makes them
guilty of Sacrilege; Priests of Idolatry; nay, more than Priests; De Idol. cap.
2.
Cum per te (says he) Dii habeant Sacerdotes.

The good use of bad Books.
TO reclaim the Spartans from Ebriety Lucurgus the Lawgiver, (in this
particular without Law) killed, and extirpated all the Vines. And the remedy
was worse than the malady; just as if we should pull out our eyes, to avoid the
sight of our deformity. He ought rather, says Plutarch, to have carried water,
and made fountains their where the Vines grew; and to have corrected Bacchus
with the Nymphs; a mad god, with many Sages. The same would they do that to
take out of the World the mischief, that ill Books occasion, would take all
Books out of the World. These are extreme Remedies; which as the Father of
Physicians teaches, would not be used, but in the cases of extremity, and when
there is no other help.

There are many Books, in which as in the head of the Pulp-^ish (that which
Plutarch says of Poetry) there is something good, De and. Poetis.
and something bad. The danger is for those that are as that Ancient Cato
Helluo librorum so greedy; that without picking, they swallow the good and the
bad: whereupon afterward they sustein some incommodity. I give you leave,
says Augustine, to make a prey or booty of the Books of evil writers; De
Doctrine. Christ.
but in the same manner as the Israelites did upon the Houses of the
Egyptians; where they took the Vessels of Gold, but not the Idols, although
they were also of Gold. Sharpen, as the Hebrews did the Sith of your Wit at
the Hones of the Philistines: 1 Samuel 13. v. 19* 20.
but mow not in their Feilds; freeing the Harvest, and the Sith, from all
suspicion; for they have more Weeds than Corn.

He that has good eyes, sees exposed in the Books of the Ingenious things as
various, as heretofore were shown by the Witty Ulysses, when in the disguize of
a Merchant, he Displayed a thousand VVomans trifles before the Virgins of
Scyros; with the fortunate invention of a wise Knight, to the end he might
discover, and gain to the Wars Achilles, whom his timorous mother had hid
among those Virgins, under a woman's habit. The success was, that whilst some
of them run to the Mirrours, others to the Tablets, to the Bracelets, to the
Rings; Achilles, remembering himself, betook him to a Sword, which was put
amongst those Femenine trinkets, for the same purpose, and with that
discovered, and as overcome by Ulysses, he yielded himself, and agreed to be
his Companion in the Trojan Expedition. In the same manner ought we in reading
of Books, to deport our selves with a carriage nobly Masculine, that disdaineth
and avoideth what ever savoureth of Femenine; and bend our desire, and put our
hands, to only such things as are worthy of us.

Even in this did Alexander show himself like himself, that is, Great; when
being offered the Lute of Paris, to which he had so often sung the beauties of
Helen, and his own Loves; he vouchsafed it not so much as a look: but in its
stead desired that which Achilles played upon in the Cave of old Chyron, with
his hands still reeking in the blood of the new-kild Tigers, and Lions.

But its not alone sufficient in the reading of dangerous Books to have a good
end, if we have not also a good Method; so that, in reading them we be so
circumspected, and wary, as if we were to go Per ignes Suppositos cineri doloso.

St. Basil ingeniously evinceth it where he says, Homil. de util. ex lib.
Gent. cap. 1.
That we must never give our minds; as the Helm up into the hand of the Author
we read, for him to turn us at his will, and steer us at his pleasure: Keep a
loof from the Cramp-fish that his venomous frigidity seize you not; lest if
otherwise he fasten upon you, and render you stupid and insensible; he make you
his prey. Herbs (pursues Basil) as sweet as they be, if they be mixed with
Henbane and Hair; Flowers as fair as they seem, if they conceal under them
Vipers, and Aspes; would be gathered with a hand more cautelous, than curious.
By how much the more the danger is concealed by so much the more is it to be
feared. Laughter in the mouth, and flattery in the face, are the semblances
that mask treasons.

It is not only in the Ring of Demosthenes, of Cleopatra, Plini^^ li. 33. c. ^
of Annibal; but in Books also, that the poisons are concealed under Jewels:
nor are they therefore the less mortal, for being the more precious. Those
sublime Wits, like the Heavens, enriched with as many Stars, as are the goodly,
and lofty conceits which resplend in their writings; should never leave us so
secure, but that in our l^ction of them, we should use much suspension and
caution; since it often eveneth in Books as in Heaven; that the fairest Stars,
compose the most deformed figures: whence in the study of them the advice is
necessary, which the Sun gave to Phaeton, still to keep his eye on his way, and
his hand strait on his reins, since even in traveling among the Stars, Per
insidias iter est, 2 Met.
formasque ferarum.

Here the advertancy of the Dogs of Egypt, serves to our purpose; that drink
the waters of Nylus running, nor are they so earnest to quench according to
custom their thirst; but that they more fear to satiate the hunger of the
Crocodiles. Here also let me insert the cautelousnesse of the Eagle, which when
it chaseth a poisonous Dragon.

Occupat adversum, ne saeva retorqueat ora. All this, when the Books are such
that there may be profit extracted from them, by those that read them; and
profit without prejudice by those that deliberately read them. Otherwise if
they are either of that kind, of which may be averred what Tertullian said of
the ancient Spectacles; De spect. cap. 7.
Quorum summa gratia de spurcitia plurimum concinnata est; or replenished with
poisonous Doctrine, and pestilential Opinions: we should not wish (as the
Comic says) ex arbore pulchra strangulari. Aristoph
What? If this, and the other Lascivious Poet should not have composed and
published his Poems, could not I know how to be a Poet? and may not I say as
sick Pompey, when the Physician prescribed him for supper by way of restorative
a Mavis, adding (since that it was out of season) that Lucullus could help him
to one, as preserving them all the year, Quid? said Pompey (with a disdainful
look) Nisi Lucullus luxuriaret, non viveret Pompeius?

With such Books whence nothing may be extracted but poison, and pestiferous
documents; we should do as Crates the Theban did with the money, arising upon
the sail of his goods; casting it into the Sea, and therewith saying, Ite:
perdo vos, ne perdere a vobis. And just so Origin, and after him St. Ambrose
called the mischievous Doctrines of fertile wits in the language of David,
Divitias peccatorum.

The songs of the Sirens are sweet and melodious: Nor are the Remorra's so
powerful in staying the Ships when they grapple them with their teeth, as they
in enchanting them; so that without casting Anchor, or striking sail, as if
they were run a-ground, they remain immovable.

Delatis licet huc incumberet aura carinis
Implessentque sinum ventide puppe ferentes, Claud.

Figebat vox una ratem. --
But what ensues? after the song comes sleep; and after the sleep death. Thus
they only enjoyed so much, as was requisite for sleep, so much they slept as
was sufficient to die.

Nec dolor ullus erat, mortem dabat ipsa voluptas. There is no better escape
from these perils, than by the stopping our ears to their chantings, and
enchantings; using for that purpose the famous wax of Ulysses. Cassiod. lib. 2.
epist. 40.
Qui cogitavit felicissimam surditatem, ut quam vincere intelligendo non
poterat, melius non advertendo superaret. No less should we do with these
enchanting Sirens of Books; pleasant its true, but for the most part
pernicious; the which both because unprofitable, and because prejudicial,
August.
Nescire quam scire melius est.

Who will drink Cyrces poison, for the Cups being of Gold and of Pearl? Who out
of the greatness of their curiosity, would behold in the Shield of Pallas, the
head of Medusa, if the sight of it cost them a metamorphosis into stone; which
to become, Satis est vidisse semel? Claud.
How irrational both in honesty and conscience (not to speak of the shameless
liberty of the bad) is the too much affiance of the simply good; Gigant.
that with a pretense of polishing the wit, by the mirror of such kind of
Books: to draw the riches of precious conceits, from the treasuries of so
Learned Authors; do as those that in taking the Jems out of the head of the
Dragon, drink the venom and poison. They run at the songs, and are caught in
the snare. They become desirous of certain Spirits that so disorder the mind in
taking them in, that they lose their Senses thereby.

He that travails in dust, or dirt, howbeit he treads lightly, always reteines
some filthiness on his feet: and even the Stars, says Pliny, which,
(notwithstanding that they are Stars, that is to say, the pure substance of
Heaven, mingled and consolidated with light;) in regard they are nourished with
Terrene humors; sordid Aliment, which they exhale from here below: they become
spotted, and deformed: Thus (though without any reason for it) does Pliny hold.
Lib. 2. cap. 9.
Masculas enim non esse aliud quam terrae raptas cum humore sordes. This indeed
is true, that minds, although of Celestial professions, and lives; if they
diet themselves with sordid humors, imbibed from Petronius, from Apuleius,
from Ovid; and besides many others, from some Poets in our Language worse than
all the rest; they will contract impurity at their hearts; with a hazard of
conceiving desires like to the objects they behold; as the Sheep of Jacob did
at the sight of the party-colored Rods, whose Lambs were gravid again, with
the same devise of many-coloured spots.

Is there any want of Books, of less danger, and equal delight and utility to
one of a sound Palate^ Who would sound the Flute, said Alcibiades; should they
see the wry mouths, and the bladder-cheeks that they deformedly make; when
they may have the Lute, and the Gittern, which afford more delight, without
causing any deformity? And with that he threw them away: nor was there any in
Athens that would from thence-forth use them. Books which make you Monsters;
and transform the beauty of Gods Image, imprinted in your Souls; into a
Beastly and Brutish deformity: to what end are they read? if there be so many
others of equal pleasure, and of greater profit? Drink not therefore the dregs
of impurest Authors, as Galato with an ingenious invention, depainted many
Poets, the imitators, or thieves of Homer; that with open mouth received that
which he vomited: if els-where there is Nectar without Lees; and so much more
sweet, Aelian. lib. 13. cap. 22. var. hist.
by how much the more pleasant, the cleanly Viands of the Mind are, than the
sluttish offals of the Sense: at whose Table much more melodiously than at that
of the Queen of Tire, By Jopas that new- Phoebus is expressed
In Robes of Lovely yellow bravely dressed, Virgil.

(With charming Looks, Aen. 1. sub sine.
and Scepter of pure Gold)
Heavens Miracles, and Motions, which the old
World-bearing Atlas to Alcydes told:
He sings the Moons obliquely Reg'lar ways,
Which her become, and often eclips Sols Rays:
How men and beasts at first were made, and how
Raines, Winds, and Lightnings are produced now:
The subject of his song in the next strain.
Is of the Bears, Crow, Hyades, and Wain:
And why the Vernal-dayes to the Ocean fly
So swifily, and the nights so leasurely.


A paranetical reprehension, of the Writers of obscene Poems.
HEar me, o ye Lucifers of the Earth: Did God endue you with a wit full of
lofty conceits, and an acute fancy; to the end you should turn the point of it
ingratefully against himself? Did he instruct you to manage the Pen with
applause, to the end you make thereof a Dart to transfix him in his honor? Did
God bestow upon you Angelical minds, to have you prove enemies like the Devils?

Tell me not, The vain of our genius is good only at these Theams. I will say
to you that which Tertullion said of the Israelites, Malu^stis alium, and
saepe, quam coelum fragrare. The clarity of your wits, which might shine as
benevolent Stars: you have made lights of rotten wood: compounded of
putrefaction and corruption. Grant it to be true, that you are good for nothing
but Poetry. Yet, to write Lascivious Poetry, was it the necessity of the Wit,
or the vice of the Will? S. Basil hom. 12. de lib. Ethn.
It suffices (as Pythagoras did with a Lascivious Lutanist) that you alter the
tune of your Muses Lyre, and change a Lascivious Lydian, into a Grave Dorick,
instead of exciting in others, affections and motions of Lascivious passions;
to repress them.

But, if still you are enamoured upon a Strumpet Muse; and tainted with that
which you call a Genius, or humor of unchaste versifying; I shall say of you,
and that with more reason, what Lactantius said of Leucyppus the Philosopher
the first inventor of Atoms, and defender of Chance, De ira Dei c. 10.
Quanto melius fuerat tacere, quam in usus tam miserabiles, tam inanes, habere
linguam! Is it not better to have no vain of Poetry; than to have a vain of
vomiting venom and poison? A prudent Emperor would never consent, that his
Wife should drink wine; although the Physicians swore to him, that there was no
other way to make her of barren that she was to become fruitful. That discreet
Prince esteemed the remedy, worse than the disease: and said, Malo Uxorem
sterilem quam Vinosam. O how much better would this other saying sound in your
mouth, Ped. apud Aeneam.
Malo Musam, Syl. li. de reb. Al. ph.
Sterilem quam Lascivam. Did I not know any other Language, than that of an
irrational Creature; I would rather choose to be a dumb Man, than a speaking
Beast.

And what gain you, when you spend your Wits, and consume your age and life to
publish a work to the World; (which suppose it should be granted Immortal) if
for the same you shall be applauded on Earth; and tormented under the Earth;
praised where you are not, and tormented where you shall eternally be? The
Horace's, the Catulluss's, the Ovids, the Gallio's, the Martiall's; (to omit
those of our own, of a holier Religion, but of a prophaner Poetry;) what
availes it the^ that they remain yet to the light of public Fame; if in the
mean-time they remain buried in the darkness of Hell: and for every particle
of that obscenity which they writ, they are tormented there below; whilst here,
without there knowledge, they are for the same unprofitably applauded?

Suppose that after many years study, your Pen should send forth a Work of
immortal merit; (in which notwithstanding Pauci quos aequus amavit Jupiter) of
that glory, which is the proper and legitimate reward of the labors of Heroic
Wits, you must promise to your selves no other share, than the least; I mean
that of the vulgar, or of the vicious: in as much as men of wisdom and
judegment (to whose ears Soloecismus magnus, S. Hier.
and vitium est turpe quid narrare,) will rather abominate you, as cankers of
civil conversation, and wholesome customs: nor will the misimployed virtue of
your Wits, appear otherwise to them, than the immeasurable, but impious
strength of Giants: who are not commended as mighty, because they can dig up
Mountains, and heap the^ a top of one another; but are condemned as
irreligious, because they therewith pretended to assault Heaven, and pull
Jupiter out of his Throne.

But if nothing else will persuade you: behold God descending to the
uncleanness of a Stable; to the miseries of poverty; to the inconveniences of
obscurity; to the scorns of mockers; to the calumny of detractors; to the sale
of a slave; to the condemnation of a Criminal; to the death of a Thief! All
blisters under the scourges; all blood, amidst the thorns; all confusion, in
his nakedness; all anguish, on the Cross! Now set him before you; and ask
him, for whom he took so long a voyage, and at so long stages, as from Heaven
to Calvary? For whom he dispended so many tears, so much sweat, and blood? Had
this noble Merchant in all this a design of other gain than of Souls?
Pretends he any other from us; requested he any other of his Father; than to
have us for his imitators in life, and companions in glory; Now put your selves
in competition with God; and behold the disproportionate unworthiness of this
comparison. He to save Souls, did what he could; you what you know, to damn
them. What prognostications make you of your selves? What faces will you have
to appear before your Judge as guilty; whilst that as many as have been lost by
your means; and in the Volumes of ages to come, shall be shown, after these, to
have perished through your occasion; shall exalt their horrid yellings, from
the deepest pit of Hell, against you? What defense will you have for your
selves, being to answer for the crimes of others? howbeit they are not so much
others as your own; since you laid the stumbling blocks to those falls, you
sowed the seed to those fruits of Death. There is not that man living on the
earth, that Lucifer beholds with a better eye, and observes, and preserves,
with greater care; than he that busieth himself in infusing from his brain,
into the golden Cup of an Ingenious Book, the pest of error, or poison of
impure Poetry. One of these alone suffices to ease half the Devils of the
trouble of tempting: for a mischievous Book, contervailes a hundred Devils. Job.
Here Behemoth sleeps in secreto calami, in locis humentibus, neither is
there any necessity of his contributing to the fall of men; where the way is so
glib, and slippery, the feet easily slide, and the supports deceive them.

Tymon the Athenian hated all men, he loved one only Alcibiades; but to love
him was to hate all: because he foresaw by his inclinations, that he would be
the ruin of many, and should become a disturber of all Greece. And those true
Misanthropii, there below; if there be any men that they hug as friends, and
embrace as dear unto them; they are those, that with Books of immortal
duration, and mortal operation, are to fight for many ages against I leaven; to
expugne honesty in many breasts, and to enrich their kingdom with many Souls.

These Truths discerned with the lights of reason, and faith by a famous Poet;
(as I hear from a person of his familiar acquaintance) they made him
oftentimes startle for horror, and almost swound for grief; and so far
transported him, that he took up the Book which he himself had composed to
behold it Tanquam Orbis Terrarum Pha^tontem (as Tyberius called Caligula)
whence as having merited a flash of lightning, Suet. in Call. 6. 11
he sentenced it to the flames. But no sooner did he reach out his hand to cast
it into the fire; but he pulled it in with occult violence of compassion; Love,
then bringing to his mind, the cold and tedlous nights, of those seven years
watching, which he spent in writing it; the great labors of the wit, which
there had expressed the quintescence of its Art; the harms of his impaired
health, enfeebled and worn away by the file of continual study: so that there
was not therein a syllable, or verse, that did not cost him some part of his
life: The public desire of the World, longing to see it: The glory, which the
merit of a Work of that singular Nature, did promise him: Alas! These were
Spells which shook his hand, stupefied his arm, and perplexed his heart:
whereupon he repented, altering his purpose, and condemned himself of cruelty,
and credulity; and in a posture, as if he would implore mercy and pardon of his
Book, he kissed it, hugged it to his breast; and to comfort it after the fright
of the fire, he promised it, as before, that it should be published to the
light. God keep you, that you may never be the Father of such a like Book.
Albeit you discern its malevolent inclination, and infamous dispositions; yet
to strangle it with your own hand, to tear it in pieces, to consume it in the
flames; will be an enterprise of that difficulty, as if you were with your own
hand to slay a Son, and to rip his Soul out of his heart with your own knife:
and the same said Origens Master in Stromati: Libri sunt filii animorum.

The knowledge, and foresight, that the publishing it it print, would be to the
prejudice of many, and perdition of your selves; as a Man, as a Christian will
sometimes infuse horror into the mind, and chillness into the heart; and you
will repent to have done that, which cost you so many sighs, so many toils. But
in Conclusion, this shall convert to that Remorse of Caesar's conscience upon
the Banks of Rubicon. You will strive to overcome God, and your selves; and
slightly over-passing the inconveniences of others, or your selves; you will
proceed with a resolute Jacta est alea. Suet. in Casi^c. 23


For my part, if two spectacles should offer themselves to my view; on the one
hand aged Abraham, binding his only Isaac as a victime upon the Altar, with a
hand as steadfast, as his heart was intrepidable; and the fire put to the wood
of the Sacrifice, and the hand up to fetch the blow upon the throat of the
innocent Son; without either by the shivering of the arm, or altering of his
countenance, or bedewing of his eyes, giving the least symptoms of a
discomposed mind; applying himself with such intensenesse to his Priestly
Office, as if he had forgot his paternal relation; or else if he had the
affectionate resentments of a Father; it was with more emulation, than
compassion of his Son that he slew; although in him he was both Victime and
Priest; (for he slew himself no less than him, in whom more than himself he
lived:) And on the other hand an excellent Author of a pestilent Book,
over-comming the contrasts of his thoughts, of his friends, and of all the
Devils in Hell; sacrificing it generously to the flames, with that self-same
hand that had syllable by syllable written, and weighed it: cutting off at one
blow, the labors of the years past, and the glory of the ages to come; and
slaying himself in his issue: losing with a voluntary refusal, that life, which
only makes us survive death; I mean, the Fame of succeeding Generations. Of
these two spectacles I know not which I should more willingly behold, and
perhaps it would appear unto me a lighter matter, at the express command of
God; Father of the unborn, and life of the Dead, to slay a Son that was
begotten with delight, and may be raised again by miracle: then at the voice,
of the un-audable Speech, in which God speaks to the heart; to burn a Book,
that in conceiving it, in bringing it forth, in bringing it up; cost more
pains, than it has syllables.

What though the love of Glory; and the hopes of obteining a Name of an
invincible Soul, moved Brutus to condemn his own Sons to death; being rebels to
their Country, and enemies to the public good? He condemned them as a Consul,
not to deliver them as a Father, Et exuit Patrem ut Consulem ageret. Valerius
Max. li. 5. c. 8.
His heart suffered him to see tied to the stake, Young Men, of amiable aspect,
Ti^. Live. lib. 2.
and in a word, Sons. Et qui spectator erat amovendus, eum ipsum Fortuna
exactorem supplicii dedit. But he could do no less. Who then so obdurated his
heart; or who bereaved him of it, for the time; whilst he both commanded, and
undauntedly beheld the death of his Sons?

Vicit amor Patriae laudumque immensa Cupido. Aencid. 6
Is the avidity of glory, able to make Fathers Executioners? Where then in one
is lost both the Son, and the Glory which from him was expected; how much more
heroical an act is it to kill him: since the power of doing it, was taken from
nothing, but from the love of Virtue?

But the hope of ever seeing so happy a Spectacle, is a vanity. Yet I would
persuade these, that the excrements, (such especially as favor wholly of
brutal) may be pared off, that the Book may remain, if not good, yet at least,
not exceeding bad. But also for this they are perfect at that answer,
heretofore given to the Senate of Rome, when they were consulting of lesning
the Tyber, by branching it, and diverting the Rivers that emptied themselves
into it, thereby to secure the City from the frequent In-undations, that
submerged it, Tacit.
Ipsum Tyberim nolle prorsus accolis fluvius orbatum, minore gloria fluere.
They will not permit their works to be a drop diminished, a tittle impaired.
They say they would seem monstrous being maimed, when as indeed they are
Monsters being entire.

DETRACTION.
The inclination of the Genius, and abusive employment of the Wit to the
defaming of others.
WHo would ever imagine that Detraction should be so sweet, that he that had
once tasted it should ever after desire it; and as the Lions, which if they
have once licked the blood from their paws, are always after that greedy for
it; so likewise he that tastes the first relish of slander, has ordinarily
so longing a desire after it, that they become like those that had rather be
without a tongue, than without their Jests; and cease to live sooner than to
leave jeering. Old age, (when they arrive at it) though it ofttimes bereaves
the head of wisdom, yet it deprives not the bitter tongue of it stings* like as
the old thorns, which Winter makes to lose their leaves not their pricks; their
ornament, but not their sharpness.

These, for the most part, acute of wit, but only to sting; never speak better
than when they spoke worst; never shine more than when most they burn. All the
proofs of their Wits are jeers, and pungent jests: and to become the smarter in
biting, they te^ter their wits, more than that famous Orator strove in
despite of his lisping tongue to pronounce and express the canicular and
snarling letter R.

To hear them, how a Menippus, a Zoilus, a Momns will play upon one another,
(so ingeniously they do it) it is as if you heard a Music, but such Music as
that, which Pythagoras observed to be made, by the blows, and percussions of
great Hammers. Their Pens, Plutarc.
taken from a Vulture, not from a Swan, like that of the famous Demosthenes,
have the ink at one end, and poison at the other: yea, the ink it self is a
venom, that impoisons the names which it writes; whereupon as those that die
of poison, they appear wan and black. The sparklings of the wit, which in
others are wont to be innocent Lamps of light, not of fire; for delight, not
for offense; in them are lightnings, that carry flames on their wings, and
death on their points.

There is transfused into their heads the Genius of Lucilius, Plinius
qui primus condidit styli nasum. (...)
They have in their mouths the proper tongue of the Ancient Epigrammatists;
namely, Praefat. l. 2. epig.
(as Martial defines it) Malam linguam: nor though their speech be sweet, and
copious, can it ever be said, of them, as of the Sweetest Plato, that the Bees
put honey in their mouths; but instead of it a Scorpions egg, or a Spiders
venom. In sum; they accustom their hands to the cauterizing instruments like an
Anatomist; rather than to the Pen like a Writer; and the more subtly they
cut, the more excellent they seem; wounding the living, and tearing in pieces
the death.

These detracting Buffoons, unworthy of living amongst Men, as partaking of
Beasts; (as was said of Cicero) to gain the applause of a jest, care not to
lose the favor of a friend.

Dummodo risum --
Excutiat sibi, Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 4.
non hic cuiquam parcet amico.
Whereupon they may well be called with the Comic Vulturii; since that
Hostesne an Cives comedant parvipendunt. To express one of their conceits,
they care not though they torment that innocent party upon which it lights.
They only use their eyes to strike their blows home; nor do they care, when it
sometimes falls out that they speed as the Eagle; that let a Tortoise fall upon
the bald head of a Poet, to break the shell. Thus they take pleasure, in others
sufferings; and honor, from others disgrace: imitating (if he did such a
thing) Buonaroti, that crucified a man, thereby to depaint to the life a
Crucified Christ. Or rather Nero, that set fire on Rome, to chaunt upon the
Tower of Mecaenas, to the sound of his Gittern, in the real wrack of his
Country, the feigned conflagration of Troy.

Ah las! too barbarous is that desire of theirs, to appear at others cost,
quick-wits; of an acute and nimble brain. Its the cruel custom of the people of
Jappoan, to prove the temper of their Scymitars, and the strength of their
arms, upon the Carcasses of the condemned. How much worse is it under pretense
of a sportive skirmish, to thrust in ones breast a Daggar, no less mortal to
the reputation of him that receives it, than the wound of a Sword would be to
his life; which, as says Vegetius, Duas uncias adactae mortales sunt. Yet you
must know, that the Satyrs, Lib. 1. cap. 12.
Fathers and Masters of Satyr, are more ugly for being Semi-beasts, than
beautiful for being Demigods: and in your mordant taunts, that which is
ingenious, does not so much please; but that which is malicious, does more
displease.

Be these the sublime uses, the divine employments, for which Wit was given
you? To make it of a King that it is a Tyrant; and of a Conservator of Civil
life, a Homicide, and Hangman? You appropriate that to your selves, which an
Ancient writ against the cruel Perillus; justly complaining, that he had
debased the innocent Art of forming in brass the Images of gods, and Hero^s;
unto the making of a Murdering Bull, to be the Executor, or Instrument of the
merciless sentences of Phalaris. In hoc a simulachris Deorum, Plinius li. 34.
c. 8
hominumque de^ocaverat, humanissimam artem. Ideo tot conditores ejus
elaboraverant ut ex ea tormenta sierent? Itaque una de causa servantur opera
ejus, ut quisquis illa videat, oderit manus.

The ordinary punishment of these is to be beloved by none, shunned by many,
hated by all: To bring upon themselves the infamous title of a Satyrist, a
Detractor, a Buffoon; who might bear in their foreheads that ancient Distich,
extracted from a Greek Epigram, Si meus ad Solemn statuatur Nasus, hianti
Ores, ben^ ostendet dentibns hora quota est.


Diogenes, the Band-dog of Cynick Philosophers; had his palace, rather kennel,
in a Tub. This was the Heaven, which he revolved: An Intelligence really worthy
of such a Sphere: This the Cave from which he delivered his Oracles, that smelt
more of Wine than Truth: This the Chair, where teaching, he undertook to
correct others uncomely customs, with a miracle (if he had succeeded so,) that
a Butt should reduce others to themselves, that is wont to make them run
besides themselves. Whatsoever was the doctrine that he taught (which yet was
such, that Plato called him, Aelian. lib. 14. cap. 33. var. hist.
alterum Socratem sed insanam) nevertheless, because in that nasty and filthy
Butt, he mingled the Wine of sincere Philosophy with the sharp Vinegar of a
continual malediction, he had more Scoffers than Scholars; and all Athens,
looked upon him as a Dog, and shunned him as a mad Man.

And who is there that will hug a Porcupine, since he cannot touch it so
warily, but that it will prick him? who would keep company with one, to whom as
to the Scorpion, Semper cauda inictu est? Plin. l. 11 cap. 25.
VVo would make a friend of a Lion; which then when it neither uses paws nor
teeth; has so sharp a tongue, that even when it licketh it fetches blood?
Better is it to honor them, that they may not become enemies; sacrificing to
them, as the Romans did to the Goddess Febris; for then they obliege you when
they come not near you; and when they only so far remember you, as never to
think of you.

But it would be so slight a punishment for Detractors, to be only shunned and
avoided; if also they were not persecuted. For although sometimes they are
subtle in the interests of their lives, as to know how much it behooves them not
to irritate those, that can answer to the Pen with the Sword; and to words,
with deeds: but that in the affairs of such they ought to be dumb, if not
blind; taking thereof an example, from certain Northern Cranes, that being to
pass Mount Taurus take a stone in their mouths, to the end they may not with
their chattering wake the Eagles there nested: yet its seldom seen, that they
are so cunning; but that one time or other, they do that unawares; which they
continually do, either out of a habit, or nature: whereby either they make to
themselves^, as the Silkworms, a prison with their own mouths; or provoke
them in whose power it is to crush the Scorpion, upon the sore it made:
bringing to mind by their example the truth of that, which Pollio said of
Augustus* That we ought not Scribere in eum, Macr. li. 2. Sat. cap. 4.
qui potest proscriber^.

They will not always meet with such as will give them money to hold their
peace; nor such as (following the advice of Alphonsus King of Aragon) will
throw to the Cur medicatis frugibus offam, to keep him from barking, or at
least from biting.

It was the singular fortune of that Advocate in Martial: Quod clamas semper,
Lib. 1.
quod agentibus obstrepis Hel^. Epist.

Non facis hoc gratis, accipis ut taceas.


Many times accipiunt, ut taceant: but they receive something, but what I know
not, upon which they cease to snarle, so that they are never heard to speak
more: which was the reward of that notorious Zoilus; who whether he were burnt
alive, or stoned; or crucified, Vitru.
in one of these sorts of coin, he was paid the wages, praef. li. 7
of his aspersions against the Prince of Poets.

He that has erred in Writing, should not refute his confutation: And he that
is ignorant himself, should not undertake to correct, or condemn others.
THere is not a man upon Earth of so clear and Chrystaline a Wit, that in
receiving the light of Sapience, does not cast some shadow; some more, some
less opacious, and muddy with Ignorance. Our souls, said a Wise Ancient,
(fires of themselves all light, and clarity,) being that they are conjoined to
this gross matter of our bodies, which they enliven; besides the sloth that
attends them, are also obfuscated with foggy vapors; whereupon, like flame
confused and intermingled with smoke, they lose in great measure the vivacity
of their motion, and the clarity of their light. And from hence is the
difficulty in seeking, and incertainty of discerning the Truth. Therefore hanc
veniam petimusque damusque vicissim, of sometimes not hitting the Center,
without being therefore expulsed the Circle of the Learned; like as the Moon,
although that it be sometimes Eclipsed, and darkened, yet she is not for this
banished from Heaven.

And to say the truth, they are not to be tolerated, that either vend their own
writings, or defend others as Oracles of infallible Truth; as Gold of the
twenty-fourth Caract without mixture of error, without alloy of falcity. As
for their own, let them hear St. Ambrose, that very aptly resembles them to
Children, to which the love that is born, blinds the judgment; whereupon the
better Fathers they are to them, the worse Judges they use to be of them; S.
Ambr.
Vnumquemque fallunt sua scripta, and Authorem praetereunt. Atque ut fil^i
etiam deformes delectant parents, sic etiam Scriptores, indecoros quoque
sermones palpant. For those of others, let them, besides many other places of
Augustine, St. Aug. epist. 111
read his 111 Epistle where he says, His custom was not to adore the Authors
but the Truth; not their Sayings, but Reason; forsaking them where they forsook
her. Talis sum ego in scriptis aliorum (concludes he the Epistle) tales volo
intellectores meorum.

On this ground, the more Wise are persuaded before the publishing their
writings, to bring them to the rest, and censure of a friend, equally
judicious, and faithful; that where they find them defective, they may say to
them, as the Ancient Fencers to their scholars, Repete, but if only after their
coming to public light, they be seen deficient; they themselves may correct
them; retacting them as Painters, which boast not their labors for works
exactly perfect according to the rigor of Art, but write underneath the
Faciebat of Polycletus and Apelles. Plin. praefat. hist.
Tanquam inchoata Art, and perfecta, ut contra judiciorum varietates
superesset artisici regressus ad veniam, velut emendaturo quidquid desideretur,
si non esset interceptus. Plutarc. quomodo profectus in virt. etc.
And of this the Great Hyppocrates gave an example, who reputed it no shame to
retract any thing, which he had writ of the Sutures of the brain.

But for as much as either the Writer (unless too late) perceives not his
errors, of which unwittingly he makes himself Master, printing them; or is
prevented by others in opportunely prescribing them an Antidote, and giving
them a reproof; when that evenes, he that is a prudent Judge, and rational
friend, should not write to disgrace, injure, or irritate him: for that is not
his desire, that as the Ancient Romans whilst they were wholly ignorant of the
Mathemathicks, regulated their public actions by an irregular and lying Dial;
Pliuius li. 7. c. 60
Non enim congruebant ad horas ejus liniae; so, his errors should be the rule
of others understandings; Nimis enim pervers^ seipsum amat, said the Great
Augustine, Epist. 7. ad Marcellinum.
qui and alios vult errare, ut error suus lateat.

Yea, to be assisted in un-deceiving himself, and which is more, the World;
ought to be so much the dearer to every one, by how much all are obliged to
love the Truth. And hear in a few of his own words, the sense that the same
Augustine had of this; A man, I know not whether of greater ingenuity, or
modesty: Non pigebit mesic ubi haesito quaerere, Lib. 1. de Trim. c. 2
sic ubi erro discere. Proinde quisquis hac legit ubi pariter certus est pergat
mecum, ubi pariter haesitat, quaerat mecu^^. Ubi errorem suum cognoscit redeat
ad me* ubi meum revocet me.

And this, of which I have hitherto writ, is the part of the modesty of him
that writes: Nor should it be less that, of him that reads. Not betaking
themselves to a profession of running only to errors of Writers to condemn
them; as Vultures to putrid Carcasses, or Ravens to Carrion to devour them;
doing it moreover with as much liberty, as if there were no possibility of
their erring, in noting the errors of others: and yet the Aphorism of Ambrose
is most true, ^. Apol.
Saepe in judicando majus est peccatum judicit, David. cap. 2.
qu^m peccati illius, de quo fuerat judicatum.

This is the discourteous manner of many, Plinius praef.
Qui obtrectatione alienae Scientiae famam sibi aucupantur; Ferulasque tristes
sceptra Paedagogorum. Mart.
they hold a Censorious brow still advanced over the Authors they read, to
lash them; they delighting no less thus to use the rod, than others to graspe
the Scepter. Thence are born the so many Contests, Apologies, not to say the
Duels, and Tragoedies of a thousand Authors, though of no ordinary judgment;
which in this kind of impertinency, have thrown away much time, and much sweat,
but to what purpose?

Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos. This seems to me a matter, not
to be wholly past over with a coniving eye: Take therefore about it some few
advertisements.

First; That a man that has no more but a belly and a tongue, Plu. Apoph.
(as Antipater said of Demades) should undertake to make himself the Tri^r of
the Golden Writings of worthy Men; finding how much of purity, and how much of
dross they contein; condemning what they understand not, rejecting what they
like not, gnawing what they cannot bite: Pl. Apoph.
That a sordid Woman instead of her Spindle, should take a Pen, and write
against the Divine Theophrastus, taxing him of ignorance and simplicity;
renewing the Ancient Monsters of Fable: That a proud Omphale, should condemn
Great Hercules from a Club to a Distaffe; from killing of Monsters, to
spinning: That a Demosthenes, (Cook to Valens the Emperor,) as if the Kitchen
had been a School of Wisdom, and the Dishes Books; should villifie the
Theology of Great Basil; and reject it as viands without salt, and Sapience
without savor: That one Mr. Johan. Ludovicus, should pretend to draw the most
Learned Augustine out of ignorance: and presume ( Sus Minervam) to teach the
true form of Logic to that Great Augustine all Soul; to that Ingenious
Archimedes, which against the enemies of Truth and Faith, knew how to make as
many thunderbolts, as he made arguments: deducing his propositions from most
manifest principles, as rays from the Sun: and directing them in a Logical
form, to the mark of infallible consequences: Is not this the same as to see
Mures de cavernis exeuntes; tilt with a straw at the breast of a Lion? To see
water-Frogs not only to muddy the water for Diana, but to desire to ingrosse it
solely and wholly to themselves? To see Beasts with the horrid yelling of their
discordant throats, to affright and put to flight the Giants?

In beholding these, and others of the like stamp expound, blot out and correct
the writings of Learned Men; it brings to mind, and sets before my eyes that
indiscreet Ass, which with teeth accustomed to Roots* Shrubs, and pungent tops
of Thistles; durst attempt to tear and devour all the Illiades of the Poet
Homer: to the greater disgrace and disaster of Troy (as a Poet speaks) in as
much as heretofore a Horse more honorably, now an Ass more sordidly destroyed
it.

The Grecian Aristides died, a man of Martial valor, proved at more than one
encounter; and died of poison taken from the wound of a certain little Animal,
that had stung him. Death grieved not the Valiant Man, but dying so
dishonourably: namely, not torn by a Lion* not bruised by an Elephant; not
dismembered by a Tiger; but stung by an unlucky Fly. The like, in my judgment,
may be the resentment of those great Masters of the World, seeing themselves
stung, reprehend^d, condemned; not by man excellent for Wit and Learning, but
by a Cook, by a Woman, by a Pedant. For i^ the Stars (says Cassiodorus) seeing
upon a Dial, the immense periods of their light imitated, and as it were
mocked, by the little motion of a shadow; would be offended, and in disdain
confound Heaven, and the World: and would commence other motions, other
revolutions, Lib. 1. epist. 15
Meatus suos fortasse deflecterent ne tali ludibrio subjacerent; What do you
think so many in every profession of Learning, Oracles of Wisdom, would now do,
if in the silence of their Sepulchers they might ^ear themselves taxed, some
for blind, some for simple, some for inexcusably ignorant; and this by men, not
only no Sages, but (if they may be measured by their judgment) no men; who to
acquire in the vogue of the Vulgar, the name and credit of Hercules, and
Samson; strip the skins from the minds of the already-dead-Lions.

Secondly, it happens many times, that that is our Ignorance, which we may
think another error: and we may peradventure say to our selves, that, which
many grave and holy Bishop said to the Apostate Emperor ^ulian; who read, and
contemned a most learned Apology of St. Sozom* Histor.
Apollonarie: Legisti* sed non intellexisti; si enim intellexisses, non
improbasses.

The Ancient Romans, in the exercise of Arms, wherein they held the Soldiery
continually trained; gave for the first rule of well bestowing their blows, Not
to lay themselves open to their Enemies weapons: so that he warding the blow,
in the same act, wound them in deficient part of their arms, before they could
recover their Swords from the thrust and return (without loss of much time) to
their gu^rd. Lib. 1. cap. 12
In qua meditatione, (says Vigetius) serv^^^atur illa camela ut ita Tyro ad
inferendum vul^^us insurgeret, ne qua ex part pateret ipse ad plagam. And the
first rule of those that take up the Pen against a Writer, ought to be, that in
condemning an others ignorance, they show not their own. Otherwise, if entering
into a Labyrinth, to fetch out one that wanders in the same, you have not a
clue with which to wind out your selves; you shall be the subject of Democritus
laughter, that derided the wretched Grammarians, wholly intent to trace out the
errors of Ulysses, whilst in the mean-time they saw not their own.

We need not betake our selves to bite others, till our Wise-teeth be grown:
which (as Aristotle advises) shoot late. It is requisite to be doubly
furnished, with Learning, and with Wit, being to correct him that erreth; that
so both the error be certain, and the correction inculpable. And how many
times does it happen, that through the insufficiently understanding the true
sense of the Writer, we commit the crime of Mutius Scaevola, that thinking to
kill the King, slew the Servant? We arraign that as said by another, which he
neither said, nor dreamt; and desperately engage in a Combat with phantasmes:
when as, if not having eyes of our own sufficiently able to discern, we had
used those of a perceptive friend; we should have put up our weapons, (as the
Sybil made Aeneas,) that we might not fruitlesly grapple with shadows with
great pains to our selves, and no hurt to them.

Thirdly, Its not the custom of these depraving Calumniators to irritate any,
whilst hey be living; measuring his knowledge by the writings which he
published; in regard that in a person incensed, anger many times converts to
Wit: rousing all his Spirits before dormant, and running where necessity
calls them, Sen. l. 4.
like as In lucernis oleum fluit illo ubi exuritur. quaest.
How many, that kept the golden veins of sublime Wit and precious Discretion
concealed and sepulchred in their breasts, not.
once being stung by such as unadvisedly dared (esteeming theo^ devoid of
Learning) to provoke them: have manifested their parts to the World: giving
their emulators cause to repent the misfortune of angring them: in like manner
as some times the Rocks being gravid with rich, but occult minerals; rent by a
thunderbolt, and sending forth by the opening of the wound an essay of that
wealth which was within concealed: make it appear, that those are Mountains of
Gold and Silver, that were reputed to be no other but incultivated heaps of
Stones? How many whose brains appeared frozen, and as impenetrable as slint:
being provoked to the proof of their Pens^^ just as slint stricken, have sent
out not sparks, to light: but flames and, lightning to wound? What can be a
more incensate, and stupid animal, than an Ass? Yet observe that of avaricious
Balaam; that being smitten with more passion, than reason, became in its own
defense a Demosthenes. In Ps. 4
Balaae (says Chrysostom) erat Asinus, ani^al omnium haebetissimum; ^ecminus
been se desendit apud eum, qui ipsum puls^ba^, quam homo praeditus rations. But
farther, Do not even Mutes themselves (as is said of that Son of Cr^^sus) in
defense of the things to which nature has related them, know how to untie the
tongue; and, with a miracle of that natural Love, to which nothing is a
miracle, to speak that which they never learnt to speak?

How many, be it envy, be it desire of contradiction, be it ambition of
crecting to themselves upon others ruins a repute of gallant Men; In praef.
(imitating, ^d d^al.
(says Theodoret,) that Shimei, which made himself famous to the World with
stoning a King: a King so holy, so innocent as David:) have with the stings of
their over-pungent Pens, infuriated those, which (being supposed Lambs, but
found Lions,) have made them wish themselves out of the lists? but in vain, and
too late, for Galea^tum se^o duelli poenitet: Juven.
have sown, with Cadmus, biting Speeches as it were teeth of poisonous
Serpents; and have afterward been affrighted seeing an Host of Armed Men so
suddenly spring up? Messis cum proprio mox b^llatura col^no. Ovid.
have took (as Archilochus told one who would without cause quarrel with him)
the Waspe by the wings; Met.
and afterward hearing the humming have wisher tha^ either they had had no
hands to take it, on had had no ears to hear it? I ^ave strived as M^rs^^s
with Apollo, Lucia^^
^believing him to be a Shepherd, Pseud.
who was a God^ and when afterward they have seen themselves s^ea'd like
Calves, have begged pity, have offered promises, but in vain; for he that
resolved to have his skin, would not give him a word: nor would he suffer
himself to be overcome with entreaties, that had overcome in Singing? In short,
how many be there that have ^ound themselves in the midst among Vipers, and
Asps; nor have they known of whom to complain besides themselves alone; that
rashly rusht among them, too late taking heed, and have complained to no
purpose^ as that unfortunate Roman Army, that finding in (...) more Monsters,
than humane enemies, with whom to sight: said, -- Nihil A^^rica de te, ^aican.

Nec de te Natura queror. (...) st^a serentem
Gentibus ablatum deaerasser emibus o^^^m.
In loca serp^ntum ^os vcnimus.


Such a one was Ruffinus, who sorely to his cost stung, and provoked, St.
Jerome; and chose rather to be his emulator than friend: But afterward proving
how dexterous a hand he had to strike, and heavy to wound, he would have
withdrawn himself from the fray, crying; That he had sufficient punishment in
himself without his blows: That Love of Truth, not passion had guided his hand
whilst he writ: That it was not handsome betwixt Christians, between Monks; to
take up the Pen, and to use it as a Sword to hurt one another. To whom St.
Jerome, Esto, said he, me nescius vulneraris: quid ad me qui percussus sum? Number
idcirco curari non debeo quia tu me bono animo vulnerasti? Lib. 1. contra Ru^^.
Confossus ^acco: stridet vulnus in pectore, candida prius sanguine membra
turpantur; and tu mihi dicas, Noli manum adhibere vulneri, ne ego in te videar
vulnerasse?

Cautions about the nice mystery of opposing others, and defending our selves.
IT suffices not by way of advice to such as know little and presume much to
have hitherto said, that a SHOEMAKER who is in his Craft raises not himself
ultra crepidam; ought not to climb to the face and censure a countenance
designed and painted by Apelles; whose Art, as he has not EYES Learned enough
to understand it, so ought he not much less have a tongue so bold as to
condemn it: But it rests also to speak of that which is required in contrasts
between the Intelligent; that so they may attein to the level of reason, and
agree with the Standard of Equity; And they are either arreignments of others
writings; or defenses of our own.

And to the writing against others: As the Love of Truth, ought to be that
alone, which puts the Pen into the hand, and in a certain sense dubs the
Writer her Knight; so Modesty ought to be the Mistress that teaches the Art
of managing it: using it not as the Lance of a Soldier; but of a Chyrurgion;
against Error to amend; not against the Author, to offend him: Therein
evincing himself a good Scholar of Divine Wisdom the Word, whose Mouth in the
Canticles is compared not to Roses, Cant. 5.
which yet are of a color, that more than all other Flower resembles the
Lips; but likened to the Lillies: and this, not only because the candure of the
proper and native Verity of the mouth of Christ, without painting or borrowed
imbellishment, by it self alone sufficiently resplends; which is the ingenious
surmise of Theodoret: but also, because the Lilly is a Flower, no less
innocent than lovely: In c. 5.
without pricks, Cant.
or roughness, to render it sharp and pungent. Flos sublimis (says St.
Ambrose of Christ pourtrayed in the Lilly) immaculatus, innoxius, Lib. 7. in
Luc.
in quo non spinarum offendat asperitas, sed gratia circumsusa clarescat.

The Stars whilst they fought against Sisera, Jud. c. 5
broke not their order, forsook not their posts, nor discomposed themselves in
doing it. Mane^^es in ordine, and cursu suo, adversus Siseram pugnaverunt. And
thus ought they to do that undertake to write against others; which yet is a
combat not without Victory, though without blood. It is good to beware, that
in running the Lance of his reason, he lose not his stirrup; and thereby the
merit of Wit be overcome by the defect of Passion: And that he censure not the
pride of Plato; with the pride of Diogenes; rendering himself criminal in the
very act of recriminating.

The convincing one of error, is to put the finger into the wound, and to
search it even to the bottom; and Action to be done with exquisite
delicateness, that the cure cause not more anguish, than the wound. Discreet
Hyppocrates, commanded that the eyes of the sick, Lib. de medico.
as parts extreme delicate, should be wiped with the purest Linen, and the
wounds cleansed with the softest Spunges; and both done with all possible
dexterity and lightness of hand. And before him the Protomedicus Holy Raphael
ordered young Tobias, that in the cure of the eyes of his blind Father, before
he applied the Gall for medicine, he should give him a kiss for Love. Tob. 11
Osculare eum, statimque lini super oculos ejus ex fell isto: We would
prescribe the like advice to such as pretend to illuminate the Eyes of the Mind
of the erroneous; still to have regard that the Gall of reprehending another
for his error (which although it were only to publish it, yet is a collirium
of great sharpness) be not disunited from the kiss; and the Kiss disjunct
from Love.

Carneades the Academian, being resolved to write against Zeno Patron of the
rigid Sect of the Stoics; with a small pill of Hellibore purged his stomach
from peccant humors, especially from Choler, to the end their fumes should not
obfuscate his Wit in that important action. Gell. li. 170. 55.
Ne quid e corruptis in stomacho humeribus ad domicilium usque animi
redunderet. He that has purged his brain, and knows what is sufficient for
that which perteins to the enterprise of confuting; let him not omit also to
purge the tartness of Cholor; so that his doctrine and the manner of
delivering it be equally inculpable. Let him accord the Affections of his mind
to the Music of Reason, that so the style in which he expresses himself,
Laert. in Xenocr.
do not participate of difficulty, or dissonancy. Let him not enter the lists
till he has made that sacrifice to the Graces; that the complacential Plato
advised the churlish Xenocrates. Then let him go as those Prudent and Puissant
Spartans that fell not to the Battle at the sound of the rattling Drum, but of
the Bagpipe and Flute, Ut modestiores modulatioresque fierent, Lib. 2. cap. 11.
said Thucydides in Gellius. Otherwise he that is not as appassionate as you
seeing your discomposed method; will scorn and disdain you. It will be also
said to you, as the Poet Menander said to Phylemon his Antagonist, and through
the ignorance of the Judges also his Conqueror, Quaeso te bona venia dic mihi,
cum me vincit non erubescis? You acquire, (though you know your Award in the
noble Science of Defense.
Veni to be good) if you be not as modest as efficacious, the Title of that
cruel Chyrurgeon of Rome, which for the roughness with which he indiscreetly
made inscitions, lost the name of Chyrurgion, Plinius 1. 29. c. 1.
gaining that of Carnifex. Archagathus.


But far more difficult is it for one, provoked to stop at the mark of Reason;
when he thinks his resentments may be freer, for that his provocation is just
and reasonable. This is one of those not ordinary tempests in which it is
necessary to be provided of the Rudder of Respect, and an extraordinary Mastery
over the Affections; so that one while with slight, another while with force we
ward off, and break, the forceable and impetuons assaults of the Bellows. That
Moderamen inculpata tutelae, there where it is lawful to conjoyn in defense of
ones self, is a line so difficult to be touched, without running beyond it;
that it resembles the case of him that runs down the steep of a Hill, and can
very hardly (in that rather prae^cipice than race) so command his feet, and the
bulk of his body, that at the place where h^ is to stop, he run not some steps
farther tha^ the mark.

If I hold my tongue, men will think I plead guilty by a tacit confession. If I
respond not boldly, that will appear a remorse^ of a guilty Conscience, which
would be the dictate of an innocent modesty. Thus I shall become the Owl of
Writers, and scorn of the World; for even the Spiders make their Webs upon the
Statues about the face and beard of Jupiter; nor fear they^ his thunderbolts,
because they are in the hands of a Wooden god insensible, and insensate. To
answer one, so, that he come off with torn Clothes, and a broken face; would be
in one, to warn all others, that they take heed of two bold sharpning their
Pens against such who know how to turn them into Darts, and report Gall for
Ink, and wounds for stings. Thus the thunderbolts from the Clouds Paucorum
periculo, multorum metu. Sen. de Clem. l. 1. c. 8.
One burns with the pain of it, all freeze for fear of it; and the death of one
alone, teaches many to fear Heaven though serene; remembering how it thundereth
when incensed.

Withal, there be many, that abandoning themselves to Passion, to assert their
Right, relinquish all Reason. And the blind Fools perceive not, that Choler in
a Disputant is commonly an argument of weakness, and a sign of being
overcome; as calmnesse and mirth, is a testimony of Victory. Thus that Prince,
the friend of Sydonius Apollinarius, presently adjudged him conqueror in the
Disputation^, as soon as the passion of the adversary did confess it.
Oblectatur commotione superati; Sid. li. 1. epist. 2.
and tunc demum credit sibi cessisse Collegam, cum fidem fecerit victoriae
suae, bilis aliena.

Moreover, as to every opposition of every emulator, we need not respond:
(whence therefore excellent was that saying of Xenocrates in my judgment;
Laert. in Xenocr.
Tragoedy vouchsafes not to answer the injuries, that Comoedy offers) so also
every opposition to which we ought to reply, requires not the same temper in
the Reply. When a Dart has only peire'd the skin, to what purpose should a man
rave, and take on, as if it had transfixed his bowels? Let it suffice to
imitate the Elephant, that disburdeneth himself of an hundred Darts by one
shake, and Mota cute discutit hastas. Lucan.


Yea sometimes, the cause is so obvious, that there is an advantage in showing
what could be said, without so much as deigning to speak it. There is not a
creature better provided for its own defense, nor more apt to another offense
than the Porcupine.

Externam non quaerit opem. Fert omnia secum.
Se pharaetra, Claud. in hist.
sese jaculo, sese utitur arcu.
Vtrum animal tuuctas bellorum possidet arts.
But against him that provokes it, though it have all the pricks of its body,
as Darts in the nock, yet he uses not his utmost power, and that which he can
do with one, he does not with two; and if threats suffice, he forbears to wound
-- Iraque nunquam
Prodiga telorum, Ibid.
Cante Contenta Minari.


He only erects his bristles, and as it were putting them in the bow, he seems
to say to such as offend him, Look to your selves there. This manner of Apology
Tertullinn uses, Cap. 6.
writing against the Valentinians, Ostendam (says he) sed non imprimam
vulnera. Si ridebitur alicubi, materiis ipsis satisfiet. Multa sunt sic digna
revinci, ne gravitate adorentur.

But when either the importance of the Matter, or the insufferable tartness of
the Provoker, admits not of silence, or dissimulation, assume a serious
Defense, and set on work all that is within the power or capacity of Wit, Art,
Reason, and Eloquence. In this case you may Thunder and Lighten: but let not
the lightenings be composed of stinking sulpher to infect the World, but of
pure light to clear the Truth. Fly not out irregularly through Passion; but
free your selves justly by reason. Let there be, as in Janus the God of War,
the face of a youth, and of an old man; Spirit; and Judgment; Fortitude and
Maturity; Resolution and Moderation. Hom. 34 in Matt.
Chrysostom lamented not; Quod tanquam lupi in adversarios ruamus, saepe sine
victoria, qui tamen vincerimus, si oves essemus a pastoris auxilio non
recedentes, qui non luporum; sed ovium pastor est.

Learning would be happy, if its Professors should use betwixt themselves the
emulations, and contrasts, wherein erst Protogenes and Apelles lovingly
contented, in drawing in the midst of a very small line, another line more
small than that, without the least crookedness: If the pungent, and resplendid
Arms of Wit, were as Cassidorus said of certain others anma juris, Lib. 7.
for. 1.
non furoris; rays of verity, not Darts of Detraction. But to conclude,
experience shows, that the controversies of wit, of Civil that they should be,
for the most part become criminal; whereupon it would be better in my
judgment, when the interest of public good persuades not otherwise, to
convert the Sword, and Spear, into Plow-shares, and Mattocks; and to cultivate
their own wits rather than to contrast with others. But if the itch of
contradiction, permits them to live quietly no way, but by disquieting others;
do the want (as said St. Jerome to Augustine, refusing to come with him to a
trial of wit, and to dispute,) do they want public Masters of Errors;
Heretics, Atheists, and Politicians to cope with? Let them spare men, and kill
beasts. Let them say with Entellus when instead of Daretes his enemy he slew an
Ox.

Erice, I here to you this soul present,
As being more worthy of this punishment
Than that of Daretes. And VIGTOR, now
As useless, I lay by my art, and bow.
SELF-CONCEIT.
The esteem of a man's own knowledge with dispraise of others.
THe head of a man is not so incapacious, but that, better than the fabulous
Budget of Ulysses, it can contein as many Winds as Pride and Loftiness
inspire; nothing less forceable to turn upside-down the Sea, and Land, than
are the Whirle-winds to raise Tempests; and the exalations, imprisoned in
subterrenean Cavernes, to shake it with Earthquakes. Those unfortunate Scholars
know this to their cost; which (I know not if I should say, in, or rather
besides their Wits,) go so stately, that they think they are riding in their
Triumphant Chariot. They are the Saules, that are above others Ab humcro and
sursum, not by the head so much, as by the brain, and opinion of themselves.
These are the Olympus'es, of whom, the loftiest summities of Mountains, the
most elevated ingenuities, and wisest Souls, scarce attein to the basis, and
to kiss their feet. They are the Suns, that alone have light to illuminate all
obscurity, and to obscure all clarity.

These, I know not whether they should more move tears in Heraclitus, for
compassion; or laughter in Democritus, for derision. And howbeit you esteem
that Alexarchus the Grammarian, is worthy of the pity of a Philosopher rather
than the scorn of the Vulgar; to whom his School seeming an Heaven; Clement.
Alex. in Pro.
the ranks of Forms that stood about him, circulations of Spheres; the Boys he
read to, Stars; his Documents, Light; the Nowns, Pronowns, Verbs, Articles,
etc, Signs of the Zodiac; himself made a Sun; nor would he be any other way
depainted, or called: and it was a crime to behold him without a certain
suffering of the eyes, as when they are fixed on the Sun: Yet that Title would
better have fitted him, which Tyberius used to give to Appion, Plinius praef.
operis.
a Grammarian as himself, and no less a Bragadocchio then he, being empty of
understanding, and full of Wind, and therefore aptly called Cymbalum mundi.

What think you of that other Remnius, (rather Pallon than Pollemon;) that went
up and down bewailing the misfortune of the World, that should remain after
him, as it had done before him ignorant: in regard learning, that was born with
him, with him also should die? And upon the matter it seemed true; for he being
dead, there was not one letter left to make his Epitaph.

But the proud conceit that the tenth Alphonsus King of Castile, had of his Wit
and Knowledge, surpast the bounds of common, yea, rather of humane
opinionativenesse; a man by profession an Astronomer, (of whom now a days
those Tables of his called Alphonsine take their denomination) not yet of so
sublime intelligence, nor of such knowledge in this Art, that Atlas might have
trusted Heaven to his shoulders, without endangering a ruin; but of so high
esteem of his own brain, Roderir. Sanctius histor. Hisp. li. 4 cap. 5.
that he used to say, That had he been permitted Gods ear when he composed the
Heavens, and assigned the periods to the Stars: he would have contrived this
work with more order, and with rules of more exact proportion. Chap. 38
Now God interrogated Job as of a thing transcending the capacity of our wits;
Numquid nosti ordinem Coeli? and pones rationem ejus in terra? If God would go
to School to Alphonsus, he offers himself to be his Master in Astronomy; And
if he would bring him the Volumne of his eternal Idea's, he would blot out, he
would adjust the Model of the Heavens, and the Pattern of the World to a more
methodical contrivance.

Only madness could defend this blasphemy from the fulminations of the
Heavens, where posuit ossuum: and indeed God imputed it to his folly, using him
with more compassion than anger, and by letting him blood as a frantic person
in the vein in the middle of his forehead, took away his Crown. He would give
him to understand, that he would not have known how to adjust the Revolutions
of Heaven to a better form; and therefore sent him a Revolution in his Kingdom:
which he, with all the Canons and Rules of his Calculations, never knew how to
adjust; whereupon he came to be deposed by his Son and died an exile in a
foreign Country.

Men distracted as Alexarchus, as Remnius, although perhaps less known, I
doubt not but (as in all times,) so also such there are now a-dayes in the
World. He that would pourtray them to the life, may depaint a great Smoke,
(that advances it self even to the Clouds, and the more it exalts, the more do
those its great Volumnes swell and dilate; In Ps. 36
) thereto affixing the Motto of Augustine Quanto grandior, tanto vanior.

Hearing them some times speak in their own praise, and in under-valuing of
others, we may know how justly they merit the salute that Philip of Macedon
returned to his proud Physician that writ to him, Menecrates Jupiter Philippo
salutem: The answer was, Philippus Menecrati sanitatem: which was to make
himself the Doctor of his Doctor; and to send him for the health of his brain,
a dose of Helibor in a salute. You may hear them brag, That under their Caps
and Gowns the most lofty, and most profound Sciences are touched as the Pearls
are confined to the shells of the Cachilae.
Pearl Cockle. That their Dictions are the Charts of secure Navigation, without
which in the Sciences, we incur, naufrage or peril. That their Documents are
at the ultimate extent of Truth, as the Stars at their extremity of the Worlds
confines: so that Altius his nihil est, Manil. 1
haec confinia mundi.

Others are the Cisterns, they the Ocean; others Moles, they Linxes; others
Farfalla's, they Eagles; others Flies they Hearns. O Medici, mediam contundite
venam! And if not so, at least let them attempt to open the door to let out the
wind, with which the wretches have their heads so puffed up; and this may be done
by bringing their eyes into the light of some perspicuous verities; Such as
these;

1 Every one fancies his own things, being little, to be great. Self-love is a
concaveglasse that represents an Hair to be a Tree, and a Gnat to be a Pegasus.
He that takes Love for a Judge, esteems his matters as that Clitus esteemed a
Naval fight, in which battering and sinking only three Grecian Galleys, Plut.
Or. 2. de fort. Alex.
as if he had either routed Xerxes, or imposed fetters upon the Ocean, from
thence-forward he always made himself to be called by the majestic title of
Neptune.

Whence is it that the Moon being forty times less than the Earth, seems to
the judgment of the eye equal to the Sun, which yet is greater than the Earth
almost an hundred and forty times? But only because the vicinity of the Moon to
the Earth, represents it so much greater; as the Sun appears lesser, by being
more remote. But there is nothing so near to any one, as is his own composures;
thence it is that they seem to them immensurably great, and more vast than
those of other men, which by being besides us, and therefore remote from us,
are much diminished in their appearance.

2 Compare a Grass-hopper to an Ant, and who doubt but that it would seem a
Giant? He that measures what he knows, though very little, with what he
knows who knows nothing; believes himself to be absolutely, when as he is
only comparatively, most Learned. Those that went to study at Athens, said
Menedemus, went thither Doctors, continued there Scholars, and came away
Ignorants. Plutare quomodo prof. etc
Not only because, the more they understood that which they knew, the more they
came to know what they did not understand; but also because, they met, in that
most Celebrious Concourse of the Noblest Wits of the World, with such to
confront their understandings, that compared to them, they believed they knew
nothing. This was the Art by which most prudent Socrates corrected the
presumption of his Alcibiades, who being rich by paternal inheritance, and by
his acquist of much wealth, became so stately, as if he had been a Monarch of
the World not a private Citizen of Athens. He brought him to the knowledge of
himself, self, by a Map of the World, in which he found Europe, and in it
Greece, and in Greece with much a-do Athens; Now (says he) show me here thy
House, and thy Fields; which having, as thou see, no place in the World: how
comes it, that thy head is filled with such contemptible thoughts of the World?
He that believes himself to be in Ingenuity and Wit a Star of the first
magnitude, let him compare himself not with the lesser, but with the Suns of
the World; and in one and the same instant, he shall see his ambition to wane,
and his light to vanish.

3 That one, where as he is great among others, should desire to be greater
than others; where as he is one of the first, he should desire to be alone; is
that which may not be suffered in any one, more then heretofore it was
tolerated in that proud Pompey; Velleius Tom. 2. hist.
Qui, ut primum Rempublicam aggressus est, quemquam animo parem non tulit, and
in quibus rebus primus esse debebat, solus esse cupiebat. For though you be
excellent in every profession of literature, yet are you not a Phoenix, alone,
and singular in the World: nor a Primum Mobile, that without receiving
impression or motion from a Superior Heaven, gives the motion, and revolution
to the lesser Spheres. Who is there, that knows so much, that others before him
knew nothing; so that (...) may assume the insolent words of Prince ^alphas,
Vos nescitis quidquam? Nature was ^ot so sterile, that you being made, she had
not the like Molds again to make others: Nor so poor, that to make you rich in
knowledge, she should leave others Beggars. Wherefore then look you round about
you, and thinking you see none in the World that may stand in competition with
you for knowledge, say you foolishly to your selves, as Deucalion said to his
Companion, Nos duo turba sumus? Wherefore make you your wit a Procrustes, and
desire that every one equallize the stature of your Judgment as the Standard of
Truth; and therefore cut off the feet of those that surpass you, and wrack the
feet of those that did not reach to your length?

But admit you were for ingenuity the first amongst the foremost, is it a very
inferior and unworthy thing to be our own Panegyrist, and a despiser of
others? Hear how the Brooks roar and accosting with stones how they rumble,
that they seem to carry not a Rivolet of water, but a Sea; and yet many times
though their channel be a mile, their depth is not a palm. On the other side
the real Rivers, no less deep than vast, with how much, I will say, modesty,
do they go to the Sea? There is not heard from them the least murmuration that
might intimate the profoundity of their bottoms, the amplitude of their shores,
the clarity of their streams, or the impetuosity of their currents; they move
silently and quietly. They that carry but a small depth (in wit many times it
is true, but in the judgment always) are most intolerably clamorous; and with
their own applauds, and the villifyings of others, deafen the world: whereby,
before they are aware, they make themselves the more contemptible, by how much
the more they extol themselves: for according to the Aphorisin of Symoniacus,
In magnos animos non cadit affectaia jactatio. Lib. 10. epist. 22.


But because it is the property of Opinionative Wits, to use not only Pride on
Earth, but to exercise Curiosity in respect of Heaven; in the first, unjust to
men, to whom they would be undeservedly superior; in the second, impious to
God, whose being, whose actions they weigh by the weight, and measure by the
pole of their short understanding: take therefore upon this occasion the
subsequent consideration.

Two great evils of Misbelievers; To search matters of Faith with the curiosity
of Philosophy, and to believe matters of Philosophy with the certainty of Faith.
GEographers in their Protractions upon Maps, or Globes of the Earth, when they
come to the confines of Countries hitherto discovered, having no knowledge of
the others that remain, are accustomed to draw certain obscure lines at random,
and in the space that is left to write Terra Incognita. Of this custom of
Geographers Plutarch makes a very apt use, In vita Thesei.
in excuse of his Pen, if undertaking to write the lines of certain ancient
Hero's, he could not one by one particularize the enterprises, with which they
acquired the grandeur of their names, and the glory of Immortals: because
Antiquity and Oblivion its follower, rendered many places unknown, many parts
of their lives, hid and obscure. That which Plutarch says of the actions of
those ancient Worthies, is equally true of all the great mass of matters,
which may be comprehended by our capacities. Much there is known much rests
incognito: rather not unknown only, but unknowable, till such time as we enter
into that School where the Word being Master in the Lecture of a bare look,
teaches with indeleble and most perspicuous proofs, how vainly the Wits now
a-dayes stretch and wrack their brains in tracing out new inventions. I say the
most abstruse Arcani^^ of Faith, which are certain, if not obvious, require an
implicit subjection to believe them, not an impertinent curiosity to examine
them.

For a man that is of high ingenuity, and of vast intellectuals, measured with
what he presumes to understand it is no more than a shallow ditch, for to
contein the Ocean. For though the speculations, and sublime thoughts, with
which the mind is elevated to the knowledge of the occult truths of Faith, be
very lofty, yet they can bring us no nearer to them, than the Giants of Phlegra
were to Heaven, when they climbed to the tops of Pelion, Ossa, and Olympus.

The eye of an Owl is not made to view the Sun, on which the Eagle with her
adamantine pupil can scarce immoveably fix her sight. Fisher-boats with a piece
of a sail, and half a rudder, are not able to furrow the Ocean, and discover
new Worlds.

What other are our Intellectuals tied to the clog of the senses, Plinius li.
10. c. 1 Nature. hist.
but Ostriches, of greater bodies than wings, whereupon they cannot raise
themselves a foot from the ground, nor can they otherwise sly, then by
distending their wings in the Air, resting their feet all the while on the
Earth. But were we better feathered we should reach the Clouds if not the
Stars. What mind is there, what Genius, of that lofty knowledge, that makes
not to God a Sacrifice of his thoughts, upon that famous Altar of Athens
dedicated, Ignoto Deo; and confessing himself unable to understand what God
keeps hid, of himself, and his affairs, as it were clipping the wings of his
thoughts conformable to the laws of Sacrifice of Birds; Act. Ap.
says not with Augustine, Melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria
scientia.

The water of a Fountain rises no higher than the head and spring from whence
it flows; whereupon we use to say: That water ascends no more than it
descends. Now our judgment does it not begin from the Senses? and these of what
other are they capable, than of matter within the bounds of sensible Nature?
And how do we expect hence Fontem aquae saltentis in vitam aeternam, which we
interpret of the knowledge of things supernatural, and Divine?

But amongst those, which we may call wickedly curious, others there are, who
presume to make themselves Masters of that of which the World hitherto has had
none that have been Scholars; and whetting the edg of their Wits, ma^gre the
impossibility, would penetrate to the very Center of Verity, and see her in her
self, unveiled, and naked. They have scarce a mouth to suck the milk of Faith,
and yet they will gnaw the bones, and take thence the marrow; As if they
already understood that, which Nature has of intelligible; so that nothing
rests for them to penetrate, but only the obscure mysteries of Faith. They
would be Hercules's, that having seen and conquered, the Sea, Land and Hell it
self they might say, Per domita tellus, Herc.
tumida cesserunt freta,
Inferna nostros regna sensere impetus, Furent.

Immune coelum est. Dignus Alcidae labor.
In alta mundi spatia sublimis ferar.
Petatur ether. --


But whilst they raise themselves on tip-toe and stretch out their wings to
fly; how seasonable would it be for one to hint to them, the much that they
attempt, and the little that they atchieve: For one to whisper in their ears,
what the Woman of Samaria said to Christ. Domine, neque in quo haurias habes,
and puteus altus est. Before you aspire to greater matters, answer to the
question made you by St. Jerome: Why the Elephants, that are as it were so many
Mountains of flesh, have only four feet, on which they rest the immeasurable
masses of their huge bodies: and the Louse, which is but a living Point, has
six? You will confess you know not this, (which if you did, you knew just
nothing;) and will you pretend to understand that, which even that man is not
able to understand who understands all things? At the first step you take in
the pursuit of intelligible things, you stumble with Thales into a ditch, and
would you attein to the sight of that which so far surmounts the Stars? How
opposite to you, would the correction be, which Zeno the Stoic, gave to a
conceited young Fellow, that had as little wit in his head, as hair on his
face; and demanded his answer to things, of which he was not able to understand
the demand: The Philosopher made him set a Looking-glass before him, and then
whispered in his ear; The demand you make, and the question you ask, are worthy
of this beard.

Your Wit in comparison of that of the Great Augustine, is but as a Grasshopper
confronted to a Horse; and do you pretend to couch the lance, and hit the mark,
when he withdraws, and presumes not to essay it? Yea, (as it were slinging
himself with that Philosopher into the Sea, and saying, O abyss tu me cape,
quia te ipse non capio:) he an hundred times protests in his writings to know
nothing; and that he knew not how to know; and goes on saying, Nescio, and non
erubesco consiteri me nescire quod nescio. And how dare you open your mouth, or
exalt your voice to contradict, and question that, to which for this sixteen
Ages, the Pens of a world of Doctors; the Blood of a world of Martyrs; the
consent of so many Nations; the Testimony of so many Miracles have subscribed
and ratified? With the Rush-candle of your Dim understanding, will you pretend
to examine the light of the Sun? Cannot the Wisdom of God, your Master, do as
much with you; as that of Pythagoras with his Scholars? S. Aug. de praes. cap.
7.
Nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum Jesum, nec inquisitione post
Evangelium.

Others there are as vile as obstinate, that swearing in verba magistri; they
take the Texts of some Ancient Philosophers for Sacraments; and his Sentences
for Oracles: and so far confess Christ, as he does not contradict Aristotle,
or Plato. Thus they hold the Gospel, and Philosophy, in equilibrium, in an
equal poise of belief.

Quid Athenis, Ibid.
and Hierosolymis? Quid Academiae, and Ecclesie? Nostra institutio de porticu
Solomonis: Viderint qui Stoicum and Platonicum, and Dialecticum Christianum
pr^tulerunt. Even at this day the Church bewails, and shall to the end of the
World complain of the detriments done her, by the profane and idle Wit of the
Age; and by the Ancient Writers of the World; (Fathers of tenebrosity, and
Masters of millions of errors;) to whom she may confirm the Title conferred on
them by Tertullian of Patriarchas Haereticorum. Adversus Her.


How much mischief did Plato in the first Ages of the Church; too much read,
too much believed, and so made, as the same Tertullian speaks, Haeresum
Condimentarium: He instanceth, (passing by all the rest, since that he alone
serves for all,) in unfortunate Origin; that of an Eagle which he had been,
accustomed to fix his eyes on the Sun of Christian Prudence, and to draw thence
lights of sublimest Truths; was transformed into a Batt: admiring a few
glimmering rays of light mixed with many umbrages of ignorance and error: and
became so great a Platonic, that he in the end ceased to be a Catholic;
losing the Truth in Fables, and the Faith in Philosophy: and that same man
whose breast had been kissed tamquam Spiritus Sancti, and coelestis sapientiae
templum; became Master of a School of Errors, and Reader of the blind; and so
madly did he talk, that as before, Ubi been nemo melius: so after, Ubi male
nemo pejus. What infinite mischief even at this day does that Struendi, Cass.
div. lect. c. 2.
and destruendi artifex versipellis Aristotle, believed the Authom of the
mortality of the Soul; which in one word, is as much as to say, Destroyer of
the Faith, and Father of those, that live without the Souls of Men, the life of
Beasts? How many of those whom he has enchanted, Cyr. Alex. li. 11 Jh.
Qui ni^il aliud quam Aristotelem ructant, hold only those points of Faith for
certain, that accord with the Oracles of Peripatus? as if Religion were a
Grain, to be gathered out of the Chaff of humane Philosophy: and not a Bread of
life descended from Heaven, to the end that upon the tasting of its sweetness,
S. Hier. lib. 4. in Jer.
we might spit out the husks, qu^e medullam non habent, nec possunt nutrire
discentium populos, sed de inanibus sti pulis conteruntur.

Those are Frogs, Sermon. 95
says Augustine, Ranae damantes paludibus lim^sis (quae) strepitum habere
possient, doctrinam verae sapientiae insinuare non possunt. Now, whilst the
Heavens are open, and you hear the Father, (from thence pointing with his
finger to the Word his Son,) to say Ipsum audite: will you lend one eye to
Christ, and the other to Aristotle, or Plato? Aug. ser. 109. de temp.
Coelum tonat: ta^eant Ran^. where Christ teaches, and in him Truth, or rather
he as Truth it self revealed; Wisdom is dumb, and the Philosophy of the World
speechless, S. Petrus Dam.
and phylosophia nostra Christus est. sermon. 57.


SELF-DECEIT.
The folly of such as pretend to study little and know much.
IT is not the opinion of Hyppocrates only, nor of Aristotle, Sen. de br. vit.
cap. 1.
and Theophrastus; but it is the common vogue and concordant complaint of all
the World, That heaven has been sparing to us of that time, Laert. in Theoph.
whereof it has been so prodigal to Stags, Crows and Cypresses. We have
allotted us too short a life for so long a Lesson; too short a Viaticum for so
tedious a Voyage. There is no such virtue now to be found in steel, to
strengthen those Elixir vitae, that inbalmed Men alive; so that seeing
themselves to aproach their thousanth year, they resolved to leave the World
more out of satiety with so long a life, than out of any necessity of death.
We, like Flowers that yesterday sprung up, to day are old, and to morrow dead,
have so short life, as if we were born only to die. That which in the Ancients
was but their Childhood, is in us old Age; their tithes are our excessive
riches, their overpluss's, our treasures: so that of horinesse and grayhairs,
the Alexandrian Tertullian says, with as much Truth, as Learning, hec est
aeternitas nostra.

If our knowing in this manner, the shortness of our life, could but persuade
us to spend it according to its brevity; that would be a favor, which we think
a punishment. Is an unreasonable thing to accuse Heaven as niggardly of time to
us, and we like prodigals profusely to wast it; using our life, as if we were
to measure it with the long pace of many Ages; not with the short palm of a few
years. Who is there that with the Prince of Physicians c^yes not out, Ars
longa, vita brevis? but in the meantime, who is there, that is solicitous to
get quickly, to the mark which the most diligent reach to, but too late? Ad
sapient^am quis accedit? Sen. not. quest. lib. 7. cap. ult.
Quis dignam judicat, nisi quam in transitu noverit? Quis phylosophiam, aut
ullum liberale respicit studium, nisi cum ludi intercalantur, cum aliquis
pluvius intervenit dies, quem perdere licet.

Nature with good advice has placed Man in the middle of the World, as in the
Center of an immense Theater, De anim cap. 16.
Procerum ^uimal (says Cassiodorus) and in essigiem pulcherrimae speculationis
erectum, to be there not as an otious Inhabitor, but a curious Spectator of
this her incomparable work: in so much union, so various; in so much variety
sounited; with more miracles, that adorn it, than parts, which compose it.
Howbeit, to those that rightly behold it, it is not the design of nature, to
put us in the World, so much in a Theater, that we should admire; as in a
School that we should learn. Therefore she has enkindled in our hearts an
inextinguishable desire of knowledge; and setting open before our eyes, as many
Volumnes, as the Heavens and Elements contein natures; with showing us in them
manifest effects, inviteth us to trace out their hidden causes. What strengh
what force of intelligence of the assistant, or rather intrinsic form is that,
which revolves the great mass of the Elements with indefatigable motion? Are
the Spheres of the Planets many Heavens, that contracted in the concave of each
others lap interchangeably surround one another: or serves only Heaven to all
that great family of Stars for Mansion? Of what substance composed? Corruptible
or incorruptible? Liquid as Air; or consollidate, and firm, as a Diamond?
Whence proceed the Maculae, and whence the Faculae about the Sun? Whence the
obscurity in the face of the Moon? Of what matter are the new Stars and Comets
composed, and with what fire enkindled, that appear unexpectedly? Are they
Foreigners, or Citizens of Heaven? Natives of that Country, or Aspirers from
here below? The irregular errors of the Planets, how may they be reduced to
regularity without error? How may we know, how may we foresee Eclipses? How
great is the profoundity of the Heavens? How great the number of the Stars? How
great the velocity of their motions? How great the moles of their bodies? The
Winds, whence take they their wings to sly; the spaces of their course, the
force of their blasts, the qualities of their operation, and the set measure of
time for their rising, duration, departure? Who holds so many ponderous
Clouds suspended in the Air? How drop by drop do they squeeze out Rain? How
from their pregnant watery wombs, are Thunders begotten, which be fire? Who
congeals them into Snow? Who hardens them into Hail? With what Ultamarine is
the Rainbow depainted with always one order of Colors, and one proportionate
measure of Diameter? Whence again, comes the source of Springs on the highest
tops of Mountains? Whence comes it, that there should be in Hills of one and the
same Earth, Marbles of so various mixtures, Metals of so different tempers.
Who assigns the Sea its periods, of flux and reflux. Who replenisheth the
Rivers with waters, so that their Channels are always full, though they be
always emptying? The imbroidery of Flowers and Herbs; the working of so
various bodies in Beasts, in Birds, in Fishes; the temper of the mixed, the
harmony of the common and occult qualities: In fine, what ever is, what ever is
made: what being has it, and how is it produced?

To know all this in comparison of what might be known, is to know nothing: And
yet who is there that knows this Nothing? Is there then so much to be known,
and have we so little time of life to learn it, and do we think that the only
surplussages, and shreds of time suffices us for study? Hear now what I have
told you, expressed in the conclusion of that precious little Treatise of
Seneca, Sen. lib. de Otio Sapientis
De otio Sapientis. Curiosum nobis Natura ingenium dedit, and artis sibi, ac
pulchritudinis suae conscia, spectatores nos tantis rerum spectaculis genuit;
perditura fructum sui, si tam magna, tam clara, tam subtiliter ducta, tam
nitida, and non uno genere formosa, solitudini ostenderet. Vt scias illam
spectari voluisse, non tantum aspici: vide quem nobis locum dedit. Ad haec
quaerenda natus, aestima quam non multum acceperis temporis, etiam si illud
totum tibi vindices. Licet nihil facilitate eripi, nihil negligentia patiatur
excidere, Tamen homo ad immortalium cognitionem, nimis mortalis est.

Those Sages, Masters of the World: some whereof have left their Memories, and
others the productions of their Wit eternized to us; knowing this, as we esteem
little Diamonds, so they held precious the least minute of that time, of which
alone it is commendable to be covetous. It was a miracle to see them in
Public: and they resembled, as in the love of Wisdom, so also in this, the
Planet Mercury, which is placed very near the Sun, and which, by that means
very hardly is discerned: as if he cared not for terrene eyes, who always was
in the eye of the Sun: and beheld by him, not with an unprofitable look, but
with a large communication of light. In perpetuity of study, they were like
those Falcons near the North Pole; which when the days are shorrest, when the
Sun approaches Capricorn, are so much more solicitous in seeking, so much the
more rapid in following, so much the more courageous in assaulting, and
over-comming their prey. Men, as white in their thoughts, as hair, were not
ashamed to sit in the open streets, where they found matter of new cognitions:
and as Diogenes to him that reprehended him for eating in the Marketplace, Cum
in foro esuriam, Laert.
said he, quare in foro non edam? thus to them, the not knowing of some object,
was a sufficient excuse to take it where it offered it self to them. Farther
more that which by the Law of Nature they were bound to allow the body to
preserve life, they allowed themselves for necessity not for delight, and many
times it fell out, that, either with a voluntary abstinence, they in part
deprived themselves of it, or immerged in the profound thoughts of their
studies, for some time forgot it. Thus Carneades, (unmindful of his being a
Man, while he was all mind, and all thought, and fated with the sweetest Nectar
of those noble cognitions, with which he banqueted his Wit,) had let his body
die of famine, if others by force had not revived him with food. Thus
Archimedes seemed always out of himself, whilst he was more than ever wholly
in himself: An seni gerenda resp.
whence, abstractus a tabula, a familis, (said Plutarch) spoliatus, unctus,
super ipsa pelle sua Mathematica Schemata exarabat. Thus, to omit a hundred
others, Demosthenes, knowing himself indebted to his noble Wit for a more than
ordinary success, took his house for a prison: and, shaving his head, obliged
himself from going abroad, till he saw his hair grown on his head, and his mind
improved in Wisdom, which he wanted. We, that ought to be so much the more
studious than these, by how much the more ignorant, do we conceit, we do not
only enough, but more than we need, if reserving one, or at most two hours in a
day from the dulcities of sleep, from the urgency of negotiation, from the
invitation of profit, we dedicate them to study? To so little study a Noah's age
would be requisite: Sym. ep. 11. Aus.
Parvis nutrimentis quanquam a morte defendimus, nihil tamen ad robustam
valetudinem promovemur. Drops of water, continually falling become chizels, and
wear away marble its true, but because this is marble and they drops of water,
they require a hundred years time before they can cut a fingers depth. Did you
never hear a certain Parasite in an Ancient Comoedy (be it of Aquilius, or be
it of Plautus) entitled Boeotia, complain of him, that being witty to the
detriment of others stomachs, had invented the Art of making Sun-dials: which
becoming the measure of hours, and time, do govern public and private
actions, so that now we must no more eat when we are a hungry, but when it
pleases the Dial? Hear some of the Verses recited by Gellius.

Ut illum Di male perdant, Lib. 3. cap. 5.
primus qui horas reperit.
Quique adeo primus statuit hic Solarium,
Qui mihi comminuit misero articulatim diem.
Nam, me puero, uterus hic erat Solarium
Multo omnium istorum optimum and verissimum.
Ubi iste monebat esse nisi cum nihilerat.
Nunc etiam non est quod est, nisi Soli lubet.
Itaque jam oppletum est oppidum Solariis,
Major pars populi aridi reptant fame.
So great a desire should ye have also, to feed your mind with the sweet honey
of Wisdom: that your sleeping hours should seem ages, and the most necessary
actions for the maintenance of life torments. That same Demosthenes, of whom a
little above I told you, had so great an appetite thereto that to feed the mind
he made his eyes abstein from sleep, and his belly from food: whereupon, Plus
olei, S. Hier. Ap. 1. contra Ruff.
quam vini expendisse dicitur, and omnes Artifices nocturnis semper vigiliis
praevenisse.

And this ought also to be a Law to you, not to give to that most avaritious
Publican (as Clement Alexandrinus calls Somnus) the half of your life for
Custom. 2 paedag. cap. 93. Athon.
It was permitted the Sybarites, humane Animals, that by public edict they
should expulse all Cocks from their City; that they might not with their
crowing break the thread of sleep, in the sweeter hours: you, that are to use
your beds, not to bury your selves in them, but to repose your selves upon
them: keep as Pythagoras did a Faithful Chanticleere, that in the morning may
wake you, and call you from feathers to the Pen; from the dreams of the Fancy,
to the contemplations of the Mind.

It will not succeed to you, Ael. li. 2 c. 10. var. hist.
as to that adventurous Warrior Timotheus, to whom Fortune with a great net
drew Cities, Castles, Provinces and cast them into his lap, whilst he in the
mean-time lay savourily sleeping. In Learning, he that sleeps arriveth not to
his end, because Wisdom is not the gift of Fortune, but the fruit of Industry.
Imagine that Cassiodorus says to you, Lib. 7. form.
that with which he advertiseth others, of the duty of their office: Vigila
impiger cum nocturnis avibus, nox tibi pandat aspectus, and sicut illae
reperiunt in obscuris cibum, ita tu possis invenire praeconium. These are the
most precious hours of the day; whether it be, as Ficinus teaches, the
privilege of particular influences of Heaven; or for that the thoughts,
impressed on the purest of the Spirits, whose drossy and gross parts either
dispersed, or digested with sleep, present themselves to the glass of the mind
without interception, and in it most apparently discern the reflexies of those
first Idea's, that are forms of the Truth. Howsoever it be, the experience of
those that practice it, teaches, that Aurora is the mother of honey; and that
in the early Morning Pearls do fall upon the paper of such as write, as the dew
distills it self into the Conchylia, to engender Pearls.

To him that sleeps in this manner, sleep becomes not only what Tertullian
calls it, Recreatorem corporum, Cap. 43. de anim.
redentigratorem virium, probatorem valetudinum, peccatorem operum, medicum
laborum, cui legitime fovendo dies cedit, nox legem facit, auserens rerum etiam
colorem; but as he in an other case adds, Master of the Resurrection for the
more blessed use of Life.

A speech of an Angel in the mouth of a Beast, esteem I that excellent saying
of Apollonius, Qui aiebat (relates Phylostratus) opportere recte
Phylosophantes, Li. 1. c. 12 vit. Apol.
adveniente aurora cum Deo versari; procedente die, de Deo loqui, reliquum
tempus humanis rebus, and sermonibus dare. For the employments of the Mind, in
whatsoever matter it is exercised, there is not a better time, than the first
Dawn of day; in which it seems, that by certain or occult consent, the light
dawns to the Wit, as the day breaks to the World. Clem. Alex. ib.
Therefore Beati qui seipsos assimilant Angelis it a vigilando.

And this ought not to hold in force for a few days only, but to be the
ordinary Law of our lives, That in the division of the hours of the day, we
dedicate the first, and commonly the most to study. Plinius l. 35. c. 10 in
Apell.
At least we should be able to say as that Great Master of Ancient Painting,
that there had not past us one day, in which we have not, if not fully
depainted a Face, yet at least drawn some line. Light and flame where it is
kindled, is kept with a little fuel; but if it be suffered to extinguish and
die, it will require much to re-kindle it. Let us not be like the Nyle, the
Nigris, and other Rivers; which before they fall into the Sea bury themselves
several times under ground, and as many times rise again. They lose themselves
in abstruse ways, rather whirl-pols, and thence disgorging, they are found a
new. They have a hundred heads, they spring a hundred times, and are always,
and yet never the same. To interrupt the studies with certain long pauses, made
more by inconstancy of Genius, then necessity of great affairs; this is to
undertake much, to prosecute little, and to complete nothing.

IMPRUDENCE.
The unprofitable endeavors of him that studieth against the inclination of
his Genius.
TO set out with success upon our journey, in Arts, Sciences, and every
profession of Learning, it is necessary to consult the Genius, and from its
inclinations to take directions; as for him that goes to Sea, to observe the
wind that blows, to fit the sails, and turn the rudder accordingly. Nature is
like the Planets; that where they go retrograde, make but small progress. They
get not most from her, that most press and force her; but they that most
please and observe her: whereupon, she, which freely working in every, though
difficult enterprise, succeeds with no less facility than felicity; (as the
Celestial Sirens revolve their great Spheres with their melody,) if violence
be offered her, she not only not increases the virtue by the force, but rather
loses her former vigor and strength: as water, that by cold freezeth; and if
before it had motion, now all strength is extinct, and it becomes immovable,
and as it were dead.

He, that in the labors of the brain, is to contrast, not so much with the
difficulty, that is incident in the acquist of the Sciences: as with his own
Genius; and with that which the Masters of Arts calls Invita Minerva: is like
to him that swims against the stream in a place where some torrent
precipitates; that toils much, but advances little; till such time as
overcome by weariness, and losing together with his little power the
remainder of his will, he prove by experience the truth of that natural Axiom,
That things violent are not permanent.

By this is evinced the error of such as apply themselves to studies, and
amongst them, to the speculative, or practical, or mixed: when the Inclination,
when the Genius, when the Nature admits it not: which is just as if you would
strive to make Rivers leave their currents, to go climb and ascend the tops of
hills.

The Wise Athenians esteemed it a foundation of never knowing any thing, not to
know from the beginning to apply our selves to that, for which Nature designed
us. Thence it was that before they applied their children to any profession,
they curiously inquired into their Inclinations; of which the Desires commonly
are Truth-telling-Interpreters: and that they did, by laying before them the
implements of all Arts: Ut qua quisque delectabatur (says Nazianzen) and ad
quam sponte currebant, Ep. 227. apud Basil. Eudoxio.
eam doceretur.

They believed that Heaven called them whether their Inclinations carried them.
And in that, they accord with the opinion of the mysterious Cebes, who at the
first turn of her Table showed you Genius, who calling, directs men the course
they should steer through the whole series of this life; Mandabat quideis, ubi
in vitam venerint, faciendum sit, and cui vitae se committere debeant, si salvi
esse in vita velint, ostendebant.

God, Dial. de just. 3. de Rep. sub sinem.
said Plato (concerning the honey of a very excellent Truth under the comb of a
Fable) has cemented the minds of men together with Metals. Into the Peasants
Iron, into those of Princes Gold, and into every one else comprehended between
these, he has infused their Metals proportionately to their States. From this
arises the difference of Inclinations, and variety of Genuis's. I would
counsel every man therefore, by the test of a good Touchstone to learn what
sort his Metal is of; and accordingly to extract therefrom what he may. Let
him observe (say the Platonists) in the descent of his Genius from the Stars,
whilst it was passing through the lesser Spheres, from the Seal of what Planet
it took Impression: whether from a speculative Saturn; or from a Lordly
Jupiter; or a Warlike Mars; and accordingly let him confidently betake himself
to the Pen, to the Scepter, or to the Sword.

It is doubtless a most unhandsome thing to see some times in the Schools
certain heads, better able to crack Lobsters, than to study. Heads that have a
Mind so stupid, and so ill adapted to the mysteries of Learning, that they seem
like a reverted Jove, to carry Bacchus in his brain, and Pallas in his belly.
Their Intellectuals, fat, and gross, (as the water of the Lake Asphaltites, in
which nothing sinks to the bottom) creep with a slower pace than the Pygritia,
a notable creature of India, that when it is at the speediest moves half a pace
at a hundred steps, and in a hundred days travails a mile. No file can be
found of temper hard enough to fetch the rust off their Sculs. Let us make use
(as the Bears do to their unformed Cubs) of all the expert Tongues in the
World, they will never be able to ingrave upon them the least feature of a
Learned Man. Ammonius would sooner make his Ass a Philosopher, than one of
them a Grammarian.

To what purpose do you send such people to School, as if it were to a Carvers
shop, if after all their hewing and carving, they retein more of a Block than
of a Mercury? To what end would you break that man's brain with Learning, out of
which, if Vulcan should open it, you should see an Owl issue, rather than a
Pallas? To what purpose do you seek out a Master that is an Eagle, if it be to
teach a Tortoise to sly? That is an Oracle of Wisdom, if it be to enterprise
the imprinting Learning in a head of one which lets ^lie all he knows out of
his brain, and never indent so many letters, as a Crane, or a Stork accent in
their flying?

Its not enough to Wish, that Pumices become Sponges; that Mastiffs become
Hariers; and that Oaks bear Honey instead of Acorns: which can never be done
with all the Art that you can use about its plants. Aelian. var. hist. l. 14.
c. 20
Foolish was that practice of the Sybarites to teach Horses to dance, and to
deprave the warlike disposition of that generous Beast, by that effeminate
exercise. The same error do they commit, who would have him apply himself to
his Book, who was born for War; and make him an Archimedes who would be a
Marcellus.

What then? We may contrast with, we cannot conquer Nature. Sooner, or later,
when she is left to her liberty, she returns thither from whence with violence
she was taken. Achilles may be for sometime concealed under a woman's apparel.
Tertul. de pall (...) cap. 4.
Ille apud rupicem, and sylvicosam, and monstrorum ^ruditorem scrupea schola
eruditus, patiens jam ustriculas, sustinens stolam fundere, comam struere,
cutum singere, speculum cousulere, colum demulcere, aurem quoque fora tu
effaeminatus: But all this was the less likely to be permanent in Achilles by
how much the employments of a Warrior were more con^ortial with the spirit of
Achilles than those of a woman. Therefore Necessitas, not of the Trojan war,
but of his Genius manifested at the sight of a Sword, reddidit sexum: De
praelio sonuerat, necarma long. Ipsum, inquit, ferrum virrum attra^it.

But behold in matter of Learning only four of a thousand that applied
diversely ^^om that to which the weight of natural I^clination bore them, after
they had contended in vain, yielded for overcome.

Socrates, applied to Sculpture, having graven the three Graces, (but, I
suppose, so ungracefully, that Hell would have received them for Furies,)
perceiving, that at working Marbles he himself was a stone; he broke the edge
of his Chizel, and sharpened that of his Wit; giving himself the Moral
Philosophy, to which his Genius led him: and he, which working, knew not how to
make of stones, Statues of men; phylosophating, made through admiration, of men
Statues.

Plato gave himself to Painting, and seeing himself turn a painted Painter, and
his pictures only meriting the name of shadows; transferred himself from the
unsuccesful, designing of Corni, which I read Corpi.
Bodies, to the noble picturing of Souls: he left the lies of the Pencils, and
gave himself to the truth of Idea's, of which he first depainted the Features,
and discovered to the World the Image.

Augustus, ambitious to in-occulate the Laurel of a Poet, upon that of
Emperor; and of being as well an Apollo with the Harp, as he was a Jupiter with
thunderbolts, composed his Ajax; a Tragaedy, which for the laughter that it
merited, became rather a Comaedy, so ill was it composed. However he would have
it a Tragoedy in despite o^ Art, and so it proved; for he gave it a mournful
Exit by tearing it in pieces. Capricorn, which he had in his Ascendent, called
him to Ruling, not to Rhiming, not to the Pen, but to the Scepter; not to
private Scaenes, but to the public Theater of the World.

On the contrary, Ovid applied by his Father to the Law, litigated more with
himself than others; for as much as his Po^tick Genius, and the tranquil
influence of Gemini, called him from the bawlings of the Forum, to the repose
of the Muses; and from the Sword of Astrea, to the Phletrum of Apollo:
whereupon in the end, commencing from himself, the Work of his Metamorphosis;
one day transformed him from an Advocate to a Poet.

See how the Genius is a faithful Loadstone, which may possibly by force be
turned to any other point, besides its North; but never rests, so, as to stand
without constraint, till such time as it has also gently done that in us,
which the Poet speaks of Fate.

Ducunt volentem Fata, nolentem tra^unt. Seneca.
But if it happen, that the interests of honor, and profit permit not men to
surcease that which they badly began; you shall see as many Monsters in a
Learned Accademy, as in an Affrican Lybia: A Poetical Physician, A
Phylosophical Historian, a Mathematical Civilian; in which, those in-nate Seeds
which are derived from the Womb, into the Instinct of the Mind, confounding and
in-termingling themselves with those, that are acquired by Study; whilst
neither those nor these wholly prevail; by being the one and the other; they
are neither the one nor the other.

There is therefore a necessity, if we will speed, to apply our selves not only
to Learning, but to this more than that other Profession of Learning; and
consult our own Genius, which is wont, to make it self understood to such as
have good Ears by the language of frequent Desires, when they have not that
which they would; and by the pleasure they have when they obtein it. Also it
behooves them to say to their Will, as Aeoolus to Juno: -- Tuus, Aen. 1.
o Regina, quid optes
Explorare labor, mihi jussa capescere fas est.


Otherwise, to pretend in despite of ones Genius to prove excellent in any
profession, is just as if one would to open the way to the Elyzian fields, lop
that golden branch from its stock, which Nature her self denied him.

-- Non viribus ullis
Vincere, Aen. 6.
nec duro poteris convellere ferro.
But hitherto I have more evinced the necessity of observing the Genius, then
the manner of knowing it: because its my opinion, that it has so knowable a
voice, that it needs no interpreters to declare it, but cares to hear it. It
only rests that we speak something for others information in this discovery;
and it shall be of the countersigns from whence Wit is conjectured: and the
knowledge thereof will be useful to the end that in employing such as depend
upon us, we err not, as others use to do, who, not knowing their Genius's,
through mistake force them to contrast with their own Inclinations.

Little credit to be given to the signs of Ingenuity taken from the Physiognomy.
THe Ancient Architects, more by the Laws of Judgment than Art, in building a
Temple to any god, of three Grecian Orders, Dorick, Jonick, and Corinthian,
Vitruv.
elected that which best agreed to the nature of the Deity to who^ they erected
the Temple. Therefore they used the Dorick order, being grave, and severe for
their Martial Deities, as Mars, Hercules, and Pallas: The Corinthian, soft and
lascivious, for Venus, Flora, Proserpina, and the Water-Nymphs: The Jonick,
moderate, for Juno, Diana, Bacchus and the like.

The very same Law (as some Platonists, and all Physiognomers are of opinion)
has Nature rigorously observed in building Bodies, which are the Temples of
the Soul: so that there being some Souls Warlike, others Cowardly; some
vivatious and ingenious, others stupid and insensate; some servile, others
imperious, born to command: she has in conformity also to their internal
Genius's, and tempers delineated the external features of the Face; and used
such Architecture in the Body, as corresponded with the inclination of the
Mind: From thence has the Art of Conjectural Physiognomy took its beginnings;
by which, from that which is seen in any one, that which is concealed is
collected, and inferred. And, look as they gather from the quantity of the
Manners, whether good, or bad: many, and different, and not seldom repugnant
Indices of the Wit in such as they find either stupid, or apprehensive, and
acute; so likewise do they multiply Signs for the knowing it, as if they were
to find out a Proteus by the natural features of his face, and not a Wit by its
Qualities.

But because many of these Masters of Divining, more looking to the Features,
and tempers of some few ingenious persons, than to the universal occult causes
of the Wit, have made the faces of a few, the common Index of all; In Magi
in so much that Porta (as if he were the Alcibiades from whom we must take the
features of a true Mercury) coppying himself, framed from his particular
Indices, the universal, and almost only conjecture of an excellent Wit; whence
it is, that it proves so fallacious to divine from the visage, constitution,
and lineaments of the Body, of the immensity, subtilty, vivacity and profundity
of a Wit: I will here recite, but without much troubling my self with their
confutation, the more common symptoms given of this matter, by the Professors
of Physiognomy. And first,

The Platonists deny that Beauty of Mind, and deformity of Body can subsist
together in one and the same man. Plot. contra Gnos. and alii.
That Trine of Venus with the Moon, which is the seal, wherewith the Stars mark
the most lovely faces, that it may have consonance with numbers, they contemper
the Mind, and accord it to the motion of the first Mind. Pythagoras that Soul
of Light, was so fair in his features, that his Scholars some called him,
others believed him Apollo in the disguise of Pythagoras, or Pythagoras coppied
from Apollo: Nor does there want a reason for the same. For as much as beauty
is no other, than a certain Flower, that is produced by the Soul, as a buried
seed, upon this ground of the Body. Likewise the Sun, if a Cloud cover it, it
shines through it, with its more subtle Rays, and renders it so glorious,
that it no longer resembles a vapor extracted from the Earth, sordid and
obscure, but flaming Gold and as it were another Sun. No otherwise a Soul, that
is a Sun of light within the Cloud of the Body, that covers and conceals it,
shines through it with the rays of its beauty; so that it renders that also
beyond measure beautiful: and this is that which Plotonus calls the Dominion,
that Form has over Matter.

Which if it should be granted, that Souls come only into Bodies resembling
them; and only tie this knot of strict amity, there where there is exact
similitude; who but sees that a beautiful Soul cannot then unite it self to a
deformed Body?

Nor avails it to tell them of Aesop, (born, if ever any was, with the Moon
in the Nodes) that he was a Thersytes; Crates, no Citizen of Thebes but a
Monster of Afric; of Socrates, so ill-furnisht with beauty, yea, of so gross
a stamp, that Sophyrus the Physiognomer gave him for the very Idea of one
stupid and blockish; whom Alcibiades called a Sylenus; thereby declaring him
without, half Beast; within, more than Man: and Theodorus describing in
Theectetus a Youth of most fortunate Wit, speaking with the same Socrates,
could tell him, Non est pulcher: similis tui est: simo naso, and prominentibus
oculis, quamvis minus ille quam tu in his modum excedat.

They deny that such deformity in them was the intention of Nature, but the
mistake of Chance; not the defect of Form, but the fault of disobedient Matter.

But if that be so, the Women have therein great advantage, to whom Beauty was
given for a Dowry; and we see, that it is Natures continual care, to work that
soft and morbid Earth, so, that she may therein plant this flower the more
succesfully. And yet through the subjection to which they were condemned, they
have as little Judgment in their heads, as they have much of handsomnesse in
their faces. Whence Aesops Fox may say of the most of them, as he said of the
Marble head of a very lovely faced Statue; O beautiful, but brainless head!

And really, if we observe experience, it will be obvious, that Nature is not
obliged to these Laws, of setting Pearls only in Gold, and of putting Wits of
excellent Sapience only in Bodies of exquisite Beauty. Potest ingenium
fortissimum, Seneca epist. 66.
ac beatissimum sub qualibet cute latere. Potest ex casa vir maguns exire;
Potest ex deformi vilique corpusculo, formosus animus, ac magnus. Rural Limbs
ofttimes cover most polite Wits. Most amiable Minds lie under rugged skins, as
He, under the dreadful skin of the Menean Lion* Galba the Orator, appeared an
informed lump of stone, but within had a Golden vein of precious and shining
Wit. Whereupon M. Lullius scoffing of him was wont to say, Ingenium Galbum
male habitat. Mar. li. 2. c. 6. Satur.
Thus many others, of whom it would be too tedious to speak particularly, have
been so deformed, but so ingenious, that it seemed, that in them, as in the
Adamant, or Magnet, beauty of Mind, and uncomelinesse of Body went hand in hand.

Others again there are, that measure the grandeur of the Wit by the bulk of
the Head; and believe, that that cannot be a great Intelligence, that has not
a great Sphere. They comprehend not how a small head becomes a womb able to
conceive a Great Pallas: how a Giant-like Ingenuity can comprise it self within
the narrow neich of a little Scul.

They know not how that the Mind is the Center of the Head, and the Center does
not increase by the bigness of the Circle. The eye, is it any more than a drop
of Crystal? and has it not in such smalnesse, a concave so capacious; that by
the gate of a pupil, it receives, without confusion of it, half a Would.

Parvula sic totum pervisit pupula caelum. Manil. 1

Quoque vident oculi minimum est, Astron.
cum maxima cernant.
It often happens, that as a little Heart naturally includes a great Courage;
so in a Head of a small bulk, a Mind of great understanding is comprised.

Others argue from the palure of the face, as from ashes; the fire of a
Spiritely Wit; and thus Nazianzen calls Palidness, Pulchrum sublimium
virorum slorem. Orat. 14
And reason seems to persuade as much; for that the very best of the blood is
exhausted in the operations of the Mind, and the face thereby left ex-sanguate
and discolored. Therefore the Star of Saturn, the Father of profound thoughts,
bears in a half-extinguish'd light, his face as it were meagre, and palid.

Many say that by the eyes sparkling in the day, and glittering in the night,
they can tell which are the true Palladian Bats. Others there are, who in
confused Characters seem to read the Velocity of Wits, whose fancies, whilst
the hand with the slight of the Pen cannot follow, it comes to pass, that it
ill makes the letters, cuts off the words, and confounds the sense. Thus the
speedest beasts, imprint the most informed tracks; whilst on the contrary the
slow-moving Ox makes his steps with patience, and leasurely forms his tracks
one by one.

But I undertook not to relate, much less to refute all the symptoms from
which Wit is argued by these subtle Diviners: the sholders, and neck dry, and
lean; the temper of the ^lesh morbidly molded; the forehead ample, the skin
thin and delicate; the voice in a mean between loud, and low; the hair neither
litherly dangling, nor, (as dry,) curled and crisped; the hands lean; the legs
small; the corporature indifferent; the color amiable; and I know not what.

These are for the most part dubious conjectures, and fallacious prospectives,
yea, they equally agree to contrary, not to say different principles. At least
it is certain, that either there must concur to their establishment,
experience, with the observation of Ingenious Men; or Reason, drawn from the
temper, and disposition of Organs, that are of use to the Imaginative Faculty,
and the Mind: and experience evinceth it, to him that is inquisitive, that of
any three of them two proves false; and that the temper of the Internal
Instruments has not such conexion with these external Signs, that one may
collect, thence ordinary, much less infallible arguments.

The Original cause of the excellency and Diversity of Wits; and the various
Inclinations of the Genius.
BY a clean contrary way to the former, go they, who placing all the energy of
the Wit in the force of the Soul; and supposing its use wholly independent from
the instruments of the Body; do deny, that we may argue from any sensible
appearance, the quality, or quantity of others Wit. There is, say they,
difference amongst Souls, not only in their proper Essence, but also in the
degrees of accidental Excellence; which makes them one more or less perfect
than another. This is no less an honor to the great Artist that made them,
and an ornament to the World, than that variety of features which is in the
face of Man (though it be composed of few members;) wherein to find two a-like
is wonderful; two stamped with the same impression, almost impossible, The
diversity of Wits arising in this manner from the diverse degrees of perfection
of Souls, to what end seek they Indices thereof from the Body; as if (according
to the error of that great Proto-Physician) the Soul were no other, than a
Consonance of qualities, and a Harmony of humors? To argue from the voice,
from the Complexion, from the features, accutenesse of Wit; is, as from the
pencils, to divine the excellency of the Art of a great Apelles; or from the
Sword the valor of the arm of a magnanimous Scanderbeg. Plinius l. 35. (...)
in Apell.
An Ox with one only claw divided in the midst; and Alexander so painted, that
his arm advancing with a thunderbolt, seemed to come out of the The cloth on
which a Picture i^ dr^wn.
Tele: These are true arguments of Art and Ability. The Ingenuity likewise is
known by no other means than by the actions; other tracks it leaves not by
which to guess of its form; other shadow it has not by which to collect, its
proportion.

And if that be not so. Observe the diversity of Wits, which as if they were
Stars of different Genius and Nature, variously incline; and then, if there be
any, you may find in the temper of the body, the principle whence such
difference is derived.

Some are so nimble witted, that they seem to have fancies composed of light;
to whom the setting out, the running, and arriving are all but one moment.
Rapid Eagles, to whom their Masters no sooner show a Lure, then they reach unto
it, so that as Plato said of his Aristotle, they have an Art to accellerate
their wings, that they may slye not by force, but by choice.

Others on the contrary, as Zenocrates, a Mercury without wings both in head
and feet, are so slow, and dull, that they must have spurs to make them run,
nay, go. They are Stars, but of that Constellation called the Bear, to whom
the vicinity of the Pole makes the motion very slow, and the revolution
tedious, as if they also were subject to the Septentrion frosts.

Some have an Understanding, like impressions made upon the water, that soon
receive the stamp and as soon also lose it: That are as swift in forgetting, as
they were in getting. Wits resembling either Doves, Quarum omnis inclinatio in
colores novos transit; Sen. li. 1. not q. c. 5
but colors of which as fast as they take one, they lose another; Ibid. c. 6.
or Glasses, in which Aeque cito omnis imago aboletur, ac componitur.

Contrariwise, in others the Understanding is a graving in Porphyre and Marble.
An image is not formed in them without the force of Chizels, and with great
patience; but then it is of such duration, that neither Oblivion, nor Time can
e-face it. Cleanthes was one of these, called in derision the Hercules of the
Schools, because his becoming a Philosopher was as laborious to his mind as it
was to the body of the other to make himself a Demi-god. Plutarc.
Oris angustissimi vas (so says Plutarch) dissicilime admittens, sed
semperretinens quod admisit.

There are them, that when Children, are all Spirit, when Men all Dregs. In
their first years, the Nightingales seem to sing on their mouth, as on that of
the Child Stesichorus; grown bigger they roar like Oxen. Like to that Ancient
Hermogenes, that was, Senex inter pueros, inter senes puer.

In others, on the contrary, the Wit gradually meliorateth with years:
whereupon those that before appeared steril truncks, their buds opening by
little and little, they send forth branches of large extent, and unfold some
leaves, and in the end are lade^ with more fruit, than others have leaves.
Observe Baldo a Jurist, that stood (to speak so) as the Palm, a hundred years
before he bore any fruit, whereupon arose the scoff which he had so o^t laid
in his dish, being a Scholar; Doctor eris Balde, sed praeterito saeculo.

What shall we say of those, that for every Science have a Wit equally
perfect; that as the light to all Colors, so their mind are adapted to all
matters; servile, or sublime; of ample, or profound dimension? Few such there
be, yet some there are; and on them we may bestow for a perfect Panegyric,
that great applause, -- Sparguntur in omnes, Claud.

In te mysta sluunt, and quae divisa beatos E^^iciunt, collectatenes. --


Blessed Wits, Plinius not. hist. lib. 16.
in whom, that which Pliny saw in a Tree, that alone was an entire Orchard, it
having ingrafted upon it the fruits of all Trees; that which Ausonius had in a
Statue of Bacchus, that had a kind of resemblance to every of the gods,
whereupon he calls it not a god alone, but a Pantheon, is much more happily,
and with greater admiration, and envy, expressly seen. They are few, but are
worth many; nor only many, but many of excellency and merit; so that it may be
said of them, as of the great Colossus of Rhodes; ^^in. lib. (...). c. 7.
Majores sunt digiti ejus, quam pleraeque statuae. They are few, but transform
themselves into as many, as Learning has Professions; nor know you in which
they most excel; being that in all they are like unto themselves, and not
inferior to any others: and you may sooner find such as envy, than such as
equal them.

Finally, in whatsoever kind of Learning you will, they are able to say as
Vertumnus amongst the Poets, Opportuna mea est cuncta natura figuris, Prop. l.
4.

In quacunque voles verte. Decorus ero.


Again, others there are so determinately intent upon one only kind of study,
and that not by election of the Will, but by instinct of Genius, that to take
them from, that is to take their Wits quite from them. He that will see their
excellency, must behold them from one point, namely that, where all the lines
of their knowledge Concenter; otherwise they have nothing considerable, and
indeed seem Monstrous.

These, and many more are the Characters and different forms, whence Wits come
to be so various in Genius, and Tallent among themselves. Now what temper of
brain, what harmony of qualities, what disposition of humors, does so obliege
the Soul; that it should be in some in the things of the Mind blockish; and in
the more simple and material most active; in others, in the abstracts
excellent, in the practicks unprofitable: That it should be disposed, here to
one, there to another, here to all, there to no act of Reason, or labor of
Wit? If the actions of the intelligent Soul are done by her-self, and rest in
her; what can the Body do, howsoever tempered; or the Brain, in what manner
soever disposed? and if they can do nothing; it remains, that the diversity of
Wits, arises from different perfections of the Soul, not various dispositions
of the Body.

But if this be so, if the mind depend not on the Organs for operation, nor on
the Humors for well operating; whence is it, that some, either by an
accidental blow on the head, or by a strange disease, have suddenly or
gradually lost their Memory, and impaired their Wit; so that their brain, like
the opened Box of Pandora, or the vented Box of Ulysses, is for ever after
without Spirit, and Judgment? How comes from the heat of the Brain, the
distemper of the Discoursive Faculty; the rebolliment of the Species, the
disorder of the Reason, Frenzy, and Madness? Why does he, (that when a Child
was ingenious, and apt growing with years), become gross of mind, and so much
the more stupid, by how much the more before he was spritely? Yet the Soul is
it self. Who then implumes the Wit, who obtuseth the Fancy, who alters the
Soul from what once she was?

But Countries, some abound with accurate Wits, as in Attica, that famous
Athens, the Nest, and Nurse of the Sciences; and in regard of the walls that
environ it, all appeared a Temple of Pallas, an Academy of Learned Men: On the
contrary Beaetia is inhabited, I will not say by living Men, but by dead
Statues; in whom Reason, amongst others shows no greater discourse, than the
Zophiti motion amongst other Animals.

Do we not see so great difference of Wits between City and City, Plut. in Alex.
even in adjacent Conntries, that some, as the Egyptian Alexandria, seem to
have designed their first foundation with Meals; others, placed upon the
summity of Olympus; have their feet higher, than others carry their heads? And
whence is this, if neither Heaven, nor Air, nor Climate, nor Spirits, nor
Humors, tempered by them, have the least influence in those Actions: which
being proper to the Soul, as the principle of discourse; by her only are
produced, and in her alone are received?

It is then a more approved, and I am sure a more received opinion, that the
Temperament of the Complexion, whence the state of the Body proceeds, serves
as well to the Wit, and to the diversity of its Genius; as the tuning of the
strings to the melody of a Lute; and diverse Consorts of Voices, Intervals,
Notes, measures of Tunes, Orders, and dispositions of Unisons, and Semitones,
proper, and mixed, to the diverse Harmonies Frigian, Dorick, Lydian; whence
proceeds the various Music, Grave, Lascivious, Martial, Melancholy, and Merry.
Consider the various (we will say) Tones, Lect 9. in Hypp. de acre and aquis.
and Moods, of Wit, which Cardan would describe by the various consorts of the
primary qualities in nine kinds of humane Bodies: Observe the proportion of
eight parts of Blood, two of Choler, and two of Melancholy, which Ficinus would
prescribe to the harmony of a great Wit, and let every one believe thereof as
he pleases.

This seems universally true, that the works of the Wit, participating an I
know not what of fiery, as the velocious motion of the thoughts, and the nature
of the ignean spirits that serve it demonstrate; those humors that partake
most of fiery, are most capable of serving it: even as on the contrary, Phlegm
rendereth it stupid, and brings it as it were into a somniferous Lethargy.
Therefore Choler which is hot in excess, and withal dry, is wholly proper to
the Wit. But Melancholy (although it does not so seem) is more apposit tha^
that; not that gross and loathsome humor, which more symbolizeth with Phlegm
in frigidity, than with Choler in siccity; but a certain (as it were) adust
part of the yellow Choler, cold and dry by nature, as the earth, but, if it be
rarefied and enkindled, so capable to conceive fire (as the exhalations raised
by the Sun, which yet are a cold and dry earth) and a fire so vehement, and
forceable, that it partaketh of lightning in strength, though it be more
durable and constant. And hence proceeds Madness, and that Grave Frensy of
the mind that wholly transports it besides it self, and wholly concenters it in
it self; that gives it velocious motions, and holds it steadfast, and fixed;
wholly dispersing, and wholly contracting the thoughts. Nor may therebe wanting
Blood and Phlegm, the one for aliment to the spirits, the other for
temperament; that so the too great dryness make not barren, or the too great
heat distemper not the organ and cause more smoke than light. The predominant
ought therefore to be fiery, the rest, of a mixture in proportion to the
degrees of this.

And this, if I guess not a miss, is the so famous Dry Light of Heraclitus;
That Igneus vigor, and caelestis origo; that where it has the flame more
bright, and in more refined humors less thick and muddy, there its a thing
more like a Heavenly Intelligence than a terrene Wit.

This is that so difficult Electrum of Wit and Judgment together. The Wit the
Mercury, all instability and motion; the Judgment, the Chemical Medicine that
fixes it: The Wit the Lion, and the Dolphin all fury, all speed; the
Judgment, the Bridle, and Anchor, that restrains the fury, that retards its
motion: The Wit the Sail, the Judgment the Ballast: That the Wing, this the
Clog: That the young face of Janus, this the old, and gray.

But because the temper of the humors for the service of the mind, is not one
indivisible one, from their varieties take rice the abilities, Genuis's, and
humors, which incline them to various kinds of studies. Because that in some
studies there is required more patience, and, as we are wont to say, more
Phlegm; in others, greater promptness of mind; in others, imaginations more
firm; els-where discourse more abstract: here great memory, their capacity of
comprehending as it were in one sole act the cognition of many objects; and
discerning their dependency without confounding them; according as the humors
and their qualities, are variously tuned and harmoniz'd together: whence more
or less according to the predominancy of hot, and cold, dry and moist, we have
abilities more apt to one than to another Science; according to the temper of
the qualities, that the instruments require, for the better disposing them to
operation. And this ability of power, well disposed toward such sorts of
objects, is the foundation of that, which they call Genius. Because that there
being in every one by natural instinct an in-nate desire of knowing; and Nature
not erring, but being conscious of that, which she is to apply us to the desire
of, as our Good: (a thing, which to obtein we have not power sufficient:)
thence it is, that she carries us to the desire of that, to attein which we
are sufficently disposed. The proportion therefore of the power to the object,
and the desire which we have to know; of which one applies, the other
determines; causes that sympathy, which we may call the Form of the Genius.

So, that it is not the disposition, figure, color, nor mass of the members
of the body that we should observe as immediate, or true testimonies of the
Wit, in applying any to Learning. But from the Acts, the most natural
testimonies of the Powers, we may argue their internal Temper, thereby to find
to which of the Arts it has most agreeable proportion. Thus, since the honey
cannot be fetch from its Sourse, which is the Stars (as Pliny speaks) at least
let them strive to make it as pure as they can; by working it out of those
slowers, which most resemble them in nature; Plin. lib. 11. c. 12. not. hist.
Ibi enim optimus semper (ros mellis) ubi optimorum doliolis florum conditur.
Since Science can be enjoyed no otherwise than as fallen from Heaven into these
terene Bodies; at leastwise, let them apply themselves to gather it of those,
which with tempers like to Heaven, fiery, and subtle, but withal stable, and
regular, most symbolize and agree with it.

AMBITION.
The folly of many who desirous to seem Learned, do publish themselves in
Print to be Ignorant.
THat insatiate, I will not say desire, but madness, which we have of
publishing our selves to the World for men of Learning, I could wish, that it
would whet the Wit, as well as it sharpens the Pen; that so the Sciences might
increase in weight, as Books increase in number.

Scarce have we got in the nest of a School the down of the first feathers upon
the brain, but we already think our selves, not only Eagles, but Mercuries with
Wings on our heads. Scarce is there enkindled in us a spark of Wit, but
presently we desire in Print to shine as Suns, and make our selves, with a
strange Ambition, Masters before we be completely Scholars. Every thought that
the mind conceives, we think worthy of the light; and although many times it is
no more than Ridiculus Mus, we by all means will call the Press, to be Lucina;
and collect it, and keep it not only alive but immortal. The Gnats, Moths and
Flies of our own brains, seem to us worthy to be embalmed, as that Be, in
Electer, and exposed to the sight, and admiration of the World. Thus -- Tenet
insanibile multos
Scribendi cacoethes, Juven.
and agro in cord senescit. Sat. 7.



Happy would Learning be, if Books also should have their Winter, and the
leaves of the greatest part of them should fall, as the leaves of trees fall
every year after Autumn. The World would be thereby so much the more wise by
how much fewer the number would be of the Masters of Errors, and Oracles of
Lies.

How many Books come to hand which bear in their frontispices Inscriptiones
propter quas vadimonium deseri possit? Plin. in praef. oper.
In perusing the proud promises of their Titles, you will ccall to mind either
that Verse of Horace, Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu? or that
scoff with which Diogenes mocked at the great Gate of a little City, saying:
Shut this gate or else the Town will run out at it, and leave you without house
or home.

The eye, Plin. ibi.
and the hand run with impatience, this to turn over, and that to read the
leaves, at cum intraveris (Dii Deaeque) quam nihil in medio invenies! Afric,
which is encompassed with such delightful shoares, is within most of it barren
sands, and naked deserts of gravel. The first leaf, like that famous Sheet of
Parrhasius, seems so painted, as if it covered a Picture, whereupon Zeuxis
deceived, Plinius lib. 55. cap. 10.
flagitavit, tandem remoto linteo ostendi picturam; but in reality there was no
other picture than the sheet, deluder of the eyes, with the lies of the pencil.
Thus, in this, is that saying of Seneca verified, Epist. 66.
Speciosa and magna contra visentibus, cum ad pondus revocata sunt fallunt.
Books many times deceive as the Apples of Sodom, that being fair to look upon,
have nothing but the hypocrisy of appearance; for within they are ashes and
smoke; and in opening they vanish into nothing: Apolog:
Si qua illic poma conantur (says Tertullian) oculis tenus caeterum conacta
cinerescunt.

A Learned Man does indeed deserve great compassion, that setting himself
earnestly to one of these Books, which has nothing but Perspective, and
appearance, finds that to be a painted Cloud, which he believed to be a rich
Juno; and instead of extracting thence the treasures which he expected, he
sees, that the Book costs him more in regard of the time he unprofitably spends
in reading it, than it stood him in, by reason of the money he gave for it. He
sisheth therein day, and night, till that with a Nihil coepimus he casts it
away. He soars with a curious Wit, to the appearance of some singular conceit,
of some Masterpiece of Art; but as the Birds that slew to the painted Grapes
of Zeuxis; Plinius lib. 35. cap. 10.
if he came with appetite, he departs hungry.

O! to how many Writers, which more than once have made the Press to groan,
may we repeat that Verse of Ausonius, Utilius dormire ^uit, quam perdere somnum
Atque oleum. --

The wretches have watched many a night to compass a Book, which shall lay a
sleep all that read it, if their resentments of Choler against the Author keep
them not awake. To how many Books, under the Title they bear in their
Frontispiece, may we write the name with which Zuazo, Ovi^do in S^or.
a Spanish Doctor called a little Desert Isle, to which approaching in his
Indian Navigation, he found neither herb nor any other sustenance; therefore he
gave it this name, Nolite cogitare quid edatis. Proem. lib. 4.
And yet (as Saint Ambrose ingeniously calls them) Books are the Ports wherein
the Soul not only recovereth rest from storms; in Lucam. but plenty from
poverty. Three reasons of the great number o^ (...) Books.
But take three Reasons only amongst many, whence it comes, that so many
unprofitable Books, and devoid of all goodness are printed.

1 Some think they do nothing if they make only one Book. They alone would make
a Library.

Hinc, Juven.
oblita modi, millesima pagina surgit
Omnibus, Sat. 7.
and crescit multa damnosa papyro.
A hundred Volumnes, of a thousand pages a piece, Children of one sole Wit,
Births of one only Mind; Works of one only Pen; this makes one go high and
stately: And yet the Glory and Fame is not to be given to the number but to the
worth of Books. For how many times in a River of words, there is not a drop of
Wit; in a Sea of Ink, there is not one Pearl; in a Forest of Paper there is
not one branch of Gold? All the Work, be it a hundred Volumns, may say as the
Echo of Ausonius: Aeris, and linguae sum silia, matter inanis
Judicii, linguam quae sine mente gero.


So that its a rare miracle of patience in the Reader, if slinging away the
Book, he say not to the Author of it, that of Martial; -- Vis garrule, Lib. 9.
epist.
quantum
Accipis ut clames, accipere ut taceas?


Books, In praef. oper.
as says Domi^ius Piso, cited by Pliny, Thesaurus oportet esse, non libros.
Every word should be a Pearl, every leaf a Jewel: so that he which reads them,
should in one hour enrich himself, with that, which we have been ten years in
gathering.

Aelas! what is become of that precious custom, and fortunate age, when the
Honey of the Sciences was put into the Wax, on which it was then the custom to
write with a Style? with how much the slower hand the words were indented by
the style, the tenacity of the wax retarding it; the more were they fixed on
the thoughts, and came to be better examined. Now a-dayes the Pen carries the
words in a slight from the hand, and the conceits from the head; and those and
these the lighter by how much the less weighed. That ostentatious Soldier in
the Comic, which said Ego hanc manchaeram mihi consolari volo, Plat. in mil.
glor.

Ne lamentetur, neve animum despondeat.
Quia jam pridem feriatam gestem:


Lively expresses the itch many have to Write, and write much, as it were to
comfort their Pens, that complain they stand Idle in their Ink-horns; without
wearing blunt with writing at the least one Book.

It is not the muchnesse, but the goodness that is valued. Books are the Souls,
whose grandeur is not measured by the bulk of the body, but by the nobility of
the Spirit. And most true is the Aphorism of great Augustine In iis quae non
mole magna a sunt, 6 de Tri.
idem est esse majus qua melius. The stones of mountains are (...) bigness,
yet a Diamond, which is only (says Manilius) Punctum lapidis, Lib. 4. after.
as far surpasses them in worth, as they exceed it in magnitude.

If you were to speak to an assembly of a hundred of the most ingenious, and
Learned Men of the World, would you say what came next to the tongues end,
without deliberation, without refining, and many times without substance, and
order? Or rather would you not study to speak not only Roses, as they said of
old, but Pearls and Gold? and do not you know that by the Press you speak not
to a hundred or a thousand, but to all the Wisemen in the World that will read,
and hear you? Therefore, why do you not as Phocion, that being asked why he
stood upon a time so profoundly pensive, answered; That being to speak in
public to the Athenians, he was picking his words one by one, and examining
them, if there was any that he should omit? Laudato ingentia rura, says the
Poet, Exiguum colito. Honor the Gygantical Volumnes of others; but strive not
so much to imitate them in bulk, as to surpass them in worth. Write one only
good one, but one that may be more worth than many. One, but one of which you
may say as Ceres of her only Daughter, Numeri damnum Proserpi^a pensat. Claud.


2 The other reason of the unfortunate success of Books, is, the undertaking to
handle a matter, and wanting a Wit proportionable. I chanced to write an
Octave, or Epigram, and presently I conceited that they called them Heroic
Poems, or Tragoedies.

Non ideo debet pelago se credere, 2 Trist.
si qua
Audet in exiguo ludere cymbalacu.
That Hercules does enterprise the conquest of the Heavens, and desire to do it
by his strength never wonder: Hercul.
Since he has already tried them, Furt.
and knows their weight.

Et posse caelum viribus vinci suis
Didicit ferendo. --
Do ye likewise measure the strength of your shoulders, by the weight of the
burden, and where you can say, Jerome. cont. Vig.
Par oner^ cervix, take up the same, and go on. Prudentia hominis est, says
St. Jerome, nosse mensuram suam, nec imperitiae suae ^orbem testem facere. Ye
should unite Argus and Briareus, so that ye should not have a hundred hands
ready to write, if ye have not also in the Intellect, an hundred eyes open to
understand. Let not a spacious field of noble Argument so transport and hurry
your Spirits, that the desire of running through it, make you forget that you
have neither wings nor ability to do it.

Vale your too venturous plumes, that would sooner make you fall than fly, and
do.

Like to the un-slegg'd Stork, Dante.
that strives to fly,
And being untimely hasty, fluttering leaves
Its lothed Nest, and so a fall receives.
But of this I am to speak upon another accasion by and by.

3 The third cause why there is more abortives than births, is from the
impatient desire to bring them forth, before they be perfectly formed. They
hear not the precept of Horace Nonnunque prematur in annum, In Art.

Membranus intus positis delere licebit
Quod non edi deris. Nescit vox missa reverti.


It is no wonder if Mushrums that grow up in one hour, rot in the next; and our
works prove, says Plato, like those famous Gardens of Adonis, Qui subito, and
die uno nati celerrime pereunt.

Agatharchus was a Painter, for whom all the Cloth of Greece, all the Colors
of the East sufficed not. He compiled the draughts of his Tables with more
expedition, than the Sun draws the Rainbow in the Clouds. But what then? They
were pictures that hung in every sordid place, and, exposed without regard,
lived no longer than the men sown by Cadmus.

On the contrary Zeuxis, who in bringing forth his works was more tedious than
the Elephant, and gave not a touch with his Pencil, which he recalled not to a
critical examination merited that eternity of glory, for which alone he
painted. The wisest men are ever the most severe with the works of their own
Wits: knowing that they ought to be not only read but examined by men of great
judgment which made them say with young Plinius, Nil est curae meae satis. Lib.
7. epist. Celeri.
Cogito quam sit magnum dare aliquid in manus hominum: nec persuadere mihi
possum, non and cum multis, and saepe tractandum, quod placere, and semper, and
omnibus cupias.

And so much suffices to have said of those, that being but ill furnished with
Wit, undertake to write of things above their capacities. Now I ought not to
omit certain others, which misusing the Wit wherein they are rich, consume
themselves, and spend their studies about certain unprofitable matters, Quas
neque scire compendium (says Arnobius) neque ignorare detrimentum est ullum.

The unfortunate pains of such who study and write matters wholly unprofitable.
ALchymists are men of more hardiness than judgment. Judgment indeed they have
none, albeit of the great tree of folly, there is in appearance perhaps is the
goodliest branch, namely, that branch of Gold that sends one to Hell sooner
than to the Elyzian Fields. But they are nevertheless fortunate, for seeking,
as they say, the Philosophers Stone, with the favor of Art they finally end
it, and it is that Ancient Golden Poverty the true Lapis Phylosophorum, which
leaving them nothing in the World, freeth them from the care of keeping, and
danger of losing: both privileges of the true Golden age. They un-avisedly
pretend to fix Mercury in Silver, and perceive not that the God of Thieves
knows better how to take away from others, then to impart of his own. In
New Mons.
They would change the Moon into a Sun. That Moon which never loses it self
more than when it most approaches to the Sun. But above all things the
efficacy of that most pleasing enchantment of hope is worthy of admiration,
which bereauing the heads of these wretched fools of Wisdom, their hands of
money, their eyes of sleep, and their hearts of the love of all the World, so
blinds them that they see not what they suffer; and tormenting their lives,
no less than the minerals on which they work, renders them stupid to pain, and
insensible of torment. Thus you see them like gnats wind themselves every
moment about a little candle, which gives heat to an Hermetical Furnace, and in
one instant to laugh at that sire, and weep at that smoke: Till such time, as
the mystery completed, they at the gathering of the fruit of all find a goodly
Ex nihilo nihil sit. All their hope is evapo^ated and only the dregs remain:
Fortune, that stood upon a Ball of Glass, that being broken, is fallen. And from
all it is at last concluded, That Gold grows not, but only in Negotiation; and
makes no Veins and Mines but in Banks.

I have with two touches of the Pen rudely pourfoil'd the equally foolish, and
unfortunate pains of miserable Alchymists, which with no other gain, than of a
smoke that makes them weep, spend all that they have, or are; to the end that
in theirs you may the better observe their folly of as many as being endowed
with a certain tallent of Wit, spend both that, and their time and pains,
(whereby they shorten their lives, and limbick their brains), about the
unprofitable composure of certain Books, whose contents serve only to consume
the time of him that reads them, as they impare the health of him that writes
them.

I know that Phavorinus advises, Gell. lib. 17. c. 12.
that for sharpning of the Wit, when it seems blunted and dulled by long
idleness, the best means is to undertake matters of less utility, and more
jollity. Thus did he that praised Thyrsites, and the Quartan Fever, as Dyon
did the Fore-top, Sinesius Baldness, Lucian a Fly, and an hundred others about
the like subjects have busied themselves. But its one thing to awaken, and
stir up the Wit with matters although not profitable, at least facetious;
and another to weary it, and dull it with over much intencenesse, and tedious
expecting from them all the glory of his prolix studies, as that other that
said, Ille ego suum nulli nugarum laud secundus. Martial


What think you of Aristomachus, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 9
that with exactest observations of every day, (I had like to have said of
every hour) for sixty two years continually pryed into the nature of Bees? So
many years, such diligence, would seem to me to have acquired no less, than a
discovery of all the secrets of Heaven, and an establishment of all the periods
of the Planets.

Seneca was offended with certain Philosophers of his time, that consumed the
tedious watches of the night, and the implacable disputes of the day, about
certain fooleries, meriting, I know not whether more of laughter, than lashes:
Mus syllaba est, syllaba caseum non rodit, Epist. 48
Mus ergo causeum non rodit.

O pueriles ineptas! In hoc supercilia subduximus? In hoc barbam demisimus? Hoc
est quod tristes docemus, and pallidi? Men are wont to say that we are twice
Children, once when we come out of our Swathing-clouts, and again when in
extreme old age we reassume childishness: but he that imployes (not to say
consumes) his life in these conceited vanities, Non bispuer est, ut vulgo
dicitur, sedsemper: verum hoc interest, quod majora ludit. Lactant. li. 2. c. 4.


To what end shall we studying unbowel our selves, to weave but fly-intangling
webs? To what purpose should we with Nero employ ^ets of Purple and Gold,
(thoughts and discourses of a precious Wit) to fish for Shad and Bream? Quis
non miretur (said Pliny, Plin. lib. 12. c. 1.
speaking of Platans, trees that produce nothing but leaves for shade) arborem
umbrae gratia tantum, ex alieno petitam orb? Are perhaps shades so rare in
Europe? or these of Plantans, because, barbarous are they therefore the more
beauteous, that we should run through nausrages to the farthest parts of the
World to get the plant that produces them? Is there so great a scarcity of
unprofitable bablings, or are they sold so dear, that to stu^^e of thousand
unhappy leaves, it must cost you study, waking, toiling, and no small part of
your life? If I can have fancies of sublime Ingenuity, that sore a lost as the
Eagle, or Falcon to make new acquist of prey: wherefore should I wish that they
be like the Lark, which seeks no other benefit from a troublesome aspiring, and
painful slight than that unprofitable chattering which they make; after which
they descend from their altitude, directly to the earth; ravished and content,
as if they had taught a Lecture of Music to the Celestial Syrenes.

There is (writes Oviedus) in the Western India's great abundance of Cotton,
Oviedus in hist.
Alumn, Salt, and such like ordinary Merchandises, with which that place is
most plentiful, but there is no man vouchsafes to carry them away; nor do they
frequent those Ports, but only to freight themselves with Gold, Silver, Pearls,
and Aromatic Perfumes. A Voyage so long, so difficult, so dangerous, (such it
was in those primitive times) none would undertake for less. Alas! most simple
Merchants: The Voyage of your life, (a great part whereof you spend in study,
the felicity of the fancy, the toil of composing, which might fill your Books
with Gold and Pearls,) you only employ to enrich your selves; with what?
Fables, empty Questions, (it had like to have escaped my Pen, Romances) Poems of
Love, reformations of Ancient Heads, more often deformed than reformed,
corrections fantastical, conjectures, imaginations, and I know not what. Isai.
c. 55
Quare appenditis argentum, and non in panibus? says Esaias, and St. Jerome
understands it of the unprofitable Sciences of the age, how much more may it be
understood of your wholly unprofitable fooleries? Is that Tyberius still alive,
that enjoins you to tell him, Whose daughter was Hecuba. What name Achilles
took when he lay concealed among the Virgins of Licomedes* What the Syrenes are
wont to sing of when they enchant passengers; Plut. qu. sonviv.
on which hand Venus was wounded by Diomedes; on which foot Philip halted? Is
Domitian yet living, that teaches you to spend many hours every day in the
unprofitable hunting of these flies?

Heliogabulus, to give an argument to the World of the greatness of Rome, like
a fool, made all the Cob-webs that hung in the houses thereof to be gathered
together upon one heap; and that he esteemed a sufficient foundation for a
conceit equal to the grandeur of a City that was Queen of the World. There is
no Wise man but smiles at this Fool. But is not this the same with the fooly of
those, which for to give a public proof of their wit, rake together a mass
rather of Cob-webs than of Papers in a Book, writing vain and unprofitable
matters? Job.
Utinam taceretis, and videremini sapientis. Let the applauses of foolish
friends make you never so great, these are never more, than what Diogenes
called the wonders done at the Spectacles of Bacchus, Laert.
Magna miracula stultorum.

But amongst the unprofitable labors of the Wit, Astrology opposed.
(however the interessed resent things) I shall only hint, that the first place
ought to be given to that, which St. Basil aptly calls Negotiosissimam
prorsus vanitatem, St. Basil.
Astrology, (I know not whether I should say) Indiciary, or extrajudicial;
worthy, rather of the disrespect, than of the Aspects of the Stars; from whence
She takes lies to vend them the dearer, in regard they be celestial
Merchandise. Her Art is to erect twelve Houses in Heaven by the help of men,
that many times have not a cottage on Earth; and by their hands to dispense to
some riches and dignities, to others misfortunes and praecipices; who
themselves beg bread to keep them alive. You must not ask her (as Diogenes
demanded of him that talked so freely, Laert. in Diogen.
of Heaven) Quando nam de Coelo venisti: For she pretends to know how to read
every ones fortune, written with characters of Stars, and Ciphers of Aspects:
To know how to trace out in the periods of those Spheres the courses of every
ones life: To be able to confine the Stars and Planets in Trines, Quadrates,
and Sextiles, as in so many Magical figures; and to force them to tell future
eveniencies, both public and private: To conclude, to be a prophetess of
truth: And all this by virtue of similary observations, which as yet never had
similary figures in Heaven; By dependence on one legitimate point of the
Nativity, the weight of which it examineth in the Balance of Hermes; By virtue
of Celestial Figures, imagined by the Capriccio of others, observed by them as
mysteries; By help of things, which have nothing of subsistence or reality,
such as are the Dragons-head, and Tail, and the An Astrological term.
Part of Fortune; in sine, in despite of the Truth not found out, but stumbled
upon; not by means of Art, but only by chance in one prediction of a thousand,
they are emboldened to mask a falsehood, as if it were a thing credible; and to
persuade a thing credible as it were true.

What does this Profession merit, whose office it is to deceive men on Earth,
and to defame the Stars in Heaven? You may give it the Caucasus, and Vulture of
Promotheus; if you think, it be a far greater crime, to make Heaven a liar, the
Planets deceivers, and the Stars malevolent; than to take from the Wheel of the
Suns Chariot, a spark of fire, a beam of light; therewith to infuse light into
the dead Statues of Epimetheus, and to transfuse Soul and Sense into their
breasts. But for my part, because I will not pass judgment to others
prejudice; I would remit them to the Tribunal of that brave Emperor Alexander
Severus, who punished Turinus his Favorite, for selling the Favors of his
Master with Falacious Promises: Condemning him to be stifled to death with
Smoke, the Trumpets all the while proclaining aloud; Fumo puniter, qui vendidit
fumum.

AVARICE.
That he is guilty of the Ignorance of many, who might benefit many by the
Press, and neglects it.
THere are not any men for whose maintenance the World more unwillingly
Labors, and Nature takes pains, than those, who regardlesse of others, would
live only to themselves. These are Pilgrims even in their own Country, and
Solitary in the midst of Society; These have the countenance of men, but are
Beasts amongst Men; that deserve no more to have been born by others, then they
care to live for any but themselves.

Amongst these, none will scruple to enumerate certain Avaritious Wits, which
would bury the Golden Talents of Sciences and Arts, (with which they are
endowed) in their Sepulchers, rather than become beneficial to posterity by the
Presss.

When, if there was no other inducement moving him thereto then the great
reward of that honored Memory, with which after death he lives immortally, --
An erit qui velle recuset
Os opuli meruisse, and cedro digna locutus
Inquere nec scombros metuentia carmina nec thus?


But, there is not only this allurement which can, there is stronger reason
which should persuade him to do it; and it is the public interest, which may
not be neglected under pretense that he is careless of his own. So much the
more in regard that Wisdom is not received from Heaven as a Gift, which may be
lost with our selves, but as a Lone, to be transmitted to our successors; so
that the doing it is not, in some sense, so much Liberality, a^ Justice: It is
to be received, as the Air receives the Light from the Sun, to transmit it to
the Earth; and not to retein it concealed from others, and with little profit
to our selves.

Therefore our solitary, pale, shriveled Ancestors have in the course of so
many ages spent the Vigils of slow-pac't Nights, and consumed not so much the
hours of the Day, as the days of their Lives, to fetch with the blows of hard
Study, from the rich Mines of their Wits, golden Ve^^s of truth, and new
discoveries in knowledge; and expounding them freely, have made their private
patrimony a public inheritance: wherefore then do we, (ungrateful to our
Predecessors, and envious to our Successors,) avariciously bury both theirs and
our own?

He that puts himself between our Ancestors, and those that are to come after
us; and beholds the Example of the one, and the Necessity of the other: I see
not how he can have a heart to deny, either imitation to those, or assistance
to these. For if the only beholding the dead Images of those, who in public
managements of Peace, and War, have acquired the name of Grandees, can do no
less than move the heart, and involve the desires in the like enterprises; in
seeing in Books the lively and breathing Images of the Wit of those Great Souls
expressed to the life, that therein still survive, still speak, still teach, to
the benefit of the World; can the rudest man choose but desire to understand,
and can the intelligible choose but blush to keep that covetously concealed
which others have collected only for Common Benefit? Sum in manus indicem
Philosophorum. Sen^^^ epist. 39.
Haec ipsa res expergiscite coget: Si videris quam multi tibi laboraverint,
concupisces, and ipse ex illis unus esse.

Yet says Phylo, De insomniis.
Sapience is a Sun, from which we cannot take the Splendour without destroying
it. And many Platonicks make Souls of loftiest intelligence to be of the nature
of fire, Plin. li. 2. cap. 107.
Cujus unius ratio faecunda; seque ipse paret, and minimis crescit scintillis.

So that if the Examples of our Ancestors is not sufficient to persuade us, let
us behold the Necessity of Posterity, to whom it is double cruelty to deny
that, which we ought to bequeath them with Interest, and they would receive
with profit. Abolish this inviolable Law, which is not written in Marble, but
imprinted on the heart of Man, of bequeathing our Goods as well as our Love to
our Posterity, and what other do you do but destroy the World, and make it
barbarous, and brutish? But if those seem fortunate, who transmit to their
Legitimate Issue, ample yearly Revenues, and entail with the riches that they
have, a happy Fortune to their Family; what more precious and durable
Inheritance can we leave them than the Endowments of the mind, and the golden
Tallents of our own Wit? These are Revenues that diminish not with use, that
consume not with time; that survive both public and private Ruins: Are
always living, always entire, always in the same esteem, and equally
beneficial. And hence drew the second Pliny that forceable motive, wherewith he
persuades a Friend to leave for public benefit some fruit of his long and
tedious studies. Lib. 1.
Effinge aliquid, Epist 3.
and excude, quod sit perpetuo tuum. Nam reliqua rerum tuarum, Ruffin.
post te alium atque alium dominum fortientur. Hoc nunquam tuum desinet esse,
si semel coeperit.

But hear what those sordid Misers have to say for themselves. I am debtor to
no man for what is my own. Let others take pains as I have done; let them find of
themselves, that, which its unhandsome to beg of others. This is pity not
rigor; love to Learning, not hatred of the Learned; for it breeds up Wits in
slothfulness when they find that in others, which they should draw from
themselves. Necessity renders Ingenious; and makes him that would be always a
Scholar, studying the labors of others, to become Master, inventing new of his
own. Thus we make Achillis's, giving them whole, the bones of Lions, that they
may break them, and pick out the Marow: thus brave Swimmers give way to the
Course of the Stream where it is most impetuous: because it is not so much Art
as Necessity in such a case that teachetb them to come out.

And do not these consider, that if this should be, Learning would always
continue in its infancy? If he that spends many years in study, teaches no man
what he has discovered; he that comes after him, when he also has been
equally solicitous in seeking, and equally fortunate in finding, shall know
nothing more than the former: and when will they this way advance Learning? Yea
the knowledge of that which others have found, helps one to find that which
others did not know. Those will serve us for Principles, which were to others
but Consequences, and there we begin our search where others left seeking.
Wisdom is given, S. Aug.
said Augustine, not for a Slave but for a Spouse, and requires from us
Successors and Sons: hoc est ingenii fructus, and quosdam mentis partus, quos
non tam libros, quam liberos dicimus; and when she obteineth not that, she
laments, I will not say like her that said, saltem mihi parvulus aula luderet
Aeneas, but like the innocent Daughter of Jeptah, that more bewailed the
Virginity, than her Death; It being the true and only death to die without
leaving an Issue wherein to live. But if a wilful abortive makes the Mother a
Homicide, In Octavio.
Et que originem futuri hominis extinguunt (says Minuti^s) parricidium faciunt
antequam pariant; to stifle in Wisedoms Womb that which she (as it were
pregnant with our Conceits) conceives, to kill it that it should not be brought
forth, is not this Parricide? Is it not homicidii festinatio prohibere nasci?

Others their are that defend themselves with years, Tertul. Apolog. cap. 19.
and excuse themselves with old age, That being scarce able to live themselves,
how can they toil for others? To him that has done his part in activity, it is
cruelty to deny him to gather his wings into his Nest, and to strike sail in
the Port. Other times, other cares. The eyes inclined to the sleep of death,
more than to the wakings of study, can go no farther without danger of errors,
and mistakes.

But if I misunderstand not, these are not the words of one that would live out
the few years that he wants of his full time, but of them that would anticipate
their death some years before they die: and to die I call the doing nothing but
live. Pli. praef. operis.
The studies of his extreme old age were the sweeter to M. Varro, the nearer he
was to his death, because not knowing any other life more like a man, than to
understand, he lengthned his life, as he did his study, and said to himself,
Dum haec musinamur pluribus horis vivimus. Yea Seneca that noble Wit, taking
motives to Labor from his Age; whence others seek pretenses to rest, in the
ultimate years of his not-compleated-life, applied himself to investigate the
occult secrets of Natural Philosophy, and therewith, as if he was more than
himself, he said with his Poet; Tollimus ingentes animos, and grandia parvo
Tempore molimur. --


Thereupon, Praefat. lib. 2. quaest. not.
as it were pricking and spurring on the slothfulness of his Old age,
Festinemus, said he, and opus, nescio an superabile, magnum cer^e, sine aetatis
excusatione tractemus.

Who ever sees (says Plutarch) Bees for age to grow lazy, An seni gerenda
Respub.
slothful and idle in their Hives, and not fly to the flowers and gather
Honey, as they did when they were young? Take from me the power of writing, In
fine noctium Attic.
said Gellius, and you take away my life. So much only of life I ask for my
self, as may be serviceable to others. Neque longiora mihi dari spatia vivendi
volo, quam dum ero ad hanc facultatem scribendi, commentandique idoneus.

Let the division of the life of him that professes Learning be such as that
of the Ancient Vestals of Rome, Plut. ib.
which was divided into three equal parts, In the first they learnt the Rites,
and Ceremonies, as Scholars to the Eldest; In the second they practiced them,
as Companions of the middle sort; In the last they taught them, as Mistresses of
the Younger. Thus the leaves usher in the blossoms, and the blossoms falling,
with a happy end, do knit in fruit.

The incomparable felicity of Good Authors, that appear in Print.
THe desire of living has been the Inventeress of a hundred ways of not dying.
And because Physic has neither the herbs of Medea against Old Age, nor the
Ambrosia of Jupiter against Death, but that its too true, Lib. 2. epist. 12.
Agr.
as Sydonius says, that many Doctors assistentes, and dissidentes, parum
docti, and satis seduli, languidos mulios officiosissime occidunt, we betake
our selves to the Arts of Coloring Linnens, Ingraving Marbles, Founding
Brass, erecting Arches, Mausoleums, and Theaters, that so if we cannot long be
men, yet at least we may be the Superficies of men on Pedestals, the images of
men in the Inscriptions of Arches, and Epitaphs of Sepulchers. But there is
nothing of our invention, as I have above adverted, so able to conserve us
alive after death, as the procreation of Children whereby Nature provideth for
the maintenance of the common Species, and private desire of every one. Mortuus
est pater (says Ecclesiasticus) and quasi non est mortuus, Chap. 30
simileni enim reliquit sibi post se. But howbeit it be true that the Father
transfuses himself into his Child that he begets, whereby dying he does not
die, whilst he lives still in him; yet nevertheless, the Child oft-times so
degenerates, not only from the looks, but from the Genius, and Customs, of the
Father, that very often it comes to pass (As in the Egyptian god Apis) that
the Father is a Lightning, and the Son an Ox. Caused, in that the temper of the
Issue, follows not the will of the agent, but the nature of the matter; nor do
we make our Children such as we would, but such as we may. But Books are the
Children of the mind, Heirs of the better part, lively Images of our selves;
these only are they, in whom we have as much of life as we can enjoy after
death. Proem. var.
Contingit (says Cassiodore) dissimilem filium plerumque generari, oration
dispar moribus vix unquam potest inveniri. Est ergo ista valde certior arbitrii
proles. They are immortal Sons, that make our dying only a cessation from
misery, to commence in them a life of glory; like even as Hercules, leaving the
earth, was received from his Labors into Heaven; and in the midst of it he
began to shine with the Stars, whose body consumed in the flames of the funeral
pile, seemed reduced to a handful of ashes.

What so strong support, what so stable Basis, has the memory of the names,
and the glory of the merits of Great Souls, comparable to the eternal duration
of Books? Observe the ruins that time makes in every thing, precipitating
some, and gently gnawing others. The Rocks, do they not, as it were, decrepit,
and bending under the heavy burden of age, incline toward the grave, and
mouldring bit by bit, and scattering their divided members rather bones here
and there, do they not seem to beg a Tomb from their own Valleys? Does not even
Iron it self, worn away by the rust, consume to dust by the Deaffile of Time.
Once-stately-Edifices, now old Carcasses, and naked Anatomies, not of Fabrics
but of ruins, if with some fragments of broken walls, more falling than
standing, they keep upon their feet, do they not more manifest, a Trophee of
Time than a testimony of their former greatness? Where once were the Temples
of the Gods, Courts of Kings, Assemblies of Senators, Accademies of Students,
there can now hardly an Owl nest her self, but revenous Wolves have there their
Coverts. In the mean-time, in the midst of the ruins of all the resisting and
durable things of the World, how do the Trophies of great Wits abide? In the
death of all things, even of the lifelesse, how live Books, or rather how live
in Books their Fathers and Writers? Let the most Sapient Roman Stoic say it.
Consol. ad Polybium cap. ult.
Caetera, quae per constructionem lapidum, and marmoreas moles, aut terrenos
tumulos in magnam eductos aeltitudinem, constant; non propagabunt longam diem,
quippe and ipsa intereunt. Immortalis est ingenii memoria. Let the Poet Martial
speak it.

Marmora Messalae findit caprificus, Lib. 10. Or. 1.
and audax
Dimidios Crispi mulio ridet equos.
At chartis nec furta nocent, nec secula praesunt,
Solaque non norunt haec monumenta mori.
Well may we call Metellus happy, who was borne to his Sepulcher upon the
shoulders of his four Sons, Plin. lib. 7. c. 44.
of which two had been, one was, and the other was a while after to be Consul
of Rome. This was so superbose a funeral pomp, that the Historian admiring it,
said Hoc est nimirum magis feliciter de vita migrare, Vitellius lib. 1. hist.
quam mori, but in fine, it was De vita migrare, and his Sons, though with
great pomp, yet carried him to the Grave. Books alone, not four Children, but
as many as we multiply with the Press, their Father retiring to death, and the
Sepulcher, bear him alive into every place where they come, and put him, not so
much into the hand, as into the eye, of as many as read him, into the mind of
as many as understand him.

And oh! how many times he, who living in his native Country, either un-known,
or un-regarded, so that with much ado he drew to himself the eyes of some few,
that ook't upon him as a Man of Wit, in his Books draws to himself the hearts
of a World: Like as heretofore the famous Lyre of Orpheus, that on Earth,
says Manilius, ravished the Trees, Stones, savag^ Beasts, in Heaven whether he
was translated, drew the Stars after him.

Tunc sylvas, 1. Astr.
and saxa trahens nunc sydera ducit. Witness that most pleasing desire that
any one has to know of what semblance were the faces, and what the features of
those, who in paper have stamped so goodly portraitures of their Wits; hence
proceeds the care of delineating them, yea, of counterfeiting them, when through
the oblivion of many ages, their faces are unknowable: Non enim solum ex auro,
argentove, aut etiam ex aere, Plin. lib. 35. c. 2.
in bibliothecis dicantur illi, quo^um immortales animae in iisdem locis
loquuntur: quin imo etiam quae non sunt, singuntur pariuntque desideria non tra
liti vultus, sicut in Homero evenit. Quo majus, ut quidem arbitror, nullum est
felicitatis specimen, quam semper omnes scire cupere, qualis ^uerit aliquis.

And not on^y so, but as often as the dubious mind knows not how to unknit the
kno^s of intricate difficulties, that wilder the thoughts; so often with desire
it runs to covet to behold those alive, which only are able to be Oedipus's to
their Aenigma's. Plutarc. qumodo quis pro faci us, etc.
Yea, as once the Generous Macedon to a Foreign Messenger that brought him
good News, and before he expressed it in words, intimated it by the joy in his
face; What now? (said he) What News bringst thou? Is Homer risen from the Dead?
This alone was the most welcome Intelligence, that that great Emperor could
receive; which yet had a Soul, and a desire adequate to the Monarchy of
Infinite Worlds.

At this day also if we did ask a great part of the Wisest Men, what thing they
desired above the terms of ordinary, we should hear them wish; some, that Plato
might return to life, and Aristotle; some, Hyppocrates and Gallen; some
Archimedes and Ptolomy; some, Homer and Virgil; some Demosthenes and Cicero;
some, Livius and Zenophon; some, Ulpian and Paulus; some, Chrysostom, and
Augustine.

Their lives, were not (in respect of the shortness of ours) so long, but that
they were to short for the need the World has of them. Therefore the death of
those is ever displeasing who cannot die without public prejudice, as also
they would not have lived but for public benefit. Mihi autem (says the Consul
Pliny very finely) videtur acerba semper, Lab. 4. epistol. maxim.
and immatura mors eorum, qui immortale aliquid parant. Nam qui voluptatibns
dediti quasi in diem vivunt, vivendi causas quotidie siniunt: qui vero posteros
cogilant, and memoriam sui operibus extendunt, his nulla mors non repentina
est, ut quae semper inchoatum aliquid abrumpat.

These Suns of the World the rays of whose sublime Sapience, enliven the
Sciences, illuminate the Ages, beautify all the Earth, merit they not in
honor that place, that the Light had in the first formation of things? The
Light was made by God worthy of the chief praise, that he gave with his mouth
to any work of his hands. And that not so much because it is beautiful in it
self, as because every thing that it sees, it makes beautiful; therefore,
Tantum sibi praejudicatorem potuit invenire, S. Amcros. li. 1. hex. c. 9.
a quo jure prima laudetur quoniam ipsa facit, ut etiam caetera mundi membra
digna sint laudibus. This is the nature, and these the merits of those, that
Seneca (adoring the minute in which they were born, kissing the earth on which
they lived, bewailing the hour in which they died, Epist. 64.
) calls Praeceptores generis humani, and if this be too little, Deorum ritu
colendos. And why not? would Vitruvius say: Vitru. in Architect.
Cum enim tanta munera ab Scriptorum prudentia fuerint hominibus praeparata,
non solum arbitror palmas, and coronas his tribui oportere, sed etiam decerni
triumphos, and inter Deorum seeds eos dedicandos.

OBSCURITY.
Ambition and Confusion, two principles of Obscurity, Affected, and Natural.
WEre it not for the Opinion, wholly against truth, which anciently has so
general credit with the vulgar: That the fixed Stars were mothers, and keepers
of Souls; and that every one whilst he lived had above in Heaven his, of the
first, middle, or greatest magnitude, and splendour, adjusted to the degrees of
Fortune which rendered him more or less considerable on earth. Certain Obscure
Souls, certain Chymmerian Minds, whence would they be able to derive
themselves, but only from the nubilous, and duske Stars, that have so much
light mixed with so much darkness, that they seem amongst their fellows,
rather Spots than Stars.

These are those unfortunate Ethiopian Souls, that extract Obscurity from the
Sun, the Father of Clarity; that learn confusion from Wisdom, the Mother of
Order. From the fire of the Sacred Palace, whereby the Wits become so much the
more luminous, by how much the more inflamed, they take only the darkness, and
blackness of Coals; and rejecting the pupils of the Eagle, for the eyes of a
Bat, esteem themselves more the Birds of Pallas, when they be most Nocturnals.

In vain would Prudent Socrates experiment his wonted conjecture upon them,
that knowing, the speech to be a lively Image of the Mind, to come to the
knowledge of what was in any one, would say to him, Loquere ut te videam. Their
speech, their writing, is as if one should design in plano certain Monstrous
figures of Faces, but so miscoloured; and of features, but so counterfeited;
that no eye can discern in them the lineaments of humane resemblances, but only
looking through a Cylinder of polished steel, and seeing them by reflection. O,
Ingenuities, unfortunately ingenious! Dedalus's, contrivers only of Labyrinths
so crooked, so confused, that they themselves can scarce find Clues, to
dis-ingage them.

But all Obscurity is not of the self-same nature; not has all one only
beginning and fountain. For there is one made by Art, and another had by
Nature: This, being the defect of the Wit, that the effect of Ambition: the
one, worthy of compassion, the other of reprehension.

Its a received opinion among the vulgar, That all Obscurity, is an Argument of
Wit, and the mark of the loftiness of a great understanding to measure it self
by it, even as well as heretofore by the nine hundred Stadium's of shadow the
Ancients found the height of the Summitie of Mount Atho^. That Nature has
given the Stars to the obscurity of the night, and Wisdom to the obscurity of
Wits. That God himself in his Oracles is all Clouds; and that the excessive
Light in which he dwells, in which he is seen has the name of darkness;
because it in such manner shows him, that it in the same instant hides him.
That the style of the VVisest Ancients was no other, whose sublime minds, whose
high conceited Wits, as it were mountains with steep tops, have their heads
still amidst the Mysts and Clouds. That their writings were so much securer
from the Fisher, the more they were obscured: that they were so much the abler
to discover Carbuncles, and Diamonds, the more palpable was the darkness. Thus
the vulgar deluded by a false appearance of truth, always most admire what they
least understand. The splendid, the clear, though profound stream of Wit,
because they reach it with their eye they esteem not; one foot of muddy water,
because they cannot dive into the depth of it with their sight, they judge to be
an abyss of Wisdom. So likewise in Learning.

Alba ligustra cadunt, Vaccinia nigra leguntur. Thereupon some take through
their ambition of Wit, an affectation of Obscurity, and with the Art of not
making themselves understood, they seek to make themselves adored. They
transform themselves into more shapes than Proteus, to get out of the hands of
such as hold them, that so they may not know what they are. They invent more
Hieroglyphics than Egupt knew, because therein they fancy a kernel of solid
truth, under a shell of feigned mystery. Every one of their Periods is a
Gordian knot, that promises an Empire to him that unknits it. They confound
their words, more then the leaves of Sybilla were disordered by the wind; and
leave credulous wretches to pore into their Oracles, and to wrest them to
senses, which never came into the Authors thought.

Other times, they expose their conceits, as the Deities in a Theater, wrapped in
a knot of Clouds. They show a small Sentence of some well composed Discourse,
thereby to win credit to the rest, which is lost in a crowd of confused
thoughts. The Reader of their Books, one would think was fishing for the Cuttle
a most crafty Fish, which maliciously frees it self from the eye, and hand of
others, muddying the clearness of the water, by disgorging up a Cloud of
certain black humors, of which it is full. Thus they with their Pens like that
Fish

Naturam juvat ipsa dolis, Claud. de saepis.
and conscia sortis,
Utitur ingenio.
Oh! how often is there just nothing found there where some believe great
mysteries to lie hid? Since it is an ordinary custom with these to cover that
with a veil, Plin. lib. 35. c. 10.
as Tymanthes, which they have neither Wit, nor Art sufficient to express.

By which means they seem to be new Heraclitus's (cui cognomen Scoti non fecit
orationis obscuritas) if of them also we may say, Sencea epist. 12.
what Pythagoras says of the writings of the other; Laert. in Pyth.
Opus ibi esse Delio natatore. They contest with the Delphian Apollo in
authority, and credit, if like him, Neque dicant, neque abscondant, Heracl,
apud Sto. 5.
sed indicent solum.

But the other Obscurity more unfortunate than faulty, is a defect of nature
not a vice of the will: And this in some is an effect of paucity and poverty of
Wit, in whom the formative virtue, as in too narrow a womb, cannot unite
without confounding, cannot place the parts without misplacing the whole. In
others it is occasioned by too fervid a mind, in whose fiery thoughts, as in
sudden constagrations, there is much more smoke than flame.

These are those Wits truly fiery, active and prompt of understanding; so that
in one only cast of the eye, (sparkling with most velocious thoughts, according
to the nature of lightning,) they reflect upon a thousand things, they make a
thousand new discoveries. It would be happy for them if they could infuse
gravity into their flame, and put a bridle of restraint upon their fire: but as
the ^leetest Beasts make the obscurest footsteps, so they being wholly bent on
the things they see, see nothing, of the manner how to express that, which the
mind sometimes* with most abstracted Species, as it were in a moment,
understands: And moreover, (being so much less able to methodize, the more
fruitful they are of invention;) they expose, whether speaking, or writing, not
a Birth, but many seeds; and they themselves being afterward cooled again, and
quiet, (when the jugdment is more adapted to discern) are not able to reform
that, for which the Wit is defective of both heat and light.

And these are, in my judgment the two Vicious Obscurities, the one the crime
of the ambitious Genius, the other the defect of the poor, or muddy Wit. There
is a third sort which they call Obscurity, and is truly so, but it is an
Obscurity of the Wit of him that does not understand, not of the Author; who
does not write or speak so but that he may be easily understood by men of mean
understandings.

If we discourse with certain principal universal Maxims, from whence as from
their true Principles we draw other Corolaries, till that we descend to some
particular matter: which is the noblest and sublimest of all other kinds of
grave discourse:) imitating the Falcons, which with great windings and
circulations mount on hing, from whence to stoop to the quarry: If we trace out
Wisdom, with feigned, but apt inventions, which like a garment we so dispose
and put on, as neither to discover what we ought to conceal, not to hid what we
would reveal; a custom which Sinesius calls, Lib. de insomniis
Per antiquum atque Platonicum: if we sometimes exempt the Pen from a
particular touch upon each circumstance by it self, and abreviate some, so that
all is seen, in a small room: If we write as Tymanthes painted. Lib. 35. cap.
10.
In cujus omnibus operibus, says Pliny, intelegitur semper plus quam pingitur
and cum ars summa sit ingenium tamen ultra artem est: These Pseudo
Vitilitigators condemn us of Obscurity, and say that to understand, and
penetrate such things, Non lucernae spiculo lumine, sed totius Solis lancea
opus est; Never considering, that our Writings want not light, but their eyes
need Eyebright; in as much as they are like that Dunce Arpastes in Seneca, who
being insensibly become blind, not doubting but that he saw as well as ever,
ajebat domum tenebrosum esse.

But because, for the remedy of that Obscurity, which is capable of cure there
cannot be better advice prescribed then to observe Distinction and Order, that
are the Father and Mother of Perspicuity, I have laid it down in the subsequent
Sections; howbeit perhaps with too frequent trips of the Pen, in regard of what
this matter requires: yet is it not besides the purpose, or without profit; I
being to lay down some advertisements, which from the Choice of the argument
even unto the last Correction, seemed to me conducible to the more orderly,
easily, and succesfully Composing.

That the Argument ought to be elected adequate to the Wit of him that handles
it.
THe first, and most of all others important trouble; is the invention of the
Argument; about which observe the first Law of Horace, where he advises: That
if you be a Pigmy, you should not go to charge your shoulders with a World, as
if you were an Atlas.

Versate diu quid far recusent,
Quid valiant humeri.
If your Wit have a weak and ill tempered edge, you must not attempt to work
in Porphyre, Flint, or Marble that may be much too hard for your tools.
Proportion your Sails to the VVind and your Rudder to the Waves* and if you be
but a small Pinnace, strive not to imitate the great Ships. A Lake, should be
your Ocean, and an Island your India's, distant some half a days sail: Altum
alii teneant.

What would you do, is fishing for small fish you should see a great VVhale
come into your Net, and make himself your prisoner? Would it so inchant you
with the greedinssse of the prey, that it should make you forget the weakness
of the Net? Rather would you not fear to take that which otherwise you would be
willing to have; knowing, that Nets knit with so small thread are no more able
to catch a Fish so big, than a Cob-web is to take a Hornet?

Oh! how many do like the Icarus in the Poets, which neither was a good Bird in
the Air, nor good Fish in the Water; in regard that flying he praecipitated,
and swimming d^owned. His unfortunate Father, seeing him surpass the bounds,
he prescribed him as he fastened his wings to his shoulders, followed him
a-far-off, and cried, Ah simple, venturous Boy Farfaila fond
Why do thou rashly sore so far beyond
The flight I set thee? why go thou so near
The scorching be^ms of Sols consuming sphere?
Art thou so foolish as to make account
Thy wings of wax can near the fire mount?
Why Icarus I say! soft! not so high!
So ho! stay Icarus, and lower fly!


But to what purpose? if he would prefer his pleasure to his perril, and his
eye to his ear, Coelique cupidine tactus,
Altius egit iter. Met 8.



Till that the wax beginning by little and little to melt, and his wings to
moult, he fell from Heaven into the Sea, and there d^ed. Just so do they who
take their flight at pleasure, and measure not the height of the course they
take, by the strength of the wings that bear them.

There be some Arguments that seem to have the ambition of the Great Alexander,
that would have no Picture, Statue, or Image of his face but what should come
from the Pencil of Apelles, from the Gravers of Phydias, and from the Moulds of
Lysippus: So they disdain the workmanship of any that is not a golden style:
amongst all the Wits, they admit only the most sublime, as Jove of all the
earth only reserves to himself the tops of Hills; and its with reason, That to
the highest Deity the highest part of the earth should be dedicated. Max. Tyr.


That then may be aptly said of Arguments or Theames, which the Ancient Sages
said of Fortunes; that, as in garments, he has not the best that has the
biggest, but he that has the fittest, and best becoming his back. Apuleus
Apolog. priore.
Pereichus the Painter depainted nothing else for the most part but Stables and
Horses: Seraphion nothing but Heavens and Gods. But the Heavens of Seraphion
partaked of Stables, and his gods of Horses, as also on the contrary the
Stables of Pereichus were a Celestial sight, and his Horses for the excellency
of Art had something in them of Divine. Its not the matter, but the work that
gives name to the Workman and value to his workmanship. If you have a Pen like
the Pencil of Pereichus that can employ it self about ordinary matters with
more than ordinary praise; desire not to be a Seraphion, that being ambitious
of more lo^ty subjects, makes the fair deformed, whereas he might save made the
deformed mose amiable.

The World has never seen a more admirable piece of Arr than the Sphere of the
^ivine workman Archimedes, who making as it were a Compendium of the World, by
Contracting the large, by Epitomizing the great, by Retarding the swift, by
Abasing the sublime, within the narrowness of a Globe, knew how to comprehend
it, and not confound it: and giving liberty to the Planets, order to the Stars,
variety to the Motions, proportion to the Spaces, so exactly disposed all, that
if the Periods of the great Heaven had been never so disordered, one might have
turned them again by the little one of Archimedes. But so noble a work, for
which Saphires and Diamonds would have been matters to sordid, did he not make
it of Glass? With the fragility of a defective Glass, he imitated the
eternity of the incorruptible substance of Heaven: nor did he lessen the worth
of the Work by the inferior value of the Matter. In vita Market.
That great Rock-Chrystal, of which Mercator made a Celestial Globe for
Charles the Fifth, enchasing therein Circles of Gold, purest Diamonds of Stars,
and making it in this manner, (as that other his Hellena) if not fair, at least
rich; has scarce purchased a remembrance, much less an applause in the World.
The Diamonds of Mercator were so much more base than the Glass of Archimedes,
by how much the Art was in it the more Ingenious, and the workmanship more
Artificial.

I do not hereby pretend to teach, that one should assume Vulgar Theames:
howbeit these are better handled, than the more select. I only advise him that
is no Delius that he should not put himself to swim in Gulphs, but content
himself with fordable streams: him that has no Wit, or knowledge, Ubi
consistat, that he go not about, as Archimedes would have done, Caelum,
terramque movere, assuming matters of great moment, and subjects of lofty
intelligence, to which neither the slight of the Wit or Pen can attein.

Yea the best part of the discourse, is the excellency of an Argument: and he
that is acquainted with Brain-work knows by experience, that the Ingenious
subject admirably sharpens the Wit; and it seems, as if a Noble Theme infuseth
from it self, thoughts worth of it self, out of an ambitious of being Nobly
discussed; Crescit enim (says Maternus in the Dialogue of Tacitus, or rather
of Quintillian) cum amplitudine rerum vis ingenii, nec quisq^am claram, and
illustrem ^^rationem efficere potest, nisi qui causam parem ^nvenit. And, to
say true, upon a rugged and course Tele of harsh Canvasse, it would show
il-favoured to paint rich embroderies of Silk; and the Pearls and Gold would
disdain to be seen upon so base a Ground. On the contrary, how proudly, and
with what state (says a Poet,) do the waters of Pactolus and Tagus move,
because they run upon Golden sands. Waters they seem not, but Diamonds, liquor
less precious, not befitting so noble a Bottom.

Let them therefore that can worthily discuss them, choose Matters of sublime
Argument, if they desire the Births of Noble Composures should follow:
otherwise it will succeed to them as it did to that Archydamus King of Sparta,
who having taken to wise a Woman of excessive small stature, was deposed by
the Ephori tanquam non Reges, sed Regunculos procreaturus.

The sub-division and Desection of the whole Discourse.
HAving found an Argument proper to him that is to treat upon it, and worthy of
him that is to hear it, he is to give it some Method, Desecting, and
Sub-dividing it into members; that so with ingenious distinction they may
comprehend all that they desire to say of that subject. And this is one of the
most important tasks of one that writes. For such as is the proportion of the
members in the body, such is the Division of the parts in Books; whereby they
enjoy that beauty which comes from symetry, and that persp cuity which proceeds
from Order. Therefore it concerns the Judgment to Ideate and figure in the
Imagination the design of all the mass together, from thence, as Love in the
Chaos, to distinguish, organize, methodize one by one, and afterward unitedly
to conjoyn all the parts.

It is indeed a great commendation of a Noble Work, that it variously revolves
it self through many and diverse matters, but with so much union of all the
parts, that looking one while on the foot, another on the hand, now beholding
the breast, then the face, still they are one and the same body, still the
whold is understood in every of its parts.

Ne primo medium, Horat. in Art.
medio nec discrepet imum. And this, of all the excellencies of Heaven, is
that, which more than all others, renders it wonderful, that in it the discord
of so many motions so harmonize, and the wanderings of so many Stars are so
reformed, that there is not only no disorder occasioned from their variety, nor
confusion from their multiplicity; but moreover the Planets show, and as it
were teach one another viewing themselves with Sextiles, Quadrats, Trines,
Aspects, and opposite Diameters: looks all, wherewith they do not so much
glance at one another, as semblably show themselves to those which behold them,
Thus it is, says Manilius: Haud quicquam in tanta magis est mirabile mole,
Manil. 1 Astron.

Quam ratio, and certis quod legibus omnia parent.
Nusquam turba nocet, nihil his in partibus erat.


For if there be wanting in Composures the right Division of the parts, and
with it a good Method, (as he that has made the first Rough-chyzelling of a
Statue of Marble lame and deficient, though he afterward pollish it, and
exactly work it, takes not away its being a Monster so) it shall be more or
less monstrous. Nor boots it, that a disorderly discourse be replenished with
high speculations, and sublime fancies, with solid reasons, and with Ancient
and Modern crudition, to the end they may seem, illustrated with so many
lights, and embellished with so many ornaments; the Aphorism holding in such
like Composures, which Hyppocrates writes of ill-affected bodies, Quo plus
nutries eo magis laedes.

It Is necessary therefore wisely to imitate the Bees, Plin. lib. 11. c. 6.
which first work their Wax into Combs, and sub-divide the rancks, and this is
their first business, in which they employ greater time and industry; and
after they go abroad in search of Honey, with which in few days they fill
their empty Cells.

The prepartion of the Matter, called Sylva.
TO the Argument found, to the parts disposed, follows the composing: which is
at it were to cover the bones with flesh, and to make a body of a Sheleton.

And here take, to begin with it, an ordinary error of such, who bringing to
such labors only clean Paper, a Pen and his own brain, would in one and the
same instant Invent, Dispose, and Compose; attending at one and the same time
to the Matter, Method, and Manner; as if he were the Sun, that to paint a
Rainbow in a Cloud, without difference in the Circle, without disorder in the
Colors, has no more to do but to behold it, and there withal to stretch forth
the Pencil of a beam, wherewith in a moment he designs and colors it.

These, whilst they gnaw their Pen, gaze on the roof, and buzzing like Beetles,
hum to themselves; putting down beginnings without conclusions, and find
themselves at the end of the work in the beginning; how seasonably might one
whisper in their ear for a jeer, and the caution that common Axiom which says,
Ex nihilo nihil: Ye pretend to rain down Gold from the head, where you have it
not in Mine; and farther, that you will mint it into weighty money, and with
the impression of lawful Coin; thus in one and the same time you play the
Alchymist, Assayer, Coiner, Treasurer, Prince, every thing: Which is the direct
way to do just nothing, Quintil. lib. 10.
Ne igitur resupini, respectantesque tectum, and cogitationem murmurare
agitantes expectemus quid obveniat. Imagine, that the compiling a Book is the
building of a House. Its not enough to have Platform, and Model, if one want
Stones, Mortar, Beams, and Iron-work. Therefore Sylva rerum, Cic. 3. de Orat.
and sententiarum paranda est: ex rerum enim cognitione, e^^lorescere debet,
and redundarum oration.

He that has not in his head a living Library, collected with long study from
Stories Sacred, Profane, Natural, and Civil; from Politic Instructions; from
Ancient Laws and Rites; from grave and sententious Sayings of Wise men; from
Fables, from Hierogly phicks, from Proverbs; and that which is more than all,
from Philosophy Natural, and Moral; from the Mathematics; from Civil Law; from
Medicine; and as much as is requisite from Theology: it is requisite, that from
dead Books he borrow and collect that, which shall suffice his occasions.

It little imports to have conceived a good Argument, if when ye be to bring it
forth, you have not breasts full of milk to nourish it, so that it is forced to
die in your hands, of pure famine. Stasicrates, that would engrave Alexander,
with making him a more than a Gigantical Statue of the Mountain Athos, was not
aware, that the City which he designed to put in one of his hands, in regard it
had not about it fields to cultivate, would become unhabitable. To this
Alexander had an eye more than to any thing else. Delectus enim (says
Vitruvius) ratione formae, Praefat. lib. 2.
staim quaesivit, si essent agri circa, qui possent frumentaria ratione eam
civitatem tueri: And understanding in the negative, he refused with a courteous
smile the offer of the inco^siderate Statuary, Ut enim natus infans sine
nutricis lacte non potest ali, neque ad vitae crescentis gradus perduci, sic
Civitas, etc. Just so, what ever Theme one assumes, if he has not wherewith
to nourish it, it cannot grow, nor maintein it self; but like a sprout
springing up in the dry sands, of Arabia deserta, no sooner does it shoot up,
but it is deprived in one instant both of moisture and life.

Therefore they do prudently, who before they resolve upon an Argument, look if
there is, or if they have whence to extract matter sufficient to complete it.
Thus experienced Architects, says St. Ambrose, in designing of all Fabrics,
employ their first thoughts, in contriving how they may bring in the Lights
with best convenience into every Room. Antequam fundamentum ponat, unde lucem
ei infundat explorat; Hexam. 5. c. 9.
and ea prima est gratia, quae si desit, tota domus deformi horret incultu.

Therefore its needful to have knowledge of, and acquaintance with many Books;
and a Judgment of competent ability to pick out, but of greater maturity to
apply the things that one finds, that so where cause requires they may in an
ingenious, and singular manner, express that which they have to say. And in
this, its an infallible observation, that every one gathers that for himself,
that to his Genius (to which always concurs the manner of Speaking) is most
apt, Quintil. in Dial. elo.
and agreeable. And as Neminem delectant, and sordida; magnarum enim rerum
species ad se vocat, and extollit; so some there are, that leave Diamonds with
the Cock of Aesop: and, as if their brains were of yellow Amber, they attract
nothing but Chafe. Thus there are some that from flowers take only the sight,
some only the odor, others the images, painting them, others the waters,
distilling them; but the Bees take thence the honey, and the honey all of one
sweetness, and of one Savor; though from flowers of diverse natures and tastes
they gather it. The same happens in Books, Meadows of odoriferous flowers and
herbs for the maintenance of the Wit. There be those who only take from them
the sight, in the delight of reading them; others some spirit of good odor, to
waken the Brain, and comfort the Wit. There are some that bundle up herbs,
carelessly gathering what comes first to hand; and some that with greater
curiosity pick only flowers to weave thereof Crowns and Garlands. Some squeeze
out the juice, others extract the waters; Few from a great multitude of
Subjects, different from one another, know how to gather honey of the same
taste, so applying things, that all speak to the same purpose; and so that there
may be the Delight of Variety, without wanting the Union of Sense.

These diverse manners of election, and application, submit to the Judgment,
and the Judgment follows the Genius which every one has of speaking some in
one style, and some in another, suitable to the Idea of his mind. Therefore
matters extracted from Books, may be said to be like the dew, which if it fall
into the shell of a Conchylia (according as Plin. li. 9. c. 35
some believe) is changed into Pearls, if upon a rotten Tree it becomes
Toad-stools.

But in uniting matter to form thereof a Book, I hint in the last place, that
it may be of no less prejudice to have too much, than to have nothing. My
SCHOLAR ought not to be so sparing in the gathering, as if be would that the
Work he is to publish were more me^ger than an Aristarchus, than a Phyletas,
than a living Skeleton; so that one may count the bones, and see all the
courses of the veins, the ligatures of the nerves, the dispositions of the
muscles, the motions of the arteries, and almost the Soul it self. Nor ought he
to be prodigal, as if he were about to form a man so corpulent, that he should
seem rather a Botle than a Man. He that amasseth together superfluous stuff,
unless he be Magnus Deus, as the Ancients called Love, as being the methodizer
of Chaos, is not able to dispose it, but that in such a crowd there will be a
confusion.

Further more, upon a superfluous Collection, it comes to pass that we
exceedingly grutch after having culled out the most excellent and opposite
things to cast away the rest as unprofitable; which yet will be far more than
those that are pertinent; thinking it not the property of a good Judgment, but
a propension to prodigality, to lose together with so many things, the toil and
time spent in gathering them. By this means whilst all pleases, and the
Author seeks a place for every thing, he stuffs his Books, as the Glutto^ does
his belly more for greediness of swallowing, than out of any heat he has to
digest: and so from the abundance of corrupt humors, arises the indisposure
of the body, the consumption of the strength, palenesse, Seneca epist. 84.
and a hundred diseases. Idem igitur in his quibus aluntur ingenia, pestemus,
ut quecunque hausimus non patiamur integra esse, ne aliena sint, sed coquamus
illa. Thus let us be advertised, that as to Bodies, so to Books, we give not so
much as they can receive, but so much as they can concoct, and digest.

Now the Argument found, the Parts methodized, the Matter collected, and ranged
in order, let him proceed to Composing.

The Discouragement of those that meet with difficulties in the beginning.
IN every Art, and Enterprise, the beginning is more difficult than all the
remainder. The first steps require the greatest strength and constancy; after
which as having mounted the acclivity of a high Rock, the way still proves more
smooth and easy. All Arts may say of their beginnings, what Apollo,
instructing Phaeton, said of his journey: Ardua prima via est, 2. Met.
per quam vix mane recentes
Enituntur equi. --


So in the gains of Merchandise, the hardest is to get out of poverty; Pecunia
(says the Stoic) circa paupertatem plurimam moram habet, Plut. an seni resp.
gerenda.
dum ex illa ereptat. Whence Lampis, a very rich Man, being asked how of a
Beggar that he was, he was become ^o wealthy; My small riches I got (said he)
by watching a nights, my great I get now sleeping a days. I moyled more in the
beginning for a Farthing, than I did afterward for a Talent; nor did my being
now so rich cost me any more, than the first pains I took, to cease to be poor.

This not being understood by the unexperienced in the mystery of Composing, is
the cause, that encountering in the first onset with sterile fancies, dry veins,
and an incomprehensive Wit, they grow impatient, and either condemn themselves
as unable to proceed, or abandon the Art as too difficult to apprehend. They
consider not that one cannot immediately pass from Nocturnal Obscurity to
Meridian Clarity. There precede it, the first glimmerings, that are a small
light mixed with much obfuscation; after that the Dawn, less dusky; which also
grows white upon the edge of the Horizon; next Aurora, more rich with light,
more adorned with colors; and lastly, the Sun; and this, in its first peeping
above our Hemisphere is thick, vaporous, oblique, weak, and twinkling; but
getting at length above the Horizon (as he that with great trouble climes a
pendent Cliffe) by little and little it recovers the Zenith point of Heaven.
They remember not that a man must first be a child, and must creep before he
can run; carrying his reeling, and at everystep-stumbling body, upon his feeble
feet, and tender arms: Nor that he is not furnished with speech, till first he
has been long silent, and then he attains a puling cry, than a stuttering and
stammering tongue, and halved and broken words, crying with much a-do Dad, and
Mam: and at last learning the syllables and words one by one from others
mouths, he repeats them as the Echo piecemeal, more imitating others speech,
than speaking.

Great Men are not made by Founding, as the Statues of Brass, (which in one
moment are formed whole and entry) but are wrought like Marbles, with the
point of the Chizzel by a little, and a little. The Apelles's, the Zeuxis's,
the Parrhasius's, those great Masters of Painting, of whose Pictures it could
not be said, that they wanted Souls to seem living, for that they knew how to
appear a live even without Souls; when they begun to handle their Pencils, and
to Pourfoil, do not you think that they gave one false touch in two; and that
it needed to be written under their Work what the Pictures were, that a Lion
might not be taken for a Dog? It is the opinion of Pliny, that Nature her self,
(notwithstanding she is so great an Artist, and Mistress of the most excellent
Works) before she set her self to make the Lilly, a work of great Art, did
prepare her self by making as it were the rough draught, and model in the
Convolvus a white and simple flower; Lib. 21. cap. 5.
therefore called by him veluti naturae rudimentum, Lilia facere condiscentis.
If you have seen the Campidoglio of Rome, and in it the Temple of Jupiter,
enriched with the spoils of all the World, would you know it for that which
once it was, when Jupiter angusta vix totus stabat in aede, Ovid. 1. Fast.

Inque Jovis dextra fictile fulmen erat?


From this neglected seed sprang that great Tree of as many Palms, as the
Compidoglio saw Triumph; according to the common Law of all things, That they
be first Springs of poor Originals and mean beginnings, then Rivolets, next
Rivers, and at last Sea's.

For though it be true that some times, according to the Ancient Proverb, Royal
Rivers have Navigable Fountains; and he that is to proceed in some profession
of Learning beyond the terms of ordinary, to any excellency, gives
extraordinary Symptoms in the very beginning, like as Hercules Monstra
superavit prius, Quam nosse posset. in his Cradle ^strangling Dragons, thereby
preluding to the Hydra, and giving the first testimony of his strength: this,
notwithstanding that it be true in some few, holds not as a Law to all; not so
much proves the facility, as the felicity of the first operations, and rather
the ability of the Wit, than the use of Art.

Let us not therefore abandon the enterprise for the difficulty of the
beginning; nor let us leave Proteus if he breaks the first snares we tie him
in. Desire not to be Masters before you be Scholars: And bear in mind, that
beginners do enough if they begin. Take for encouragement some Verses of the
King of Poets, with their application to the purpose; Qualis spelunca subito
commota Columba,
Cui domus, and dulces latebroso in pumice nidi
Fertur in arva volans, plausumque exurita pennis
Dat lecto ingentem: Mox air lapsa quieto
Radit iter liquidum, celeris neque commovet alas.


Just such shall be your Wit. Now it behooves you to beat the wings strongly,
and raise your selves to fly with great pains; he shall not need to go much,
that without clapping the wings, or beating the feathers, can take most
fortunate flights; and that shall be, when (having acquired the skill of
composing,) or the doing what you will, the bare desiring it shall suffice to
effect it.

That we ought to use various Styles, according to the variety of Subjects
discoursed of.
IT is requisite now to show what Style, what From, or, as Hermogenes called
it, Idea of speech, ought to be used by him that composeth. About which you
must know, that in the Method of discussing any thing whatsoever, what is most
worthy to be observed, is reduceable to Quantity and Quality. The first is
measured by the Prolixity and Brevity: the second by the Efficacy and Debility
of the discourse. And because in both the one and the other of these two
Species, you have the two Extremes, and the Mean between them, it thence
follows, that under the Quantity is comprehended the Longest, Mean, Shortest:
Under the Quality, the Sublime, Mean, and Vulgar. The three first have had
people that have made use of them. Of the Longest the Asians, of the Shortest
the Spartans, of the Mean the Atticans. The three second have had Orators,
which upon the word of M. Tully, have been excellent in each of those Forms of
Speech.

The pure Asiatick is most Diffused; and likes of what it pleases, and is
accustomed to speak; as that Albutius recited by Seneca, Non quidquid debet,
sed quidquid potest. A Style cruciating the ears, which in an Ocean of words,
has not a jot of Salt; Nullo enim certo pondere innixus, verbis humidis, and
lapsantibus diffluit. Cujus orationem been existimatum est in ore nasci, non in
pectore. Whence its a miracle (that which Aristotle said to an importunate
Babbler) that he should find any that have feet, ablt to walk with him, or ears
willing to hear him. Have you observed the first Letters of Indentures written
in Parchment? How many strokes of the Pen how many dashes, how many flourishes
in Text go to the forming them? and in the end they are no more than an A, a B,
a Letter, as the rest that are simply writ. This is the true Symbol of the
Asian Style. In a World of Words it tells you no more than others would say in
a Sentence.

The pure Laconick, uses rather Hieroglyphics than words; and in it as is
said of the Pictures of Parrhasius. Plin. 35. cap. 10.
Plus intelligitur quam pingatar. Studet enim ut paucissimus verbis plurimas
res comprehendat, De jud. Thuc.
as Helicarnassus says of Thucidides. Its three great Periods are touched in
one Line. Three Lines are little less than a complete Oration. Plut. prae
Reipub.
Every world of it, nay, almost every syllable, is what Demosthenes termed the
sayings of Phocion, A blow with an Axe.

The Mean between these two, that as Elixor is tempered and compounded of both,
is the Attick; which without the Insipidnesse of the Asian, without the
Obscurity of the Laconick, has the Perspicuity of that and the Efficacy of
this: and as in a well-form'd Body all is not Nerves, not is all Flesh, but it
has part of the one for Strength, and part of the other for Beauty. Gel. li.
2. cap. 20.
He that takes a word from it, bereaves it not, as Lysias, De sententia, but as
Plato, De elegantia. It has that, Proem. lib. 2. Contr.
which Seneca the Controvertist calls Pugnatorum (of which the Asiatick is
wanting) but uses it with other more secure and proper ways of skirmishing
than the Laconick, which at every blow makes a Pass, and comes to the Close,
and not offering (as Regulus said of himself) any thing but Foynes, and all at
the throat of the cause, still runs the danger; Plin. l. epist. 2
Negenu sit, aut talus, ubi jugulum putat.

The different Styles under the Species of Quality, have not as the a-foresaid,
the extremes vicious, and the mean best; but they proceed in goodness one
above the other; as they be one more perfect than another.

To display their nature more clearly, Rhos. l. 1.
we will call to mind, Orat. ad Bru^.
what is taught by Aristotle and Marcus Tully. That the Art of Persuasion has
three most potent Means, with which it is wont to obtein its end: these they
are, to Teach, to Delight, to Persuade. And because every one of them has a
different office from the other, they have also different characters, and
forms, of which they make use, the Vulgar or Popular to Teach, the Mean to
Delight, the Sublime to Persuade.

As for the kind called Popular, see the terms between which the Father of
Latin Eloquence has confined it. Vbi supra.
Acutum omnia docens, and dilucidiora non ampliora faciens; subtili quad^m, and
pressa oratione limatum. In it the principal things are distinction,
perspicuity, order, politenesse, and propriety of words, without Metaphors,
Phrases, or Metanymies. It has not the flashes, thunders, lightnings, nor
those lofty and magnifick forms of Speech, with which the Oration Majestically
flourished.

The Mean, Ibidem.
Insigne, and florens est; pictum, and expolitum: in quo omnes verborum, omnes
sententiarum illigantur lepores: neque enim illi propositum est perturbare
animos, sed placare potius, nec tam persuadere, quam delectare. Concinnas
igitur sententias exquirit magis quam probabiles; a re saep^ discedit, intexit
fabulas, verba apertius transp^^t, eaque ita disponit ut pictores varietatem
colorum. Paria paribus refert, adversa contrariis saepissimeque similiter
extrema de^init, etc.

But the Sublime all Majesty, all Empire, in that most grateful violence that
it offers to the minds of its Auditors, transforming them in all their
affects, and ravishing them with their consent, recollects as much of sublimity
in the senses, of strength in the reasons, of Art in the order, of weight in
the sentences, of ennergy in the words, as can be possible. It is Ample,
Eloquent, Magnificent. A Torrent but most clear, a Lightning but regular. With
excellent variety of Figures, with mutations of affections, mixed without
disorder. And as it were a Cloud, which in the same day gives out Fire and
Water, Lightning and Rain. Of this Form of Speech I will take in Picture from
the design of Quintilian: Lib 12 cap. 2.
Quae saxa devoluit, and pontem indignatur, and ripas sibi facit. Multa, ac
torrens. Judicem vel obnitentem contra ferens, cogensque ire qua rapit. E^
defunctos exitat. Apud eam Patria clamat, and alloquitur aliquem. Amplificat,
atque extollit orationem, and vi superlationum quoque erigit, Deos ipsos in
congressum quoque suum, sermonesque deducit, etc.

These are the Characters of the Forms of Speech in their pure being, only
hinted, not described. The Masters of this Art which according to their
profession do treat thereof, will completely satisfy them that desire a more
full information. It suffices me to have said so much concerning it as was
requisite to be known by way of Introduction to the ensuing advice: And it is,
That the Style should be varied conformably to the variety of the Subjects
treated of; accommodating it to each as the Light to the Colors, which into so
various Forms, so constantly transforms itself. The same Scoene serves not to
Tragoedies, Comoedies, and Pastorals. This requires Fields, and Woods, that
City-houses of resort, The Tragic Princely Palaces, and Temples. The place
ought to correspond to the Action. Likewise Oration should adapt it self to the
subject; not treating of sublime matters with a Plebean Style, nor of base
Arguments with sublime Eloquence.

In fine, we should have that subtlety in the use of Styles, which some Ancient
founders of Statues had, that formed not every god every Metal; but according
to their various natures, in various tempers mixing them, they expressed them
to be either, gentle, or cruel; horrid or handsome; bright or duskish: and in
that most commendable was the judgment of Alcon, that made a Hercules all of
Iron; Laborum Dei patientia inductus, said Pliny.

Yea, we ought not only universally to use Styles fitted to the nature of the
entire subjects, of which we speak; but in every composition it behooves so many
times to vary it: as the things are diverse which compose it. And like as in
Tragical Actions the Scoene changes, and alters it self to Rural, to express
some particularity either of the Ancient Satyr, or of the Modern Pastoral;
thus where there occurs in one discourse matters proper to other Kinds, than
that, which the set subject comprehends, to express it decently, it is
requisite to change the Form of Speech; using appositely and opportunely, as
Seneca advises. Lib. 43. cap. 14
^^liquid Tragice grande, aliquid Comice exile.

Moreover; the parts of one and the self same Discourse, require various
manners of Oration; and so various, as the Narration is different from Proof,
and Proof from persuasion. Omnibus igitur dicendi formis utatur orator, nec
pr^^ causa tantum, sed etiam pro partibus causae. Thus he that well peruseth a
Treatise of some bulk, shall find no less variety, than there is in the acting
of a Scoene; in which appears many Persons of different State, and Office: and
as in that Intererit multum Davus loquatur, Quintil. lib. 12. cap. 10.
an Heroes.
Maturus ne senex, an adhuc florente inventa
Fervidus. An Matrona potens, an sedula Nutrix,
Mercatorve vagus; Cultorve virentis agelli,
Colchus, an Assyrius, Thebis nutritus, an Argis:
and in the variety of these persons, the variety of their affects should also
be observed, therefore; -- Tristia moestum
Vultum verba decent. Horat. in Art.
Iratum plena minarum,
Ludentem lascivia, Severum seria dictu:
so proportionably in Prose, should we according to the variety of things,
variously accommodate the Sty^^ And he alone is the perfect, In Orat. ad Brut.
and only Orator (says Tully, after the long quest he made of him) Qui and
humilia subtiliter, and magna graviter, and mediocria temperate potest dicere.

Of the Style called Modern Affected.
BUt I do predict, that there will be some who will think, that speaking of the
better Idea's of Speech, I have been unmindful of the best, having hitherto
said nothing of that which they call the Conceited, or Witty Style, used now
a-dayes of many with no small applause of Wit.

This is (say they) that Style, given only to Wits enriched with high fancies;
for all is dissolved Pearls, and beaten Gold, the office of sublime Souls;
since that as the Indian Bird called the Bird of Paradise, it never sets foot
on Earth, never abaseth it self, but still towers a-loft in the purest Air, and
the serenest and sublimest Heaven. It composeth the draughts of the things it
represents with a precious Mosaic of a thousand Ingenious Conceits;
emulating that great Pompey, that Triumphantly (albeit, Verior luxuria, Plin.
l* 37. c. ^
quam triumpho) carried his Picture composed only of Diamonds, Rubies,
Sapphires, Carbuncles, and Pearls, with so goodly a contrast between the design,
and the colors, that one knew not which to admire most, the matter or
workmanship. Plin. lib. 35. c. 10.
That Venus (Quam Graeci Charita vocant) that Apelles said was injured by every
Pencil but his own, is wronged by every Pen but that of the Sprightly Style,
which will expressly and lively delineate her features, according as vivacity is
proper to her. The World is not now what it was when men, brought forth by
trees, did eat Acorns for Confects. In the taste of Learning it has now
a-dayes so delicate a Palate, that it will have not only the liquours which it
imbibeth by the ears (which are the mouths of the Soul) to be precious, but
will have the cup to be no less precious in which its put; so that both the
matter, and the manner of pouring it out, be worthy of it. And this Ingenious
Style is that only, Plinius proem. lib. 37.
in which Turba gemmarum potamus, and Smaragdis teximus calices.

That Ancient Idle kind of Speech, which in a discourse of many hours spreads a
great Table; seems to feed you, thereby to hold you in suspense; but leaves you
in the end, as hungry as in the beginning: Sen. her.
just as Tantalus, In amne medio facibus, siccis senex
Sectatur undas. Abluit mentum latex,
Fidemque cum in saepe decepto dedit,
Fugit unda; in ore poma destituunt famem.


It promises you Fruit, but gives you the Leaves of bare words; and leaves
your mind as hungry as your ears glutted. But the Modern Speech sets before you
as much variety as plenty of sweet Viands; and taking them away upon your first
tasting them, and setting on other new ones, keeps you still sated, and still
hungring: according to the Ancient Laws of the Noblest Suppers, A. Gell. li.
14. c. 8.
in which, Dum libentissime edis, tunc aufertur, and alia esca melior, atque
amplior succenturiatur: Isque flos Caenae habetur. Nor because the Style is
pleasing and delightful, it is therefore either softly effeminate, or feebly
weak for the enterprise of Persuasion. The Grace takes not away the Force. It
can make the same vaunt with the Soldiers of Julius Caesar that knew, Sueton.
in Caes. cap. 6.
Etiam unguentati been pugnare. Ajax wore his shield of Hides, without
ornament, horridly negligent; Achilles that had his covered with Gold, and
studded with Diamonds, was not therefore less strong, because more beautiful.
M. Tir. sermon. 29.
Imagine an Alcibiades, equally generous in the heart, and fair in the face;
which delights to appear in the field with Garlands of Flowers on his Helm,
and with Imbroyderies upon his Curasses, and to be as bravely adorned when he
fights, as others are when they Triumph.

Thus speak these of their Style, besides which none does please them. If a
Treatise want those, which they call Conceits, as if it were a face, Cui
gelasinus abest, they vouchsafe not so much as to look upon it. To there Palate
that only which stings has a good savor, all the rest, Melimela fatuaeque
mariscae, is meat for Children. In sine, they so idolize the substance, that
many times they adore the only name of a Conceit, where they think it is: and,
I had almost said, they do with it, as he described by Martial, did with his
Pearls, Non per mystica sacra Dindymenes, Lib. 7. epist. 81.

Nec per Niliacae bovem juvencae,
Nullos denique per Deos Deasque,
Jurat Gellia, sed per Uniones.


Others on the contrary say this is not the Modern Style. The true and lively
Image of it is portrayed in that Ancient Picture that Quintilian left of it (
lib. Quint. li. 12. c. 10.
12. cap. 10) which yet was not the first that drew it. But be it as it will,
Ancient or Modern; whosoever its applauders be, yet if either we weigh its
Nature, or Use in the Balance of good Judgment, it weighs nothing (...) its all
lightness, it has no solidity, (...) all Vanity. It does as the Western
Indians, that more esteem a Glass, that a Pearl, a sorry Brass Bell, than a
Wedg of Gold, with this its rich and pompous, Seneca epist. 115.
and omne Ludicrum ille in pretio est. Its Authors, fantasticating day and
night, consume, and unbowel their brains, as Spiders, to weave with ingenious
subtleties the Webs of their discourse.

They turmoil themselves in hammering out Conceits, which most commonly prove
Abortives, or Cripples; works of Glass, neiled by a Candle, which touched, I
will not say seen, break in pieces: and yet by how much the frailer by so much
the fairer, Plutarc. proem. lib. 35.
Imo quibus pretium faciat ipsa fragilitas.

Its a matter of most pleasant divertisement to see their Writing^, as it were
sickmens Dreams, to pass at every period de genere in genus, verifying in
their Actions that which they; That their Conceits are lightnings, and flashes
of Wit; since, besides that their appearing and disappearing is the same thing,
they in the same instant fly from East to West, and oft-times sine medio. All
their Leaves resemble a Peacocks tail displayed before the Sun: as various in
colors, as ^^onstant in motion. Tertul. libro de Pall. c. 13
Nunquam ipsa, semper alia, etsi semper ipsa quando alia. Toties mutanda,
quoties movenda. And because they hold it for a Maxim that this kind of
Composing is a woven Garland of Flowers, quae varietate sola placent, Plin.
lib. 21. c. 9.
they thrust in all they can, and that sometimes that would not have come in;
whence in viewing the particulars thereof, they incur not so much the
censure, Plin. lib. 25. c. 2.
as anger of Pliny, who curses the superstitious care of the Inventor of a
certain Counter-poison, that was compounded of above fifty several ingredients,
and some of them of insensible quantities. Methridaticum antidotum, ex rebus
quinquaginta quatuor componitur, interim nullo pondere equali; and quarundam
rerum sexagesima denarii unius imperata. Quo Deorum perfidiam istam monstrante?
Hominum enim subtilitas tanta esse non potuit. O^^ntatio artis, and portentosa
scientiae venditatio manifesta est, ac ne ipsi quidem illam moverunt.

From hence comes the uniting of periods, divided, and as it were Apostrophi'd
into small concise particles; an effect of the multitude of minute-points, each
of which finish the sentence, and changes the sense, and tam subito desinunt,
Sen. pro. l. 2. contr.
ut non brevia sint, sed abrupta: Or rather, as the word is atro, but it being
the same Seneca, I read it altrove.
els-where Seneca says, Non desinunt sed cadunt, ubi maxim expectes relictura.

Finally, from their not speaking what they speak, it comes that they speak it
a hundred times; so that, like them that beginning always new designs how to
live, they know not living how to live, Ep. 100.
says Manilius, Victuros agimus, semper neque vivimus unquam.

so these which have this method of speech, that they can as well conclude in
the beginning, as begin in the conclusion, may aptly enough be able to say of
themselves, Dicturos agimus semper, neque dicimus unquam.

Therefore their discourse resembles the unhappy sport which Seneca assigned
to the Emperor Claudius, for an Infernal pain, and it was that he should
always stand in a posture of casting the Dice, and never have his Throw; Nam
quoties missurus erat, In Apoc.
resonante fritillo.
Utraque subducto fugiebat tessera fundo.
Cumque recollectos auderet mittere talos,
Lusuro similis semper, semperque petenti;
Decepere fidem. --


That then, in which these Wits triumph, is in their Descriptions, which when
they obtein, they say to themselves, Hic Rhodus, hic salta. And yet it commonly
succeeds with such constraint of Art and Wit, and in so Hyperbolical, and
Gigantical a manner, that the more they desire to speak the less they say;
equally roving from that which is natural and that which is profitable. Ath.
lib. 8.
Whereupon we may say as much of their childish Descriptions, as Dorio said of
a violent tempest at Sea described by Timothy, Majorem se in ferventi olla
vidisse.

What would that Ingenious Phavorinus say now a-dayes, that reading in Virgil,
where he described Euceladus thunderstruck under Mongibello, and says
Liquefactaque saxa sub auras
Cum gemitu glomerat:
judged this saying, A. Gell. l. 17. c. 10.
in a Poet, and that speak of a Giant, and of an Aetna, Omnium quae monstra
dicuntur, monstro si ssimum: what would he say, say I, if he should hear: That
Roses in the Cheeks to remove, and arches of admiration in the brows to the
triumph of others virtues, in running through the fields of Eternity with the
steps of Desert, etc. expressions usual in subjects of familiar but Plebeian
Argument, and about things that they engreaten not in the least.

When its indiscretion to use too Elegant and Polite a Style.
BUt of Conceits and the manner of using them, let every one judge according to
his reason and fancy. For my part, if I be to borrow any of them, for the
necessity of the Argument, I esteem them as Jewels, and take their value from
their Nature, and Use: so that they be not counterfeit but real; and not
disordered at all adventures, but put in their proper places. The one is the
Office of the Wit, which is to Invent them; and the other of the Judgment,
which ought to Dispose them.

The Wit is not to take Chystals for Diamonds; the Judgment must not crowd them
in where they should not be: imitating the Western Barbarians, which cut the
skins of their faces, to enchase therein Jewels; never perceiving that they
more deform themselves with the Gashes they make, than adorn themselves with
the Ornaments they wear. The face requires no other ornament, than its natural
beauty; and its more wronged and deformed by a Pearl although very excellent,
enchased in a Cheek, than by the blemish of a Mole, growing there naturally. In
like manner in the Art of Speaking, some things appear the fairer for their
plainness; and resemble Pictures, in which says Pliny Junior very
excellently, that the Painter; Ne errare quidem debet in melius.

Lysippus cast a Statue of Alexander so to the life, that it seemed, he had
infused into the melted Brass the veey Soul of that great King. Nero, (that
was Cruel even in his Favors, and did hurt even there where he pretended to
help,) having it in his power amongst other spoils of Greece, would gild it;
judging that a Statue of so excellent workmanship was not worthily composed of
any worse Metal than Gold. The Fool considered not, that Martial faces were
better expressed by the fierceness of Brass, than by the sprucenesse of that
Womanish and lascivious Metal. Therefore the Gilded Statue of Nero, lost all
the Nobility of Alexander: all the Workmanship of Lysippus: and that, being
gilt, became a dead Statue which seemed before a living Image: So that he was
constrained to correct his error, and for Nero's fault to flea Alexander:
taking off with the Fyle that Golden Skin, which had been laid on with fire:
and yet so gasht, so ill dealt with, it remained more beautiful than it did
before when it was gilded; Plin. lib. 34. c. 8.
Cum pretio periisset gratia artis (said the Stoic) detractum est aurum;
pretiosiorque talis aestimatur, etiam cicatricibus operis, atque consciscuris,
in quibus aurum haeserat, remanentibus. Therefore Imbelishments are not always
Ornaments; but sometimes transform one into deformity, and where Ornari res
ipsa negat, Man.
contenta doceri, to be superfluously, and sometimes affectedly conceited,
declares a great plenty of Wit, but a small portion of judgment.

In Affections then, either let us betake our selves to imitate, or suppress
them; which is the hardest point in the Profession of Rhetoric; because an
exquisite Art of a refined Judgment, must lie hid under such Naturalnesse that
what is said, may not seem a Dictate of Wit, but a venting of the heart; not
studied, but born of it self; not got by pausing, but found in the very act of
speaking; what use can be made of a Style, that is distilled drop by drop by the
dim light of a Candle; with words wract in their Metaphors, double in their
allusions, with spiritous and lively senses: more able to puzle the brain, than
to move the heart? Chrysol.
Mortuum non artifex fistula (says Chrysologus) sed simplex plangit affectio.

For my self, when I chance to hear the affections managed in so improper a
manner I feel a greater naucity, than one who is Sea-sick; and my tongue
itcheth to be using that saying of a Wise Emperor, that said to one of his
Servants, all perfumed with Musk as he trust him out of his Chamber, banished
him the Court, Mallem allium oleres.

How would that great Master of the Stage Polus, in expressing the affections,
suffer the affectatio^ of a childish Style, who to represent more lively the
person of Hecuba, lamenting the loss of her Valorous Son dead Hector, whose
ashes she carried in an Urn, dis-interred the Bones of his own Son a little
before buried, and filled the Urn therewith, and with that in his arms appeared
on the Stage; leaving the Art of Mourning to Nature, and expressing the
imitation with reality, whilst under the mask of Hecuba, he represented himself
a child-lesse Father, and under the name of Hector bewailed the loss of his
Son? Thus the Style of the affections is the truer, the more natural it is, nor
is it possible that whilst the Thoughts run to the motions of the Soul, the Wit
should be so idle as not to be studiously Ingenious; nor that whilst it is
conveyed from the heart to the tongue of a person impetuous and violent,
replenished with a thousand different meanings, it should have time to select
the words, to disguise them, turning them from the natural to the metaphorical
sense, and to imbelish them with flourishes, and conceits. But he that has a
solid judgment, if in treating of any matter humerous, he see his
importunely-fertile Wit, to offer and present before him, subtleties, and nice
quirks, he will thrust them away, with his hand, and say unto them, Non est hic
locus. He does with the eye of his mind, as the bodily eyes do, when they see
too much light; they contract the pupils, and thereby exclude part of it. And
is wise in so doing, Plin. lib. 34. c. 14.
like that famous Ariston, that being to express in a Statue of Bronzo the
Fury, Shame, and Grief of Athamas, mixed Iron and Brass together, and darkened
the brightness of this, with the rustinesse of that. A wonderful work it was,
and how much the less rich for the matter, so much the more precious for the
Art; by which the rust, which is a fault in the Iron, became a virtue to the
Brass, and made it worth its weight in Gold.

In fine, where he is to speak seriously to convince, to reprehend, to condemn,
an act vice, or person, in using a Style that sings when it should roar, that
instead of thundering, lightens; (the Periods leaping by salts like the spouts
of a Fountain, when they should run like a stream) every one sees how far he is
from obteining what he aims at. Non enim amputata oration and abscissa, sed
lata, Plin. lib. 1 ep. 20. Tac.
and magnifica, and excelsa tonat, fulgurat, omnia denique perturbat, ac
miscet. It would be nervous and masculine, not womanish, effeminatly dressed, and
all escheated for Levity. The looks of the Orator should not be game-some, and
laughing, but majestic and severe; Sen. Her. fur.
of whom it may be said, as the Poet said of Pluto: Vultus est illi Jovis; sed
fulminanti.

What vanity is it, Lib. de Medico.
said Hyppocrites, to busy ones self more in embroydring the swathes than in
healing the wounds? as if the handsomnesse of the bindings were a Balsome to
the sore. Certain over-worn, toothlesse Files, serve to polish and give
brightness and luster to Iron: But where it is rusty, than it needs others,
That scrape, fret, and rub: The near it goes to the quick the better. Quid
aures meas scalpis? quid oblectas? aliud igitur. Urendus, secandus, abstinendus
sum. Ad haec adhibitus es. Tantum negotii habes quantum in pestilentia Medicus;
circa verba occupatus es?

The Style with which we combat with Vice, is as Warlike as the Sword, whose
goodness, and bravery consists not in the Gold of the Hilt, nor in the
Diamonds of the Pommel; but in the temper of the Steel. But the more its beset
with Jewels and enriched with Insculptures, and Ornaments, the worse it cuts,
and the less expeditiously is managed. Syn. de Regno.
And well said that brave Theban Captain Epimanondas, to a young muskified
Athenian, that laughed at the plain wooden Hilt of his Sword: When we fight
thou shall not prove the Hilt but the Blade: and the Blade shall make thee weep
then, if the Hilt make thee laugh now. Auri enim fulgor, atque argenti (says
Tacitus) neque tegit, neque vulnerat.

Let the Style therefore, wherewith we are to fight be no Bridegroom, but a
Warrior. Where the words are to be Darts, fill not the mouth with Flowers of
Elocution, to send out at every stop, a puff; as if Vice was a Hornet, to which
the smell of Flowers is a deadly poison; or as if you would kill your
adversaries as Heliogabalus did his friends, suffocating them in Roses. It is
an-hitherto-observed folly, to fight a Duel dancing, and to mix Salts, and
Assaults, and Flourishes, with Passes. There Is no jesting with edg-tools. Blows
made to wound the heart, are not to be fetched meeting the breast of the enemy in
a jesting way; as if one would embrace rather than wound.

And yet there is none that believe that the serious and severe Style wants its
elegancy, by wanting the ornaments of subtle, and superfluous conceits. The
Lion requires not a combed crest, gilded paws, pendents at his ears, nor ropes
of Pearl about his neck lasciviously fitted, to make him brave. The horrider he
is, the more beautiful; the more ruff and shagg'd, the handsomer. Hic spiritu
acer (says Seneca) qualem illum, Epist. 41.
esse natura voluit, speciosus ex horrido, cujus hic decor est, non sini temore
aspici, praefertur illi languido, and bracteato.

Of the Examination and Correction of our own Composures.
THe work of a Book being completed (about which, the end which in the
beginning I proposed to my self, was, to advert that only, which concerns the
invention and disposing of matters, and the manners of expressing them) that
which only remains is, to go over it with the finishing touch, and repolish
it, examining to particularly, and making a severe judgment of each of its
parts, to see if there be as Sydonius found in those of his Rimigius, Sydonius
l. 9. ep. 7.
Oportunitas in exemplis, fides in testimoniis, proprietas in epithetis,
urbanitas in figuris, virtus in argumentis: pondus in sensibus, flumen in
verbis, fulmen in clausulis, etc. And experience will prove the observatio^ of
Seneca to be most true, that the things, that whilst they were in composing
seemed most lovely, revised appear no longer the same, nor resemble the
Author, Nec se agnoscit in illis. The reason is, because the boiling of the
Spirits whilst the Wit is warmed in indicting, leaves not that tranquillity nor
clear serenity in the judgment, as is requisite for to work as evenly as
deliberately. Therefore Fere quae impetu placent minus praestant ad manum
relata. Ep. 100. Seneca.
And Quintilian condemns the precipitate method of those, that abandoning
themselves to a certain rather fury than fervor of Wit, inconsiderately write
what comes first in their heads; repetunt deinde, and componunt quae
effuderunt, Quintil. li. 10. c. 3.
sed verba emendantur, and numeri, manet in rebus temere congestis, quae fult
levitas. Therefore (subjoyns he) let them write (especially in their
beginnings) considerately, and slowly: and put every thing in its place, and
not confound matters; and select their words with judgment, and not take them
at adventure; not esteeming that good which comes easily, Non enim cito
scribendo fit, Quintil. ibid.
ut been scribatur, sed been scribendo sit ut cito. Virgil a man of so
excellent Judgment, and that in writing Gradarius fuit, Phavor. apud Gel. l. 17
c. 10.
was wont to say, that he brought forth his Verses, More, atque ritu Ursino,
because not content to have brought them forth, he repolisht them one by one as
the Bear, which with her tongue shapes out the members of her Cubs, which were
brought forth not only deformed, but unformed.

We should not therefore seek only to form the work, but to reform it also; and
remember, that others will not stick to use with them that severity in
condemning them, which we, foolishly pitiful, spared in correcting them. Let us
in this take example from GOD himself, that has been ever since the beginning
of the World with a great Lesson our Tutor herein, in that he made the World in
one day, and was five in beautefying it; taking one while darkness from
Heaven, another while sterily from the Earth; adorning that with Stars, this
with Flowers: till that having completed, his Work he commended it as worthy
of his hand, and requievit ab universo opere quod patrarat. He might, its true,
have made the World as in a Mould, and perfected it in a moment. Lib. 1. cap.
7. hexam.
But as St. Ambrose well advises, Prius condit, and molitur res corporeas,
deinde perficit, illuminat, absolvit. Imitatores enim suos nos esse voluit, ut
prius faciamus aliqua, postea venustemus, ne, dum simul utrumque adorimur,
neutrum possimus implere.

Nevertheless, I will not say that we should be so strangely cruel with our
writings, as to wreck every word if not every syllable, that so it become like
the Chords of the Lute; Sidon. ep.
Quo plus torta, plus Musica scripta enim sua torquent, Sen. lib. 2. contr.
prop1
(says that Ancient Controvertist) qui de singulis verbis in consilium veniunt

And we must know, that in this particular the superficious diligence of such
who like Prothogenes, Nescit manum de tabula, is no less blameable, than the
negligence of such who wholly omit to correct. For Negligence, its true,
leaves the superfluous matters in a Treatise; but the superstitious Curiosity
(which is worse) takes away the necessary. That, by not corecting omits to
chang the bad into good, this, by overmuch correcting, changes very often the
good into bad. Plin. lib. 5. epist. 1. l. 7. ep. 35.
Perfectum enim opus, absolutumque, non tam splendescit lima quam deteritur,
and Nimia cura deterit magis quam emendat.

From the desire of contenting their insatiable Genius, proceeds, in some,
their beginning a thousand times the same labor, weaving and re-weaving with
Penelope still the same piece, and cancelling to day what they writ yesterday.
Resembling the punishment of Sysippus in Hell; who never cease to roll to the
top of the Hill that inconstant and deceitful Stone, which trundling back to
the bottom whence he took it, frustrates his pains, and wearies his arms.
Imitating the folly of that famous Apollodorus, who not pleased with the
Statues, which with great expense of pains he had made, for anger broke them to
pieces with his tools, and was almost ready to grind them in his teeth; called
therefore the Saturn of Gravers, because he dismembered his Children, and eat
them though of Stone.

Nunquid in melius dicere vis quam potes? Petr. l. 7. epist. 7.
Said an old Master to a melancholy young man, that being unable to speak as he
would, would not speak as he might; and therefore had unprofitably travailed
three days together about the beginning of an Oration. This is the way to
learn not to speak well, but to say nothing; of which, the more Ingenious Young
men are most of all in danger, that having by Nature sees of high thoughts, and
impolite rudiments of a Noble Form of Speech; neither know how to content
themselves with the ordinary, nor yet have so much of extraordinary, as
therewith to satisfy themselves: Therefore Accidit ingeniosis adolescentibus
frequenter, Quintil. 1 apud Petr.
ut labor consumantur, and in silentium usque descendant, nimia been dicendi
cupiditate.

What man is there though of never so excellent a Judgment, to whom his works
are so pleasing, that as Gold of the twenty fourth Karact, there is nothing to
be added of good or taken away of base Alloy? Perfection is a privilege denied
to all the things in the World. The Sun has its Mysts, the Moon her Spots; of
the Stars, some are turbulent, some melancholy; and yet these are the most
considerable Bodies in Heaven; nor ought they therefore to be disolved, because
they are not altogether so beautiful as they might be. Examine the Books that
have the esteem of great Learning and the fame of great knowledge, they will be
fair faces but not without some blemish, or defect; for not only good Homer,
Quandoque dormitat, but in a word, the Argus's also, though they have a hundred
eyes. For if they had resolved fully to satisfy themselves, and not to publish
their labors to the World, till that they should have been completely
perfect, Adieu-Books: the World would not have had one good one; But if they
patiently suffered their defects counterfeited by so many excellencies, we need
not despair but that so much as is of good in our writings, may find more
praise than the culpable dispraise.

Let us apply unto our selves that counsel which that Astrologer gave to the
Cripples, to comfort them concerning their maimed, shriv'led, and dislocated
limbs: Observe, says he, the Heaven, and in it the Constellations, one by
one; all are not so beautiful, but that there are some that are deformed, lame,
and one way or other, maimed. The Scorpion wants his claws: Pegasus, and Taurus
have no more than half of them seen.

Quod si solerti circumspicis omnia cura. Manil. lib, 2.

Fraudata juvenies amisses sydera membris.
Scorpius in Libra consumit brachia, Astro. 6
Taurus
Succidit incurvo claudus pede: Lumina Cancro
Desunt, Centauro superest and quaeritur unum.
Sic nostros casus solatur Mundus in astris,
Omnis cum coelo fortunae pendeat ordo,
Ipsaque debilibus formentur sydera membris.
That finally, which consumates all diligence, requisite about our
Compositions, is to submit them to the judgment, to the censure, to the
correction of a faithful and understanding Friend. One eye of a by-stander sees
more into another matters than two of his own: Seneca libro de tranquil. anim.
c. 1.
because love of his own productions, is a certain necessary blindness, which
deceives the more, the less its suspected. Others eyes see our matters as they
are in themselves, ours give judgment according to the disposition of the
optic powers, not according to the essence of the object. Familiariter
domestica aspicimus, says the Stoic, and semper judicio favor efficit, nee
est, quod nos magis aliena judices adulatione perire quam nostra. A good friend
should stand us in the same stead as that Mirror did Demosthenes, of which he
made use, as of a Corrector to mend the faults which he committed in his manner
of delivery; using to say nothing in public which he had not tried at his
glass, Apuleius apol. 1.
Quasi ante Magistrum.

But take notice that the submission of our Writings to the censur^ or others,
is not to be done out of complement, but ^o have them corrected; not to be
commended but ^mended (...) it happens, that Modesty or Respect restrain our
friend from using liberty and rigor with us, we must show our resentments at
it, and bespeak him as Cel^^^ the Orator in a like case did his confident,
Seneca lib. 3. de ira c. 8.
Dic aliquid contra, ut duo simus, and be with him, Quod non irascatur, irati

But this is become now adays so difficult, that, whereas there is but few
that know how, there is none almost that will, Plutar. 2. de Fort.
like a friend undertake the charge to be T^i^^s of others works. They know
that Phyloxenus the Poet, because he used his Pen freely in expunging a great
part of a Tragoedy of Dionysius (a man that knew better how to make Tragoedies
as a Tyrant, Alex.
than to write them as a Poet) was for a reward of his fidelity, buried alive
in a marble Cave. We must not be offended to know that which we desire to know:
otherwise we shall find in our friends the Style of that Ancient Quintilian, of
whom: Si defendere delictum, quam vertere malles: Nullum ultra verbum, Horat.
aut operam sum^bat inanem,
Quin sine rivali teque, and tua solus amares.


But I have hitherto personated that old Tiresias, that being blind himself
opened the eyes of others, and stumbling at every step, showed the doubtful the
safest ways. Nor do I yet think that I ought to be therefore reprehended; nor
because my Style is a rusty File am I culpable, if with it I have endeavored to
brighten others. Who expects that the Hone which sets an edg on Blades, should
it self cut? Or looks that those Mercuries of stone, which pointed the way to
Travelers should travail themselves? The Brain has no sense, affirms
Cassiodorus, and its true: and yet, for that the nerves are fixed in it, and
from it receive the spirits for the noblest operations of the Soul, Sensum
membris reliquis tradit.

If I have not the applause of a Pencil, that Painting is able to teach others
to Paint; I may assume that of a Cole, that draws those dead lines which first
Pour^oil the Design: Which though they be expunged by the Colors, and lost in
the Picture, yet they lose not their virtue, of prescribing order to the
Colors, and giving a rule to the Design.

FINIS.
The Table of the most material Contents.
A
Abraham's generous sacrificing Isaak 2^8 Achilles his Characte^, etc. 78, 106,
110, 129, 279, 381. Affections not moved with to affected a style 389 Age
excuses not from studying ^o profit others 331 Alcibiades his Character, etc,
56, 198, 205, 249, 381. Alexander Magnus his Characte^; etc. 26, 34, 35, 96,
105, 120, 131, 151, 192, 351, 361, 388. Alexander Severus his Character, etc.
4, ^4, ^2 Alexarehus Grammat. concet of his own Learning 244 Allegories excuse
not las^ivious Poets 18^ Ambition of seeming witty makes some affect Obscurity
344 Amendment of errors is the most used by best Wits 222 Anaxagoras his
Doctrine and Character 27, 35, 46, 63, 76, 113 Alphonsus Rex preferred himself
in Astronomy to God 245 Apologies with what caution to be writ 220 Apuleius
Philosopher his Apophthegms, etc. 33, 198 Architas his character, etc 174, 183
Architecture 164, 185, 284 Archimedes Syracus. Character and commendation 73,
98, 132, 165 268, 353, 354, Argument to be discust should be adequate to the
capacity 349 Aristo's inscription over his Gate 143 Aristides killed by a Fly
225 Ariscomachus slu^dred the nature of Bees 67 years 319 Aristophanes
Phylosophus 132 Aristotle his character and doctrine 96, 131, 260 Ariscippus
answer to Dionysius ^y^cus. 6 Arms and Arts make a complete Captain 101
Astronomy its delight etc. 15, 128, 150, 155, 156, 159, 171, 172, 173 200
Astrology censured 323 Athenians observed their Childrens Genius's 275 Augustus
Sanct 180, 224, 258 Auguseus Emp. his Character, etc. 94, 280 Austerity adds
not to Majesty 98 Authors good Books incomparably happy 328
B
Beauty of Body no true sign of beauty of Mind 288 Bees their subtlety 140
Beginning of all things difficult 366 Bodies held by some to answer the Souls
of their owners 284 Books abide when all things decay 329. Not to be rejected
for a few (...) but corrected 190. Not to be valued as Great but Good 309. If
bad they some ways hurt the Reader 197. If wholly ^ad not to be read 195. If
partly good partly bad, with circumspection 191. Sometimes have nothing good
but their Titles 306 Brutus his justice upon his Son 209 Buonarotti ^^^cified a
man to paint the Passion by him 214 Business of the Idle in Cities 48
C
Caesar Dictat. his praises 104, 207 Caligula Emp. his Character 95, 137, 206
Captains glorious if Conquering they can w^te their Conquests 104 Carneades
moderation in writing against ^eno 236, 268 Cato his love of Books 191 Cautions
to those that borrow from other Authors 160 Cebes Tables 186, 276 Censures not
to be commonly practiced 222 Chemists and their discoveries 146, 316, 337
Cicero his love of jesting 213 Cleanthes his char^^^. and doctrine ^3, 159
Columbas discoverer of W. India ^52. Composures should he submitted to others
judgment 403 Composures of brave Authors Coppy's for others imitation 161
Conceies, as Jewels, must be True, and Proper 587 Condemning others is often the
fault of the Ignorant 226 Courts full of Scholars, a Princes Glory 97 Court of
Dionysius of a Shambles turned Academy 100 Constellations obscene, unworthy of
Heaven 172 Crates his Character, etc. 37,38, 195, 287 Cruelty, of Buonarotti
214. Of the Japponois ibid. of Patillus 215 Cyrces Rod 169. Cup 197
D
Death feared, is Deadly 72 Delight to be taken in Astorn^m. contemplate. 16
Demosthenes his Character, etc. 10, 193, 268, 170, 403 Democ^^us his Character,
etc. 114, 159 Demenax his Cynical Apophtheg. 116, 122 Detraction how pleasing
to some 211 Defined 212 Dialling 156, ^69 Domitian Caesar his Character 94
Diogenes his Character and Apophtheg 36, 38, 39, 47, 99, 123, 134, 158, 215,
235, 267, 306, 322 Difficulty of making new discoveries in Learning 151
Dionysius Tyran 3, 6, 99, 121, 134, 404 Discourse of man cannot (...), the
truths of Faith 253
E
Earth, beh^ld from the Stars, seem contemptible to the Mind as little to the
Eye 23 Elius Verus Emp. his Charact. 97, 182 Epicurus his Doctrine 67 Erasmus
his witty Echo 150 Euripides composed his Tragaedies in solitude 63 Exile to a
wiseman, not loss but gain 44
F
Families happy in a succession of Learned Men 117 Fear of Death a deadly evil
72 Fortitude of mind required by Sto^cks in bodily Torments 68 Fountains of
Artificial contrivance 166
G
Galaton a famous Painter 199 Giotto another 122 Galil^us praised for inventer
of Optic Telescopes 138, 155 Gallen Emp. his strange sentence in ^avour of an
ill Marks-man 123 Genius what and whence it is 302. It may be misled never
wholly suprest 274 Geography 156, 253, 343 Glory of a Captain that can manage
both Pike and Pen victoriously 104
H
Heads of great bulk, held capable of great wit 289 Helena painted by Zeuxis,
admired by Nicost^atus 20 Heliogabalus his Charact. 322, 394 Heraclitus his
Character and Doctrine 114, 158, 159 Hercules his Character and Labors 33,
102, 111, 125, 141, 172, 123, 256 313, 335 Hermotimus soul could leave its body
at pleasure 58 Hierog^yphicks 91, 186 History commended 103 Horace Apology for
his Poems 148 Homer Princeps Poetar. 106, 154, 180, 199 Humors that serve the
wit of what ^^mper they should be 275 Hyppocrates his Doctrine, etc. 177 235,
261
I
Ignorance Epidemical, and none are exempt from it 219. Shameful in a Soldier,
especially in time of peace 108 Ignorant men: intolerably insolent in writing
against the Learned 223. They censure for obscure what they do not understand
247 Imitation distorting a good Author, is worse than stealing 168 Impatience
in revising our writings, cause of their imperfections 365 Inclination of the
Genius may be misled but not totally suppressed: 274 Igenuity known by palenesse
290 Intentions, pretendedly good, of Lascivious Poets, (were they so) excuse
them not 187 John the Emperors constancy 92, 93 Jerome Saint 172, 242, 257
L
La^pis his method in growing rich 366 Learned Men's paucity the crime of great
men that regard them not. 2 Honors done them by several Princes 3 Learning its
two great enemies, Ignorance and Vice, Praesat. By some held needless in
Rich-men 112. Not evil because some make ill use of it 128. Hard to make new
discoveries in it 151. Not to be obteiued by every Genius 275. Honored by our
Saviou^ 80. his Apostles 81. and by God himself 84, 87. Hated by Licinius 93
and Lewis XI. ibid. Leucippus the Inventer of Atoms and Chance 201 Leocras an
excellent Imager 169 Life too short for great undertakings 261 Love of life
^nventeresse of many things 333 Love of our Books makes us partial judges of
them 248 Love of Posterity should move us to publish our studies 325
M
Man is placed in the midst of the world to contemplate it 163 Martial the Poet
141, 202 Metellus the happiest man of his time 337 Method the principal part of
a Book 356 Methrodorus first affirmer of Multiplicity of worlds 159 Mercury God
of Scholars is also God of Thieves 132 Moor Sir Thomas his witty Epigram 83
Modern Br^achers of novilties censured 157 Modesty in defending 202. In
opposing 233 Morning best for study 271 Muse better Dumb than Obscene 202
Music 15, 31, 202
N
Navigation 9, 10, 39, 54, 148, 152, 155 Nero his Character, etc. 93, 97, 320,
388 Novel-discoveries are most profitable studies 143 Novelties not to be
rashly divulged 155
O
Obscurity of the wit two fold, Affected 343, and Natural 345 Opinionatenss of
some men, 124, 244, Origin a great Platonist 259 Ovid Poeta 198, 401, 281
Oviedo the Historian honored by Carolus V. 157
P
Painting, Imagery, Carving, etc. 114, 136, 162, 163, 169, 178, 184, 189, 199,
214, 233, 241, 307, 314, 315, 352, 361, 368, 388, 391, 398, 399 Palenesse
believed a sign of Ingenuity 290 Paulus AEmilius, as ingenuous is Feasting as
Fighting 108 Persons feigned are incentives to Lust 184 Plagiaries of three
kinds 132 Plato his Character, etc. 3, 15, 58, 99, 131, 213, 259, 276, 280, 286
Pleasant dream of a Fool of Argus 59 Phylolaus a 2d Pythagoras, 135, 159
Philosophers that confront their authority to the Gospel 259 Physiognomy a Liar
in the symptoms of wit 284 Physicians ignorance dangerous to a Nation 177
Poetry lascivious doubly culpable is Christians 179. Poets more culpable for
obscenity, than commendable for wit 203 Polus unburied his son to weep more
perfectly 390 Pompey his Character, etc. 77, 185 Possidonius sick in body, was
strong in mind 75 Poverty is a complicated Misery. 30 Honorable in a wise Man
31. Defended by Apuleius 33 Prisons are not prisons to Philosophers 57, are a
school to the Learned 62 Princes unlearned are not perfect Princes 5, 90, 91
Pythago^as Character, etc. 15, 113, 159, 172, 201, 212, 270, 186
R
Repentance too late for him that conjures up a witty pen against him 230
Revising our writings necessary 397 Rich men's Herangue against Phylosophick
Poverty 107
S
Sacred things should not be alienated to profane uses 10 Sanctity is of great
worth in Learned men 83, Seems better without learning 79 Scipio African 50,
110 Selecting and appropriating others studies requires judgment 362 Seneca the
Phylosoph. 22, 74, 66, 98, 116, 157, 332 Ship Paralos 10, Argo 9, 155, Of
Magellanes 39, 111, Of India 50 Sickness most tolerable to Wisemen, and why
71 Silva, or Collection, necessary preparative to writing Books 360 Skeinerus
commendation for discovering the Theory of the Solar spots 156 Socrares his
commendation, etc. 34, 52, 49, 80, 113, 249, 280, 287 Solitude praised 64, 65,
and infra. Sordid to praise our own Writings 251 Souls of wise have the body
for a House, those of the Ignorant for a Prison 57. Souls have individual
perfections whereby they excel each other 292 Soldiers in opinion of some
should be Rude, not Learned 101 Spheres Celestial are harmonious 15 Sphere of
King Cosroes 98, Of Archimedes 353, Of Mercator 354 Spartans their Customs,
etc. 115, 118, 175 Stasicrates offered to Grave Alexander in mount Athos 106
Statue of Alexander, disgraced by Gilding 388 Stephen Monachus praised 82 Study
of things unprofitable is foolish 318 Style contracted praised by some 379
Dispraised by others 382, If over concise satisfies neither Affections 388,
nor Reason 382 Sybarites a Brutish People 46, 270 278
T
Temerity of those who not comprehending Natural Causes would yet by them
evince supernatural 256 Temples formerly confirmed in order of Architecture to
the nature of their Deity 284 Themistocles chose not a Son in Law for Riches
117 Tybe^ius Caesar's Character 321, 322 Time short therefore precious to the
Ancients 261, 266 Truth never barren of new Nations 147 Turinus his reward for
Bribery 325
V
Varro his avidity of study 322 Virtue little valued in the world 1 Ulisses his
Character 55, 161, 243 Vestals of three Orders 333
W
wise answer of an Emperor 91 wise sick-man, is strong in Mind 66 wise
ancients covetous of time 266 Obliged to banishment 42 Wit and Judgment rarely
united 302 Sharp^d by provocations 229 Wits, whence their variety 300 have
their equals, so that they need not despise others 250, Some wits apt for every
thing 296, Obscure through excess of wit 346, How different 293, Proud of
themselves 243, Prone to detraction 211
X
Xeno^^ates Phylosophe his Character 113, 235, 236
Z
Zeno Stoic* his Character 66, 257 Zeuxis Pict^^ 20, 127, 307, 315
FINIS.

