A SCHOLASTICALL DISCOURSE, Demonstrating this Conclusion, That (admitting
Erastus Senior's Reasons for true) neither the Pope, nor those called Bishops
in the Church of Rome, are Bishops either in Order or Jurisdiction.

Wherein is answered All which is alleged by Erastus Senior against the Order
and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of the Church of ENGLAND.

ALSO A Defense of the Order and Jurisdiction of the Bishops in the Church of
ENGLAND.

By R. C.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most SACRED
MAjESTY. 1663.

PREFACE to the READER.
MEn in avoiding Scylla usually fall upon Charybdis. But the Nation is wiser, I
hope, having avoided the Irreligion and Profaneness of the late times, then now
to run into Popery; although many fear there is more then an ordinary design
tending thereunto. To facilitate which, is newly crept abroad a Champion of the
Roman Catholic Cause, under the title of Erastus Senior, who in charity to
others, will not allow so much charity to our Bishops in the Church of England,
as to be so much as Legal. But if his zeal the Roman Cause, or charity to other
men, has so far dilated his reasons, that they conclude as much against the
Pope and Bishops in the Church of Rome, as he intended them against ours in the
Church of England; he shall have no great cause to triumph, nor his Church much
reason to thank him, in that he has made himself and Church as very Heathens,
as he designed us of the Church of England.

Imprimatur.

M. Franck S.T.P. R.D. Ep. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Nov. 27. 1662.
CHAP. I. Proving from Erastus Senior's Reasons, that neither those called
Bishops in the Church of Rome, nor the Pope himself, are Bishops Ordine.
TO the perfection of all powers, whether Spiritual, Natural, or Legal, these
two things are necessary, Jus and Exercitium: these, I think, Erastus Senior
calls Order, and Jurisdiction or Office; the former may be without the latter,
nay it must be before the latter can be. Therefore a King must be by right or
order, before he can rightfully exercise any Regal Authority or Power; so must
a Bishop or Priest be by right or order, before he can justly exercise any
Episcopal or Sacerdotal Jurisdiction; and so Parents, Husbands, Magistrates,
and Masters of Families are endued with a right or power, before they can
exercise any Jurisdiction over their Children, Wives, Fellow Subjects, or
Servants. That Kings, Husbands, and Parents are endued with a right or power
from the Law of Nature, and Magistrates and Masters of Families from the
Municipal Laws of every place where they do exercise them, has been asserted
by us elsewhere. That Episcopal Order or right is a Divine Institution, and
founded by our Savior, and not by Nature, or any Temporal or Civil Sanction,
is affirmed as well by Erastus Senior, as us of the Church of England in the 9.
chap. A Bishop then Ordine, or by Right, is he who is so made, or ordained by
such form and means as our Savior has instituted, and by no other; unless
Erastus Senior will grant another a Divine Power, which is Blasphemy. A Bishop
Jurisdictione, or by Office, we will call him who is possessed of a Bishopric.
So that Erastus and I will not differ who is a Bishop Ordine, and who
Jurisdictione.

Ours in the Church of England are no Bishops Ordine, Erastus Senior says,
because the form of Ordination wants fit words to signify the Order given. The
words are these; Take thou the Holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the
Grace of God which is in thee by Imposition of Hands: for God has not given us
the spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and soberness. If this form be
insufficient to the Ordination of Bishops in the Church of England, then were
not the Apostles Bishops by order; for our Savior used no other in their
Ordination. Nor were they made Bishops by these or any other Sacramental words
(with much confidence, c. 3. p. 10.
and no reason) Erastus Senior says, but only S. Peter, and that by these
words (Pasce oves meas.)

What? were none of the Apostles Bishops but only S. Peter? how then, I pray,
came the College of Apostles (not Saint Peter) to choose S. Matthias to the
Bishopric of Judas, ((...)) if Judas had no Episcopal right or order? Acts
1.20.
how came all the Apostles (not S. Peter) to ordain S. Stephen, Acts 6.5.
and six other Deacons? and how is it that S. Paul and Barnabas, and not S.
Peter, Act. 14.23.
did ordain Elders in every Church; which without all contradiction were acts
of Episcopal power? Nay, can any man believe, Acts 8.
that when S. Philip the Deacon had converted and baptized Samaria, and given
notice thereof to the College of Apostles at Jerusalem, that they, being
inferior Apostles, should upon Canonical Record send their superior, and only
Bishop among them, ( viz. S. Peter) to administer their Decrees, and join S.
John in equal power with him? Ver. 14.
for, says the Text, They sent Peter and John to confirm them; Ver. 17.
and they laid their hands upon them, and they received the holy Ghost: or that
S. Paul should publicly withstand S. Peter to his face, in that wherein he was
to be blamed, if he had been any ways inferior to him either in Order or
Power? for however men may privately advise their Superiors, yet no man can
without Arrogance and contempt of Authority publicly withstand his Superior.
Nor had always S. Peter the precedence of name with the other Apostles; for we
read of James, Gal. 2.9.
Cephas and John, which seemed, etc. Nay, S. The Lords brother, B. B. of
Jerusalem.
James, though none of the twelve Apostles, did preside in the Council of
Jerusalem, although Saint Peter and the other Apostles were members of it.

Well, but if the form by which our Savior did ordain the Apostles, did not
give them Episcopal order, as Erastus Senior says, let us see whether upon his
own grounds (Pasce oves meas) could endue S. Peter with it. I say it could not.

For if the form by which our Savior did ordain his Apostles, which was a form
of Ordination, viz. Receive the holy Ghost, P. 2.
etc. were insufficient to confer Episcopal Order for want of fit words to
signify it, as he says; then much less can Pasce oves meas (which not only
do not signify the order given, but are no form of Ordination at all, but
only imperative, and refer to Jurisdiction) confer any upon S. Peter. If our
Savior had ordained S. Peter in this sense, it must have been by these or like
words, Accipe potestatem pascendi oves meas: and that this is not my single
sense, but of Erastus Senior, he says, c. 2. p. 9.
the exhortation to the Bishop consecrated, to behave himself as a good Pastor,
does not give this Order: and I pray what is the difference between I exhort
thee to be a Pastor, and Feed my sheep? He says moreover, c. 6. p. 28.
Be thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and his holy Sacraments, do
not give any power to this or any other Sacrament, but only to dispense them;
Now to dispense a Sacrament is not to consecrate it, for it must be consecrated
before it can be dispensed: by like reason cannot Pasce oves meas give any
Episcopal Order to S. Peter; for to command to feed is not to consecrate; and
S. Peter must have a power to feed, before he can be commanded to feed my
sheep. P. 28.
Again he says, be thou a faithful dispenser, etc. give no power, etc. and
have thou authority, etc. give no power of Order, but of Jurisdiction; and
therefore Pasce oves meas give none, for they only command, and refer to
Jurisdiction, not Order or Consecration. The Pope therefore, nor any Bishop in
the Church of Rome, are Bishops Ordine from Pasce oves meas, nor from the form
by which our Savior ordained the Apostles (he says;) and thefore no Bishops
Ordine, which was the thing propounded.

Well, but suppose Pasce oves meas did endue S. Peter with Episcopal Order, yet
cannot the Pope, nor any Bishop in the Church of Rome, from hence derive it;
for being a Divine Institution, it cannot be conferred or ordained, but by such
means as God did institute and ordain it: but neither the Pope nor any Bishops
in the Church of Rome are consecrated or ordained by this form, and therefore
are not Bishops Ordine by virtue of it. So then take (Pasce oves meas) to be
essential, or not essential to the conferring of Episcopal Order; yet hence
cannot the Pope, nor any Bishops in the Church of Rome, derive any Episcopal
Order.

CHAP. II. Asserting the Order of Bishops in the Church of England.
BUt though Erastus Senior, out of his charity to others, has argued himself
and party into a Heathenish state, and reduced them into the same condition he
intended us of the Church of England in his Preface; yet will not I grant the
form used in the Church of England to be insufficient for the consecrating of
Bishops, of giving Episcopal Order: for since it is evident the Apostles did
exercise this Order or Power, yet were endued with it by no other form then
that used in our Church; how much better is it to apply this form, being
instituted by our Savior, to one presented to the Consecrators as a Bishop
elect, and after examination and prayers as for a Bishop elect, and as called
to the office of a Bishop, and after Consecration, to exhort him as a Pastor or
Bishop, then to alter it into any other, thereby making it doubtful whether it
be done or not? as if any Creature were wiser then God, and would dare to mend
what God has made. But certainly it is most abominably done of Erastus Senior,
P. 11.
equivocally and cantingly to deny this form of our Savior, used in his Church
as well as ours, to be any essential part of their form (which I believe no
ingenuous man besides himself in his Church will do:) and to affirm that the
prayers of Propitiare, Domine, etc. anciently called the Benediction, and used
ever since S. Peter's time in their Consecration, Physice, non moraliter
loquendo, and no ways essential to the Consecration, but of later time altered
by his Church, should give that which only God could do; unless he will make
himself or Church equal to God, to abrogate, or make what God has made a vain
thing, and set up what himself and his party think fit above it, or instead of
it. If there be any defect in our Ordination, Erastus with much more ingenuity
might have charged it upon our Savior for instituting it, then upon our Church
for imitating it.

CHAP. III. Proving that neither the Pope, nor any Bishop in the Church of
Rome, granting Erastus Senior's Reasons for true, are Bishops Jurisdictione.
ERastus Senior says, P. 3^.
none can give a Jurisdiction which he has not: hence, he says, it is, that
no number of Bishops can validly confirm or consecrate the Bishop of any
Diocese, but the Metropolitan of the Province must be one; nor the
Metropolitan of a Province, but the Primate of a Nation; nor the Primate of a
Nation, but the Patriarch of that part of the World (or some person having
faculty from him:) and in the next page he says, the Bishop of Rome is
Patriarch of the West, and the undoubted rightful Metropolitan to the Primate
of this Nation; and therefore no Bishop can validly confirm or consecrate the
Primate of this Nation, but the Bishop of Rome.

If it be true which Erastus Senior says, that none can give a Jurisdiction
which he has not, then if he cannot show, in the intervals of the Papacy, some
who may give this supreme Patriarchal power, or Headship of the Church, to the
Pope, then can neither the Pope have it, nor any Primate, Metropolitan, or
Bishop derive any Jurisdiction from him; and by consequence neither the Pope,
nor any Bishop in the Church of Rome, are Bishops Jurisdictione.

I say, it is impossible any such Primacy, as is pretended by Erastus Senior,
can be in the Pope: for admitting that our Savior did endue S. Peter with a
Primacy above the other Apostles, and that he was Bishop of Rome, and the Popes
his rightful Successors; yet cannot this Primacy be transferred to any of them;
for Extraordinaria potestas non transit in successorem. After S. Peter's death,
none of the Apostles having this Primacy could give it to another; for, as
Erastus says, None can give a Jurisdiction to another which he has not. The
Pope of Rome therefore not having this Primacy, no Primate of a Nation can
receive Jurisdiction from him, nor the Metropolitan any from the Primate, nor
any Bishop from the Metropolitan; and therefore from Erastus Senior's Reasons,
neither the Pope, nor any Bishop in the Church of Rome, are Bishops
Jurisdictione.

Although at first I designed no more then to show from Erastus Senior's
Reasons, there is neither Order nor Jurisdiction in the Church of Rome, and to
assert the Order and Jurisdiction of our Bishops in the Church of England; yet
cannot I but take notice how ignorantly (I will say no more) he affirms Bishops
to be consecrated to their Bishoprics, and that the Pope was Founder of the Sea of Canterbury.

For no Bishop is consecrated into his Bishopric, but invested or installed;
and originally Bishoprics with us in England were donative, per traditionem
baculi (i.e.) the Crosier, which was the Pastoral staff, and annuli, the Ring,
whereby he was married to the Church: Coke com. Lit. 344. Sect. 648.
and therefore if the meanest Bishop of Jurisdiction in the world be elected to
the Papacy, he is no more consecrated; nay though he be one sine titulo, yet he
is never more consecrated, though made Primate, Patriarch, or Pope.

Well, let us see whether the Pope were Founder of the Sea of Canterbury, as
Erastus so vainly, and without any authority or reason affirms. That S. Paul
did preach the Gospel here in England, is affirmed by Theod. l. 9. de curandis
Graecorum affectibus. Paulum e priori captivitate, Roma dimissum, Britannis and
aliis in occidente Evangelium praedicasse; and Nicephorus says that Simon
Zelotes doctrinam Evangelii ad Occidentalem Oceanum Insulasque Britannicas
perfert. Lib. 2. c. 40.
But I do no where find, that ever any Christian Church was planted and endowed
in any part of Britain, now called England, before King Lucius his time, Lib.
1. c. 4.
(which Beda says was Anno Christi 156. and in the Reigns of Marcus Aurelius
and Lucius Verus, (yet in the year 156. Antoninus Pius reigned, In vita Sancti
Eluth p. 20, 21.
and until 160.) when Pla: says the 25 Flamens, In London, York, and Carleton.
whereof three were Arch-Flamens, were converted into Bishoprics and
Arch-bishopricks: some say the chief and Metropolitan of all was the
Archbishopric of London. I speak this to show (if this were so) how the
Primacy came to be founded in Canterbury, and by whom.

After the English Saxons had not only driven the ancient Britans our of that
part of Britain now called England, some into that part of France called
Britannia Aremorica, others into Wales, (where Christianity continued, when the
English Saxons were converted) but also the free exercise of Christianity; they
continued Pagan till their conversion by S. Austin and Miletus, sent by S.
Gregory the Great.

But though Austine was sent by the Pope, yet did he not upon that mission
presume to enter King Ethelbert's Dominions without leave; but in the Isle of
Thanet gave the King an account of his Embassy, who commanded him and his
followers to remain in the Isle, and provided them necessaries, till he should
see convenient how further to dispose of them. After Austin had declared his
message, he received leave of the King, and went to preach in Kent, where the
King gave him and his followers dwellings in Canterbury, which was the
Metropolis of his Empire, and also leave to preach. Bed. Eccles. Hist. Gent.
Ang. cap. 25. Afterward, before he was made a Bishop, or had given any account
to the Pope, or received any message from him, cap. 26. the Content says, Ut
idem (viz. Augustinus) in Cantio primitivae Ecclesiae and doctrinam sit
imitatus and vita^, atque in urbe Regis sede^ Episcopatus acceperit. How the
same man (viz. Austin) in Kent imitated the doctrine and life of the Primitive
Church, and received his Episcopal See in the City of the King. And the Chap.
says, Austin and those joined with him, upon the King's conversion to the
Faith, in all things received a greater liberty to preach, and to build and
restore Churches. And at the end says, Neither did the King delay, but gave to
his Teachers in the Metropolis of Canterbury a See, or place of Seat, agreeable
to their degree, and also conferred upon it necessary provisions of diverse
kinds; Nec distulit, quin etiam Doctoribus suis locum Sedis, eorum gradui
congruum, in Dorovernia Metropoli sua donaret, simul necessarias in diversis
speciebus possessiones conferret. And it is in the 27. chap. where Beda relates
how he went into France to Arles, and there was ordained by Etherius
Archbishop of that City, Archbishop: and after he returned into England, he
presently sent to Rome Laurence the Priest, and Peter the Monk, who should give
an account to the holy Bishop Gregory, how the Nation of England had received
the Faith, and how he was made a Bishop.

CHAP. IV. Showing the Bishops in the Church of England are Bishops
Jurisdictione, viz. are rightfully invested and installed in their Bishoprics,
and regularly may exercise in their Dioceses any Episcopal Act.
I Will not dispute the power of God in his miraculous propagating of
Christianity by the means of poor men, and by setting of Dissension and Discord
in the World, all temporal powers contradicting it: nor is it reasonable for
any man to imagine, that after Christian Faith and Religion is received and
planted in any place, that there men should expect that God would continue it
by miracle, but that they ought to use what means they can to support them: nor
can Erastus Senior by a Bishop Jurisdictione, as of London, or Canterbury, mean
this, but of a planted Christian Church, where the State, as well as Church, is
Christian.

We, Erastus and my self, both agree, that the Order of Bishops is a Divine
Institution, and therefore it cannot suscipere magis aut minus, because no less
power then that which made a thing can alter it; and being a Divine
Institution, all Episcopal Acts are done, and never to be undone, in one place
as much as another: and therefore wheresoever any Bishop does confirm a man,
ordain a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, or consecrate any place to the worship and
service of God, these Acts are not only done, but are indeleble characters,
and can never be wiped out. But what power that is which founds and confines
Bishoprics, and qualifies men so, as none but such men can regularly exercise
any Episcopal Act in such limits or precincts, is now to be enquired into.

First then, I answer negatively, the endowments and limits of a Bishopric are
not in Spiritual Jurisdiction or cognizance, for nothing is purely Spiritual
but what is derived from our Savior, either immediately, or mediately: but the
limits and endowments of Bishoprics are temporal things; and our Savior
says, Joh. 18.36
My Kingdom is not of this world; and, Joh. 3.17.
God sent not his Son into the world to judge the world, but that by him he
might save the world; and, Lu. 12.14.
O man, who made me a Judge, or Divider among you? Nor can it ever be showed
wherein Christianity does in any respect detract from the Regality of Princes,
or temporal Powers. And as under the Gospel, so under the old Law, though the
Priesthood were a Divine Institution, yet were the Priests subject to the
temporal Powers, and their Cities assigned by temporal Powers. Exo. 4.16.
Moses was in the stead of God to Aaron; Josh. 21.8
and the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these Cities with
their Suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses. Behold, I will lift
up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, etc. and
Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, Isa. 49.22, 23.
and their Queens thy nursing mothers, says the Prophet Isaiah. Yet never after
was there any King of Judah, but Idolaters; and the Children of Israel were
then carried into so strange a captivity, that to this day is unknown what
became of them. This Prophecy then has reference to Christian Kings, and in
them it is fulfilled. Christian Kings therefore may, and ought to nurse and
indulge God's Church. And if Sacrilege be a sin, then is Oblation to God a
virtue. Quod datum est Ecclesiae, datum est Deo. By our Laws all
Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics within the Realm of England, have been founded
by the Kings of England, and do hold of the King by Barony, and have been all
called by Writ to the Court of Parliament, and are Lords of Parliament; as
(among many) take one notable Record: Rot. 18. H. 3.
Mandatum est omnibus Episcopis, qui conventuri sunt apud Glocestriam, die
Sabbati in crastin. Sanctae Katherinae, firmiter inhibendo, quod sicut Baronias
suas, quas de Rege tenent, diligunt, nullo modo presumant consilium tenere de
aliquibus quae ad Coronam Regis pertinent, vel quae Personam Regis, vel statum
suum, vel statum Concilii sui contingunt; scituri pro certo, quod si fecerint,
Rex inde se capiet ad Baronias suas. Test Rege apud Hereford. Coke Com. Lit.
p. 97.
23. November. etc. And see Com. Lit. 344. At first all Bishoprics in England
were of the King's foundation, and donation, per traditionem baculi and annuli.
King Henry the first being requested to make them elective, refused it: but
King John by his Charter bearing date Quinto Julii, Anno decimo septimo,
granted that the Bishoprics should be eligible. So that at first all
Bishoprics were not only of the King's foundation and donation, but persons
to them are eligible from no other cause but the King's Charter. Since
therefore by God's Precept Kings ought to be nursing Fathers to Christ's
Church, and since all Bishoprics are of the King's foundation, and since the
persons of all the King's Subjects are in his dominion and power, or otherwise
every soul should not be subject to Higher Powers; it will certainly follow,
Bishops rightfully invested and installed in their Bishoprics from the King,
may regularly exercise any Episcopal Act in their Diocese, and none but such,
without apparent disobedience and contempt of the Laws of the King, to which
they ought to be subject.

CHAP. V. Answering the Reasons alleged by Erastus against the Jurisdiction of
the Bishops of the Church of England.
ALthough Erastus Senior in the first Chap. would distinguish between a Bishop
Ordine and Jurisdictione, yet in the 9. chap. he does so confound different
things, as it is impossible, without further explaining them, to show wherein
Erastus begs the question, and wherein he is mistaken.

Things which pertain to the Church are twofold: either as they are in
themselves purely and simply spiritual in their Essence; or as they
accidentally have reference to the Church, and in themselves are not purely and
simply spiritual: for example, Blasphemy, Apostasy from Christianity, Heresy,
Schism, Holy Orders, Admissions of Clerks, Celebration of Divine Service,
Rights of Matrimony, Divorces, general Bastardy, Substraction and right of
Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Dilapidations, Excommunication, Reparation of
Church, Probate of Testaments, Administrations, and Accounts upon the same,
Simonie, Incests, Fornication, Adultery, Solicitation of Chastity, Pensions,
Procurations, Appeals in Ecclesiastical cases, Commutation of Penance, are
determined here with us by Ecclesiastical Judges.

So that there is a mixed Conusance, or Ecclesiastical Judicature, viz. of
things purely spiritual, by which Ecclesiastical Judges are empowered to
determine, and that by no Humane Power, but only as they are empowered by our
Savior, and are his Ministers, viz. of Ordination, Consecration,
Excommunication, Heresy, etc. and this power the Church and Ecclesiastical
persons had, before ever temporal Powers received the Gospel of Christ, or
were converted to Christianity. But after it pleased God Kings were converted
to Christianity (I do not read, nor ever heard of a State or Commonwealth that
ever was) then did Kings cherish and defend God's Church, and endued it with
many privileges and immunities, which erewhile was persecuted by them. It is
true, no question, but that originally all Bishoprics their bounds, and the
Division of Parishes and their Endowments, the conusance of Tithes, the
Probation of Wills, the granting Letters of Administration and Accounts upon
the same, the Right of Institution and Induction, and Erection of all
Ecclesiastical Courts, etc. were of the Kings foundation and donation; also to
him by all divine and humane Laws belongs the care and preservation of all his
Subjects in all cases, none excepted. And therefore not only all those things
which relate to the extern peace and quiet of the Church, although exercised by
Ecclesiastical persons; but all those privileges and immunities which the
Church and Churchmen have in a Church planted, which the Apostles and
primitive Christians, in a Church planting, had not, are all originally grants
of Kings and supreme Powers.

So that to the Installment of a Bishop in an endowed Bishopric diverse things
are necessary: viz. That he be a Priest rightly and truly ordained, and
consecrated a Bishop, and this is a pure spiritual act: but that he is elected
to the Bishopric, confirmed, invested and installed in it, are no spiritual
acts, but founded in the King; however it may be they are executed by
Ecclesiastical persons. Erastus Senior now confounding the creation and
institution of a Pastor, C. 9. p. 34.
(whereas they are different, for to create or consecrate a Pastor is a power
of the Keys, but to institute him into a Bishopric is a power of the King's)
in the same thing, not only begs a false question, in making it a power of the
Keys, but also falsely infers, that the King cannot institute a Pastor to a
See or Bishopric, which is purely and solely in him. And therefore Queen
Elizabeth might assign, constitute and confirm Matthew Parker to the Sea of
Canterbury, nor could any but she do it. If she were the rightful Queen of
England, which Erastus does not deny, What needs Erastus Senior now take such
pains to prove ten whole Pages together, that our Bishops had no right to be
confirmed, constituted, and assigned to their Bishoprics but from the King,
which none will deny him?

I cannot but take notice how Erastus having confounded Consecration here with
Institution, P. 7.3
makes confirming and consecrating of an Archbishop or Bishop to any See, the
same thing, and purely spiritual: whereas to consecrate an Archbishop or
Bishop is one thing, and purely spiritual; and to confirm an Archbishop or
Bishop in his See is another, and temporal.

But I would advise Erastus to have a care lest he be not shent for affirming,
P. 40.
that no Bishop Ordine can confirm or consecrate a Pastor; for the being seized
of a Bishopric does not validate or invalidate any spiritual Act of a Bishop,
as to the essence of it: and if Barlow and Scory's being suspended the exercise
of their Jurisdiction in their Bishoprics of Bath and Chichester, did
invalidate their consecrating and confirming Matthew Parker, because they were
not actual Bishops of Cathedral Churches, P. 42.
as Erastus says; then do I not see how any Act of Vigilius the first, when he
was in exile, and Rome in the possession of Totila, could be valid. Nor could
Boniface the Eighth, when he was taken prisoner by Philip the Fair, and Rome
possessed by him; nor Clement 7. when Charles 5. had him prisoner, and
possessed Rome, consecrate or confirm any Archbishop or Bishop; for without
doubt they then were not actual Bishops of Rome.

P. 42.
For Erastus Senior's Objection, that simple Bishops cannot give a Superior or
Metropolitan Jurisdiction, is nothing to the purpose, nor affirmed by us: for
though the Order of Bishops be a Divine Institution, yet the extraordinary
exercise of a Metropolitan in his Province (being no wise purely spiritual,
but having only reference to the extern peace of the Church) is not so, but
from humane and temporary Laws.

I will not undertake to answer for all which is literally contained in the
Oath of Supremacy, C. 9 p. 32:
or charged by Erastus Senior upon our Churchmen taking it, neither is it much
to our purpose. This I say, that Queen Elizabeth by her Proclamation, and after
by her Injunctions, did declare, that she took nothing upon her more, then what
anciently of right did belong to the Crown of England, Came. Eliz. Reg. 39, 40
viz. that she had supreme Power under God over all sorts of people within the
Kingdom of England, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Lay persons, and that no
Foraign power has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction over them: and in this
sense every man is allowed to take the Oath of Supremacy, and I hope Erastus
will not deny his Sovereign this power. See the Admonition to simple men in Q
Eliz. Injunctions, as they are set out with Dr. Sparrow's Preface, p. 78. C.
11. p. 3^.


Nor will I undertake to answer for all the acts of Princes, whether they
entrench upon the Power of the Keys, or not: This I say, that if Kings do
entrench upon this power, yet cannot this annihilate any act thereof, being
rightfully done. And therefore admit King James' did authorizing other Bishops
of his own, appointing them to do all acts pertaining to the power and
authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury in causes or matters Ecclesiastical,
as amply, fully, and effectually to all intents and purposes, as the said
Archbishop might have done, (which without all doubt the King might do;) and
that the Declaration of his now Majesty (whom God grant long to reign over us)
touching affairs of Religion, in which he deprives all the Archbishops and
Bishops of this Land ( Erastus says) of their power of sole ordaining and
censuring their Presbyters, and joins their Presbyters in Commission with them,
as to the acts of Ordaining and Censuring, did entrench upon the Ghostly Power;
yet could not this any ways rescind the Order of any Priest or Bishop
rightfully ordained and consecrated, but Priests and Bishops rightfully
ordained and consecrated, are as much Priests and Bishops after such acts as
before.

CONCLUSION.
Whether our Bishops be legal or not, conduces not to the Question, whether
they be rightfully ordained, for the Order of Bishops being a Divine
Institution, cannot suscipere majus aut minus, a Bishop rightly ordained is as
much a Bishop, although all temporal powers did contradict it, as if they
allowed it. It is loss of time, therefore, fore, to examine and cross-examine
all the Statutes alleged by Erastus, whether they allow, or not allow, the
Order of our Bishops. And now, let any man judge, whether Erastas Senior has
any great reason to boast, in that his own Reasons have concluded the Pope and
Bishop of Rome to be neither Bishops Ordine, nor Jurisdictione: Neither has he
clearly alleged one right Reason against the Order or Jurisdiction of the
Bishops in the Church of England; but only lost much time in endeavoring to
prove them no Legal Bishops, which to the essence of the Order of a Bishop is
no ways material.

THE END.
ERRATA. In the Preface, Line 12. read his zeal to.


