The most Material Omissions and Erratas, are these which follow:

PAge 1. line 1. read at the King's Bench, on

p. 3. l. the last, r. they are distinctly enough by, etc.

p. 5. l. 25. and 26. r. in all the last Trial

p. 7. l. 34. r. there Reader any

p. 9. l. 32. r. White, alias Whitebread

p. 11. l. 17. r. writ, and left with a Friend there and l. 28. r. time for
which

p. 24. l. 31. r. Changes that can

p. 33. l. 9. r. pretend it to be

p. 44. l. 37. r. the Party were ready

p. 57. l. 7. r. there was Hope. l. 4. circumstance is

p. 64. l. 21. second Evidence

p. 65, and 66. Margent r. 1675.

p. 69. l. 20. r. on our behalf

p. 71. l. 29. r. emplicitly

p. 85. l. 11. r. bin found (except in Coleman's Case of which we have already
treated)

p. 86. l. 27. r. proclaim it to no manner of purpose at an Alehouse,

p. 87. l. 6. r. (nor the Liberties and l. 14. r. pretend to

In the Margent is Printed sometimes page 16. for ib. and the Marks that refer
to the Figures in the Margent, are sometimes wrong placed, especially in the
Beginning.

THE COMPENDIUM: OR, A SHORT VIEW OF THE LATE TRIALS, In Relation to the
Present PLOT Against His Majesty and Government: WITH THE Speeches of Those
that have been Executed. AS ALSO, An Humble Address (at the CLOSE) to all the
Worthy Patriots of this once Flourishing and Happy KINGDOM.

-- Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum Dolopumve aut duri Miles Ulissei
Temperet a lachrymis! --
Aen. 2. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

To all our Worthy Patriots, of what Rank or Condition soever they are.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving considered with great admiration, how it could possibly happen,
notwithstanding so many legal Trials, (and those also published by my Lord Chief
Justice, and others in Authority) to show the World how Guilty the Papists have
been, That the Dispute should yet continue, and that each Champion keeping
still his ground, should think the other extremely willful and unreasonable. I
say, having considered this with admiration, I at last found, That one main
matter, besides Prejudice, was, That People had never well examined the said
Trials; and therefore I took the pains (and truly it is no little pains) to
present you with a Compendium, by which at the first glimps, you shall see both
how well the Witnesses have made good their part, and how the Accused have
defended themselves. I have been exact to a tittle, defying any Man to show me
that I have lessened the force either of the Charge or Answer: nor does the one
party, or the other, allege any thing here, but that the Margent gives the
very Page where it is in the original Treatise; for as to mine, and other
Spectators's Reflections, they are by themselves; so that every Reader may
presently judge, whether they are just or no.

But now my Lords and Gentlemen, before I end, I must acquaint you; That
Yesterday, as I was sending this to the Press, I found that Somebody had so far
jumpt with me in my Design, as to abbreviate all the late Judicial Proceedings,
by the Title of the History of the Plot; which upon consideration, has not
hindered me from publishing this; Because the Author of the said History has on
the one side past by, or sluber'd over, several things which the Parties
concerned may justly insist upon to be of great force in their business, as you
will here plainly see; and on the other side, my bare Compendium is not much
more than a Fifth Part of his, as his is about the Fifth of the Whole. Peruse
then, what I present you with, and by and by, I shall again Kiss your Hands.

Concerning Mr. Coleman.
MR. Coleman was Tried at the Old Bailey, on Thursday the 28 th. of November,
1678. and was thus Charged by Oats: Vid. Trial. Page 17, and 18.
That in November 77. the said Mr. Coleman did write Letters by him to St.
Omers, in which he called the King Tyrant; and that the late Marriage with the
Prince of Orange, would prove the Traytor's and Tyrant's Ruin: That a Latin
Letter in Mr. Coleman's Hand, was also then enclosed to Fr. La Chaise, thanking
him for the 10000 l. which should be employed (he said) to no other use, but to
cut off the King. That this Letter was written by the Provincial, Strange's
Directions, because page 19.
he had hurt his Hand, and Mico his Secretary was ill: That Oats carried the
said Letters to Paris; That La Chaise asked him there, How the Dutchess's
Secretary did? That the Answer (written by La Chaise) was sent Mr. Coleman,
after it was first perused by the St. Omer^ Fathers, in Oats his Presence; for
he (the said Oats) was by a page 20.
Patent^ to be of the Consults, and had Power also to page 28.
open Letters. That there was (in page 21*
April 78.) a Consult of the Jesuits, at the White-Horse-Tavern in the Strand,
to send Carry to Rome: That afterward, they Adjourned into several Clubs, and
pitched upon Grove and Pickering, to Kill the King; the one being to have 1500
l. and the other 30000. Masses. That this Resolve was Communicated in page 29.
Oates's hearing, to Mr. Coleman. That the Jesuits that then came over with
Oats, were F. Williams, F. Pool, Sir Thomas Preston, Sir John Warner, etc.
That in August, there was a Consult of the page 22.
Benedictines, (which, in all the (...) Trials, he positively fixes on the 21
th. of the said Month) and then Letters came from Talbot (Bishop of Dublin)
that four Jesuits were to Kill the Duke of Ormona; and if they mist, Dr.
Fogarthy was to Poison him: So that, Mr. Coleman would have him presently sent
away. That page 23.
Forty Thousand black Bills were provided for Ireland. That Mr. Coleman told
Fenwick, That he had found a way to send Two-Hundred-Thousand pound thither, to
promote the Rebellion. That the Four other Ruffians, (procured by Fogarthy)
were sent in August, to Kill the King at Windsor. That the next Day after
(being page 72.
about the 21 th. of that Month) Hartcourt made a Provision of page 24.
80 l. to be sent them; and that Mr. Coleman gave the Messenger a Guinney, to
be nimble and expedite. That Mr. Coleman saw the Instructions, which Ashby
brought from White the Provincial, (who was then at St. Omers) about page 25.
10000 l. for Sir George Wakeman, to Poison the King, in case the Assassines
failed. That page 26.
Mr. Coleman thought it too little, and took a Copy of these Instructions to
send into the Country, to several Conspirators, to Encourage their
Contributions. That he heard Mr. Coleman (in page 27.
Mr. Fenwick's Chamber) acknowledge the Receipt of his Commission for Secretary
of State; which was sealed with the Jesuits Seal, and signed by their General.

To this Mr. Coleman answered: That now forsooth, Oats pretends to be page 30.
extremely well acquainted with him, and a World of Intimacy, (even at
Consults, and meetings about the King's Death) whereas before the Council, he
told his Majesty, He did not know him: That Oats was then so far from laying
any positive Treason to his Charge, (for as to the Payment of the 5000 l. to
Sir George Wakeman, 'twas a Hearsay, as not page 40.
seen by Oats) that the Board (after they had heard his Defense) did, instead
of sending him to page 39.
Newgate, commit him only to a page 16.
Messenger, 'till his Papers were Examined. And whereas Oats Accuses him at
present, of ordering (about the page 72.
21 th. of August) 80 l. for the Windsor-Russians, and giving of the Messenger
a Guinney; He was then in Warwickshire, having left London on the page 80. and
96.
15th. of August, without ever returning till the 31th. late at Night.

Oats replied, That he said at the page 30.
Council, He could not swear he had seen him before; For his Eyes were bad by
Candlelight, and Candlelight alters the Sight much: But when he heard him
speak, he could have sworn, it was he; yet did not say so, page 38.
because he was not asked.

Besides, he designed then to lay no more to his Charge, than was matter for an
page 30.
Information; for Prisoners might supplant Evidence, when they know it. That
the Information, which he then gave against him, was (as near as he could
remember) his writing News, Letters with base Reflections. Moreover, he was so
weak and tired, (through his late Fatigue and Watchings) that upon his
Salvation, he could scarce stand upon his Legs; which (together with his page
32.
Want of Mem^ry) was the best page 31.
Answer he gave the Court, why he omitted the present weighty Matters; as also,
the Account of the 80 l. and the other Particulars, in relation to the King's
Murder at Windsor. Nor could Sir Robert Southwel witness any thing new, page 40.
to Oates's Advantage, more than that he did in Council say; That if Mr.
Coleman's Papers were searched, there would be Matter (he believed) found in
them, that would cost him his Neck: Which, on the one side* most People deemed
an easy Surmise, seeing Coleman was generally known to be a great Intriguer;
and on the other side, they imagined, Oats might as well have then Charged him
with downright Treason, if what he here alleged, had not been a Fiction of a
later Date: For 'twas impossible to say, He thought there was Hanging matter in
a Man's Letters, and through Lassitude, or any other Pretense, not to be able
to tell the King, That the same Person had Contrived his Death, if it were
really Designed. But as for Mr. Coleman's Absence on the 21 th. of August, (as
before) the Chief Justice told him, page 80.
That if the Cause did turn on that Matter, he would stay 'till his Book were
brought; (which Mr. Coleman urged, could prove his said Absence) but that he
doubted, the Cause would not stand on that Foot; and yet, if that were the
Case, it would do him little Good.

This is the Sum of the Reply to Mr. Coleman's Plea, in relation to Oats: But
Sir Thomas Doleman (who was one of the Clerks of the Council) attested in
Court, not only, that page 38.
Oats said at the Board, He knew not Mr. Coleman well; and (to the best of his
Remembrance) That he had no Acquaintance with him, but also, That Mr. Coleman
was Examined before Oats spoke: Which evidently shows, that Oats knew him no
better after his speaking, than before.

As for Bedlow's Charge, 'twas to this Effect: That Sir page 41.
Henry Tichbourn told him, That he brought a Commission for Mr. Coleman, and
the Lords, from the Principal Jesuits of Rome: That he carried a Packet from
Mr. Coleman to page 42.
La Chaise, Dated April 75. That he Delivered the said Letters to La Chaise,
and brought Mr. Coleman and Answer: That he did not understand what was in it;
because it was in a page ib.
Language he did not well understand; but it was about carrying-on the Plot.
That Mr. Hartcourt went to Mr. Coleman with Letters, and took him (the said
Bedlow) along with him; but made him stay over the Way: That Hartcourt
afterward beckoned him in; and there he heard Mr. Coleman say, page 43.
If he had a Hundred Lives, and a Sea of Blood, to carry on the Cause, he would
spend it all for the Establishment of the Church here; and if there were a
Hundred Heretical Kings, he would see them all Destroyed. page 44.
That Mr. Coleman saw him in Somerset-House-Gallery, coming from a Consult,
with great Persons; which he is not to name here, but 'twould make the Bottom
of the Plot to tremble.

Mr. Coleman made little Answer to him, besides protesting, that he never page
72.
saw him before: Nor was there any of Mr. Coleman's Family, that had ever seen
him, which had been Morally impossible, had he received and brought Letters, as
he pretended. Besides, few of the Auditory could comprehend, how Bedlow did
know, that the Letter, which (he said) he brought from Paris, and yet
understood not, was about carrying on the Plot; or why Mr. Hartcourt should
just call him in from over the way, for no other Reason, (for Bedlow gives not
the least) but to hear Mr. Coleman's Treasonable Expressions, in his Zeal for
the Church: But more especially, how the said Bedlow could carry La Chaise a
Letter from Mr. Coleman, dated April 75. and yet Mr. Coleman's first Letter to
him, was page 68.
his Long one of September 29, 75. and came to the said Father's Hands, on the
page 57.
22 of October following.

Now for Mr. Coleman's Letters: Though He acknowledged them full of very page
73.
Extravagant Expressions; yet he hoped (he said) they were not Treasonable; and
that Some of the page 16.
Expressions would explain, there was no Plot, or Intention to Kill the King.
For the Reader may not only find him telling La Chaise, page 69.
That the Laborers were few, and the Harvest great, (which assures us, that
Few were concerned with him;) but showing him all along, that the promised
Advantages to the French King and Religion, were to accrue by the Dissolution
of the Parliament, which MONEY (the page 72.
Aid and Assistance he expected from France, and not page 102.
Force) was to Effect. No wonder then, Money being the Thing he aimed at, and
hinted also by him, in almost every other Line of each Letter, if he kept no
Correspondence ( page 102. and 103.
as he solemnly protested, he did not) with France, after the Year 75. when we
see him complain in his Last Page 70.
Letter, That his page 68.
Christian Majesty was not with Him, and his Party, to the Degree of helping
them with Ten Thousand Crowns: For the Truth is, that Court presently found,
(for all his Pretenses) that he had no Interest with the Duke, or with our
Leading Men: Nay, we see, he could not so much as persuade his Highness, to
page 66.
Sign a Letter, which he had prepared without page 69.
Order, (as he confesses, and the Court acknowledges) to give him Countenance
with La Chaise. Besides, who can imagine, Mr. Coleman should expect or dream to
wheedle in La Chaise, without telling him of a page 80.
Pestilent Heresy to be subdued; of a mighty Work on their Hands, to wit, the
Conversion of three Nations; as also, of their never having such Hopes, since
the Days of Q. Mary, with the like Rhetorical Flowers.

Mr. Coleman, being then found Guilty upon the account of his Letters, (for my
Lord Chief Justice told him, (as I already mentioned) That the Cause hung not
on the Matter he insisted upon, to wit, on the Consult of August, which Oats
pretends him to be at) He was next day Condemned at the same Bar, where he
declared, with all the Execrations imaginable, page 161.
That he told the House of Commons, all that he knew of this Business: That he
never heard of Proposition, or knew of any to Supplant the King, or Government,
by Invasion, Disturbance* or the like: That he thought, ('it is true) by Liberty
of Corscience, Popery might come in; and that every Body is bound, to wish all
People of the Religion be professes, with much more to the same Purpose. Then
being carried back to Prison, where his Wife had only private Admittance; he
was on Tuesday, the Third of December, brought to Tyburn, where he made the
following Speech:

Mr. Coleman's Speech.
IT is now expected I should speak, and make some Discovery of a very great
Plot; I know not whether I shall have the good Fortune to be believed better
now, than formerly; if so, I do here solemnly declare upon the words of a Dying
Man, I know nothing of it; And as for the raising of Sedition, Subverting the
Government, stirring up the People to Rebellion, altering the known Laws, and
Contriving the Death of the King, I am wholly Ignorant of it; Nor did ever I
think to advance that Religion (which People think I am so Zealous of) hereby.
I thank God I am of it, and declare I dye of it; nor do I think it prejudicial
to King or Government: But though I am (as I said) a Roman Catholic, and have
been so for many Years, yet I Renounce that Doctrine (which, some say the
Remish Church does usher in to promote their Interest) That Kings may be
Murdered, and the like; I say I abominate it.

Here Mr. Coleman being interrupted by being told, that if he had any thing to
say by way of Confession or Contrition for the Fact, he might proceed,
otherwise it was unseasonable to go on, and spend time with such like
Expressions; Mr. Coleman then replied No! But he thought it was expected; then
being told to the contrary, he concluded with these few words following; I do
say I had no intention to subvert the Government, or to act any thing contrary
to Law, but what every Man of a contrary Religion, would do in a peaceable
manner, if he could. And if I may be believed* the Witness, that Swore against
me did me wrong; and that Bedlow.
Witnesses, that swore, He was with me in Sommerset-House-Gallery, upon the
words of a Dying Man, I never saw his Face before. Being afterward asked, if
he knew any thing of the Death of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, He also declared on
the words of a Dying Man he knew nothing of it:

Concerning Mr. Ireland, Grove and Pickering.
WIth these three, Mr. White the Provincial, and Mr. Fenwick Procurator of
Saint Omer's, held up their Hands at the Old Baily on the Seventeenth of
December, and though they were charged home by Oats, yet Bedlow had so little
against the said Mr. White and Fenwick, that after a Trial of several Hours,
they were for want of two Witnesses (as the Law requires in Treason) remanded
to Newgate, where we will leave them till by and by, being now only to treat of
the others.

Oats then not only repeats the beforementioned April Consult at the Vid.
Trial.
White-Horse-Tavern; his coming over with page 35.
Sir John Warner, Page 19.
Sir Thomas Preston, Fa. Williams, Nevil, Hildesley, and others: his lying page
36.
close in the time of the said Consult at Groves's (when as the Prisoners
attest that he was then page 34.
actually at Saint Omers) but he further deposes, that Mr. Ireland was
caballing in Mr. Fenwicks Chamber about a page 60.
Fortnight or ten Days in August, and that the said Mr. Ireland gave him
particularly on the first or second of September twenty Shillings. page 22.
Then He says that two Jesuits were sent into Scotland to stir up the
Presbiterians there; That at the aforesaid April meeting there was a formal
Resolve (drawn up by p. 19.
Mico their Secretary, signed by at least p. 26
Forty, and entered into a page 47.
Book or Register) page 19, and 26.
That Grove and Pickering should go on with their Attempt to Kill the King, and
that the first should have 1500 l. and the other 30000. Masses: That it was to
be done by page 23.
long Pistols, something shorter than Carbines, and that the Bullets were
Silver, which Grove said he would page 24.
champ, that the wound might be uncureable. That Pickering had mist an
opportunity in the preceding March, by reason his Flint was loose, for which he
underwent a Penance of twenty or thirty strokes with a Discipline. page 22.
That the Duke was also to be deposed, if he were not! vigorous for the Cause;
That he saw in their Entry book that Sir George Wakeman had accepted of 15000.
l. to poison the King if the others failed; That he perused the Entry-book of
the page 30.
Peter Pence which Grove and Smith had gathered; That page 32.
Grove told him, that he fired Southwark, and that his, the said Oates's
business of coming now over, was to page 20.
Kill Doctor Tongue for Translating the Jesuits Morals.

Bedlow being called, acknowledges the Entry-book, and adds that Mr. page 47.
Langhorn was the Register; page 46.
That the Earl of Shaftsbury, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Ossory and
Duke of Ormond were to be killed; That page 41, and 44.
Mr. Ireland was at Mr. Hartcourts Chamber in the latter end of August, where
it was agreed (the other Plot not succeeding) Coniers should go with Pickering
and Grove to New Market, to kill the King in his Morning-walk there; That
Pickering and Grove were also present in the said Chamber; page 49.
that his Brother James Bedlow, heard him often talking of the Prisoners, and
as one acquainted with Priests, and that he brought him (as the said James
attested) Fifty and Sixty pounds at a time from the Jesuits.

The Charge was solemnly denied by them all, and besides their own constant
Loyalty, they alleged that of their respective page 67.
Relations, who had been great Sufferers both in their Lives and Fortunes for
the King; and Pickering (as to his particular) protested he never page 25.
Shot off a Pistol in his Life, which by his very mine and looks seemed not
very improbable to the Spectators. Then Mr. Ireland* (after Answers to the
several other particulars) affirmed, That he was constantly out of London from
the third of page 56.
August till above a week after the beginning of page 59.
September, which he proved by three Witnesses got together by page 62.
chance by his Sister. He also urged page 65.
that he had Witnesses, that there were more Witnesses, but that he and the
rest were kept so page 56.
strict, that they were not permitted to send for any body; nay that he was
refused page 56, and 62.
Paper, and expressly denied to send for his Witnesses. Besides Mrs. York (who
actually lived both before and after April in her Brother Grove's house) page
65.
attested, that she saw not Oats there, which he excused by his being forsooth
in Disguise. In conclusion, there were three that gave evidence against Mr.
Ireland* for Oats produced one Sarah Pain (an ordinary Maid that had formerly
served Grove) who swore she saw him about the Twelfth of page 57.
August in Town at the door of his Lodging; Whereupon the Prisoners were all
Condemned, and being carried back to Newgate, Mr. Ireland writ there under his
own hand a Journal which showed where he was every day, and who saw him from
the Third of August to the Fourteenth of September, being the time of his
absence from London. The chief places were Tixhal, Holy Well, Wolver-Hampton
and Boscobel; the Persons that saw him were of great Quality, as my Lord Aston
and his Family; Sir John South^^^ and his Family; Madam Harwel and hers;
several of the Giffords of Chillington; several of Sir John Winfords Relations;
Madam Crompton, and Mr. Bidolph of Bidolph; Sir Thomas Whitgrave, Mr. Chetwin,
Mr. Gerard and his Family; Mr. Heningham and his; the Pendrels of Boscobel and
above Forty more; nor is there one day during the whole time (...) which there
cannot be produced above a dozen of these Witnesses.

On Friday the Twenty Fourth of January, Mr. Ireland and Mr. Grove were carried
to Tyburn; where they spoke as follows.

Mr. Irelands Speech.
WE are come hither as on the last Theater of the World, and do therefore
conceive we are obliged to speak:

First, then we do confess that we pardon all and every one whatsoever, that
have any Interest, Concern or Hand in this our Death.

Secondly, We do publicly profess and acknowledge that we are here obliged, if
we were Guilty our selves of any Treason, to declare it, and that if we knew
any Person faulty therein, (although he were our Father) we would detect and
discover him; and as for our selves, we would beg a Thousand and a Thousand
Pardons both of God and Man; but seeing we cannot be believed, we must beg
leave to commit our selves to the Mercy of Almightly God, and hope to find
Pardon of him through Christ.

As for my own part, having been twenty Years in the Low Countries, and then
coming over in June was twelve month, I had returned again, had not I been
hindered by a Fit of Sickness. On the third of August last I took a journey into
Staffordshire, and did not come back to Town before the Fourteenth day of
September, as many can Witness, for a Hundred and more saw me in Staffordshire
and thereabouts; Therefore how I should in this time be acting here Treasonable
Stratagems, I do not well know or understand.

Here one of the Sherifs told him he would do well to make better use of his
time, than to spend it in such like Expressions, for No body would believe him;
Not that they thought much fo their time, for they would stay; but such kind of
words did arraign the proceedings of the Court by which they were tried.

Then Mr. Ireland proceeded, and said, I do here beg of God Almighty to Shower
down a Thousand and a Thousand Blessings upon his Majesty, on her Sacred
Majesty, on the Duke of York and all the Royal Family, and also on the whole
Kingdom. As for those Catholics that are here, we desire their Prayers for a
happy passage into a better World, and that he would be Merciful to all
Christian Souls. And as for all our Enemies we earnestly desire, that God would
Pardon them again and again, for we pardon them heartily from the bottom of our
Hearts; And so I beseech all good people to pray for us and with us.

Then Mr. Groves said.
WE are innocent, we loose our lives wrongfully, we pray God to forgive them
that are the Causers of it.

MR. Pickering being Reprieved till the Nineth of May, was then brought to the
place of Execution, expressing infinite Joy at that great happiness, and taking
it upon his Salvation, that he was Innocent in thought, word, and deed, of all
that was laid to his charge. Being taxed for a Priest, he smilingly denied it,
saying, he was but a Lay-Brother; then Praying for his Accusers and Enemies, he
said to the Hangman, Friend do thy Office; and presently after was turned
over, being regretted by many, as seeming a very harmless Man, and altogether
unfit for the Desperate Employment put upon him.

Concerning Mr. Hill, Green and Berry.
MR. Hill (servant to Doctor Godwin) Green an ancient ^eeble man
(Cushion-keeper of the Chapel) and Berry the Porter of Somerset House were
tried at the Kings Bench Bar, on Monday the tenth of Feb. 1678. where Oats
swore, page 12.
that he was told by Sir Edmund Godfrey the week before he was missing* That
after the Plot was known, several Popish Lords (some of whom are now in the
Tower) had threatened him, asking what he had to do with it; That other Persons
desirous of the full Discovery, threatened him with the Parliament for his
Remisness; That he was in a great Fright saying, He went in ^ear of his Life by
the Popish Party, as having bin often dogged; That he came some times to the
said Oats for Encouragement, That he did encourage him, by telling him, That
he would suffer for a just Cause, and the like.

Prance swore, page 14.
That at the plow, Girald and Kelley (two Priests) did about a fortnight before
the Murder, entice him to it, saying, That Sir Edmund-Godfrey was a busy, man
and would do a great deal of mischief; That page 16.
Green, Girald and Hill dogged Sir Edmund Godfrey to a House at St. Clements:
That Green came about seven at night to tell Prance of it, (Kelly and Girald
being at watch there) but the said Green did not tell him where at St. Clements
Sir Edmund Godfrey was, nor did any of the rest do it; That about the hour of
Eight or Nine, Sir Edmund Godfrey came homewards; That Hill ran before to give
the Conspirators notice of it at Sommerset-House* and then going to the Gate,
He told Sir Edmund that two men were quarelling within, and desired him being a
Justice to qualify them; that he consented to it, but when he came to the
bottom of the Railes, Green threw a twisted Hand^ercher about his neck, and
cast him behind the Railes, and throtled and punch'd him; That within a quarter
after, Prance (who had bin before watching above at the Watergate,) came down,
and laying his page ib.
hand upon the body, found the legs to totter and shake, and then Green wrung
his neck quite round. But here the Reader is to take notice, that Prance having
related the matter of Fact in this manner, Mr. Attorney asked him on a sudden,
if he saw Green thus w^ing his neck? No; (answered he, forgeting what he had
just before said) but Green did afterward tell me, that he did it; which words
supris'd not a ^ew. Then he proceeded and said, that being thus Killed, they
carried the Corpse to a page 18.
chamber of Hills at Dr Godwins, where lying till Monday night, they brought it
to a Room in the page 19.
lower part of Sommerset-House, and then Hill* showed it Prance by a dark
Lanthorn; Green, Berry, and the rest being by. That on Tuesday, it was brought
to Sir John Arundels, where lying till Wednesday, it was conveyed to the first
lodging, and from thence (about twelve) in a Sedan to the page 20.
So-ho, and then on a Horse before Hill to the place where it was afterward
found; That page 22.
Girald and one Vernat spoke to him the said Prance of a great Reward, and that
there was to be a good one from my Lord Bellasis; That in the beginning of page
21.
November, Girrald, Lewson, Vernat, one Dethick and himself met at Bow, where
reading all the Writings of the said Murder, they were very merry, and a
Drawer listening, Prance threatened to kick him down stairs; but the page 44.
Boy being called said he knew nothing, but that Dethic was with company there,
and that in reading a Paper he heard Sir Edmund-Godfrey's name, and that some
body threatened to kick him.

Bedlow swore, page 29.
That Le-Phair, Prichard, Keines, and other Priests (but Girald he knew not)
did treat with him, concerning the Murder of a Gentleman about the beginning
of October last; That he having a mind about page 28.
two years ago to discover the Plot, was prevented, but now drilled them on to
know the Party, that he might prevent them; but they would not tell him who it
was. That they set him to insinuate page 29.
himself into the acquaintance of Sir Edmund Godfrey not telling their Design;
That on Saturday, (the day that Sir Edmund Godfery, was murdered,) Le Phair
having mist Bedlo in the morning, met him by accident in page 30.
Lincolns-Inn-Fields about four, and at the Palsgraves Tavern told him, That a
material man was to be put out of the way that night, who had all Oates's and
Tongue's informations; which if not taken from him, would discover their
business to that Degree, that they must stay till another Age to effect it:
That Le Phair then told him he should have Four Thousand Pound for a Reward,
That no worse man than my Lord Bellasis was engaged for it, and Mr. Coleman had
order to pay it, yet named not Sir Edmund Godfrey to him; That he parted then
with, Le Phair, but came not according to his engagement (to Somerset House;
That Le Phair met him on Monday in page 31.
Fleetstreet and charged him with breach of promise; That he answered, That he
knew not but the murdered person might be his Friend, whereupon Le Phair
appointed him to meet at Eight in the Evening at Sommerset-House, and he should
know more; that coming there, the said Le Phair told him the man was Killed;
and that if he would help to carry off the Body he should have page 32.
half the Reward: That he then showed him the body by a dark Lanthorn; but that
he saw neither page 33.
Hill, Green, nor Berry, there, Green being in the Court; That he had such a
remembrance of page 32.
Faces, that he can tell all he saw there, though the light were small. And by
the way Reader, now it was (as appears by the Lords Journal) that Bedlo Deposes
he saw Prance, and that Wa^s, Le Phair, Atkins, and my lord ^ell^si^'^ man were
wi^h him, being is you see quite different Actors from those mentioned by
Pra^er.

Then he tells (...). T^^^ ^he Corpse had a page 32.
Cravat about the Neck, like that about his (...) now; but so straight, that he
could not put his Finger between; which (Reader) one would think, were no very
proper Instrument, to Strang^^ a strong Man so cleverly, and without Noise.
That he knew Sir E. Godfrey presently, though they said, he belonged to a Man
of Quality^ That the Jesuits now with him, (the said Bedlow) were not those,
who had formerly employed him to insinuate himself into this Knight's Company;
and yet (Reader) his Worship informed us (as you see) but just before, That his
present Introducer, Le Phair, was one of them, who had thus, employed him. He
further says, That for his part, he advised them to throw the Body with
Weights into the River; That they thinking that not safe, answered, They would
put it on himself. That upon asking Le Phair, How they could get him away? they
said, in a Chair, and Berry was to let them out. That upon his saying, It Was too
early, (Eleven or Twelve being better for their purpose) and that he would come
again, Le Phair conjured him not to fail that Night, on the Sacrament he had
taken on Thursday; for after Oa^es his Discovery of the Plot, the Sacrament was
Administered to him twice a Week: That he hasted away; and (having so great a
Charge upon him as the page 33.
Sacrament) he grew disturbed, and went to Bristow, where God put it into his
Mind to discover All, and so writ to the Secretary.

The Premises were endeavored also to be confirmed by Four Colateral
Testimonies; as first, by page 14.
Mr. Robinson, of the Common Pleas; who attested, that Sir Edm. Godfrey said to
him, That he believed, he should be the first Martyr; but if they came fairly,
he would not part with his Life tamely. Secondly, by one Curtis, a poor
Chair-Woman belonging to Sir E. Godfrey, who said page 40.
She saw Hill with her Master, about Nine or Ten in the Morning, on the
Saturday he was Murdered: Thirdly, by page 41.
Hill's denying before the Council, that ever he saw Girald, whenas the Boy at
the Plow proved in Court, that they met there. And lastly, by page 49.
Berry's sending away the Prince (whilst this Intrigue was on foot) upon
pretense, that he had Orders to acquaint all Persons of Quality, That the Queen
received no, Visits: And then being asked at his Examination by the Lords,
Whether he had ever had such Orders before? he then said No; which Contradicts
his present Answer.

To this Charge the Prisoners answered with all imaginable Protestations, That
they were Innocent: Nor did Sir Robert Southwe^'s Testimony advantage them a
little, in the Opinion of many; for firsts he (being summoned as a Witness for
the King, to acquaint the Court with several Particulars about Prance's
Examination before the Council) was asked, Whether his present Description and
Account of Places, were suitable to what (...) which Sir Robert answered, *
page 46.
Yes: but that it was (...) had said* In the next place the A^turney General
demanding whether Prance did hesitate, when he showed the Lords the several
places in relation to the murder? He answered, That he went positively and
directly, till they ask^ him where in Sommerset-^ouse the Body was carried, but
that then (after going into several rooms) he was in great^ page 47.
distraction; yet (because in that Confusion, he said; Th^^ (...) we are right)
the C. Justice would have it, that his doubtfulness gave credit to his
Testimony, since a Knight of the Post never sticks at any thing. Now as to the
Prisoners themselves, they struk at the root,) for page 23.
Hill desired that Prance's Testimony might not stand good against them; for he
urged that the said Prance had denied all not only before the King, as page 71.
Mr. Chiffins attested, but before the Council, as Captain page 26.
Richardson acknowledged; to which page 24.
Lord C. J. answered, That no body did believe Prance's denial, because his
Discovery was so particular; and Mr. page 25.
Attorney said* That whilst he was a Papist, and not sure of his Pardon, he was
(it is true) under disturbances and fears, yet no soone^ returned he to Prison,
but he desired the Captain to carry him back to his Majesty, offering to make
good his first Confession; which gave several of the Auditory but small
satisfaction, considering that a ^o^ler, whose interest it was to further the
Plot, might easily (if the thing were true) at the sight of a Prison obtain
such a promise; besides, not a few knew how he had been used and what Cries were
heard where he lay for many days together, as Mrs. Hill page 71.
urged. But Prance's own reason for his Recantation, seemed yet odder; for he
said, it was out of apprehension of his page 70.
Trade, as fearing to lose the Queens Employment, and the Catholics, which was
the most of his business, and also because he had no Pardon. The Prisoners plea
being over ruled, and Prance his Testimony adjudg'd good. Hill calls for his
Masters Niece, and Mrs. Broadstreet (who looked after the house) as also the
Maid in his behalf; the sum of whose Testimony was this, page 52.
That he was a trusty servant, that he never kept ill hours, and always came
in by Eight of the Clock; that he could not go out afterward, because the Maid
did lock up the doors, and that they were still up till Eleven; That he was at
home on page 53.
Saturday night, when Sir E. Godfrey was killed, and on the Wednesday night,
when carried away. That their House and stairs were so little, page 54.
that it was impossible that any thing could be brought in or out, without
their knowledge; that the room (where the body is said to have lain) was not
only over against the Dining Room, but a room that had the page 56.
Key in it always, and that page 58.
every day they went often into it for something or other, and that the
foot-boys staid there when any body visited the young Lady; Nay the Servant
Maid, (whom page ib.
judge Wild commended, as wary in what she said) attested, that she called in
every day at the door of that Chamber, and was the last up every night. Prance
his main reply (having first page 56.
declared, That he laid nothing to their Charge) was, That Mrs. Broadstreet had
said before the page 54.
Duke of Monmouth, that there were Six or Seven Keys; and consequently he would
have it, that Hill might go out. But whether the Court thought it improbable,
that any Door should have so many Keys, or that they took the young Ladies
Word, who said, There was but one page 55.
Key to that which fastened the Door; they never sent to the Duke, or
questioned Sir Robert Southwel about it. And whereas Prance also tax't Mrs.
Broadstreet of saying, p. 56, and 57.
That Hill was gone from them before Sir Edmond's Death, 'twas clearly proved,
that said Hill was then there, not only by his former Examinations, (where he
says, He was then treating with his Landlord about his New House, and that he
did not go to it, till about a Week, or a Fortnight after) but also by the
Testimony of Daniel Gray, who positively affirmed, page 59.
That he came not to it till the 22d. of October. After this, Hill called on
Mr. Archbold, (a Gentleman of the Lifeguard) who said, page 61.
That his Tailor being at Hills, he went thither; and being ask't, What News?
he told them, How Prance was taken about Sir E. Godfrey's Murder; whereupon
Hill Replied, He was glad of it, wishing them all taken; and that next Morning,
the said Hill was taken out of his Bed. This Mr. Ravenscroft confirmed; page 67.
adding, That Hill's Wife told him the same Night, That the Neighbors spoke
strangely of it; but that her Husband did defy Prance, and all his Works: From
which Hill inferred his Innocence, page 62.
since he might (as every Body also acknowledged) have escaped, if he pleased;
nor could he doubt (had he been Guilty) but that he would be empeach'd and
questioned. Green also called for his Landlord Warrier, and his Wife, being
both Protestants; and the Man attested, That page 63.
Green came in on Saturday night (the 12th. of October) at Seven, and went not
from them till after Ten. Upon this Home-Evidence, the Judge asked him, How long
after Sir Edmond's Murder he began to Recollect? he answered, a Month after,
Green being in Prison; and that he remembered the Time particularly, because
Green had not bin at his House but Fourteen Days before he was Apprehended.
'Twas replied, That Green was then in Prison about the Oaths: That it was the
24 th. of December, before he was secured upon the score of the Murder: And
that he (the said Warrier) had told Captain Richardson, that he and his Wife
could do Green no Good. page 64.
To this he answered, He called it not then to Memory, though he had since done
it by his Work, and the time Green came to his House; for he had been a Lodger
there not above Fourteen or Fifteen Days in all: And besides, He never knew
him out after Nine in his Life. The Woman also affirmed the same with many
Particulars; but calling the Day, page 65.
Saturday Fortnight after Michaelmass, and Michaelmass being on a Sunday, this
in Rigor was the 19 th. of October; so that, their Testimony was rejected,
whenas the Woman, it seems, meant only by the Expression, a bare Fortnight
after Michaelmass; for otherwise Saturday the 19 th. being the Day after Friday
the 18 th. (which she page 65.
expressly said, was the time when her Milk Woman told her of the finding of Sir
Edm. Godfrey's Body) she must have known, That what she had to say, was nothing
to Green's purpose. After this, Berry calls his Maid, who witness't, page 70.
That on the 16 th. of October, (or Night when Sir Edm. Godfrey was said to be
carried away) her Master came Home from Bowls at the Dusk of the Evening; That
he was not out an Hour all Night after: That he lay within her Chamber; and
that she went to Bed about Twelve. But that which surpised People most, was
the Testimony of the Three page 68.
Sentinels, who Watched that Night from Seven till Four in the Morning, at the
great Gate of Sommerset-House, through which the Body was affirmed to be
carried in the Sedan; for they attested, (and their Corporal was also with
them) that there came in no Sedan, page 69.
besides that which stands there every Night; but that none ever went out,
during their respective Watches; it being impossible for any to pass-by, or for
the Gate to be opened without their Knowledge; nor did they Drink one drop
whilst they Watched, nor stirred a Pike's Length from the Gate: And moreover,
that they were Examined twice about this very Matter by the Committee, before
ever Prance was taken up.

As for the Collateral Evidence against the Prisoners; first, Mr. Robinson's
was not insisted upon, (we suppose) because Sir Edm. Godfrey did not say, He
feared to be a Martyr by the Papists; and most People had heard, That he had
bin very much threatened by Great Persons, that were not Papists. Nor did the
Court longer insist on Hill's denying before the Council, that he knew Girald,
when Sir Robert Southwel showed them, that it was page 48.
Kelly he spoke of: And the page 43.
Master of the Plow could not say, He had seen Kelly and Hill together. Now, as
for Curtis's (the Chair-Woman's) Evidence of seeing Hill with Sir Edm. Godfrey
about Nine or Ten that very Morning before he was Killed, it was both
Contradicted by page 60.
How, (who witness't, That Hill was with him that Morning from about Nine, till
Two) and by Hill himself, who protested, That she said at Newgate* page 40.
She never had seen him in her Life before: To which Answer, neither the Bench,
nor the King's Council, nor the Woman her self, ever made the least Denial or
Reply. And lastly* as to Prince Rupert's Non-admittance, Berry not only
declared, that the page 49.
Gentleman Usher brought him his Orders about the Answer he gave to the Persons
of Quality, that came to see the Queen, and that the Prince might have entered
if he had pleased, since several did go in, But he added also, that he never
denied, he had such Orders before; for (the Truth was) he had had them
formerly: So that the Court, when they commanded his page 50.
Examination to be read, found not the least mention there of the pretended
Denial; nor did they so much as send for the Gentleman Usher, which inferred,
they were satisfied: And besides, every Body knew, that the Queen's receiving
no Visits by day was little Advantage to the Conspirators in their Deeds of
Darkness; especially, since all the Family, and who else pleased, might come in
and out, as before. Nor was it possible, for the said Conspirators, to assure
themselves of Wheedling Sir Edmond into the Palace, and more particularly, at a
prefixed and certain time, which showed the Allegation to be vain and frivolous.

This was the Prisoners Plea; but the Jury finding them Guilty, they were
Condemned the next Day; and Ten Days after, (viz. Friday, the 21 th. of
February) Hill and Green were carried to Tyburn* where Hill spoke thus much of
the Speech, which was found in his Pocket, and being since Printed, is often
put at the End of his Tyral.

Mr. Hill's Speech.
I Am now come to the Fatal Place of Execution, and in a little time, must
appear before the Tribunal of God Almighty, who knows all things; and I hope,
it will be Happy for me, because I am innocently put to Death. I take God, Men,
and Angels to witness, I am Innocent of the Death of Justice Godfrey; and
believe, it will be well for me, because I dye Innocently; and hope, through
the Merits of my Blessed Savior, to be saved. I do confess, as I lived, so I
dye a Roman-Chatholick, desiring such to Pray for me. God bless and preserve
his Majesty, and this poor Nation, and lay not Innocent Blood to its Charge: So
I bid you all Farewell in Jesus Christ, into whose Hands I commend my Spirit.
Then turning to some of the Officers, he said, There is a Report up and down,
that I have Confessed the Murder of Sir Edm. Godfrey to Dr. Lloyd; I do deny
it.

Then Mr. Green spoke thus.
I Desire all your Prayers: And as for Sir Edmundberry Godfrey, I know not
whether he be Dead or Alive; For in my Days, I never saw him with my Eyes, as
I know of: And if false People will Swear against me, I cannot help it; I pray
to God to Bless my King, and all Good People.

Then Captain Richardson told him* He had a fair Trial, and wished him not to
reflect upon others, but to prepare himself for Death. To which Mr. Green
replied, I pray God Almighty Forgive them all: I never saw Sir Edm. Godfrey to
my Knowledge, in my Life.

MR. Berry was Executed on the 28 th. of the same Month; and though he was
brought back to the Church of England by the Pains of Dr. Lloyd, or rather
declared, that he had for Interest pretended himself for some time a Catholic:
I say, notwithstanding this, he absolutely denied at the very Gallows, the
Fact: Nay, as the Cart was Drawing away, he lifted up his Hands, and said, As I
am Innocent, so receive my Soul, O Jesus.

Concerning Mr. White, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gaven and Turner.
ON the Thirteenth of June, 1679. the aforesaid Provincial Mr. White, and Mr.
Fenwick, together with Mr. Harcourt (Rector of London) Mr. Gaven, and Mr.
Turner (two other Jesuits) were Tried at the Old Bailey, being Vid. Trial.
Indicted for meeting in London at a Traitorous Consult on the Twenty Fourth of
April, Page 3.
78. where 'twas agreed upon, That the King should be-Kill'd by Grove and
Pickering, and upon their failure by Four others, as it has been formerly
mentioned. Mr. White p. 4. and 5.
told the Court, that he had already (viz. with Mr. Ireland on the Seventeenth
of last December) been Indicted, the Jury Empanell'd, Witnesses called, and he
Examined during many Hours, and that he humbly conceived, he could not by Law
be put again in Jeopardy of his Life for the same Fact; for otherwise a Man
might be Tried 100. times. To which the Chief Justice Answered, That it was
supposed, when he was Endited, there would have been Two Witnesses, but that
fell otherwise; that he was not in Jeopardy, being discharged before the Jury
went together, and that his Case was no more, than if a Witness were taken
Sick, and should that happen, it would not be reasonable a Malefactor should
therefore escape. Chief Justice North affirmed the same, and said, that he knew
this often done, and besides that his Plea was not good, because there was no
Record of it extant; which surprised many of the Auditors to hear of the
necessity of a Record about a public Fact done in that very Court* and before
the same Judges. Hereupon Mr. White demanded Counsel as his right, as also,
whether he ought not at his former Trial to have been Condemned or Acquitted;
but the Chief Justice Answering, that it lay in the Discretion of the Court,
and that he must plead; He did it at l^st, and so did Mr. Fenwick (whose case
was the same with his) after he had urged in his own, and in Mr. Whites behalf,
this reason; page 6.
That not being formerly proceeded against, because the Second Witness declared
he had nothing against them, it followed that his Silence ought to have then
discharged them, since his Evidence would certainly have Condemned them; which
not satisfying the Chief Justice, he replied, that this lay in the Breast of
the Court, for it was unreasonable that a Man accused of a Capital Crime by the
express Oath of one Witness, should go Scot-free for want of a Second. Now the
Consequence of Mr. Fenwick's Argument tended to this, that if the Law were so,
a Man thus accused might possibly never be freed, though Innocent; seeing he
might be remanded from one Trial to another, and so in infinitum, on pre^ence
of more Witnesses; a power which many Lawyers think the freedom of England, can
by no means allow.

The Dispute thus ended, and the Prisoners having all pleaded Not Guilty, Oats
began the Charge, the main of which was to this effect; That Mr. White page 12.
having ordered preaching at St. Omers against the Oaths, and given them an
account how ready the Irish were to rise, He summoned a Consult (which began
April Twenty Four, 78. at the White-Horse Tavern in the Strand) where they
pitched upon Carry to go to Rome, and resolved (the Paper being afterward signed
by some at Mr. White's Chamber, others at Mr. Harcourt's, others at Mr.
Ireland's and others at Mr. Fenwick's) that the King should be Killed as
aforesaid. Moreover he affirmed, page 13.
That Mr. White did about the beginning or middle of July send from St. Omers
Instructions by Mr. Ashby, concerning Ten T^onsand Pounds for Sir George
Wakeman to Poison the King, and a Commission for Sir John Gage, etc. That in p.
14. and 15.
July or August, but he thinks 'twas at the latter end of July, he saw Mr.
Gaven in Mr. Irelands Chamber, and though he had seen Letters from the said
Gaven in June (about the affairs of Staffordshire and Shrop shire) yet he
never saw him Write till then; for he there drew a page 15.
Bill of Exchange upon Sir William Andrews, and that between the Eighth and
Twelfth of August, Mr. Ireland took leave of them, as if he were to go to St.
Omers. As for Harcourt and Fenwick, he affirmed, they were with Blundel and
others, on the Twenty First of the said Month at Wild-house* where lay before
them the Eighty Pounds for the Windsor^ Russians, and that Coleman coming in,
gave the Messenger a Guinny. That a day after (as he thinks) there was held a
Consult at the page 16.
Benedictines, where Hartcourt and Fenwick were present, and there they
understood of the Conspiracy against Ormond, by Bishop Tal^ot's Letters, who
also desired Commissions and Money. That on the Fourth of September, White
being returned, Oats went to him, but was beaton and reviled by him; for the
Jesuits suspected he had hetray'd them, they having understood, that one in
such page 17.
clothes as Oates's, had been with the King; yet the said White told him, he
would be friends with him, if he gave an account of the Party and Minister that
went to his Majesty. Then declaring he had no more to say against the Prisoners
at the Bar (except it were concerning the additional 5000. l. which by Letter
from Flanders, Mr. White offered Sir George Wakeman, and rejoyet at the
acceptance of it) heends with this, That he remembered not perfectly that Gaven
was at the Consult of April, though he remembers he saw then his subscription,
but as for page 21.
Turner, he could positively say, he was there, at the lesser Clubs or
Colloquies, to wit, in Fenwicks Chamber.

page 22.
Dugdale followed Oats, and said, he had very liitle acquaintance with Mr.
White, but had seen him at my Lord Astons about two or three Years ago; That
White did send a Letter (enclosed in Groves's) to Ewers, That he should Choose
trusty, stout, and desperate Men to Kill the King, no matter whether Gentlemen
or no: That Mr. Whites name was to it: That he knew it was his hand, because he
had seen him once write a Letter when he was at my Lords, as aforesaid: That
Mr. Ewers, Letters were all directed to Dugdale; That he intercepted this
Letter, and read it, the words page 29.
Killing the King being in it, and that the said Letter was sent by page ib.
the ordinary Post, which seeming strange and wonderful to the page 44.
Chief Justice, and all the Court, He salv'd it by a far madder Answer, viz
page 29.
That the Letters being directed to him, if they were intercepted, he should be
hanged, and they saved. He further said, page 23.
That he had bin at several Consults in his own, and in Ewer's Chamber, about
this matter; That Gaven was the Orator to persuade people; That my Lord
Stafford was at one about the Twenty second of September; That he the said
Dugdale himself was then Chosen out for the Assassination; That he heard of the
Kings Death two years before, page 24.
Gaven often encouraging him to it, and upon his giving them 400 l. to pray for
his Soul, and promising them 100 more to go on with the Work, the said Gaven
assured him, he should be canonized for a Saint: That an Army was to come from
beyond Seas; That the Massacre was to be put upon on the page 25.
Presbyterians; That the Killing of Kings was a thing which Gaven endeavored to
prove out of Scripture, but that he could not call now the Text to mind; That
he saw a Letter from page 26.
Harcourt to Ewers on Monday the 14. of October, and in it were these words,
This very Saturday night Sir Edm. Godfrey is dispatched; whereupon he the said
Dugdale told Ewers, that he would be hanged, if that Action did not overthrow
their Design; That the next day he went to an Alehouse, and asked there, if they
had heard of a Knights being killed at London? now that this demand of his was
true, he could prove by Mr. Chetwin, who being called in, attested, page 27.
that one Sandbidge told him on that very Tuesday, that being at the said
Alehouse in the morning, a page 28.
Girl told him that Dugdale had reported there, the Killing a Justice of
Westmi^ster; besides the said Chetwin attested, that he discoursed with Dugdale
about this Letter etc. when he came to London to be examined by the Council;
That going out of Town, he understood at his return that the said Dugdale was
no witness, though his Evidence had been page 29.
very material at the Trials of Hill, Green, and Berry.

Dugdale having ended with this Account against White, Hartcourt, Gaven, and
Turner, (for he said, page 30.
Turner did in Mr. Ewer's Chamber, about two Years ago, assent to the former
Treason, and was to carry on the design in Worcestershire.) Prance stood up
next, and said, That having made an page ib.
Image for Mr. Harcourt, which was sent to Maryland, in the Portugal's
Country, the said Mr. Hartcourt, as he paid him for it, about a Year ago, told
him, There was a Design of Killing the King. But when afterward, Mr. page 31.
Hartcourt asked him earnestly thus; Can you say, that I ever spoke to you about
such a Business? Yes (answered he, with an Asserveration) and one Tompson came
with you, when you paid me for Four Candlesticks: which either Contradicts his
former Evidence, or the Image must be turned into Candlesticks. Then he
proceeded, and said, That Mr. Fenwick in Mr. Ireland's Chamber, talked of page
ib.
Fifty Thousand Men, which should be raised for the Catholic Cause, under the
Command of my Lord Bellasis, Powis, and Arundel; and that there should be Trade
enough for him and others, in Church-Work: That he going to Mr. Fenwick's
Chamber, and his Confessarius, Father James, being dead, Mr. Fenwick would have
had him come to Confession to him, page 32.
and enjoined him Secrecy once or twice.

Then Bedlow was called, who said, That he questioned not, but Mr. White and
Fenwick would now object his former, slender Evidence against them; but that it
was then Convenient; for otherwise, it would have stopped a Design; there being a
Treaty with Mr. Reading about them two, as well as the Lords in the Tower: So
that, Mr. Reading depended on him, as to the favoring the said Lords,
according as he dealt with these; which made him then Apologize in Court, (as
some of the Justices he believed, did remember) That he could not then safely
declare all he had to say; and in truth, he was so far from saying all, that he
did not say half of it. Now, as to the Particulars of his then Evidence, it was
(he affirmed) thus: That he had seen Mr. White at several Consults; but this he
said with a Caution, viz. That he never heard Mr. White was so very much
concerned in the Plot, because he had no reaeson to say otherwise, since he
heard of it from Mr. White himself, and so could not well speak it from a
Hearsay. And for Mr. Fenwick, he never heard him ('it is true) give in any
Answer; but yet he had seen him at the Consults. This was Bedlow's Prelude; but
whether Satisfactory or not, the Auditors then, and the Readers now, can best
judge; and especially since his former Charge was not as he would now have it
to be; it being without any Apology or Advertisement to the Court, that he had
more to say against them; as it most manifestly appears by Ireland' s Trial.
Page 42, and 43.
Ireland's Printed Trial: For being then ask't, Whether he knew any thing of
Mr. White's being present at any of the Consults? His Answer was, That he had
the least Acquaintance with him, of any of all the Society; yet both he, and
Mr. Fenwick had been several times at Consultations; but he knew not the
particular Resolves of them, nor had he heard them speak any thing in
particular; only he was often told, that nothing was done without Fenwick; but
this Evidence not being enough, the Jury was Discharged of them, and they
Remanded to Prison. The Court taking no notice of Bedlow's Pretense and Plea,
or of Mr. White's Demand, viz. Whether any thing he had now said, was in the
last Trial? the Chief Justice asked Bedlow, if they had told him any thing of
Killing the King? who answered, Yes: For White had told Coleman the manner of
sending the Pr^s. Trial. Page 32.
Four Ruffians to Windsor: That he saw Hartcourt take out of a Cabinet 80. or a
100 l. That Hartcourt paid them the Money by Coleman's Order, and gave the
Messenger a Guinney to Drink his Health; for Coleman was gone before he (the
said Bedlow) came in. Moreover, he had seen page 33.
Mr. Fenwick at Mr. Hartcourt's and White's Chamber, when this whole Business
was spoken of: That he heard from Mr. White, and others, in Mr. Hartcourt's
Chamber, of Grove's and Pickering's Reward or Killing the King, as aforesaid:
That Pickering had received Checks for slipping many Opportunities; For once
his Flint was loose; another time there was no Power in the Pan; a third time
he Charged the Pistol with Bullets, and no Powder; and a fourth time, (as one
that was at the Trial assured me, though the Common Print has omitted it) he
Charged it with Powder only: Which Reader (if these Attempts had bin Bells) are
all the Charges that can be Rung on them. That Mr. White was in Mr. Hartcourt's
Chamber with him and others, where 'twas agreed, that the Additional 5000 l.
should be given Sir George Wak^man; and yet page 17.
Oats in his Evidence told us, That Mr. White ordered it by Letter from
Flanders. He further says, That page 33.
Fenwick was to go to New Market along with Coniers, etc. to Destory the King
there, in his Morning-Walk: That he knew nothing in particular of Turner and
Gaven: That ^e had brought Hartcourt many Pacquets from Spain, page 34.
France, Flanders, etc. about this Affair: That he had often carried the Papers
of Business to Mr. Langhorne, to Register them: That he saw Hartcourt in Sir
William Aderson's Presence, give a Bill of Exchange to Sir page 35.
George Wakeman of 2000 l. in part of a greater Sum; That Sir George then said,
15000 l. was too small a Reward for settling Religion; but that Sir George did
not read out the Merchant's Name on whom it was drawn.

After this, two Letters were produced, taken among Mr. Hartcourt's papers; The
first being from Mr. page 37.
Peter's here in England, in which the 24 th. of April was mentioned, as the day
of the meeting. Now because it was there enjoined, that they should not appear
much about Town till the meeting were over, lest their Design should be
suspected; and because of the word Design, as also that Secrecy was much
recommended, as in its own nature necessary, The C. Justice thought it extremly
conduced to the making out of the Plot. As for the page 41.
second, it was from Mr. Anderton at Rome, bearing date the 5th. of February
was Twelve month, where mention being made of Patents that were sent, and
Patents being in the Plural number, 'twas thought that these were the
Commissions so often spoken of.

The Charge being finished, it became soon very dubious as to Gaven and Turner,
because Oats knew them not at their Apprehension; and his own words in Court
make it good; for first page 14.
He confessed, that (when he met Gaven after his apprehension in the Lobby, and
was asked by a Gentleman about him) he did not well know him, nor could say any
thing against him then, because being under an ill favored Perriwig, and being
a man he knew had a good Head of Hair, he did not understand the MYSTERY of it,
and so spared his Evidence, and informing the Council against him. Again, Gaven
produced several Staffordshire Witnesses, and among others p. 63, and 64.
Sir John Winford's Niece, and her Maid, where he sojourned, who attested that
they were very confident of his being with them (besides other months) all
June and July, 'till the 23th. because they remember not his absence; yet they
would not page 65.
positively say, that 'twas impossible for him to be away some days, since they
had no particular Circumstances in readiness; but both they and the rest of
his p. 68. and 69.
witnesses did averr, that he was in Wolver-Hampton, from the 23th. to the end
of July; for then to their knowledge, he was in the Spiritual Exercise; which
in truth included the very time of Oats his Accusation; for by his saying,
that Gaven was in London either in page 14.
July or August, and then absolutely agreeing that it was in page 19.
July, it in manner follows, that the time in dispute was in the latter end of
the said month; and besides in the page 15.
beginning of his Charge, He himself says, That he believed it to be in the
latter part of it; but when once Oats came to be pressed with it, and especially
with a counter-evidence, he flew back, taking the utmost extent and Compass for
his Plea that he could. Now for Mr. Turner, He informed the Court, That Oats
not only, did not know him at page 21.
Whitehall, but called him there by another name; nor could Oats give the
Court any better reason for it, than that Turner was at that time in a
disguised habit, and a nasty Perriwig; when as the Poor man was in his ordinary
Clothes and Accoutrements; neither had he (and the voluntary surrendry of
himself most evidently proves it) the least aim or design of concealing himself
from any body. Mr. Turner further urged, that though page ib.
Oats deposed now, That he saw him at a Colloquy in Fenwick's Chamber, yet by
his former Evidence, it was at Wild-house; to which Oats had nothing to reply,
but this; That because the chiefest part of the Consult Sat at Wild house, '
it was called by them the Consult of Wild-house. As for Dugdale, the said Turner
protested that he had not been in Staffordshire these page 30.
Four Years, which made no little impression upon many present; Since No body
in all appearance could seem a more unfit man for intrigues than He; and
besides had Dugdale named any of my Lord Astons Family, as Witnesses of the
said Turner's being there later, than the time he prefixed, it would have been
to his Confusion, not only in that point, but in all things else for the
future. Nor were many less surprised with Mr. Hartcourt's Answer to Dugdale;
for though he acknowledged he had written page 27.
several Letters to Mr. Evers directed to him, yet he affirmed he had left off
corresponding diverse Years; for Reader you must know, that about Three Years
ago, he was from Procurator of the Province (which keeps a general and frequent
correspondency with all the principal Members) made Rector of London. Now
Dugdale to prove Mr. Hartcourt's later correspondency with him, to wit, with
Evers; for Priests have generally their Letters directed to others, so that Mr.
Hartcourt never took notice at Dugdales mentioning the receipt of Letters from
him; I say Dugdale, to prove a later correspondence, urges this wild and
unheard of Circumstance: page ib.
That Mr. Hartcourt having Written at least Eight Letters last Year, to Mr.
Ireland, whilst he was in Staffordshire, two of them made mention of Mr.
Edward Astons Death at Paris, which Dugdale intercepting, pretended to Conjure,
by telling the accident, before any of the said Gentlemen's Friends knew of it;
so that Mr. Ireland chid Mr. Hartcourt, for not acquainting him sooner; who
replied* that he had sent him word of it; and yet it seems Mr. Ireland, and Mr.
Evers were so far from questioning Dugdale about this silly Interception and
Treachery, that he was a greater Confident than ever, as chosen to Murder his
Majesty himself. Mr. Hartcourt also further showed, how little this fellow had
knowledge either of him or his Letters; for first, He came (and several of
these Witnesses Reader, have under false names served other Prisoners thus) to
the Gate House to entrap him; and then he (the said Dugdale) did not so much as
know his hand before the Committee, when they made him write there for a trial;
to which the Chief Justice replied, that Hartcourt might write more hands, as
well as have more names than one: but people thought there could then be no
cheat in that, since the many papers which had been taken from Hartcourt, would
presently have made it apparent. But above all, how incredible is it, that
Dugdale (who was so apprehensive, as he page 26.
told the Court, of the danger that might en^ue to the main Plot or Design by
Godfrey's Murder) should go to an Ale house (the very next Morning after
notice or the accident) and proclaim it there, before any Man dreamt of it in
the Country.

Now upon Mr. Hartcourts protesting, that, as to Bedlow (who pretended to bring
him page 33.
diverse and diverse Portmantles full of Letters) he had never seen him but twice
before his Apprehension, ^^z. page 34.
once about five Years ago, with some Letters from Dunkir^ (...) others, though
under his Cover (for then Reader he was Procurator) and once again, when he
borrowed Twenty Shillings of him, as one deserted by most of his friends for
his Religion. I say, upon Mr. Hartcourt's protesting thus, Bedlow replied, page
33.
that he had Seven or Eight Witnesses out of Town, to make his familiarity
evident and clear; but that he could not get them together, because the Trials
had been so put off; whereas on the contrary (Reader) all the World knew, that
they were positively ordered above Ten Days before, and and the Prisoners had
accordingly provided. Mr. White now page 34.
Questioned Bedlow, where he was a Lieutenant, as he had Vid. Ireland' s Trial.
formerly sworn; who answering in Flanders* in the Prince of Frizland's
Regiment of foot, He replied, Page 37.
that there was no Lieutenant in all the Flanders Companies; whereupon Bedlow
said, he would send for his Commission, and a while after something was brought
in, page 36.
which Chief Justice North took and looked upon, but no further words were made
of it; and without any manner of doubt, 'twas a Paper of his own making; for we
had several Officers in Flanders all the last War, yet no Man ever heard of him
or his name there, either then or since, as a Soldier.

As for the two Letters produced against the Prisoners, and first as to that
from Mr. Peter's, it was Answered by Mr. Hartcourt, Mr. White, and the rest,
page 37.
that it was a Summons to their Triennial Congregation; there being a meeting
of the Society every Three Years in France, Spain, Germany, etc. as all the
World knows. That the Secresy enjoined was necessary; for since every body's
eye was upon them, they ought to be cautious of appearing in such numbers as
might give offense, and especially at a time, when the Parliament was meeting.
That as to the word page 38.
Design (which the Chief Justice did so much insist upon) it was a hard thing
to bring men's lives into danger upon the mere nicety of a Word, and especially
when it was proper in it self, for they had a Design to choose a Procurator for
Rome, and to consult about the whole Concern of the English Jesuits. Now as to
the page 42.
Roman Letter of February the 5 th. Mr. White Answered, That the Patents there
mentioned were the Literae Patentes, that constituted him (on the Fourteenth of
the preceding January) Provincial, That the expression (though in the Plural)
was genuine and applicaple to any single man; nor did Mr. Anderton the Writer,
know at the sending of them, whether he the said Mr. White would accept the
Office or no; which Mr. Recorder much doubting of, (as being a too self-denying
Action for a Jesuit) Oats presently affirmed, That He was bound on pain of
Damnation, not to disobey his superior, and if he choose him or others to a
place, they must take it upon them; and yet every body knows (that knows any
thing) that nothing is more frequent, than for a Jesuit in these Cases to reply
(as they term it) to the General, and consequently to free himself, even after
Nomination.

After this, the Prisoners called for Witnesses to prove Mr. Ireland's Absence
out of London, from the 3d. of August to the 14th. of September, contrary to
the Positive Oath both of Oats and Bedlow, which several of the Judges were
against, because that Business had p. 71.
received Trial: Others urged, 69.
That the Jury was not to take notice of any thing done at a former Trial,
unless it were then spoken of; which seemed hard and strange to many, because
in reason the Accused were to lay hold of all Matters, that could lessen the
Credit of their Accusers, and more especially of things relating to the Plot.
But the Court (even according to their own Rules) were at last, forced to grant
them their Demand; because Oats did in this very Trial say, That page 15.
Ireland was in Town between the 8th. and 12th. of August, and that Mr. page 72.
Fenwick was with him. Then the Witnesses (to wit, Sir John Southcot, my Lady,
their Son and Daughter) were called; page 73.
whereupon Sir Edward Southcot the Son affirmed, that he was told, That Mr.
Ireland came to his Uncles (my Lord Astons in Hartford-shire) on the 3 d. of
August at Night, but he saw him not there, till early on the 4 th. and that he
went with him, and his Family to Tixhal, (my Lord's usual Residence in
Staffordshire) continuing every Day with them till the sixteenth. My Lady
Southcot (who was my Lord Aston's Sister) said, That he was with her from the
fifth to the sixteenth. Sir John the Father, said to the same purpose, to wit,
that he met Mr. Ireland at St. Albans on the fifth, and that he was in their
Company for Twelve Days after. To them succeeded Mrs. Harwel the Mother, Mrs.
Harwel the Daughter, and their Maid; as also, Sir John Winford's Ncece, four
Giffords of the Chillington-Family, Mr. Biddulph of Biddulph, and two of the
Perdrels of Boscobel, Son and Daughter to him who had there saved the King in
his Escape from Worcester. These page 73.
proved Mr. Ireland's being at Wolverhampton from the 17 th. to the 26 th. when
he returned to my Lord's at Tixhal: And five of them, to wit, p. 74, and 75.
Mr. Biddulph, two of the Giffords, and the two Pendrels, attested, that they
saw him on the 2 d. of September, some at Boscobel, and others hard by: which 2
d. of September, was the very Day, or the Day after, that Oats Vid. Ireland's
Trial. Page 60.
positively swore, Mr. Ireland gave him Twenty Shillings in London. But Oats
foreseeing this Evidence, did (notwithstanding the Fact was in Print, and that
he had made Oath of it in that very Court, even in the Hearing of several of
the Judges, and two of the Prisoners at the Bar) insi^^ now, The Pres. Trial.
That it was the Day, Page 71.
to the best of his Remembrance; but whether it was the 1 st. 2 d. 7 th. 8 th.
or 9 th. of September, he would not positively say: Whereupon Mr. Gifford (who
had bin a summoned Witness in Ireland's Trial) stood up, and affirmed, page ib.
That when Oats after much pressing, would not be positive as to the Days in
August, he came at last to a Circumstance, and aver'd, That on the 1 st or 2d.
of September, Ireland gave him (in London) Twenty Shillings. The said Mr.
Gifford also, and his Wife, (when the Court objected, whether it were the same
Ireland that Dyed, that was in Staffordshire) declared, page 75.
That they had seen him in the Country, and afterward Tried and Executed. This
Evidence being full and clear, and the Witnesses that appeared, Persons of
great Quality, (nay, there were twice as many more in the Country, that could
not come by reason of their Domestic Affairs) Oats had nothing to balance
it, but the Testimony of page 78.
Sarah Pain, the Servant-Maid which he had produced formerly in Ireland's
Trial, about his being in Town on the 12 th. of August, as I said. And here
it is to be Remembered, that there were two Mrs. Giffords Witnesses in this
Affair, which confounds the Reader at the first sight, when he peruses the
Printed Trial; for the Short-hand-Writer makes little Distinction between those
Gentlewomen; and therefore, sometimes the same Person seems, as it were, to
answer Negatively and Positively to the same Question. Besides, the said Writer
is not always Exact (when the Witnesses are many) who speaks; so that he says
sometimes John a Nikes spoke, when 'twas (in truth) John a Styles.

The Prisoners then having cleverly proved this Point, strike at all that Oats
had ever said; for having in Mr. Ireland's Trial often said, That he was here
at the Consult of April 1678. he endeavored (as a greater Satisfaction to the
Court) to further prove it by these Circumstances, viz. Vid. Irel. Trial. Page
35.
That he came over with Fa. Williams, Pa Nevil, Fa. Pool, Sir Thomas Preston,
Sir John Warner, Hildesley, a young Scholar, and others. So that, pres. Trial.
Page 45.
Mr. Fenwick demanding now, Whether he did not own his coming over with the
said Hildesley? Oats would have avoided it, by Bidding him ask Questions of
what he said to Day; but Mr. Fenwick insisting upon this, as necessary and page
46.
threatening Oats, That he had Witnesses to prove his Asserting his thus Coming
from beyond Sea; Oats at last owned it: whereupon Mr. Hildesley (who is a
Gentleman's Son of Quality) appeared, and denied it, protesting, that he left
him at St. Omers behind; which Oats granted, but would have it, that he met
him at Calis the next Day; and to confirm this, alleged, that Hildesley lost
his Money there, that Fa. Williams did relieve him, and that he went not
straight to London with them. Hildesley readily confessed the loss of his Money,
etc. saying; He knew how Oats understood this, to wit, by a page 47.
Gentleman, that (having met Hildesley) came to St. Omexs, with whom Oats was
very familiar on the 2 d, of May, as several Witnesses present would prove.

Then were called in Nineteen Witnesses from beyond Sea, Fourteen of which were
from St. Omers; and among them Sir James D^rington's Son, Sir Philip Palmer's
Son; Sir R. Dalison's Son, and Sir Richard Colester's Son; Son-in-Law to
Colonel Charles Gifford, who was so instrumental in saving of the King after
Worcester; but Dalison not hearing when the rest were called, appeared not, and
so could not be a Witness till next Day. The Substance of the St. Omarian
Evidence was this; Some remembered (by very good Circumstances) Oats at St.
Omers at, and after Hildersley's Departure, which was on the 24 th. of April,
New style. Others of Burnaby's coming to them on the First of May, who was the
Person (you must know, Reader) that could tell Hildesley's Adventures, by
meeting him on the Way: Others of Oats his Familiarity with the said Burnab
(...) Others, that they saw Oats whilst he was in the Infirmary: Others; that
they saw him in the Spiritual Exercise: Others, that Father Nevil, and Fa. Pool
were not Absent, as he said: And others told many Particulars relating to him
on the latter End of April, and first Week of May; but all agreed in this, That
he came to them a little before Christmas, 77. and went not away till the
following June, living there the whole time as a Scholar; nor did they
remember, that in all that while, he was a Night out of the Seminary, but on at
Watten, a House of theirs two Leagues distant from St. Omers. They gave also
these Reasons of their Assurance, That he could not be absent without their
Knowledge, because first, The whole College would have Rung of it, the
Discourse of Coming and Going being their News, and which all continually mind.
Secondly, Because he sat in the Hall, or Rectory alone, at a distinct Table
from them, viz. between Theirs, and the Fathers; so that, being thus in the Eye
of all, every Body would have been missing him. And lastly, That from about
Lady Day to his Expulsion in June, he was Reader of the Spiritual Books in the
Sodality, and therefore, he could not be away or Sunday or Holy Day, but that
they must most particularly have known it.

Now, for the other page 60.
Five Witnesses, Three of them (besides one of the former) affirmed Sir John
Warner to be at Watten all April and May, because being Superior there in Fa.
William's Absence, they were sure they saw him almost daily. The like did the
p. 61. and 62.
Porter and Caterer, as to Sir Thomas Preston's being then at Liege; nor could
the Court find the least Incoherence or Disagreement in their Evidence, (though
they were all strictly Examined, and cross Questioned) but in Cox's, who being
a Stranger, and speaking English ill, made (by his odd Expressions, and giddy
Answers) the Auditors often Merry: Yet the only thing objected to him by the
Court was his saying, that Oats left the College in page 53.
July, when it was on the 23 th. of June, as the Scholars, and Oats himself
acknowledged; whereupon, answering as to this, That it was after May he was
sure, and that it was no matter for the Month, whether June or July, the People
laughed: But his Meaning Reader, was that being sure, that Oats was never
Absent (as he always said) from his coming, (which was before Christmas)
'till his going away for good and all, after May, (except to Wa^ten, as before)
it was no Matter for the Month, whether in June or July.

Though these St. Omarians had (at least in Appearance) as well by the
Innocence of their Words and Behavior, as by their Punctuality in all the
Material Parts of their Evidence, given Oats a deadly Blow, yet he was far
from leaving the Lists; For Sir William Waller having a while before taken
Three of these Scholars, as Papists, in Town; they upon their Examination,
declared what they came for, and told Oats to his very Face, That he never was
but one Night out of their College, from December to June: So that, by this
time he had provided himself for the Storm, and therefore brought into Court
first; one p. 79, and 80.
Walker a Minister, who deposed, That about the latter End of March, or the
Beginning of April, 78 (and then presently, according to Oats his usual
Method, extended the Time to the Middle of the said, Month) he saw one in
Disguise near Lecester-House, but could not Recollect who it was, till a little
before he rose next Morning; and then having drawn him within the Scheme of his
Knowledge to be Titus Oats, he went and told Sarah Ives of it at her Shop; who
now attested, that Walker had said so to her in April, but she knew not the
Day. Then apeared Cecily Mayo, a Servant-Maid to one Sir Richard Barker of
Ba^bican, (who from a Parrier, had by Posted Bills, made himself a Doctor) and
page 81.
she swore; That the Week before Whitsuntide, 78 (and Whitsuntide ^ell then,
Reader, on the 19 th. of May) she saw a Man in Sir Richard Barker's Yard, whom
a Servant-Boy, that is since Dead, jeered at, telling her, That the said Man
had changed his Coat from Black to White, and was turned either Quaker or
Papist. That she saw him the Week after in the Garden with another, but
discontented because he was no more Countenanced by the Family, (the Young
Ladies being shie of him) and that the afore-mentioned Boy said to her, Yonder
is Oats again, Does he not look like a Jesuit? Therefore, when the Plot was
discovered, she went to see Oats, and knew him; who spoke slightingly to her,
seeming offended with the Family, because they had scorned him; but she excused
it, as proceeding from his being then a Papist: and further told him, That she
hoped, he would never forget the Bread he had Eaten there.

After her Philip Page (one of the same House) witness't, page 82.
That he saw Oats there, about the beginning of May, 78. to the best of his
knowledge, by the token, his Master had a Patient at that time at Islington,
Sick of a Fever, whose name he knows not; but the Doctor told the Court, she
was Aldram Milvars Daughter. The Coach man also said, page 83.
That Oats in the beginning of May, was there to ask for Dr. Tongue, and when
he came out of the House he seemed troubled. Then the Knight himself being
present deposed, page 82. and 83.
That he was at the time of the Evidence abroad in the Country, as his
business often leads him; that his servants (to the best of his Remembrance)
told him after Witsuntide the story of Oats his being there in two Disguises,
the one in Short-hair, which made them think him turned Quaker, the other in a
Long-Perriwig, and then they thought him turned Papist. That upon the visiting
a Gentleman he fell ill, in which time Oats was gone, and upon his Recovery,
he the said Oats came to enquire for Dr. Tongue, which was the latter end of
June, or beginning of July. These Witnesses were followed by one Smith and
Clay. Smith was Oats his Master, as Usher of Merchant Taylor's, and he
positively swore, that on the First Monday in May, 78. (i. e. on the Sixth of
the said Month) Oats Dined with him, and staid Three or Four Hours after
discoursing of several things. Clay was an old weak, and doting man, who being
taken as a Priest, was thrown into the Gate House, and suffered to see no
Friend; so that Oats (to whom all Prisons were open) visiting him, and
caressing him daily, brought him also for a Witness into the Court, where he
attested, that he saw (he thinks) Oats in Apil was Twelvemonth at Mr. Charles
Howards Lodgings in Arundel-house, and in May also at the same place, as he
thinks.

To this Reply, the Jesuits make a smart Rejoinder, proving the whole (by the
Contradictions that must follow) either a downright perjury, or a mistake; for
Mr. White page 85.
remembered the Court, how that when (at that very Bar) he had formerly pressed
Oats to name any body, that had seen him then in Town, He had nothing to say,
but that he lay privately at Groves's. Nay Reader he deemed it, in a manner, an
unreasonable thing to be then asked such a question; for directing himself to
the Lord Chief Justice, he Answered in these very words (as notoriously appears
in Mr. Irelands Trial) Ireland' s Trial. Page 36.
My Lord (says he) when I came to London, I was ordered to keep very close;
and lay at Mr. Groves's house, let him deny it if he can. This was (you see)
the best of his game then, and this made him fly to the former circumstances
(which the late Witnesses have now proved also false) viz. of his coming over
with Hildesley, Williams, Preston, Warner, etc. whereas had the present
Evidence in his behalf been true, it would have been impossible for a man of
his rank and acquaintance to have been more public; and yet a greater
impossibility for him, (when demanded so pertment a question) to have forgotten
all these persons, especially when the seeing of any one of them in his then
pretended Condition, was a great and dangerous fault, and consequently must
have imprinted them in his Memory. But Mr. Gavens chief plea was about the time
of Oats his Chimerical stay in England, and therefore cried out Ex ore tuo te
judico; for since it was (as he urged) only a matter of page 86.
Six days, (not did the Kings page 77.
Council ^^tend it to be above Eight or Ten) and since (according to the
computation of the Court) Hildesley page 85.
landed on the 17th of April our style, and consequently reached not London,
till the 19th, what could become of the Ministers Testimony, that saw him the
latter end of March or middle of April, or of the Schoolmasters, that dined
and discoursed with him on the 6th of May for four or five hours; and
especially of the Knight's Family, that saw him often that month even after
Whitsontide. Now for Clay and the invalidity of his Testimony, there shall be a
fuller account of it in Mr. Langh^rnes Trial, and more also said of the Rest.
Mr. Gaven further insisted on the quality of his Witnesses and the fullness of
their Testimony as to p. 87, and 89.
Mr. Ireland's being out of Town in August; of the clearness of the proof in
relation to Sir Thomas Preston's and Sir John Warner's absence; of the
positiveness of the evidence concerning his own being at Wolver-hampton, at
least the last week in July, and that all the Witnesses did incline rather to
think him there the other weeks also, than not, with much more of this nature.
Nor did Mr. Fenwick forget to tell the Court (besides the Repetition of the
former unanswerable arguments) page 91.
that there was not the least Commission found, or the least Letter to show
that there were such, or any Money paid, or Arms provided, and the like; but
that all depended on the word of these Witnesses. Nay if they were Guilty, he
said, they ought to be hanged 'twice, Once for Knaves and then for Fools, for
trusting a matter of this nature to such a fellow as Oats, who was not only
expelled their Colleges, but necessitous and beggarly even to the last moment
before the Discovery. And Reader you must also remember, that (among others)
one Captain Hill did witness, that Bedlo (who had been long his fellow
prisoner in the Marshalsea) was in May was Twelve Month, (which was the May
just before the Discovery) so poor there, that he lived upon the very page 76.
Basket. But notwithstanding this, or Mr. White's wondering, how he could be
thought (were he of a fighting disposition) to page 91.
beat Oats, to whom such a secret was committed, or to send a letter by the
common page 90.
post about Killing the King as Dugdale witness't; and notwithstanding Mr.
Gavans great Eloquence (which every body much commended) or Mr. page 91.
Hartcourts appealing to the Integrity of his life for 70 years, and to the
Infamy of his Accusers; or his concluding thus, that since a Negative cannot be
well proved, he hoped Innocence will find some to defend it; I say
notwithstanding this, They were all found Guilty, and (being condemned the next
day) were on the Friday following (to wit the 20 of June) executed together at
Tyburn, where they made these following Speeches.

But Reader be pleased first to know that they were drawn on several Hurdles:
On the foremost went Mr. Thomas Whitebread, and Mr. William Harcourt. On the
second, Mr. Anthony Turner, and Mr. John Gavan. And on the Third, Mr. John
Fenwick. And being come to the Gallows, They were all put into one Cart.

Then Mr. Gavan said, If God give us His Grace, it is no matter where we die, at
the Gallows or elsewhere. The Executioner being fastening the Halters.

Gavan said, I hope you will be civil to dying Men. Executioner. I will be
civil to you.

Gavan. I hope they will give us leave to speak.

Mr. Whitebread's Speech.
I Suppose it is expected I should speak something to the matter I am Condemned
for, and brought hither to suffer: it is no less then the contriving and
plotting His Majesty's Death, and the alteration of the Government of the
Church and State. You all either know, or ought to know, I am to make my
appearance before the Face of Almighty God, and with all imaginable certainty
and evidence to receive a final Judgment, for all the thoughts, words, and
actions of my whole life. So that I am not now upon Terms to speak other than
the Truth, and therefore in his most Holy Pre^ence, and as I hope for Mercy
from his Divine Majesty, I do declare to you here present, and to the whole
World, that I go out of the World as innocent, and as free from any guilt of
these things laid to my charge in this matter, as I came into the World from my
Mothers Womb: and that I do renounce from my heart all manner of Pardons,
Absolutions, Dispensations for Swearing, as occasions or Interest may seem to
require, which some have been pleased to lay to our charge, as matter of our
Practice and Doctrine, but is a thing so unjustifiable and unlawful, that I
believe, and ever did, that no power on Earth can authorize me, or any body so
to do. As for those who have most falsely accused me (as time, either in this
World, or in the next, will make appear) I do heartily forgive them, and beg of
God to grant them his holy Grace, that they may repent their unjust proceedings
against me; otherwise they will in conclusion find they have done themselves
more wrong than I have suffered from them, though that has been a great deal. I
pray God bless His Majesty both Temporally and Eternally, which has been my
daily Prayer for him, and is all the harm that I ever intended or imagined
against him. And I do with this my last breath, in the sight of God declare,
that I never did learn, or teach, or believe, nor can as a Catholic believe,
that it is lawful upon any occasion or pretense whatsoever, to design or
contrive the Death of His Majesty, or any hurt to his Person; but on the
contrary, all are bound to obey, defend, and preserve his Sacred Person, to the
utmost of their power. And I do moreover declare, that this is the true and
plain sense of my Soul, in the sight of him who knows the Secrets of my Heart,
and as I hope to see his blessed Face, without any Equivocation, or mental
Reservation. This is all I have to say concerning the matter of my
Condemnation; that which remains for me now to do, is to recommend my Soul into
the hands of my blessed Redeemer, by whose only Merit and Passion I hope for
Salvation.

Mr. Hartcourt's speech.
THE words of dying persons have been always esteemed as of greatest Authority,
because uttered then, when shortly after they are to be cited before the high
Tribunal of Almighty God. This gives me hopes that mine may be looked upon as
such: therefore I do here declare in the presence of Almighty God, the whole
Court of Heaven, and this numerous Assembly, that as I hope by the Merits and
Passion of my Lord and sweet Savior JESUS CHRIST for Eternal Bliss, I am as
innocent as the Child unborn of any thing laid to my charge, and for which I am
here to die.

Sher. How. Or Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry's Death?


Hartcourt. Or Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry's Death.


Sher. How. Did not you Write that Letter concerning the Dispatch of Sir Edmund
Bury Godfry?


Harcourt. No Sir, These are the Words of a dying man, I would not do it for a
Thousand Worlds.


Sher. How. How have you lived?


Harcourt, I have lived like a Man of repute all my life, and never was before
the Face of a Judge till my Trial: No man can accuse me. I have from my Youth
been bred up in the Education of my Duty toward God, and Man.


Harcourt. And I do utterly abhor and detest that abominable false Doctrine
laid to our charge, that we can have Licenses to commit Perjury, or any sin to
advantage our cause, being expressly against the Doctrine of St. Paul, saying
Non sunt facienda mala, ut eveniant bona; Evil is not to be done that good may
come thereof, And therefore we hold it in all cases unlawful to Kill or Murder
any person whatsoever, much more our lawful King now Reigning; whose personal
and Temporal Dominions we are ready to defend with our Lives and Fortunes,
against any Opponent whatsoever, none excepted. I forgive all that have
contrived my Death, and humbly beg pardon of Almighty God for them. And I ask
pardon of all the World. I pray God bless His Majesty, and grant him a
prosperous Reign. The like I wish to his Royal Consort, the best of Queens. I
humbly beg the Prayers of all those who are in the Communion of the Roman
Church, if any such be present.


Mr. Turner's Speech.
BEing now, good People, very near my End, and summoned by a violent Death to
appear before God's Tribunal, there to render an account of all my thoughts,
words, and actions, before a just Judge, I conceive I am bound in Conscience to
do my self that Justice, as to declare upon Oath my Innocence from the horrid
Crime of Treason, with which I am falsely accused: And I esteem it a Duty I owe
to Christian Charity, to publish to the World before my death, all that I know
in this point, concerning those Catholics I have conversed with since the
first noise of the Plot, desiring from the bottom of my heart, that the whole
Truth may appear, that Innocence may be cleared, to the great Glory of God, and
the Peace and Welfare of the King and Country. As to my self, I call God to
VVitness, that I was never in my whole life present at any Consult or Meeting
of the Jesuits, where any Oath of Secrecy was taken, or the Sacrament, as a
Bond of secresy, either by me or any one of them, to conceal any Plot against
His Sacred Majesty; nor was I ever present at any Meeting or Consult of theirs,
where any proposal was made, or Resolve taken or signed, either by me or any of
them, for taking away the Life of our dread Sovereign; an impiety of such a
nature, that had I been present at any such Meeting, I should have been bound
by the Laws of God, and by the Principles of my Religion, (and by God's Grace
would have acted accordingly) to have dicovered such a devilish Treason to the
civil Magistrate, to the end they might have been brought to condign
punishment. I was so far, good people, from being in September last at a
Consult of the Jesuits at Tixall, in Mr. Ewer's Chamber, that I vow to God, as
I hope for Salvation, I never was so much as once that year at Tixall, my Lord
Astons House. It Is true, I was at the Congregation of the Jesuits held on the
24 th. of April was twelve month, but in that meeting, as I hope to be saved,
we meddled not with State Affairs, but only treated about the Concerns of our
Province, which is usually done by us, without offense to temporal Princes,
every third Year all the World over.

Sheriff How. You do only Justify your selves here. We will not believe a word
that you say. Spend your time in Prayer, and we will not think our time too
long.

I am, good People, as free from the Treason I am accused of, as the Child that
is unborn, and being innocent I never accused my self in Confession of any
thing that I am charged with, Certainly, if I had been conscious to my self of
any Guilt in this kind, I should not so franckly and freely, as I did, of my
own accord, have presented my self before the Kings Most Honorable Privy
Council. As for those Catholics which I have conversed with since the noise of
the Plot, I protest before God, in the words of a dying Man, that I never heard
any one of them, either Priest or Layman, express to me the least knowledge of
any Plot, that was then on foot amongst the Catholics, against the King's Most
Excellent Majesty, for the advancing the Catholic Religion. I die a Roman
Catholic, and humbly beg the Prayers of such, for my happy passage into a
better Life. I have been of that Religion above Thirty years, and now give God
Almighty infinite thanks for calling me by his holy Grace to the knowledge of
this Truth, notwithstanding the prejudice of my former Education. God of his
infinite Goodness bless the King, and all the Royal Family, and grant his
Majesty a prosperous Reign here, and a Crown of Glory hereafter. God in his
mercy forgive all those which have falsely accused me, or have had any hand in
my Death; I forgive them from the bottom of my heart, as I hope my self for
forgiveness at the Hands of God.

Mr. Turner's Prayer.
O GOD, who have Created me to a supernatural end* to serve thee in this life
by Grace, and enjoy thee in the next by Glory, be pleased to grant by the
merits of thy bitter Death and Passion, that after this wretched life shall be
ended* I may not fail of a full enjoyment of thee my last end and soverain
good* I humbly beg pardon for all the sins which I have committed against thy
Divine Majesty, since the first Instant I came to the use of Reason to this
very time. I am heartily sorry from the very bottom of my heart, for having
offended thee so good, so powerful, so wise, and so just a God, and purpose by
the help of thy Grace; never more to offend thee my good God, whom I love above
all things.

O sweet Jesus, who have suffered a most painful and ignominious Death upon the
Cross for our Salvation, apply, I beseech thee, unto me the merits of thy
Sacred Passion, and sanctify unto me these sufferings of mine, which I humbly
accept of for thy sake in union of the sufferings of thy sacred Majesty, and in
punishment and satisfaction of my sins.

O My dear Savior and Redeemer, I return thee immortal thanks for all thou
have pleased to do for me in the whole course of my life, and now in the hour
of my Death, with a firm belief of all things thou have revealed, and a
steadfast hope of obtaining everlasting bliss. I cheerfully cast my self into
the Arms of thy Mercy, whose Arms were stretched upon the Cross for my
Redemption. Sweet Jesus, receive my Spirit.

Mr. Gavan's Speech.
DEarly beloved Contrymen, I am come to the last Scene of Mortality, to the
hour of my Death, an hour which is the Horizon between Time and Eternity, an
hour which must either make me a Star to shine for ever in heaven above, or a
Firebrand to burn everlastingly amongst the damned Souls in Hell below; an hour
in which if I deal sincerely, and with a hearty sorrow acknowledge my Crimes, I
may hope for mercy; but if I falsely deny them, I must expect nothing but
Eternal Damnation: and therefore, what I shall say in this great Hour, I hope
you will believe. And now in this hour I do solemnly swear, protest, and vow,
by all that is Sacred in Heaven and on Earth, and as I hope to see the Face of
God in Glory, that I am as innocent as the Child unborn of those Treasonable
Crimes, which Mr. Oats, and Mr. Dugdale, have Sworn against me in my Trial;
and for which, Sentence of Death was pronounced against me the day after my
Trial. And that you may be assured that what I say is true, I do in like manner
protest, vow, and swear, as I hope to see the Face of God in Glory, that I do
not in what I say unto you, make use of any Equivocation, or mental
Reservation, or material Prolation, or any such like way to palliate Truth.
Neither do I make use of any Dispensations from the Pope, or any body else; or
of any Oath of Secresy, or any Absolutions in Confesion or out of Confession to
deny the Truth; but I speak in the plain sense which the words bear; and if I
do speak in any other sense, to palliate or hide the truth, I wish with all my
Soul that God may exclude me from his Heavenly Glory, and condemn me to the
lowest place of Hell Fire: and so much to that point.

And now dear Countrymen, in the second place, I do confess and own to the
whole World, that I am a Roman Catholic, and a Priest, and one of that sort of
Priests called Jesuits; and now because they are so falsely charged for holding
King-killing Doctrine, I think it my duty to protest to you with my last dying
words, that neither I in particular, nor the Jesuits in general, hold any such
opinion, but utterly abhor and detest it: and I assure you, that amongst the
vast number of Authors, which among the Jesuits have Printed Philosophy,
Divinity, Cases, or Sermons, there is not one to the best of my knowledge, that
allows of King killing Doctrine, or holds this position, That it is lawful for
a private Person to kill a King although an Heretic, although a Pagan,
although a Tyrant: there is, I say, not one Jesuit that holds this, except
Mariana, the Spanish Jesuit, and he defends it not absolutely, but only
problematically, for which his Book was called in, and that opinion expunged
and censured. And is it not a sad thing, that for the rashness of one single
Man, whilst the rest cry out against him, and hold the contrary, that a whole
Religious Order should be sentenced? But I have not time to discuss this point
at large, and therefore I refer you all to a Royal Author, I mean the wise and
victorious King Henry the Fourth of France, the Royal Grandfather of our
present gracious King, in a public Oration which he pronounced, in defense of
the Jesuits, amongst other things, declaring, that he was very well satisfied
with the Jesuits Doctrine concerning Kings, as being conformable to the best
Doctors in the Church. But why do I relate the testimony of one single Prince,
when the whole Catholic World is the Jesuits Advocate therein? Does not
Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and Flanders, trust the Education of their Youth
to them in a very great measure? Do not they trust their own Souls to be
governed by them, in the administration of the Sacraments. And can you imagine
so many great Kings and Princes, and so many wise States should do, or permit
this to be done in their Kingdoms, if the Jesuits were men of such damnable
principles as they are now taken for in England.

In the third place, dear Contrymen, I do protest, that as I never in my
life did machine, or contrive either the deposition or death of the King, so
now at my death, I do heartily desire of God to grant him a quiet and happy
Reign upon Earth, and an Everlasting Crown in Heaven. For the Judges also, and
the Jury, and all those that were any ways concerned, either in my Trial,
Accusation, or Condemnation, I do humbly beg of God, to grant them both
Temporal and Eternal happiness. And as for Mr. Oats, and Mr. Dugdale, I call
God to witness, they by false Oaths have brought me to this untimely end. I
heartily forgive them, because God commands me so to do; and I beg God for his
infinite Mercy to grant them true Sorrow and Repentance in this World, that
they may be capable of Eternal happiness in the next. And having discharged my
Duty toward my self, and my own Innocence; toward my Order, and its Doctrine;
to my Neighbor and the World, I have nothing else to do now, my great God, but
to cast my self into the Arms of your Mercy. I believe you are One Divine
Essence and Three Divine Persons, I believe that you in the Second Person of
the Trinity became Man to redeem me; and I believe you are an Eternal Rewarder
of the Good, and an Eternal Chastiser of the Bad. In sine, I belive all you
have revealed for your own infinite Veracity; I hope in you above all things,
for your infinite Fidelity; and I love you above all things, for your infinte
Beauty and Goodness; and I am heartily sorry that ever I offended so great a
God with my whole heart: I am contented to undergo an ignominious Death for the
love of you, my dear Jesu, seeing you have been pleased to undergo an
ignominious Death for the Love of me.

Mr. Fenwicks Speech
GOod People, I suppose you expect I should say something as to the Crime I am
Condemned for, and either acknowledge my Guilt, or assert my Innocence. I do
therefore declare before God and the whole World, and call God to witness that
what I say is true, that I am Innocent of what is laid to my Charge of Plotting
the King's Death, and endeavoring to subvert the Government, and bring in a
Foreign Power, as the Child unborn; and that I know nothing of it, but what I
have learned from Mr. Oats and his Companions, and what comes originally from
them.

Sher. How. If you can make a good Conclusion to your own Life, it will do
well; consider if your Letters did not agree with the Evidence, That' s another
matter.


Fenwick. I assure you; I do renounce all Treason from my very heart. I have
always, and ever shall disown the Opinion of such Devilish Practices as these
are of King-Killing. If I speak not the whole frame of my heart, I wish God may
Exclude me from his Glory.


Sher. How. Those that Murdered Sir Edmun Bury Godsrey, said as you do.


Fenwick. As for Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, I protest before God, I know nothing
of it: I never saw the man in my life.


Sher. How. For my part I am of Opinion you had a hand in it. Fenwick. Now that
I am a dying man, Do you think I would go and Damn my Soul?


Sher. How. I wish you all the good I can, but I Will assure you, I believe never
a Word you say.


Fenwick. I pray for his Majesty every day, and wish him all happiness with all
my heart. Also I do with all my Soul pardon all my Accusers. If the Judge or
Jury did any thing amiss, I Pardon them with all my Soul, and all Persons
directly or indirectly. I am very willing and ready to suffer this Death. I
pray God Pardon me my sins. and save my Soul.


And as to what is said and commonly believed of Roman Catholics, that they
are not to be believed or trusted, because they can have Dispensations for
Lying, Perjury, Killing Kings, and other the most Enormous Crimes, I do utterly
renounce all such Pardons, Dispensations, and withal declare, That it is a
most wicked and malicious Calumny cast upon Catholics, who do all with all
their hearts and souls hate and detest all such wicked and damnable Practices;
and in the words of a dying Man, and as I hope for Mercy at the hands of God,
before whom I must shortly appear and give an account of all my actions, I do
again declare, That what I have said is true, and I hope Christian Charity will
not let you think, that by the last act of my Life, I would cast away my Soul,
by sealing up my last breath with a damnable Lie.

Then they were at their private Devotions for about an hour. And Mr. Sheriff
How spoke to them; Pray aloud, Gentlemen, that we may join with you; we shall
do you no hurt, if we do you no good. Are you ashamed of your Prayers? Then he
spoke to Mr. Gavan, and said, It is Reported you did preach at the Quakers
metting.

Gavan. To which he made answer, No Sir, I never preached there in my life.

Concerning Mr. Langhorn.
MR. Langhorn was tried at the Old Baily on Saturday the 14th of June 1679, and
to make good the charge of High Treason against him Dugdale first appeared, who
proved the Plot in general, page 6.
as having been at several Consults with the Jesuits, about the Alteration of
the Government and introducing Popery, where they spoke of an Army to be
raised, of Killing the King, and a Massacre; and that he knew of page 7.
Sir Edm. Godfry's death by Ewers Letter on the Monday night, which began thus,
This very Nig^t Sir Edm. Godfry is dispatched: that upon his being concerned,
that the Plot might be spoild by it, Ewers said it would be put upon debauched
persons, for he was severe with such; yet he the said Dugdale, could not (it
ran so much in his mind) but the next morning he spoke of it at an Alehouse
hard by, and thence it was carried to Mr. Ch^twin.

Prance rose next, and deposed, page 8.
that Mr. Messenger (Gentleman of the Horse to my Lord Arundel) was employed by
his Lord, and my Lord Powis, to kill the King, and this he was told of by my
Lord's Butler; That meeting Messenger, he asked him, what his reason was, that
he would kill the King; who answered, He was off of it, now; which Question and
Answer (Reader) made many smile: Then he proceeded and said, That presently
50000 men should be raised and governed by the said Lords, to kill all that
were not Catholick^; that he heard it from Mr. Ireland, Fenwick, and Grove, who
spoke of it to him together; That Mr. Har^court acquainted him (before one
Thompson) that the King was to be killed by several; and that Fenwic said, That
Langhorn was to have a great hand in it; so that still we see here are new men
and (mean ones too) who know of the King's Death, and tell it one another for
pastime, and ordinary News.

Oats followed next, saying, page 9.
he went into Spain in April 1677, that returning in November, he brought
Letters from Mr. Langhorn's Sons, who studied there; That Mr. Langhorn at the
Receipt of them, was informed by him, that the Youths would enter into the
Society, which much rejoiced Mr. Langhorn, being a great Votary of the Jesuits,
but said, if they would continue Secular Priests, they would have great
Promotions in England, since things would not last long in this Posture; That
Mr. Langhorn did upon Oats his going to St. Omers in November give him a
Packet, and in his Letter to the Fathers, he mentioned his writing to Fa. La
Chaise, in order to their Concerns, and that Coleman had written very largely
to that Father, which made him the more brief; That Mr. Langhorn writ another
in March. or April, about ordering Five Pounds to his Son, that had bin in
Rebellion and turned Soldier, but was now reconciled to him by the Intercession
of the Fathers; In this Letter also Mr. Langhorn expressed at large his great
Care of the Catholic Design, and told them among other things, that the
Parliament Flagging, they had a fair opportunity to give the Blow; which seemed
very odd to many, That in an ordinary letter of Domestic concerns, He should
treat of such high and secret matters. Then Oats go's on and says; That after
the great Consult of April, he was ordered to acquaint Mr. Langhorn (in the
Temple) of the page 10.
MINUTES, past at the said Consult, by which he understood of Grove's and
Pickerings employment and Reward; That Mr. Langhorn (with lifted up hands and
eyes for the good success:) did then sign also the Consult, and told him, That
he had Received about fifty page 12.
Commissions from Rome; and among others showed him the Commissions for my L'd.
Arundel, Powis, Stafford, Bellassis and Peter's; as also Mr. Langhorn's own to
be Advocate of the Army, which were all page 11.
Sealed with the Jesuits Cross or Cipher, and signed by their General; the Seal
and Hand being the same as that of the Patent which Oats had then in Court,
viz. a page 14.
Pattent constituting F. Stapleton. Rector of St Omers* and found it seems
among the Jesuits Papers. That He the said, Oats saw those Commissions in his
Study upon his Desk; when as Mr. Langhorn appeals (in his Mem. p. 6.
Memoires) to all that great Company which frequented his Chamber; whether any
of them ever saw a Desk in his Study? That Mr. Langhorn gave him several page
12.
Originals from F. Anderton and La Chaise, who did assure them of his Constancy
in carrying on the Cause, and that the French King would stand by them with
page 13.
Men and Money. That Mr. Langhorn being Solicitor for the Jesuits, did
Communicate the Design to the Benedictins, who promised 6000 l. That Mr.
Langhorn called Sr. George Wakeman, a narrow soul'd Physician, for not being
content with 10000. l. That he, the said Oats, never stirred out of the page 14.
College of St. Omer from December till his coming away in April, except a
Night or two at Watten, and when he went to Paris. 'Twas here (some two
questions before) that Mr. Langhorn began to be Nice about the time of his
coming to St. Omers, etc. whereupon the Court answered, That all the Defenses
of the Papists lay in Catches about time, a thing which no man living could be
positive in, which heartned Oats not a little; for he being presently asked by
Mr. Langhorn, when he returned in April into England, he answered, about the
middle of that month, and that he stayed page 15.
under twenty days, a Latitude which he would now have fain granted him, by
reason of his ill success in the former Trial, though the Court never then
pretended (as you vid. Whites Trial, p. 77.
saw) to extend it to above eight* or ten; and because he feared Mr. Langhorn,
he desired the Court to ask the Questions, adding, that he knew they would be
so Present Trial, p. 14.
kind, as to ask him such Questions as were reasonable. After this, Mr.
Langhorn demanded whether he came with Hildestey from Dover by Coach or on
Horseback? to which Oats (after much hesitation) answered, page 15.
That the Question was so sudden, that he could not be positive; but at last
said, that as near as he could remember, It was by Coach. This strange
uncertainty amazed many, but more smild at it, considering that in truth, he
had reason for what he did, as not knowing the question was casual, but that
Mr. Langhorn might have Witnesses ready to prove how Mr. Hildesley made that
journey; nay, he would not tell Mr. Langhorn positively, whether he lay at page
16.
Grove's the first night of his coming to London, or no; though he (...)
directly sworn in Irelands Trial (as has bin mentioned before) vid. Irel.
That he was commanded to lie close at that House; so that if he had had such
Instructions, Trial, p. 36.
it was impossible for him not to remember whether he broke them or no, and
more especially at his first Arrival about so dangerous and great an affair.

Bedlow brought up the Rear, and after he had also produced (as Oats had done
before) a private Patent of the Jesuits, found by him in the search of Mr.
Arthur's House, and which (Reader you must know) is written (forsooth) in the
same Hand, and sealed with the same Seal, as the Commissions were he had seen
at Paris; I say, after this he asked (fearing there would be Witnesses to what
he said) whether a page 18.
Papist might take Notes? The Court at first thought not; But when they
understood, that the Scribe was the Marchioness Dowager of Winchester, 'twas
answered, That a Woman's Notes would signify no more than her Tongue; and then
he thus began.

page 19.
That Coleman carried him about three Years ago, to Mr. Langhorn's Chamber, who
in his presence registered several Treasonable Letters for La-Chaise, etc. some
of which had been read in Court at Coleman's Trial; page 20.
That there was no a penny of money received or paid, or the least thing done
in relation to the Plot, that was not registered by Mr. Langhorn. That a year
and a half ago, he carried a Packet from Hartcourt to be registered, That he
was registered by the name of Captain Williams, and not by his own, which he
wondering at, Hartcourt Answered, That this was but a blind Register, and that
there should be a new one; That one of these Letters, was from the Rector of
the Irish College at Salamanca, who desired the Lords, and the rest here to be
ready; for that he had provided at the Groin, as Pilgrims, several Irish
cashiered Soldiers and Bandits, as also a great many Lay-Brothers, who landing
at Milford, should be joined with the Army my Lord Powis was to raise, page 21.
That in May 76. he carried a Letter to Mr. Stapleton the Benedictin, to raise
money for England: That Pritchard told him; That Mr. Langhorn had Commissions;
That Sir H. page 22.
Tichbourn showed him three at Paris, signed by the General of the Jesuits, and
sealed with their Seal, like the beforementioned Patent. That he knows only by
report, of Mr. Langhorn's being privy to Grove's and Pickering's design of
Killing the King; for having a mind to go to Windasor, to see what the
Assassines did, he asked Hartcourt leave, as if he went to a friend at Plymouth;
who Answered, He could not be spared, till they knew how the Gentlemen had
succeeded; and that he, the said Hartcourt, was going to Mr. Langhorns, to take
the MINVTES, which was the contrivance of sending down the Assassines to
New Market. That page 23.
the Letter, which he saw Mr. Langhorn Register to the Benedictins beyond Sea,
was to Solicit them to get their contributions ready, since the Hearts and
Arms of the party (...) ready here; and, That in the French Letter to F. La
Chaise (Registered also by Mr. Langhorn) there were invitations to that King to
invade us. Now upon Mr. Langhorn's saying that he understood only Law-French,
as an Argument that he could be no Register, and upon Bedlow's confessing he
never heard him discourse in French, Oats (to salve the difficulty) cried out
(and thereby made not a few laugh) That he himself could neither write not read
French, but he could Translate it. And when Bedlow* was asked by Mr. Langhorn,
whether Mr. Coleman's Letter (Transcribed by him) were long like those in the
Narrative or no; the said Bedlow Answered, The best part of half a sheet of
Paper; for Coleman writ a curious fine small hand, and would thereby put a
great deal in a little room; which very much surprised all that knew Coleman,
who was far from writing a curious, or fine hand, and far from a small one
also. Nor was this the only thing that amazed the Auditors, for both Oats and
Bedlow openly declared in Court, when Mr. Langhorn charged them with Rewards,
Gratifications* and the like, that they were so far from any benefit by the
Discovery, page 27. and* 28.
That they were out of pocket 700. l. a piece, and yet the one was proved the
day before, to line (...) Gaol on the vid. Whites Trial, p. 76.
Basket, and the (...) as deplorable? as a Man of ^e^p^ll'd the College, and
des^tut of Friends could^ be (...) Nay, there were several Witnesses at hand*
Ibid. p. 91.
to prove also Oiteo's, wretched poverty, but by not appearing presently at
call, the 'Court went on to other matters. Besides Reader, you may imagine that
Mr. Langhorn's Friends and Acquaintance, were not a little confounded, to find
Bedlow saying Thus. Pres. Trial page; 20.
I saw him Register Colemauys Letter to his Studjl, whilst Coleman and I
walk^^^ in his Chamber; when as all knew (as he hints in his page 6.
Memoires) That it is impossible to see one out of his Chamber writing in his
Study.

Mr. Langhorn being asked, The Pres. Trial. p. 26.
what he had to say to all this, Answered, page 28.
That he had been a close Prisoner from the Seventeenth of October, and never
conversed with any Friend to tell him news, nor could he foresee what these
men would testify; so that the main of his Defense was to lessen their
Evidence, and thereupon he called the 19 St. Omer's Witnesses, etc. who proved
as before, both Oats his being constantly at St. Omers from December to June,
and that Sir Thomas ^reston, Sir John Warner, etc. were not in England either
in April or May. But here the Court too (...) great Exceptions at the Gardener
of Watten, who was a Dutch man, and could scarce speak English, for being asked
how he could be so ^onctual as to Sir J. Warners being there all April and May,
and not so in July and other Months. page 33.
he Answered, because Sir John, in the Rector's absence (who went then into
England,) supplied his place; that he did not take so much notice of him (at
other times: and besides, That the Question that he came for, did fall in those
months and not in July, etc. whereupon the Court inferred* That he had his
part given him, and the rest, and consequently, that there was no credit to be
given to them. Now his meaning was this (and every body was thought to
understand him so) viz. That all the World ringing by reason of the Printed
Trials and the like, with the noise, That Sir John was at London in such and
such months, he had reflected on the several circumstances in relation to the
said months, and therefore could positively speak to them, when as for the
others he never considered or dreamt of them.

Then Mrs. Grove and her Maid a Protestant appeared, who witnessed page 42, and
43.
that Oats never lay there, for they knew him not; that all March, April, and
May, the House was full of Lodgers, whom they knew; and that Mrs. Fitzherbert
lay: then in that room which Oats pretended was his; but because the Mistress
(being demanded who lay there in June and July) answered* that she was not to
be examined further then April and May they were both slighted and dismissed like
the Gardener, though the Maid positively page 43.
named Mrs Fitzberbert as there then; nor did Mrs. Grove mean any thing else by
the words, but that April and May were the only months which Oats pretended
to, as lodging at her house. * After this, Mr. Langhorn called for the
Authentic Copy of the Record out of the Lords House, which though it were in
the beginning of his Trial granted not only by Oats, but by the Court also,
that (if he had one) it should be page 15.
read, yet now 'twas denied, and Chief Justice North said* page 44.
It was unreasonable to think a man should be prepared to justify all he has
sworn in his life; besides 'twas absolutely determined, that he should not
prove even by page ib.
Witnesses, what Oats had said against him at another Trial; which was thought
very hard After this, came the Mistress of the White-Horse, a Protestant also,
page 46.
who said she had kept that Tavern Seven Years, that she had never seen Mr.
Oats before. That it was a small inconsiderable House, that there was no room
would hold above a dozen, and that she remembers not so great a company at one
time, unless at a Parish Jury, page 47.
who were divided into three rooms: Now Oats fearing much this Witness at
first insisted on his privilege of not answering to any question relating to a
former Trial, and therefore would not tell the Prisoner how many Jesuits met
here; but the Chief Justice persuading him to speak page 46.
he answered at last, about Eighteen or Twenty (and not Fifty Reader, as
formerly) and that these were also, in two or three several rooms; which not a
few deemed nonsense, and contrary to the Nature of a Consult; for that
requires that the Members should be together; and besides the Meeting according
to this rate comes but to about three Clubs or Colloquies (as he calls them)
which were still kept (according to his usual story) in other places, the
general Randezvous being only here. But Oats was soon comforted; for upon the
woman's Evidence there stood up one that attested, that there were Rooms there,
that would hold Thirty; and then another, that he was at a Wedding there, where
Dined above Twenty, and so she made her Exit like the rest, and retired. But
this ended not thus; for after the Trial, several went to view this so much
talked of Tavern, and though it is back part be rebuilt since April 78. yet the
Jesuits famous Room still remains, being about four Yards and a half square,
and consequently not able with any convenience to contain above a dozen; no
wonder therefore, if people can hardly comprehend how such a number of
Politicians could meet there; or why they should choose the poorest Tavern in
all London or Westminster, and where every extraordinary company, must
necessarily be taken notice of; I say people cannot comprehend this, and
especially they that knew Mr. White's, Mr. Hartcourt's, and Mr. Ireland's
Chambers, either of which (besides the us doubtless of the respective Houses,
upon any extraordinary occasion) is almost twice as big as the pretended one,
and would have been 100 times more convenient to all intents and purposes
whatsoever.

After this, the Prisoner asked Oats about his distributing the Commissions who
averred, that page 49.
He (the said Prisoner) had told him in July or August, that he had distributed
them, which* Mr. Langhorn urged to be quite contrary to his former Oath* as
having sworn in Coleman's Trial, Vid. Col. Trial. p. 29.
That he never saw him after the day in April, when he brought him the Result,
and particulars of that grand Meeting as aforesaid. But this home Charge came
to nothing, because there were no Witnesses ready to prove it viva voce; for as
to the Print, (though published by the Chief* Justice.) it was refused, since a
man was not (as Pres. Trial. page 50.
Mr. Justice Pemberton Answered) to be Convicted by a History. The Prisoner
urged again the Record of the Lords House, which could show, that Bedlow had
there sworn, page 48.
that he had no persons more to accuse either in or out of the House* than
those he had already mentioned; so that He Mr. Langhorn, not being one of them,
the said Bedlow must be perjured; but this was denied him, as was also the
hearing of Witnesses to prove, that Bedlow had owned in Mr. Reading's Trial,
that he had formerly minc't his Evidence against Mr. Whitebread, which was
plain perjury, since he then swore, to speak the whole. Truth, as well as
nothing but Truth.

Mr. Langhorn (though he thought he had hard measure) patiently acquiest, for
he was a very quiet and modest man; and then the Court called the Witnesses
that proved (in the preceding Trial) Oates's being here in April; but all of
them in some material thing or other page 52.
varied from their former Depositions; for, Walker the Minister (finding it
necessary to advance in his computation about the time when he drew Oats the
next morning within the Scheme of his Knowledge (as he worded it in the former
Trial) tells us now, page 52.
that he believes it was in April, and toward the middle of it, though in the
said former Trial he made it every whit as likely to be in the Vid. Whites
Trial. p. 80.
latter end of March; and yet half April could not then serve (you see) Oats
his turn. But Cicily Mayo on the contrary (finding it as necessary to shorten
her time) will have it, page 54.
That it was a matter of a fortnight before Whitsuntide (as she remembers) when
she saw Oats at the Doctor's; and yet before, she not only deposed, That it
was the week before Whit suntide (or May the 19) but that he came again to them
a week after. As for the Doctor or Knight himself (who was to assure the Court
that his servants told him of Oats his visits) he now tells us, that he was
then sick in the page ib.
Country, whereas before he swears in these words, vid. Whites Trial. p. 82.
At that time (says he) that they have given in Evidence, I was abroad, as my
business leads me often abroad into the Country; or this Treatise, p. 32.
and then he add's a little after, that upon the visit of a Gentleman he fell
ill, in which time Oats was gone, but upon his Recovery (to wit in June or
July) He came to enquire for Dr. Tongue: So that if the said Doctor or Knight
were sick and out of Town from February, to Whitsun week or latter end of May,
as his Pres. Trial. page 53.
Coachman and page 54.
He both now depose, what becomes of his Boy Page's Testimony, that remembered
(the day before) Oats to have been at his Masters in the beginning of May,
because his said Master had a Patient in vid. Whites Trial, p. 82.
I slington Sick of a Feavor; nay, what shall be thought of the said Doctor
himself, who (to vouch the Boy, and to satisfy the Jury) swore then, that that
Patient of his was Ibid.
Aldram Milvers daughter, when as here we find him not in the Country about his
business, but under the Care of Doctor Needham, and to be a Patient himself by
his own Confession for a great many weeks together. The School-Master's also
showed that he understood his business; for having well considered Mr. Gavans
late Inferences, he swore at present only, that it was on the first Monday in
May, Present Trial, p. 56.
to the best, for sooth, of his Remembrance, and, as he takes it; which are
expressions far different from the words Yes I do, when* the Judge asked him,
vid. Whites Trial, p. 84.
if he swear positively and directly.

As for Clay the old Priest, he was confronted by Mr. Charles Howard (the Duke
of Norfolks Brother) who was only examined, though his wife and two servants
were also present to attest, That Oats was never with them after April 77,
till July, 78. Nor were these the sole witnesses that were past by; for it had
often happened thus both in this and the Jesuits Trial, there being above 30,
who never came to their Examinations, either for want of hearing or of being
called. Now because Mr. Howard feared his Testimony in Court might be altered
by the Writers of the Trial, he gave the following account to several of his
friends, under his own hand, one of which came accidentally into mine: Nay he
sent one to Oats himself, to the end no foul play might be used with him.

An Account of what the Honorable Charles Howard said at the old Baily, June,
14. 1679. As he attest's under his own hand.
June, 14. 1679.
AT the Old Baily I'was examined how long I had been acquainted with Mr. Oats,
and at what times I had seen him? I answered, That I had bin acquainted with
him two years or something more, That I did see him in Arundel House, in April
1677. That upon the Fifth day of May following my Son Charles died. and that I
have another Son living; That after that time I did not see Dr. Oats until the
third day of July, 1678.

That after the said Third of July, Mr. Clay did see Dr. Oats with me at
Arundel House in my Chamber, and not before in my sight, but how many times I
do not remember.

That possibly Mr. Clay might see Dr. Oats before I did, but as to that, I
could say nothing.

Charles Howard.

Besides, it must be remembered, that Mr. Howard (above a month before) had bin
examined by a Committee of the Lords about this business, in the presence of
Clay and Oats, where he satisfied their Lordships so well by the time of his
Son Charles's Death (who had (as he told the said Lords) bin Examined or posed
by Oats in April 77) and by many other Circumstances concerning the whole
matter, that Clay himself confessed he might be mistaken in time, and that since
Mr. Howard (who had a better memory than he,) said Oats was not at his House
in April 78. he would no longer gainsay it, or words to that purpose.

Mr. Langhorn being found Guilty, was Condemned with the five Jesuits that very
day, and on the Fourteenth of July he was drawn to Tyburn, where he publicly
declared his Innocence, as appears by the following Speech, which he left
written under his own hand.

Mr. Langhorns's written Speech, and Prologue.
IN regard I could not foresee whether I should be permitted to speak at my
Death, so as to make a public Declaration of my Innocence and Loyalty, as a
Christian ought to do; considering likewise, that if it should be permitted
unto me, it would be more advisable for me rather to prepare before hand, and
set down in writing the very words in which I should make my Declaration, than
to trust my memory with them; to the end that the same may be well considered
of, and digested by me, and that all mistakes might be prevented, as far as may
be: I say, in regard of this, I have in the present Paper reduced what I have
to declare, as to my Innocence and Loyalty; and it is in these following Words.

I Do solemnly and sincerely, in the presence of Almighty God, profess, testify
and declare, as follows: That is to say,

1. That I do with my heart and soul, believe and own my most Gracious
Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, King Charles the Second, to be my true and
lawful Sovereign, Prince and King, in the same sense and latitude, to all
intents and purposes, as in the Oath commonly called, The Oath of Allegiance,
His said Majesty is expressed to be King of this Realm of England.

2. That I do in my soul believe, That neither the Pope, nor any Prince,
Potentate, or Foreign Authority, nor the people of England, nor any Authority
out of this Kingdom, or within the same, has or have any Right to dispossess.
His said Majesty of the Crown or Government of England, or to depose him
therefrom, for any Cause or pretended Cause whatsoever, or to give license to
me, or to any other of His said Ma^esties Subjects whatsoever, to bear Arms
against His said Majesty, or to take away his Life, or to do him any bodily
harm, or to disturb the Government of this Kingdom, as the same is now
established by Law, or to alter, or go about to alter the said Government, or
the Religion now established in England, by any way of force.

3. That I neither am, nor ever was, at any time or times, guilty so (much as
in my most secret thoughts, of any Treason, or misprision of Treason whatsoever.

4. That I did not in the Month of November, or at any other time or times
whatsoever, say unto Mr. Oats, or unto any other person or persons whatsoever,
in relation to my Sons in Spain, or either of them, or in relation to any other
person or persons whatsoever, That if they did continue in the World, (as
Secular Priests, of otherwise) they should suddenly have great promotions in
England, for that things would not last long in the posture wherein they then
were; nor did I ever say any words to that or the like effect to any person or
persons whatsoever.

5. That I did never in all my lifetime write any Letter, or other thing
whatsoever, unto, or receive any Letter or other thing, from Father La Chese,
or any French Jesuit whatsoever, or from Father. Anderton, or Cardinal
Barbarino; or any other Cardinal; nor did I ever see any Letter, or the Copy of
any Letter, or other paper, or other thing, written or purporting to be written
unto the said La Chese, or unto the said Father Anderton, or the said Cardinal
Barbarina, by any person or persons whatsoever, other than the printed Letters,
printed in the Narrative of the Trial of Mr. Coleman, lately executed, which I
never saw otherwise than in the said printed Narrative; nor did I ever hear any
mention made by any person whatsoever of the Name of La Chese, or Father La
Chese, before I read the said printed Narrative.

6. That I did never in all my lifetime make any Entry or Entries, into any
Book or Books, or take, or make, or write, or cause to be written into any Book
or books, or otherwise any Letter or Letters, or any Copy or Copies of any
Letter or Letters, written by the said Edward Coleman, to any person or persons
whatsoever.

7. That I did never in all my lifetime enter or register into any Book or
books, Paper or papers whatsoever, or take, or make, or Write, or cause to be
written, any Copy or Copies, of any Act or Acts, Consult or Consults,
Determination or Determinations, Order or Orders, Resolve or Resolves, or other
matter or thing, at any time made, determined, resolved, passed, decreed or
agitated, at any Congregation or Congregations, Consult or Consults, Chapter or
Chapters, Assembly or Assemblies, of the Society or Order of the Jesuits, or of
any other Religions Order whatsoever; nor did I ever see, read, or heard read,
nor did any person or persons, at any time whatsoever, ever Communicate unto
me, any such Act, Consult, Determination, Order, Resolve, Matter or Thing
whatsoever.

8. That I did never in all my lifetime, to my knowledge, belief or remembrane,
see or speak with Mr. Bedloe, who gave Evidence against me at my Trial, until I
saw him in that Court wherein he gave Evidence against me.

9. That after the month of November, which was in the year of our Lord 1677.
I did never see or speak with Mr. Titus Oats before named, until I saw him in
the same Court where he gave Evidence against me at my Trial.

10. That I did never see in all my lifetime, to my knowledge, belief or
remembrance, any Commission or Commissions, Pattent or Patents, Grant or
Grants, Order or Orders, Instrument or Instruments, Writing or Writings, or
other matter or thing whatsoever, under, or pretended to be under the Hand and
Seal, or the Hand or the Seal of Johannes Paulus de Oliva, or any other General
of the Jesuits whatsoever, other then the Paper or Instrument produced and
showed unto me in the said Court at my Trial, which whether it was signed or
sealed by the said de Oliva, I do not know.

11. That I did never in all my lifetime write, or cause or procure to be
written, any Treasonable Letter or Letters whatsoever, or any thing which was
or is Treason, or Treasonable in any Letter or Letters, Book or books, Paper or
papers, or otherwise howsoever.

12. That I believe, that if I did know, or should know of any Treason or
Treasonable Design, that was or is intended, or should be intended, against His
said Majesty, or the Government of this His Majesty's Kingdom, or for the
Alteration by force, advice or otherwise, of the said Government, or of the
Religion now established in this Kingdom, and should conceal and not discover
the same unto his said Majesty, or his said Majesty's Council or Ministers or
some of them; that such concealment would be in me a sin unto Death, and
Eternal Damnation.

13. That I do believe, that it is no ways lawful for me to lie, or speak any
thing which I know to be untrue; or to commit any sin, or do any Evil, that
Good may come of it. And that it is not in the Power of any Priest, or of the
Pope, or of God himself, to give me a License to Lie, or to speak any thing
which I know to be untrue, because every such Lie would be a sin against Truth:
And Almighty God, who is perfect Truth, cannot give me a License to commit a
sin against his own Essence.

And I do solemnly in the presence of God, Profess, Testify and Declare, That
as I hope for Salvation, and expect any benefit by the Blood and Passion of my
dearest Savior Jesus Christ, I do make this Declaration and Protestation and
every part thereof in the Plain and Ordinary Sense, wherein the same stands
Written, as they are commonly understood by English Protestants and the Courts
of Justice of England without any Evasion, or Equivocation, or Delusion, or
Mental Reservation whatsoever. And without any Dispensation or Pardon, or
Absolution already granted to me, for this or any other purpose by the Pope or
any other Power, Authority or Person whatsoever, Or, without any hope,
expectation or desire of any such Dispensation; and without thinking or
believing that I am or can be acquitted before God or Man, or absolved of this
Declaration or any part thereof, although the Pope or any other Person or
persons, or Power or Authority whatsoever should dispense with, Or take upon
him or them to dispense with, or Annul the same, Or declare that it was, or is,
or ought to be Null or Void in part, or in the whole, from the beginning, or
otherwise howsoever.

Having made this Declaration and Protestation in the most plain Terms that I
can possibly imagine to express my sincere Loyalty and Innocence, and the clear
intention of my Soul, I leave it to the Judgment of all Good and Charitable
persons whether they will believe what is here in this manner affirmed and
sworn by me in my present Circumstances, or what is sworn by my Accusers.

I do now farther declare, That I die a member (though an unworthy one) of that
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, mentioned in the Three Holy and
public Creeds of which Church our Lord Jesus* Christ is the Invisible Head of
Influence, to illuminate, guide, protect* and govern it by his Holy Spirit and
Grace, and of which Church, the Bishop of Rome, as the Successor of St. Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles, is the visible Head of Government and Unity.

I take it to be clear, That my Religion is the sole cause, which moved my
Accusers to charge me with the Crime, for which upon their Evidence I am
adjudged to die, and that my being of that Religion, which I here prosess, was
the only ground which could give them any hope to be believed, or which could
move my Ju^^y to believe the Evidence of such men.

I have had not only a Pardon, but also great Advantages, as to preferments and
Estates offered unto me, since this Judgment was against me, in case I would
have forsaken my Religion, and owned my self guilty of the Crime charged
against me, and charged the same Crimes upon others: But blessed be my God, who
by his Grace has preserved me from yiedling to those Temptations, and
strengthened me rather to choose this death, than to stain my Soul with sin,
and to charge others, against truth, with Crimes, of which I do not know that
any person is guilty.

Having said what concerns me to say as to my self, I now humbly beseech God to
bless the Kings Majesty with all temporal and eternal Blessings, and to
preserve Him and His Government from all Treasons and Traitors whatsoever, and
that his Majesty may never fall into such hands, as His Royal Father of
Glorious Memory fell into.

I also humbly beseeh thee (O God) to give true Repentance and Pardon to all my
Enemies, and most particularly to the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe, and to all
who have been any ways accessory to the taking away of my Life, and the
shedding of my Innocent Blood, or to the preventing the King's Mercy from being
extended unto me; and likewise to all those who rejoiced at the Judgment given
against me, or at the Execution of the said Judgment; and to all those who are
or shall be so unchristianly uncharitable, as to disbelieve, and to refuse to
give credit unto my now Protestations.

And I beseech thee (O my God) to bless this whole Nation, and not to lay the
guilt of my Blood unto the charge of this Nation, or of any other particular
person or persons of this Nation. Unite all (O my God) unto thee and thy
Church, by true Faith, Hope, and Charity, for thy mercies sake.

And for all those who have showed Charity to me, I humbly beg (O my Jesus)
that thou will reward them with all Blessings both temporal and eternal.

13 July, 1679. R. Langhorn.

Mr. Langhorns's Speech at the time of Execution.
WHen the Hangman was putting the Rope over his Head, he took it into his
hands, and kissed it. Afterward He said: I would gladly speak to Mr. Sheriff
HOW; who coming up to him he addressed himself thus:

Mr. Sheriff. I having some doubt, whether I should be suffered to speak, in
relation to my Innocence and Loyalty, I did, for that Reason, prepare what I
had to say, and what I intended to say in Writing, and it is delivered into
your hands, Mr. Sheriff; and therefore for the particular and precise Words and
Expressions, I do refer my self to that, and I hope you will be so just to my
Memory, that you will permit it to be seen.

I shall therefore make only a short Preface, and I do declare, in the Presence
of the Eternal God, and as I hope to be saved by the Merits and Death of my
dear Jesus, That I am not Guilty directly or indirectly, of any Crime that was
sworn against me; I do not speak this to Arraign the Court of Public Justice,
either Judges or Jury, but those Men that did swear it; and the Jury had
liberty to believe, or not believe, as they pleased; And I do like wise say,
with the same Averrment, That I did never in my Life see any Commission or
Patent, or any Writing, or any other Thing, under the hand of Johannes Paulus
de Oliva. etc.

S. Nor under no other Hand.?


L. No, nor under any other Hand, of any Commission or Patents, for the Raising
of an Army, or any Thing else against the King.


S. What was the Patent for? for Nothing!


L. I never saw any, nor do I believe there was any: And whereas I have read in
a Narrative, that I sent a Commission by my Son, to the Lord Arundel of Warder,
and that I delive'rd another to the Lord Petre (or Petres) with my own hands, I
take God to Witness, that I never knew him in my life, or ever, to my
knowledge, saw the face of that Lord; nor did I send or know of any thing that
was sent to my Lord Arundel of Warder, of that nature.


S. Shorten your business, you have, Mr. Langhorn, and your Party, so many ways
to Equivocate, and after Absolution you may say any thing.


L. I refer my self to that Paper I gave you, Mr. Sheriff.


S. I think it is not fit to be Printed. I will do you no wrong.


L. I do not think you will.


S. You have already printed a Paper, or some body for you.


L. Sir, I did not Print it, and it was done without any Direction or
Permission of mine. The Lord preserve his Majesty from all manner of Treason,
and preserve Him from falling into such Hands, as His Royal Father, of Glorious
Memory, fell under; I pray god forgive my Enemies, as I freely do those that
Accused me, those that witnessed against me; and all others that either desired
my Blood, or rejoice at the shedding of it; and all Persons that have any ways
concerned themselves with me, I freely forgive them with all my Soul, and beg
my dear Jesus to forgive them, and all others. God Almighty bless you, and
bless the whole Nation, and the Government, and preserve it from all Evil and
Mischief that I am afraid is coming on it, for the shedding of Innocent Blood.
Sweet Jesus, lay not my Innocent Blood to their Charge.

I shall say no more now Publicly.

Asked the Executioner, Whether the Rope was right or no? He said, Yes; and he
asked him, Whether he did forgive him? To which Mr. Langhorne said, I freely do.

I shall now recommend my self to God in Private.


S. You may have liberty. The Writer. The Lord have Mercy on your Soul.


L. The Lord in Heaven Reward your Charity. Crossed himself, prayed again.


Blessed Jesus, into thy Hands I recommend my Soul and Spirit, now at this
instant take me into Paradise; I am desirous to be with my Jesus; I am ready,
and you need stay no longer for me.

Concerning Sr. George Wakeman, Mr. Corker, Mr Marsh, alias Marshal, and Mr.
Rumley.
THese were Tried at the Old Bayley on the 18. of July, against whom Dugdale
first appearing, repeats his former Story of his knowing long ago something of
the page 8.
Plot, but more particularly, about two years since; That the Killing of the
King* and Duke of Monmouth was told him by the page 9.
Priests and my L'd. Stafford. That Hartcourts Letters (besides others) were
ever directed to him, frought with the Business of the Plot; That he opened
many of them privately, and that he kept those, he could not handsomely Seal
again; which Reader, infinitely amazed the Auditory, as not being able to
imagine, why if he were such a Privado, he should play such Tricks with his
Fellows, and especially when there was no design or Advantage in it; for he had
not one of them to produce, as the page 18.
Prisoners urged; Nor could any body comprehend how the Conspirators themselves
should have Letters of such Concern intercepted, and not be presently in an
Uproar. Then he said page 9.
that Sr. James Symons, Mr. Howard, Mr. Gerard and Mr. Adderley were to be
Officers in the Army which was to be raised; That he saw St. Omer Acquittances
of July last, of the Payment of the money for this Affair; That in a Letter
directed to him, there was also caution given. That no Rumor should be of
Arms, or any thing else, till the King were dispatched; but he could not now
recollect, either who wrote it, or its Date, or from whence it came, and yet
'twas brought by the page 14.
Common Post; all which seemed very strange to the Court, nor did the Prisoners
(besides the other mad Assertions) fail often to insist upon this Letter, so
that Ibid.
Dugdal (being perplexed and Confounded) was forced to run to another
(forsooth) brought by a particular Messenger, and Communicated also to my Lord
Aston, which at last proved as wild and odd as the former; for it came he said,
from Paris, and from Sr. John Warner as he thinks, promising them not only all
Assistance, but advising them also to lay the Kings murder on the King-killing
Presbiterians, which would make the Church of England join with the Papists, to
cut them off; and that my Lord Stafford, Bellasis, and Arundel did approve of
this Advice, by setting their very Ibid.
Hands to it, which Reader was incredible. Moreover he affirmed (besides the
notice of Sr. E. Godfreys Death as before) That my Lord Stafford (who came down
about July last) offered him page 11.
500 l. as a present Encouragement for Killing the King, and to be received at
his Arrival at London in October; That they had all a great Confidence in him;
for he had bin free of his Purse in giving the Priests page 13.
400 l. secured upon Lands, and 100 l. more on promise; a passage page 19.
Mr. Corker made sport with, as thinking it very pleasant and pretty, for him to
give 500 l. with one hand, for the promotion of the Cause, and then for
Encouragement, to receive as much with the other. Nor had D^gdal any better
Reply ready, than that my Lord Stafford (he supposes) knew not of the money
given before by him; which was far from answering the Difficulty, why such a
Zealot as he should have Encouragement for his bare personal help, even out of
the present public Stock, especially when he page 13.
confesses, the Contributions were so backward, that Mr. Peter' s complained to
him of it. But the Evidence that made the most Mirth, both then and since, was
Mr. Whites Letter, sent by the Common Post (as he also mentions in the former
Trial) to command Mr. Evers in express Terms, To Choose hardy persons to kill
the King; for the p. 10, and 1 6.
Expedient in case Letters did miscarry (which made not a few Laugh outright)
was, That he the said Dugdal should be the only Person hanged; the Jesuits
having, (as he assures the page 10.
Court so devised it, That they never subscib'd but two Letters of their names,
and the packet being directed to him, he was upon all accidents to deny it, and
to observe the Secrecy, (which they had at least ten times sworn him to) and
then they could not be discovered (he said) but must go page 16.
free, seeing all was flung upon him.

This Evidence being thus without either Head or Tail, Rhyme, or Reason, the
King's Counsel told the Prisoners. that it was not to affect any in particular,
but to prove the Plot in general, whereupon page 12.
Sr. G. Wakeman readily answered, That it was the worst made out, that ever any
thing was, he believes. ^rance therefore being next, repeats also his old Tale,
page 20.
and among the particulars, of my Lord Arundel's Butler's acquainting him That
the King was to be killed by Mr. Messenger and then Mr. Messenger's Answering
him afterward in surprise when he found ^rance knew it, That they were now off
the Business: and then he adds as new, That Mr. Paston told him, that Sr. Henry
Benningfield Mr. Stoner, and Mr. Talbot of Long-ford had Commissions to to
raise an Army, which was to be Governed by the Ld's Bellasis, Powis, and
Peter's, as G^ove assured him, whilst he was buying silver Spoons of him for a
Christning.

Then stood up a new Witness, to wit, Mr. Robert Jennison, who said, page 21.
That Mr. Ireland told him in June 78, (his sister Anne Ireland being by,) that
there was hope of the Restoration of their Religion; that only one stood in
the Gap; and that it was easy to poison the King: That he (the said Witness)
called it a horrid Action; That Mrs Ireland did rebuke her Brother for talking
so, who answered, That he thought it ought not to be done; That Mr. Jennison
replied that Violence would never do the thing, it being a Scandal to their
Religion, as appeared by the Gunpowder Plot, which Mr. Ireland said, was a
state-trick and Cicils Invention. That he was then a Papist though now a
Protestant; page 22.
That he went to Windsor on Saturday the 17th of August; That on Monday the
19th, he returned about Noon, and then positively saw Mr. Ireland in his
Chamber in Russel street pulling off his Boots as newly come from
Staffordshire. That Mr. Ireland (upon his the said Mr. Jenison's telling him,
That the King in his fishing Divertisements at Windsor had usually but three or
four with him,) answered page 23.
He wondered he went with so few, for he might easiely be taken off; That he
replied, God forbid; which Mr. Ireland qualifieing, he made no ill reflections
on it, 'till after the discovery of the Plot, and then speaking of it to his
Father and Sisters (for he went hence homewards on the 4th of September) he
said, to them, pray God there be nothing in the Plot, for it is Suspicious by
reason of My Cousin Ireland's discourse; Besides he writ (as he pretends) on
the 19th of December last a Letter of these particulars to one page 24.
Mr. Bows, who produced it in Court, and is since printed in Mr. Chetwins Nar.
p. 3.
Narrative, where he declares, that all that He lays hold on in the Kings then
Proclamation (for the Encouragement of Discoverers) was pardon for concealing
the aforesaid Circumstances; for it is all he can tell, as he hopes for the
forgiveness of his sins, and eternal Salvation; nor did he ever hear (as he
hopes for life everlasting,) either Mr. Ireland or any of them defend or
maintain in the least, the damnable Doctrine of, Deposing Kings, which made him
have no ill opinion then of the Expressions. One Circumstance (he says) there
is more, which has (considering the times) an ill sound with it, Nar. p. 4.
and then he will have cleared his Soul; The Circumstances is, That Mr. Ireland
said 'Twice or Thrice at their parting, that he had some business to
Communicate to him, but when he urged him to tell it, he answered, he would
take some other occasion to do it, but never did.

Thus, is seen, what this Witness has said, or can credibly say as to this
business; for he that in a Letter or otherwise, will with imprecations and
Oaths declare, he has no more to say to a thing, is upon any further Evidence
as much a perjured man in Conscience, (and consequently as little to be
believed) as he that deviating from his Recorded Despositions in a Court of
Judicature, has been therefore punished with his Ears as the Law orders and
awards. Now that you may also know what this person is, I must tell you his
Father is a Gentleman in Durham of about 500 a year at most; he is the Eldest
Son as to the Estate, in case his Brother Thomas (who they say is a Priest)
turns not Protestant after his Example; so that his Temporal Gain depends
wholly on the Spiritual loss, and Popish blindness of the other; who (by the
way) is reputed a very notable and quick sighted Scholar in all learning, and
yet is as unfit a man, (I Will assure you) for a Plot of this nature, as ever
was; and truly so most of the Conspirators have been. His Father sent the
aforesaid Robert a while ago (with a small Allowance) to Greys Inn to study
the Law, but instead of it, he has learned to run in Debt, and is a Proficient
to that Degree (as all that know him can testify), that no body would longer
trust him, and therefore was forced to pawn all the little Necessaries he had.
Besides he has had a Mother in Law, by whom his Father has a very plentiful
stock of Children, and Consequently want's no Heirs; Nay there is a third
Brother, besides daughters by the first venture, so that considering his late
life and other Accidents, neither Oats nor Bedlow had more need of their
present employment and profession than he. As for his knowledge of the Plot, or
of Mr. Ireland's being here, take this short Account; That at Easter last, (the
Lords providing for their Trial) summoned by an order of the House several
persons of quality out of Staffordshire, as Witnesses of Mr. Ireland's being
there all August; and among them Madam Harwell Mr. Jennison's Aunt, his Cousin
her daughter, and others of his Acquaintance came to Town, whom he often
visited, and showed them also Letters newly received from his Brother Thomas in
Newgate, which mentioned several Witnesses that could prove him in
Lincolnshire and else where in the Country, whilst Oats in his Narrative says
he was at Consults here in London: nor did Mr. Robert fail of railing at the
said Oats and Bedlow, and the rest of the Cabal for their Villainy; and was so
far from pretending then, That Mr. Ireland was in Town on the 19th of August,
that he knew his said Relations were come purposely to prove him with them that
very day; Nay (on the 13 of June, or the Jesuits Trial) He came to the three
Cranes among the Crow'd of Witnesses, and even Ushered into Court his young
Cousin Harwell to that very end, who (besides several others) vid. White's
Trial, p. 73.
averred (as it appears in the Print) That Mr. Ireland was to her knowledge
every day (but the 23th.) in her mothers house, from the 17th of August to the
26th, the time he returned to Tixhal. Let the world therefore judge, what a
Witness he is; and moreover it can, and shall be made appear by two and Twenty
persons (many of them of quality, and many also Protestants) that Mr. Ireland
was on the said 19th with his Aunt in Hampton, as I now mentioned. The like ill
luck also befell Sarah Pain, who pitched (as you have seen) on the 12 of this
Month, as the Day of her Saluting Mr. Ireland in Town; for then he was in the
midst of his Holy well journey with 35 in company, as my Lady Southcot and her
Family with several others of Note and fashion will Witness.

Here it was, that the King's Council admonished the Prisoners, page 25.
That now it would behove them to take Notes, (as if, Reader, Hector himself
with all his God's were at hand) and they no longer to be dallied with:
Whereupon Oats being called he began at the first onset with the most
Stupendous Circumstance that ever was heard of; for he deposed, That Mr. Ash^y
Arriving here ill from St Omers in July, Sir George ordered him to go to the
Bath, and sending him a Letter of Physical Instructions how to govern himself
(viz to take a Pint of Milk every Morning, and as much at night, and 100
strokes of the Pump) He (the said Sir George) mentioned in it, not only,
Poisoning the King, page 26.
but that the Queen would also assist him in it. Then he proceed's saying, that
he knew this to be Sir George's hand by another Letter a day or two after,
which could not be but his, for Sir George had it before him in a Writing
posture, and he saw him put by the Pen, and found the Ink not yet dry, nor was
there any body else to write, Mr. Ashby being Lame. That Oats heard Ashby talk
to him of the Commission he had received of being Physician to the Army; That
presently there came one Sir Richard or Sir Robert (a brisk man, about 45 years
old) to call Father Keines, Langworth, Fenwick, Hartcourt, and another to wait
on her Majesty at Somersethouse; That Oats accompanied them, and staying in
the Antichamber whilst they went into her Room, he heard a Woman, (after
expressing much zeal for her Religion and the violation of her Bed) say, That
she would assist Sir George in poisoning the King; That when the Fathers came
out, He (Oats) desired to see the Queen, who gave him a gracious Smile, and
spoke to Mr. Hartcourt in the former voice about 1000 l. nor did he see there
any other Woman; and Reader you may easily imagine how ridiculous this stuff
seemed to every body; That a Lady eminent in virtue, should not only make such
a declaration in a public Consult, (for the resolves of all Consults are known
at one time or other) but also in the hearing of such a pitiful Wretch as
Oats, who could help neither her nor any body else in any part of the Plot
more than the first Kennel raker you meet with. After this, he tells the Court,
That he heard Ashby (in express Terms) offer Sir George 10000 l. to poison the
King, which he refused, as too little for so great a Work. p. 27. and 28.
That Mr. White sent to offer him 5000 l. more, which he accepted and received;
for he saw it thus Registered in the Jesuits Entry book, (which Langhorn
sometimes kept), Mem. The -- day of August 15000 l. was proposed to Sir George
Wakeman; and then under it was written. Received of Mr. Hartcourt by the Order
of Ed. Coleman 5000 l. in part. G. W. Now Reader he that can swallow such a
Register, or such unnecessary, and unheard of Entrys, and Memorandums, let him
him never for the future think any thing either Romantic, or sottish. As for
p. 31, and 34.
Mr. Corker, he said he had a Patent, which Oats saw in his hand to be Bishop
of London; That he, being p. 31, and 33.
PRESIDENT of the Benedictines, did consent to the raising of the 6000 l.
contributed by them. That he heard Mr. Corker dislike the Choice of Pickering
to kill the King; page 33.
because he commonly attended upon the Altar, and might miss an opportunity by
being at High Mass; that Mr. Marshall knew of Pickering's Design; and that he
went page 35.
halves with Coniers that the King should eat no more Mince Pies. That Mr.
Rumley was privy to the giving of 6000 l. That he saw Mr. Marshall at the
Consult in August; but Mr. Marshall asking him what day, he answered, Ibid.
^Twas a great privilege he named the month. At last with much ado, he said,
' It Was either the day before, or day after the (15th or) Assumption. Whereupon
Mr. Marshal answered with heat and briskness, Now he has avouch'd this
positively; so that Oats fearing the Consequence, cried; Nay I will not be
positive, and continued so all along as good as his word; only he said, that
the Benedictin Consult, in which they had an account from A. B^. Talbot of the
Irish Affairs, was positively on the page 36.
one and Twentyeth if it fell on a Wednesday, as it did; which contradicts his
former depositions (and therefore he is not to be blamed if he refuses to be
positive) for in Mr. Whites Trial, vid Whites Trial. p. 15.
he fixes the Consult about sending the 80l. to the Ruffians on this day; and
yet those two Consults are by his account on different days all along.

Bedlo succeeding Oats said, page 37.
That being at Mr. Harcourts about the beginning of August, Sir George came in
Angry and discontented at put offs, and asked Mr. H. if he had any thing for
him; who after some words gave him a Bill of 2000 l. saying, it was brought him
by a Gentleman. (whose name Bedlo had forgotten*) who received it from such a
one, that said it was by the Queen's Order; That the Bill was charged on a
Goldsmith's (as he thinks) near St Denstans, but his name he had forgotten
also; That Sir George upon reading the Bill said^he found more encouragement
from his good Mistress than from all the rest; Ibid.
That Sir George asking Mr. Hartcourt* who Bedlo was, answered, A Friend long
engaged in our business, and is to do the next great work; which Bedlo thought
a sufficient answer to Sir George's wonder, page 40.
That upon the first sight of a man he should discover such high and dangerous
secrets. Nay after Sir George's protesting he had never seen Bedlo before his
now appearing in Court, for he had too remarkable a face (he said) to be
forgotten, Bedlo replied, That Sir George was his Physician three years before
at the Bath; which by the premises (Reader) is absolutely false you see; for
how could Sir George ask Hartcourt now, who he was, or Bedlo need Mr.
Hartcourts Character, if there had been such an page. 41.
Acquaintance between them formerly, as he pretends? Bedlo moreover says, page
37.
That presently after this discourse in Mr. Hartcourts Chamber, page 38.
Sir George told him the said Bedlo near the Temple, That the Bill was accepted
and would be paid in the afternoon, That upon asking Hartcourt a while after,
he told him, That he the said Hartcourt had made up the former sum, 5000, l.
it being for the old business; for, if they should fail at Windsor, then this
way was to be taken, and if this fail, they should be sure to do it at
New Market; and that so was the Discourse with Sir George. That he had heard
Corker speak of a Design, Army etc, and of Letters he had received from beyond
Sea in relation to it; page 39.
That Mr. Marshall was one that knew the Affairs; That he communicated all to
Sir Francis Ratcliff, and used to be one of the Club that saw and examined the
Letters he brought. That for page 40.
Mr. Rumley, he heard he was one employed, when Secret Letters were sent into
the Country, and so knew of the Plot.

Here Sir George, asking Bedlo, (what day he had this Bill, he answered, He had
no Dispensations (as formerly) to lie, and had no delight to damn his Soul, and
therefore could only tell him, it was in the beginning of August or
thereabouts, nor remembered he any names but those relating to his business. Now
when the Evidence came to be stated, the page 45.
C. Justice said, that Bedlo had heard (it is true) doubtful words told Sir
George, but that Hartcourt had not fully spoken of the business to him in the
said Bedlow's presence; so that in effect 'twas no more than, That Sir George
received from Hartcourt a Bill, he know's not upon whom, nor for what. But
Bedlow being called to repeat his former Evidence and finding now where he had
been too short, page 46.
declared, That Hartcourt ( page 47.
in one entire discourse) said in his hearing to Sir George, This is to be well
followed and closely observed, because so much depends on it, for if we should
miss to kill him at Windsor, or you miss in your way, we will do it at
New Market. This impudent and Notorious addition; for if there were any Hint of
such a design in Bedlow's before recited Evidence, it was (you see) only in
doubtful words, or as a thing told Bedlo by Hartcourt; I say this impudent and
Notorious addition amazed the C. Justice and most of the Auditory; but when Sir
George saw that some seemed in earnest to allow it, and considered the Fate of
all that had been yet tried, he turned himself to his Fellow Prisoners, and
with a Disdainful smile said, There is my business done; But resolving
nevertheless not to die a mute, he and they fell to their Defense, the main of
which is as follows.

First Sir George proved by the present Mayor of Bath (his Apothecary,) page 49.
who had read (and his Son did the like) the Letter of Directions for Mr.
Ashby; That there was not the least mention of the p. 48, and 50.
King or Queen besides the Baths called by their names. That he had the page 49.
Physical part still by him, having torn it off the page 51.
bottom of the said Letter, and that Milk was ridiculous, and never prescribed
by any Physician. Oats being thus pinched, would fain have the Milk to be Mr.
Ashby's direction in Town, page 50.
before his going to the Bath, and that there were then two Letters. To this
page 48.
Sir George replied that it was Non sense to think he should write page 51.
two Letters of Directions for the same man at the same place; and that Mr.
Ashby went to the Bath presently after the writing of them; so that what he had
ordered was for him there, which he proved by young Madam Heningham, and his
man Hunt; for he attested, that his p. 52, and 53.
Master coming in late and weary, and understanding by him that Mr. Ashby was
going next day to the Bath, the said Sir George made the Witness write his
directions (Mrs. Heningham being also all the while present, who averred the
same) and that he carried them that very night to Mr. Ashby; nor was there any
mention of Milk, only Mr. Ashby told him the said Hunt, that a friend had
advised, him to drink it. Besides page 30.
Sir George told the Court, that Oats at his first examination before the King
and Council, declared, he never saw him, and consequently could not see him
write, that he charged him there so slightly that the Board thought it not fit
so much as to Commit him. page 53.
That he had his Liberty 24 days after his being accused before the Council*
That when Oats had accused him a new at the Common's Bar, the Lords (as
appears by the Journal) examined Oats about this very pretended Letter; and
when the Chancellor asked him, if he knew Sir George his hand, he answered, NO;
and that he only knew it was his Letter by being subscribed, George Wakeman;
which is (Reader) directly contrary to his present charge. Then Sir Philip
Lloyd being called by Sir George, he said, page 55.
That on the 31 of September, Oats declared in Council, that Fenwick writ to
St Omers, that Sir George had undertaken to poison the King for 15000 l. of
which 5000 l. was paid by Coleman; That Sir George denied the thing, and
demanded Reparation; that the Board not likeing his Carriage, the Chancellor
asked Oats, if he knew any thing personally more than by Hear say, desiring a
sufficient ground for a Commitment; That he lifting up his hands, answered, NO;
God forbid I should say any thing against Sir George, for I know nothing more
against him; and the said Sir Philip, for the Truth of what he attested,
appealed to the whole Board. To this killing stroke and unquestionable
evidence; for every body knew Sir Philip durst not for his head have asserted a
false thing, since the Council (before whom Oats had deposed) would have
certainly questioned him; I say to this killing stroke, Oats had no other
answer, but his former to Coleman, that he was weak by his two nights fatigue,
and that he was not page 55.
COMPOS MENTIS: Whereupon the C. Justice replied page 56
That it required not much strength to say he saw a Letter under Sir George's
hand; which was a plain and full answer also to page 59.
Sir Tho. Doleman, who witnessed, That Oats was in a very weak and feeble
condition at the Council; for can any body (Reader) life up his hands, and cry,
God forbid I should say more than I know, and yet be so feeble as not to be
able to say, I know he has written Treason in a Letter? Now when Oats saw this
foolish Excuse would not do, he openly cried; It was such a Council as would
commit no body; which was not only a most Rascally Reflection, (and for it the
Court reprehended him) but a most Notorious lie, since they secured every body,
whom he personally accused; I say this was not only a Reflection, and a Lie,
but enough to perjure him also; for if he thought that this partial Council
would not secure Sir George, then he has forsworn himself, by saying, that the
remisness of his Accusation proceeded from forgetfulness and Lassitude. After
this Sir George desired that the Record of the House of Lords might be read,
but the Court page 61.
refused it, and then Mr. Corker began his plea.

He told the Court, Ibid.
That it was swearing with probable Circumstances, that must render a man
Guilty and not a ridiculous Charge by Scandalous men; for otherwise no-innocent
person could ever escape an Oats, or a Bedlow, page 66.
That the Record or Lords Journal shows that Oats acknowledged he had nothing
to say against any man but those already accused, and that his name was not
there; page 72.
That when Oats came to seize on Mr. Pickering, He and the Officers ask't, who
was in the House? and when the Names of Mr. Pickering, Mr. Corker, and Mr.
Marshal were mentioned, they said they had nothing to do with any body but Mr.
Pickering, as Ellen Rigby the House-Maid attested; which plainly mproves, that
had Mr. Corker and Mr. Marsh been. Traitors to Oats his knowledge, they would
have been apprehended also. That the said Mr. Corker was not President of the
Benedictines as Oats had deposed, and this he proved by three, to wit page 75.
Madam Sheldon, Mrs Broad-head and the said Ellen Rigby, who declared, that Mr.
Stapleton was in that Office, and had been so for many years. Besides, this El.
Righby (who had also with others attended the Court the two former Trials)
witnest, page 73,
That Oats last Summer came to their House a begging to Pickerings, and that
Pickering bad her not let him come in any more; which showed to all the Court
what a Plotter Oats was, being forced to beg even in the very heat of the
Plot, and contemned also by his pretended Partisans.

Mr. Marsh. added also (and had the Messenger in Court) Ibid.
That he sent for Witnesses out of the Country against his former Trial, and
that they were then here to disprove Oates's Charge, but that neither his purse
was sufficient to keep them, nor could their business permit them to come up
upon any uncertainty; but now the time being sure, if the Court would respite
his Trial for four days at most, they would be here he was confident. This
being refused him, and the rest having done, he fell into an page 76.
Harangue so pathetical, weighty, and moving, concerning the death of the
former prisoners, and their present Case, that it affected the whole Assembly;
but it being thought at last reflecting, the C. Justice gave him a Reprimand,
and then summing up the whole Evidence he told the Jury in short, page 83.
That if they were satisfyd that Oats and Bedlo swore true, they would do well
to find them Guilty; if otherwise to acquit them; for they ought (he said) to
consider their Conscience, and not what the world would say. The Jury then went
out, resolving at the very first not to condemn them; but two or three being
Timorous proposed this expedient viz: to find it misprision, which they thought
might satisfy the Clamorous, and yet be no such great inconvenience to the
prisoners, especially since the King's merciful Temper was known to every body.
But the Court declaring, that they must either be convicted of High Treason or
discharged, they presently brought them in, Not Guilty; for Prance and Dudgal
(the two Collateral Witnesses) had made (you see) a most Lamentable, and (if
possible) a more ridiculous story of it then ever; Bedlo's Impudent perjury, by
his new and second evidenced) was also so manifest and shocking that all good
people abhorrd it; and lastly Oats his Beggary; his falsely accusing Mr. Corker
of being President; his ignorance of him and Mr. Marshall when Pickering was
apprehended; and his not knowing either Sir George, or his hand, (as the said
Oats had himself declared to the Council, and to the House of Lords) was so
Notorious, that no man could fear, that persons of repute and worth would do
otherwise than they did; and more especially since the Scandalous and ill lives
of these Accusers were now written with a Sunbeam, and no longer hidden from
any body.

An humble ADDRESS to all Worthy PATRIOTS, of what Rank soever they be.
HAving (my Lords and Gentlemen) given you this exact and short account of the
late Judicial Proceedings; for when should I have ended, had I not (in spite
of the continual Follies that occurred) forced my self to Bounds? I say, having
given you this short account. I know not whether you are now more surprised
(for surprised I am sure you are) at the strange Incoherencies, nay,
Impossibilties, in the Charge all along, or at the mighty weight of the
Defense, though the Accusers themselves had bin men of Repute and Probity. For,
after a sober and close Consideration (to which nothing can more conduce than
an Abstract, or Compendium) what have they laid at the doors of Catholics,
that* by its^monstrous and disagreeing parts, shows not it self to be wholly
vain and Chimerical? Or if any thing has at last bin reduced to the Appearance
of some little Proportion, by the Efforts, and skill of better Artists, yet how
has the positive Testimony of so many Untainted Persons still discovered its
Defects, and consequently proved the whole as Fabulous as before? Untainted I
call them, and with Justice I may do it, who are not only Masters of a
Reputation by Law, but have also so lived among their Neighbors and
Acquaintance, that their Word has on all occasions bin as readily taken, as any
body's in the same Rank and Station; when as there is not one Witness against
us, who has not either bin amost Profligated Wretch, by the unanimous Consent
of all that knew him, or given at least Prognostics by his Poverty or Temper,
that the first Opportunity would infallibly make him so.

Let us therefore consider a little the four Props or Pillars on which this
Scene of so much Trouble, Of Oats.
and Distraction to the whole Kingdom stands; and having first taken a view of
Oats; what can be said to his bare word, when I defy Mankind to produce any
one of Repute, who formerly knowing him, gave the least manner of Credit to it?
Does not Sir Denny Ashburnham (a Parliament man) declare as much in page 66.
Irelands Trial? and do not the vid. Records of the Session held there May 27.
167^.
Records of Hastings, and the Order of Council notoriously make it good; for,
being Minister in that Town, he accused young Parker of Sodomy, and attested it
at the Bar with all the Oaths and Impudence imaginable; but the Jury
nevertheless brought in the Prisoner not Guilty, as remembering what an Accuser
he had, and understanding by their Neigbours, that he was making merry with
some of them at the very time of the pretended Fact. This so enraged the very
women of Hastings (as Oats complain's in a Bill of Equity, drawn for his
Relief, after he was arrested by Parker, in an* Action of the Case) That they
stood at the Hall door with Rods to whip him, and Tubs of Water to wash him
when bloody, that so they might whip him again. Did he not also accuse old
Parker the Father (thereby to hinder the Son of all Assistance) of speaking
scandalous and opprobrious words against the Lords of the Privy Council; which
the King in Person examining, (as the then Vid. Order of Council April 28. 1675.
Order testifies) he forthwith graciously discharged the old Man, having found
by the Certificats of the neigbouring Justices, both his and Oates's true
Caracter. Infinite are his Prancks of this nature in that very one Place, and
therefore, no wonder that such a Witness should now (in the House of Lords)
swear, that Mr. Preston (who is yet in Prison upon that account) was a Priest,
and his Confessarius too; when as the poor Gentleman has not only a Wife, and
has lived in Town with her these many years, even in the public view of all
Catholics, but has several at hand, that can prove the very Marriage it self?
Was not also his old pretended Camarade (Mr. Blundel, the Jesuit) taken by him
with the like truth? for the Person is now found so far from being Blundel (and
therefore one may plainly see how Oats know's those he accuses) that He is one
of the Caryls, who never went so much as by the name of Blundel, nor has the
least relation to the Jesuits.

There is no end of these kind of Perjuries, Of Bedl^w.
as may be seen at first sight in his Charge all along, and which by and by we
shall again touch upon; so that now we will Treat a little of Bedlo, who by his
former Villainies has long ago forfited all his Lives, had he as many as Cats
are said to have. For does not every body know how he has taken upon him names
of my L. Cornwallis, Gerard, nay of almost every body else (whom Accidents made
to abscond) the better to accomplish his pitiful Tricks and Designs? Has not
Mr. Sanders of Oxfordshire known this by Experience? How often has he bin
forced to fly from Chepstow by the Officers of Justice, that would have
apprehended him? Was not Captain Spalding, (the now Governor there) accused by
him for a Traitor, and Papist (though no man could show a more constant Zeal
for the King and Protestant Religion, than He) only because, he seized upon the
Horses he had stolen, as he would have done on him, had he not then gotten away
by chance? Has he not committed a hundred late mean and wretched Cheats here in
London even for Bread? and has he not lain in Ga^l (as From 15 Dec. to 22 Jun.
7^
Books of the Marshalsea, show us) for seven Mouths this very last year, and
reduced also to the Basket, though the Spark were then (forsooth) every Noble
man's Privado, and the great Negotiator in the very Plot? H^s he not accused my
Lord Brundel for a Grand Conspirator (^s his several Depositions Testify, and
most particularly in the Lords Journal) and yet, either his Lordships
Conversion has made him as innocent as the Child unhorn, or else his Worship's
Testimony is looked upon as false as it ought to be. But what shall we say of
this unheard of, nay, childish Perjury; that whilst he was shirking (as we see)
for a mere livelihood, and dipped also in the Plot (as he pretends) to the
destruction of the King and Government, he should scrupulously refuse 4000 l.
to assist in the Murder of Sir E^. Godfrey, and 2000 l. for carrying away his
very body, which had not bin Death, though known. But why should we wonder at
any thing now, since a man could have the Impudence to take his Oath (in a high
Court of Judicature) to say all the Truth, as well as nothing but the Truth,
and yet at one Trial we shall find him (as you have seen in Mr. White's) lay
several positive Treasons to his and Mr. Fenwick's Charge, whenas in the
former, he seemd hardly to know them?

Is not Prance also a Witness of great value, Of Prance.
were there (besides the extravagancy of his Tale all along) no more to be urgd
against him, than his notorious and solemn Recantation before the King and
Council? for what can render a Testimony invalid, if this will not? Nay, our
very Law which grants and supposes that there may be Knights of the Post,
leaves them no possibility, or way to stop the mischief when begun, but by
making (as he has done) an humble and hearty Confession of their Villainy? But
now, if on the one side, we consider the Advantages he was to have by
continuing an Accuser (as Oats and Bedlo too plainly showd him) and on the
other side, the Inconveniences, that would necessarily ensue by a Pali^ode or
Retraction; for this was to make him a perjurd man ^n Record; this was to
submit him to all the Cruelties and hardships of a Prison; and this was to
endanger his very Neck* as being an Actor (by his own Confession) in a great
and horrid Murder; I say, if we consider all this, can there be any equality
or proportion between one Action and the other, let our greatest Enemies
themselves be the Judges? As Pain then and Terror drove this unhappy Man (as
has been already hinted in the Trial,) to proceed, contrary to the Touches of
his own Conscience, in this wickedness, so the Motives that first induced him
to it were Revenge, and Profit; for what mountains had the success and good
fortune of the forementioned Couple Created in his Fancy? and how quit did he
imagine he should now be with the Queen, for refusing to let his Name (though he
were only a Workman to the Chapel) be put into the List of her servants, after
the late Proclamation had banished all Catholic Artizans out of Town?

Now for Dugdal^ the fourth Worrthy, Of Dugdale.
both the Town and County of Stafford know not only what an idle and
inconsiderable Companion he was, but how ill he behaved himself in my Lord
Aston's service; Nay my Lord took him in flagranti at last; even making a
Tenant a Debtor, who had but just before showed his Lordship the Acquittance
for his Rent. This put the Fellow into the utmost Confusion, especially when
called to give up his Accounts, which knowing he could not possibly do, He
conveyed his things out of his Chamber, and went away privately by Night; so
that skulking a while, he was in the end arrested by some Creditors, and then
other great Actions being* entered against him, He laid hold on the Kings
Proclamation, and presently knew the whole Plot, with the management of it, as
you^ see, for several Years together.

It Is with the utmost Regret (my Lords and Gentlemen) that I am forced upon
this ungrateful subject; but since impending Dangers have made the very Dumb to
speak, what Pen can stop in its Cariere, when the Writer sees not only himself
and Relations under the Talons of such Bloody Vultures, but even his very
Country at their Mercy also? For if whole Parties may be thus devoured, which
of them, (and in England we know there are many) can assure it self, but the
like trick may be put upon it; especially seeing besides our Transcendent
Loyalty and service to the Crown (which two of our great Monarchs have amply
owned) there was a time when Episcopacy was as much hated as Popery, and a time
too, when Papists were far more esteemed, than any sictary whatever? The
Changes and Chances of time are ineffable: And therefore, let him that thinks
that he stands, take heed least he falls; nor is the Caution unnecessary, when
we consider the Precipice on which every good Protestant is at present placed;
for how many of them have already been either sacrificed to the private Malice
of these Birds of Prey, or singled out by them to satisfy some Patron's
Revenge? Nay what Patron can really deem himself secure, since several that
have stiffly abetted them, have also felt their unparalled Treachery and
Falsehood? Fallacious without doubt is the World in general, but most fallacious
are such particular servants; yet how unconceivable is it, that these should
impose or put the Dice on any man, since their abandond and prostituted
Reputation was like a smoke by day, and a Flame by night, to give every body
warning of them. But seeing the death of Sir Edmund bury-Godfrey, has with many
bolster'd up their dying credit, some sew Considerations and Reflections on that
Affair, cannot but be at present very pertinent and necessary.

Were it not a sufficient Assurance to any one, Of Sir E. Godfry's Death.
even against the positive Testimony of ten Travelers, though of some ordinary
Credit, That the grand SEIGNIOR did not send the VIZIER here to Kill this
Knight; because, his Death being of no import to him, he would never order so
vain a thing; and certainly the confirmation of it would be yet greater, were
the Witnesses of different stories among themselves? If then (my Lords and
Gentlemen) this be enough to show the falsity of such an Evidence, we have it
in our present Concern, and infinitely more, which demonstrates the unspeakable
wrong, that has been done us, or rather the poor nation in general. For does
not every body know, that Sir Edmund-bury-Godfrey was so far from being our
Enemy, that he was a friend to all, a most kind one to many, and in this
affair, so extraordinary and particular, That he no sooner received Oats his
Depositions, but he presently acquainted Mr. Coleman with them, who went to
Windsor and divulged the whole matter to all he knew. If no Turk then can be
thought (with Deliberation and in cool blood) to kill another, that has neither
done him harm, nor can bring him the least Emolument by his Death, what
Christians can be imagined so nonsensically stupid, as to lay their heads
together, in relation to the Murder of a Person, who was so far even from
accidentally provoking, that he had performed the utmost service on our Behalf,
that Friendship it self could suggest? But how unconceiveable is it now, that
there should be such a number, and Rabble of Conspirators, and that they should
execute this Design, when not only his Death would (in the Judgment of any
Fool) infallibly ruin us all, if known, but when his Life also was so
infinitely useful to us? For he was able, and he had also courage to confront
Oats, and consequently to Witness how impudently, and beyond all measure he
had now deviated from his former Depositions.

No wonder then, that the Wits of our Enemies every where have been on the Rack
to find pretenses for this Murder; but after all, how ridiculous and weak they
are, let any man judge that will? Did Prance and his Friends offer at better
reasons (and certainly they had time and concern enough for invention) than,
vid. Hill's Trial, p. 14.
That Sir Edmund-bury-Godfrey was a busy man in the opinion of the Priests, and
that he had done, and would yet do us a great deal of mischief; when as in the
first place his Kindness to us was (as I have already shown you) extraordinary,
and in the next, what a work should we have on our hands, If we must Kill all
that are Busy, and all that would do us harm?

As for Bedlow, let us consider his account, and we shall find in it, Ibid. p.
30.
That Tongue's and Oats his Information, was their sole drift and aim: Nay the
Conspirators tell him forsooth, That the Plot without these papers would be
discovered to that D^gree, that they should not be able to bring it to pass,
till another Age. Is not this more than extravagant, and what Bedlams do they
fancy the People to be, that believe them? for how could the Assassines hope
(the Plot having been a full fortnight before the Council, and several of the
main Plotters in Prison) that Sir Edmund-bury-Godfrey had not already (as de
facto he did) delivered up those Papers to the Board, Or supposing the
contrary, what expectation was there, that he should have them then in his
pocket? and lastly if they had been about him; What advantage could men imagine
by the Action, when Oats was still at hand, to give (as often as the Ministers
of State pleased) a perfect account of all he knew? Are these reasons for the
Killing of a Dog, much less a Man, that had acquainted us with the Design even
when it was a Secret? But now (my Lords and Gentlemen) what shall we say, when
this is pretended to be done in Somerset House, notwithstanding the Queen's
whole Court, and God knows how many Protestant Guards were there to be alarmed
at the least noise; That this Knight should be presently strangled (though
stout and strong) by a feeble Ancient Man without resistance or bustle, and
with a Cravat also; that he should be removed into many different places of the
House (and that to no manner of purpose) without ever being discovered by any;
That he should for the most part be hid in a little Lodging full of people, who
neither saw him carried in or out, nor found him lying in the pretended
Chamber, which was both over against their Dining Room, and a place also where
the whole Family, as it was vid. Trial.
proved) were necessitated to go often every day; That he could being a very
tall man, be crowded when stiff into a Sedan; nay that the Sedan could be not
only conducted and carried out by men, That were then in other places (as
several, testified, (you see) at the Trial) but through the great Gate of the
Palace too, without being scen by the Sentinels, though they never stirred a
Pikes length from it? Can there be within the reach of fancy such
impossibilities? YES (my Lords and Gentlemen) That Bedlo should be offered
almost 4000. l.
three times more for this Murder, than Grove was to have for killing the
King, and (for the mere carrying away the body) 2000. l.
four times as much as Dugdal pretends for his Enterprise; and yet the said
Bedlo refused (as I already mentioned both these vast sums, though he were
then an actual Conspirator (if you will believe him) in the main of the
Treason, and in such want also, that he was forced to hazard his neck, or at
least his back, by Cheates and the like, for mere Bread and necessaries. To
conclude in short; for I cannot now stay to trouble you with the different
Actors, and all the several contradictions which these two Sons of Belial
mention in their respective Accounts; I say to conclude in short, can any man
believe, if the Accused had bin Guilty, they would have denied (with the utmost
Execrations) the fact at the Gallows, when a single Confession had saved their
Lives; and especially, when one of them to wit Berry, was a Convert to the
Protestant Church, and such a one also (as the Ordinary of Newgate in his late
The Behavior of the Malefactors page 17.
Treatise declares) as did much lament his ever having bin of our Communion.
Show me then (my Lords and Gentlemen a plainer Demonstration since the Creation
of the World for the Innocence of any man, or more Contradictions for the
Detection of an Accusers Villainy? Yet if Sir Edmund must have bin made away by
a Consultation and Cabal, lay it then I beseech you at some bodies door, that
had reason to wish his Destruction; and enquire (as has bin formerly hinted to
you) of Doctor Loyd, who it was that told him, even before the finding of the
Body, that he lay Murdered with two Wounds, and his own Sword through him, as
he publicly declared in his printed page 24.
funeral Sermon. But since I have mentioned the solemn Denial made by those
that were Executed for it, I must desire your considerations on a new Charge, I
mean on the DISPENSATIONS, which they say we have for our LYING at our very
Death; and truly before I begin I cannot but profess, that I know not whether I
am more confounded with the infinite Arguments that crowd on all hands, or with
the thought that Christians and those Englishmen too, should soberly and in
earnest Charge us with so sottish and senseles a Crime.

For first, Of Dispensations.
was there ever a Party in this Nation, that has so eminently as ours refused
(ever since the very Reformation) the Preferments, to which their great Birth
and Quality gave them pretenses, or more Heroically underwent the Rage and Fury
of all the other Laws, when one Halt, or one false Step would have put them
within the capacity of their Birthright? Have not all our Protestant
Parliaments, ownd this ^mplicity by the penal Acts, which from time to time
they have made; for he that denies it, makes them worse than Gotams, since
every body now knows, that no Cuckoo can be hedged in, that has wings to fly
over the Enclosure? Nay did they not explicitly also confess it, when in the
next Session, after the Act passed, for putting Catholics out of 1673.
Offices, they publicly congratulated the success of the Test, and then went on
to new Rigors? Are not these then invincible Arguments, that there can be
juggling with us in Religion? And do not they also amply prove, that we are (as
I first hinted) the persons that stand most on Principles, seeing there was not
one man, of any one party here besides our selves, that left the least
Employment upon the score of the said Test, though it commanded not only a
Kneeling at the Communion, and a Compliance with several other Popish
Ceremonies, as they are called, but contained also some speculative Points,
which many of the Church of England themselves thought very new and thwarting?
Besides this I appeal to any man of Fashion or Credit; that has bin of our
Religion (and you may assure your selves he will not be over partial) whether
he has heard, that a Catholic without Mortal Sin (and any ill man may do it at
that rate) can deny the least point of Faith, or whether we do not look upon
every Church Papist, or any one else, That for by-ends, and other pretenses
defer's to reconcile himself, to be in a far worse spiritual state and
condition (let him be never so kind and advantageous to us by underhand
Favors) than an open Protestant following the Dictates of his Conscience and
Reason? If then we are so se^^re in their life time with the Nicodemus's and
Dissemblers in Religion (notwithstanding all the Good they can do us) what
shall we be with those that sin at their Death, even by calling God as Witness
to a Ly? We have therefore Reason certainly to complain of our late Usage, when
thirteen Christian men of great probity (even among all their Protestant
Friends) should be decry'd as most infamous Liars, because with their last
breath, they solemnly asserted an Innocence, which was never questioned or
blasted, but by the now Testimony of four Execrable Persons, who did not urge
the least circumstance, matter or thing against them, that depends not wholly
on their bare Word and Credit. Nay was there ever Imputation more weak and
silly than this, that the Expression in their last Speeches, As Innocent as the
Child Unborn, was misterious and designed and yet every body knows it to be the
common Phrase of the Kingdom, and that Eighteen out of twenty will certainly
use it, when they are to assert either their own or another Innocence? Is it
not also pleasant that there could be a Dispensation for Dissembling and Lies,
when these poor Men (on the one side) with their blood disown the Power both in
the Pope and Church, and we on the other, deny it also with the loss of our
Liberties and Estates, seeing we could save both in any storm, if (Watermen
like) we could look one way and and row another. In the name of Jesus, let us
not impose such Fanatical Nonsense on our Country; for if you see that no
person is at any time out of the reach of Law, but some young, or LooseMan,
that owns himself to the whole Nation a Convert and Desertor, where is the
benefit of these Dispensations, if we had them? But perchance his Holiness is
never thus Indulgent, you will say, but when a Plot of State is to be concealed;
and if so, I wonder first how he knows that no weak Brother in hopes of life,
will discover the Design and Stratagem? For take but twelve Protestants
casually, and they perchance will hardly find many Sureties, that all of them
shall rather choose the Gallows, than the Alcora^; and yet Christianity is a
far plainer Doctrine than the Pope's power of Dispensing, even in the Opinion
of any Jesuit. No (my Lords and Gentlemen) there is nothing but Innocence can
make us thus Resolute and Constant: Nay Humane Nature it self is too impotent
and feeble for such an Enterprise; it being impossible that any number of
Conspirators in the hands of Justice, should all upon the strength of Fancy, or
their mutual Promises prefer Death to Confession, especially when, besides
Self-preservation (which their respective Tempers and Passions are still
suggesting) each of them may reasonably fear the weakness of his Companion, and
consequently deem it madness to be longer obstinate, and behind hand. In the
next place, May I not truly say, of this pretended Fortitude of ours what
Doctor Pierce once fondly said of our Religion, Non fuit sic abinitio, It was
not formerly thus? for does not Judge Cook (the then Attorney) in his famous
Speech against Garnet acknowledge, vid. Proceedings against the Traitors page
117.
that all the Treasons against her Majesty, viz. Squire's, William's, York's,
etc. were freely CONFES'T by the parties themselves under their own hands, and
that they remained yet extant to be seen? How easily in the beginning of King
James's Reign, might the two Priests, Watson and Clerk (had the present
Doctrine bin true) have saved the danger, or at least the Scandal, which was to
fall on their Party? for, being drawn (you know) into that Protestant
Conspiracy, by the Lord Gray, Cobham, Rawleigh, etc. the Queen's old Favorites
(who dislikeing this new Prince, fancied a couple of Priests sufficient to get
them the Assistance of Spain and the other Catholic Princes) it had then bin
but swearing they were Innocent, and taking it upon their Death, that these
(their formerly known Enemies) had thrown the Calumny on them to discredit
their Friends and Religion with the King at his first Coming; I say it had bin
but doing thus, at least (I am sure) if their Consciences could have dispensed
with so horrid a thing, there was matter enough for Pretenses; but on the
contrary, how far were they from it, when they both publicly and humbly
confessed their Crime against his Majesty, and when Watson also acknowledged that
infamous death to be a just Judgment for his former factious Writings and
Designs, as may be seen in page 275.
Father Moors History? Again, who had sealed up their Plot with deeper and
solemner Oaths, than the Gunpowder Traitors; and if their Religion could permit
them (upon a sober consideration) to be obstinat, and to forswear themselves,
what needed Fawkes to have made so particular a Confession and Discovery, as is
printed in page 231.
King James his Works? for there was no necessity that his Imprisonment, or the
finding out of the Mine, (had the promise of Secrecy bin valid) must have
discovered his Accomplices; nay we find in the said Treatise that he hufft in the
beginning like a Ibid.
Scaevola, and declared he would confess nothing, laying all the blame upon
himself, which the wise Lords of the Counsel laughed at, knowing that the
Gentleman being in Hold, they would, for all his Bravadoes, find presently (and
so it happened) the depth of the whole Intrigue. 'Twas the knowledge of this (I
mean, that in a discovered Treason there is no Reliance on Oaths) that made
Winter with both the Wrights, upon Fawkes his Apprehension post out of town, as
he vid Winter' s Confession.
confess^s they did; for had they not bin desperate and without further hopes
of secrecy and faith, they would never have run to seven or eight Gentlemen,
supposed then in Arms, who had now up against them both King and Kingdom to
their own particular knowledge; Nor coul'd Tresham himself escape you see,
though he still continued (as K. Jam. page 880.
How tells us) about the Court, that he might thereby seem wholly free and
innocent. In fine their own Declarations were such, that the Publisher of the
Proceedings against them in the very Epistle says, That Justice passed on the
several CONFESIONS of all the Capital Offenders, which they openly CONFES'D,
and confirmed at their Arraignments in the hearing of multitudes of People. And
by the way, be pleased to remember, that no Catholic ever denied this Treason,
only some question, whether Protestant History it self dos not show us, that
Cecil (to ruin the Party) drew those fiery men into it by his subtle Tricks and
Artifices.

This one would think were more than enough to show you, how you are by ill men
deceived, and we abused; but because no present Pretense shall be left
untoucht, I will speak a word of the two Examples which our weak Enemies deem
so strong, and pertinent to prove this Calumny. The first is of one Curphy (an
Irish Papist,) who being condemned (they say) in his Country for Burglary,
denied it with great Asseverations at his Execution; vid. Letter of E. of Ess^x
printed, 1679,
but the Rope by chance breaking before he was quite dead, he thankt God,
confessing the Fact, and then (in spite of the Sheriffs great Intercession)
was again hanged by the Judge's special Order and Command. The next is of the
before mentioned Tresham, who protested, (as they will have it) in writing upon
his Salvation, and this just before his death, That he had not seen Garnet in
16 years, whereas Garnet and Mrs Vaux did both confess, that they had been
often since that time together. As to Curphy then (though truly I know not why
any Christian or Pagan, should be responsible for every Atheist or Libertine of
his Pro^ession) give me leave to ask first, how our Adversaries can think this
so Nicking a Blow? for since they themselves must acknowledge him already to
have been an impudent Liar and an ill man, why may it not be as possible, nay
as probable also (and then how is the Argument convincing) that seeing he could
not save his Life by asserting a TRVTH, he now hoped to work on the Judge, by
attacking him with a LIE on the other hand; for the denying of a Fact to death
never pleases him, that gave sentence, especially if the Evidence be in the
least questionable; nor was the said Curphy's Expectations it seems wholly
frustrated, since the Sheriff and others did (as you see) earnestly intercede
for him. Now for Tresham, the Case is plain, and at most but a poor simple
woman's Project, and Mr. At. Cook cannot but vid Proceedings etc. page 143.
confess it in the aforesaid Speech; for there he tell's us, That Tresham's
wife understanding with great Concer^ment, that he had confessed all against
Garnet, got him a little before his death (even when he could not WRITE
himself), to dictate the PROTESTATION to her servant; so that it is no wonder
(since the mere changing of a Word, nay a Figure might do it) if there were an
Error, as to the number of years in question. But (my Lords and Gent) if both
the Examples were as our Adversaries would have them, what Resemblance or
Analogy has the Action (I beseech you) of a single man once in a Century to
Twelve that dyed together, who were not only free from the least matter or
Circumstance, that could make them suspected, besides the Testimony of most
nefarious Persons, but had also LIFE add PREFERMENT offered them upon their
bare CONFESSION. Besides do they that thus charge us think their Religion so
harmless, or us so ignorant, that we can show no Precedents against them of
this nature? Certainly we can, and (as I suppose) much more to the purpose, Nay
witnest also by Protestants themselves. For does not first that most learned
New-Gate-Divine declare in the before mentioned page 30.
Treatise, That in his late Experience (as Ordinary there) he knew some
Malefactors condemned for Murder and Burglary to have gone out of the World
with a Notorious asserting their Integrity, although they had twice or thrice
confessed to him, with some seeming remorse, that theywere justly condemned for
the said Crimes; so that here Reader we have not only Protestant Penitents
denying the truth at their death, but a Protestant Confessarius revealing
secrets; and such another, or one at least very like him, Hind (the famous
Robber) met with at Worcester, being there convicted and hanged by the evidence
of his spiritual Guide. But what do you think of a far more eminent Example, to
wit that of my Lord Castle haven, who (as all the Writers of King Charles's
Reign will tell you) was after a Netorious ill life Charged and condemned at
last, for prostituting his Daughter in Law; for holding his own Wife whilst his
servant forced her; and lastly for Sodomy it self; and yet though these Crimes
were proved by several plain Circumstances, by his wife and daughters
Testimony, and lastly by Brodway and Patrick, his abused Patizans (who were
both hanged for the facts, and owned the Committing of them to the last) he at
his Execution most solemnly denied all, dying (as K. I. p. 160.
Sanderson affirms) not only a true Protestant, but assisted also by his Ibid
and H. L. Chapter I. 121.
Chaplain's, to wit the Dean of St Paul's and Doctor Wickham. Thus then you see
(besides the former evident and unanswerable Reasons) that we are not only free
from this Imputation our selves, but that the Protestant Doctrine is guilty of
it, if the Actions of some few men are sufficient to determine and adjudge the
Point. In fine then was it not very pertinently asked by the Author of the New
Plot; page 11.
That seeing the Council of Trent has positively declared, No Absolution
available which is not preceded by Detestation of the sin committed, and seeing
it is impossible freely to do a thing, and at the same time to detest it, how
could it be imagined, that the late executed Catholics should hope for any
benefit by such an Absolution as is pretended, or be thought with the least
appearance of Reason to make use of so wretched an Artifice to cheat the World,
and manifestly to damn their Souls, even according to their own professed
Doctrine and Tenets? Besides do not our Adversaries (by this wild Dream) show
not only their own Barbarity and Ignorance, but affront, and call Villains the
greatest and the most eminent parts of the Civilized World? and certainly
should one of them say to a Knight of Maltha, or to a Teutonick Knight, or to
any other Catholic Cavalier, That he was not to be belie^ed, since he might by
his principles lie an^ forswear at pleasure, Of the Bishop of Lincoln's Book.
he would (I must tell him) be soon Kicked and bastanado'd for it.

But (my Lords and Gent:) if this Calumny which carrys some Alleviation in it
(as having the Ignorant and Rabble for it is chief Abettors) be never the less
shocking, what must the Aspersion do, which is revived by a Nobler and
Learneder hand, I mean, by the present Bishop of Lincoln? Yet if it be a breach
of CHRISTIANITY to crush the bruised Reed, and of GENEROSITY also to Trample on
the Oppressed, I wish his Lordship may be found Guilty of neither, and that
there never rise any such, who, in hopes of Applause, shall contrary to the
Light of their own Consciences reprint a Martyn-Marprelate, a Cobbler of
Gloucester, or any Scandalous Pasquil, should EPISCOPACY, by some foolish
Accident or Misfortune, fall again within the Fury of the people. But who could
think, that his Lordships heat against us, should force himeven to a TITLE that
has confuted his whole Book, viz. That Popish Principles and Positions (when
really believed) are destructive and dangerous to all Kings, especially
Protestants; for he cannot Term them Principles of Faith, because they were
never thus believed by any Catholic, nor never thus approved of by the Church,
and consequently nothing to his purpose. But if on the other side he means,
that there have been Popish Doctors of the Opinion, That Princes might be
deposed upon the Account of Religion, what advantage I would fain know, can
that be to his Lordship or his Treatise, since not onlyall the prime Leaders of
the REFORMATION (as Luther, Calvin, Zainglus, Beza, etc.) have in express
Terms held the same, and in pursuance of it raised Rebellions and Confusions,
in all Countries where they had footing, but also since very great Pillars of
the Church of England it self have taught it too, as appears in Queen Mary's
Case, in that of the Queen of Scots (who was at least the Vnd^ubted Heir) and
in later Efforts also of the same nature; and doubtless he that believes he can
disinherit a Lawful Successor with Justice upon the account of Religion, will
hardly find Arguments of Force to keep the Prince in being, on his Throne, when
ever this happen's to be imputed to him. Nay we have several Protestants here,
who cry up the Bishop of Lincoln's Book at a strange ra^e and yet avow this Vid
Pereat Papa.
printed Doctrine: That God not only raised Johu to purge the Idolaters of
Ahab's House, etc. but That there is no Reformed Church from the first
Waldenses to this Day, that have not held such a Procedure lawful. These things
considered, (as they have been often (I dare say) by his Lordship) he expected
not certainly of us to think, that he believed what he writ; for then we should
(he knew) have required him to show us at least, some Catholic Potentate or
other (nor want they Worldly Wit or Inclinations, we see) abandoning this
pretended dangerous and troublesome Religion, either out of Ambition or Safety.
No (my Lords and Gentlemen) that is now a thing hardly within the reach of
Speculation; for, Who find themselves so Flourishing and Great, as they? Or can
it be said, That the Monarchy of England has gotten by the Reformation, when
Protestants acknowledge, (and what desperate Enemies that has Created us, may
be easily imagined) That nothing but Popery, or at least its Principles, can
make it again emerge or lasting? Does not his Lordship therefore play at
Cross-purposes with us? and is not his Meaning in truth this, That Protestant
Principles (when really believed) are-destructive to all Kings, and especially
to Catholic ones; since we see, that the Lawful Monarchs and Princes of
England, Scotland, Swedland, Denmark, the United Provinces, Transylvania,
Geneva, etc. have been actually Deposed by their Protestant Subjects, not only
as Florimundus Raimundus, and Popish Writers show us, but as Dr. Heylin, and
other Protestants have laboriously made it appear? Nor has the Pope, in all
that time, pretended to the giving away of any Crowns, except those of France
and England; For the Defense of which, several zealous and noted Catholics
appeared as well with their Swords as Pens. Nor could this Imputation have been
worse timed, as to his Lordships purpose by him, seeing there was a Protestant
Rebellion then actually in Hungary, to the great Danger of Christendom; and
another newly broken out in Scotland, for the Subversion of the English
Monarchy; and this also ushered in by the Barbarous Murder Of the ArchBishop
of St. Andrews. What Parity then is there between US, and our Adversaries,
either in our Actions, or Books of this Nature? And truly; we are so far from
holding the Deposing Power of the Church, an Article of Faith, that the
Greatest Defenders of it have absolutely declared the contrary. For does not
Cardinal Peron, in his famous Speech to the Nobility of France, tell us, That
the Proposition is PROBLEMATICAL? and does not C. Bellarmine, the Pope's great
Champion, in his Answer to Barclay, (who writ so smartly against it) call the
Assertion only Opusc. page 830.
ARROGANT and TEMERARIOVS. In short, There is no Writer, though never so
zealous for the Opinion, that says, That Men of the contrary Sentiment are out
of the State of Grace, (as in truth they are) that asse^t not to Articles of
Faith. This also plainly shows, that no Council ever imposed it on our Belief,
seeing it has been, and is still without Censure denied, even by those, that
would dye for the Pope's Supremacy. Nay (besides former Authors) the Catholics
^f England have written 1. F. Caron.
four Books (since the King's Restoration) to this very purpose; 2. Provincial
Letters.
I say, the Catholick's of England have done it, who are so scrupulous in
Doctrines of Faith, that they deem it Damnation, to deny the least Article, 3.
Reply to the Answer of the Catholic Apology.
and therefore will not (you see) to save their Lives and Estates, profess one
thing, and believe another. But his Lordship (which adds nothing to his
Ingenuity) is so far from answering these Authors, by showing their Fallacies
and Errors, that he never so much as cites them to this purpose, so that we
must conclude them unanswerable; 4. Answer to the Jesuits Loyalty.
for he could not but have heard of them, when we find him pretending to so
great an Insight in all our Books, that (to show his Reading) he has quoted our
very Almanac. But since his Lordship has mentioned this notable Tome, I hope
he will not take it ill, if I say, That his whole Work has been already
answered by a Treatise of the price and value of an Almanac; I mean, by one of
the Common Numb. ^377.
London-Gazets. For was it not a home Blow, and a just one also, that in the
thus publishing of his Erroneous Book to the Nation, which pretends Popery so
destructive to Kings, there should be there proclaimed, even in the very next
Advertisement, The Trials of Twenty-nine Protestant Regicides, as Deposers and
Murderers of their Glorious Sovereign under the cloak of Justice; a Villainy of
a Dye, which the worst of Papists never yet arrived to? But to go on yet
further in our Vindication, Was there ever on the one side, any Catholic
Country, or Pope, that has censured either Man or Book, for the denying the
said Deposing-Power of the Church? And have not the Venetians on the other
side, openly professed it in their very Writings? Has not Mariana's Opinion been
Condemned in Spain, and yet his Lordship p. 75. etc.
cites this Author against us? Has not vid. French Mercure, An. 1626.
Sanctarellus's Book been censured in France, with all the Formality
imaginable; as also Bellarmine, Suarez, Schoppius, and others of the same
Subject? And have not the College of Sorbon, the Universities of Paris, Caen,
Rheimes, Poitiers, and God knows how many others joined in this Condemnation?
Nay, does not Vid. Pref. K. I. Work^.
Bishop Moutague himself tell us, That not only Becanus was Corrected at Rome,
but that no State dis-own'd this (Independency) or Power of Kings. This then
being Matter of Fact, and this being the public Declaration of the Church of
Rome, may I not with Justice call upon his Lordship to turn to our Religion,
seeing in the very last Paragraph of this his Book, he professes, That if any
Popish Priest, or Gentleman, can make it appear, that the Church of Rome by any
public Declaration, has disowned such Principles, and damned them as Erroneous
and Impious, he will turn (one of the worst sort of Christians) viz A Roman
Catholic. Truly (my Lords and Gentlemen) I shall expect this of him, or he is
not as good as his word: Besides, I do here declare, that supposing the
Premises, to wit, That the chief Reformed Doctors have speculatively taught
this Deposing Doctrine; That they have actually deposed and murdered their
Princes, upon account of Religion; That the Catholic Princes are more
absolute, than the Protestant; That our Monarchy of England is not a whit safer
or powerfuller, than formerly; That Catholic Kingdoms and States have
condemned the said Doctrine: That no Catholic Country, or Pope, has censured
any that have done so; and that no Council ever imposed it on our Faith: I say,
granting these Premises, (which are also of themselves evident) I do here
declare, That I my self will turn Protestant, if his Lordship shows me but one
Single Paragraph in all his Book, in relation to our dangerous Principles,
(which is the Scope of the Whole) that is not here, either fully answered, or
does not at least wound the whole Protestant Party by its consequence, more
than Us: And more-over, I must tell his Lordship, He may find a great deal more
to this purpose, in the beforementioned Sect. 6.
Reply to the Answer of the Catholic Apology.

To conclude, Let me once more remind his Lordship of his Promise, and then
tell him (for I know he is a Man of Parts) what Dr. Tailor said to a Friend of
mine, concerning his Disswa^^e from Popery, viz. That though 'twere liked, yet
'twas but turning the Tables, and he could write a Book twice as good.

HAving thus (my Lords and Gentlemen) run over in have, the odd Pretenses, and
Accidents, that have been so advantageous to the Saviors of the Nation; I
shall desire you before we part, to take a second Consideration of them, (for
second Thoughts are still the best) and then you will find more Extravagancies
in their Relations, than in any Romance extant. For 'bating the Ridiculousness
Of the Army we were raising, when the King had Forty Thousand Men in pay,
besides a very considerable Fleet; and 'bating the Wildness of Civil and
Military Commissions, granted (as both Oats and Bedlow have it) to a whole
Nation by the General or Superior of Religious Men, and sealed with the very
Seal of their Order; Things that would make not only a Canonist, but any
Forreigner run mad to hear of: and 'bating the carrying on by Oates' s
Narrative p. 24, and 25.
Eighty-six Men and Women, the Fire of London, in as great a Method, as the
Machins move in Ba^tholomew-Fair, without any Bodies being ever yet taken in
the Action; and bating Vid. also Lords Journal, par. 24.
Oats his particular Story of the Jesuits Plundering during these Fires, to
the value of several Thousands of Pounds; Of Magazins full of stolen Goods,
orderly brought and received; Ibid.
Of their taking a thousand Carracts of Diamonds from a Man, who escaped and
run away, after they had knocked him down; and no words ever made in London,
either of him, or the Loss: Ibid.
Of their Banc^ of One Hundred Thous^nd Pounds, and lending it out at Fifty per
Cent: vid. ireland's, Whit's and Langhorne's Trials.
Of Entry-Books for all the Treasonable Debates and Resolves; Of Acquittances
of Money, received for Killing the King; Of poisoning of Silver-Bullets, by
chawing of them: Of gathering Peter Pence; and of a Thousand such unconceivable
Whimfies, Which appear in the Trials, in the Journal of the Lords, and in the
Narrative Printed by Oats his Special Directions, and also solemnly sworn to
by him: I say, ^bating this ridiculous and unconceivable Stuff; How was it
possible, that the Jesuits should make this Fellow so particular a Confident,
when the whole World sees he is Master of no one thing, that could render him
in the least Advantageous? For, being a Beggar, he could not tempt them with
Money; being a Weaver's Son, and (like one of Jeroboam's Priests) of the
meanest of the People, he had no Relations to Countenance, or help them; being
no manner of Scholar, but as ignorant as any other poor Curate may be imagined,
(for I will be a Bond Slave for ever, if he can Translate six Lines into Latin,
without a Solaecism) these Jesuits could not have the least Hopes of him that
way; Being no greater a Linguist than his Mother made him, there was little
Expectation of his proving a good Trouchman or Interpreter: In fine, Being also
Ill in his Mine and Beh^viour, Ill in his Elocution, Ill in his Writing, and
Ill in every thing else, that can recommend one Man to another, How was it
possible, (as I mentioned) That they should make him such a particular
Confident, as he pretends; and especially, send one of this Guise Ambassador
to the Crowns of Spain and France; I mean, to Don John, and Fa* La Chaise, as
he has sworn? Now, though these English Fathers should be such easy and silly
Men, How came it I would fain know, or what wonderful Advantages could be
proposed to the General, and his Assistants at Rome, that they must grant him
those Privileges, that were never before heard of, since the Institution of
their Order; to wit, That a Layman should be admitted into their Congregations
and Consults; and more-over, should have Power (as you have heard in p. 20. and
28.
Mr. Col^man's Trial) to open^their very Betters? But suppose, that the Refined
Romans are in truth, as weak as the Tramontans, What did our Gentlemen, nay our
Neblemen, and the Queen her self, find so admirable in Oats, that they should
so unanimously also receive him for a Privy-Councellor? Has the recommendation
of a Jesuit, or two such power, as to make men of this Rank, trust their
Lives, Honors, and Estates* in the hands of one that could not be so
serviceable to them, as any of their respective Footmen; and yet no part of
this Plot was thought fit (it seems) to be communicated to my Lord Shrewsbury,
my Lord Arundel, my Lord Brudnel, my Lord Lumley, or to any of the other late
Converts, who were (one would have thought) as likely to be then trusted with
any thing that tended to the Wealfare of our Religion, as the Heroes, that now
appear as our Accusers? But after all the mighty and great Employments, which
this Fool boasts of, could any body have thought him yet so simple, as to
declare upon Oath in the face of the World Irelands Trial. p. 20.
That the business they sent him now into England about, was, to kill Doctor
Tongue for having translated the Jesuits morals; as if that forsooth were an
Action so horrid and inconvenient to the whole Catholic Cause, that it
deserved such a punishment, even in the principal time of the Plot, and by his
hand also, that managed the whole, and knew all the secrets of it; nor was his
Reward (though one might be hanged as well for Doctor Tongue as Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey) any more than fifty pound, as he swears in the Parag. 30.
Lords Journal, and in his page 19.
Narrative. Is not this a happy Poet, to flag thus in the very top, and flight
of his Fancy? and does he not also, (do you think) well personate his former
Offices and Caracter, when in the Lords Journal he swears; That Colonel Roper
gave him Ten Shillings for bringing him his Commission, a gift (one would have
imagined fitter for an Ordinary Keeper, that brought him a Hanch of Venison,
than a Present for a great Envoye and Statesman? But Money and he were ever
such strangers (that according to his Idaea) the sums and business did fully
quadrate and agree. Neither was his foresight greater in the Story about
Colonel Howards, Commission, for in the Lords Journal he not only swears, That
he himself delivered him one in Wild^Garden in May or June, but tells us also
in his page 59.
Narrative, (to make it a clear and indisputable Lie) That the said Colonel
Deceast, CONFESSED he had received and accepted his Commission; For, had this bin
true, would not the King do you think) would not the Council, would not the
Parliament, and would not the whole Nation have told us of it, as having now
found out the thing, they had so long sought after. But why do I stand thus on
a single Perjury, when there are undeniable and evident ones in every Trial.
For in Mr. Coleman's, does he not (besides a Hundred other Falsities) accuse
him, of sending relief from London to the Ruffians at Windsor, on the twenty
first of AUGUST, when as all his Servants could attest, That he was then, and
several days before in Warwickshire? Does he not swear in Mr. Ireland's, That
he the said Mr. Ireland was in Town between the eighth and twelveth of that
Month, though he were notoriously and constantly absent from the THIRD to the
FOVRTEENTH of the following September, as I formerly showed you? Is he not
forsworn in Hills Trial, for saying that Sir Ed. Godfrey told him, that he went
in fear of his Life by the Popish Party; whenas he has since declared in the
presence of several, That this Knight was (he believed) a PAPIST; That he
frequented the Benedictins* and was most cruelly threatened by a Protestant of
great Power and Interest. Is he not also forsworn in Sir Geo. Wakeman's Trial
by the Testimony of Sir Philip Lloyd, and the clear proof of Mr. Corkers not
being President of the Benedict^ines, as he positively swore he was? And as for
Mr. Langhorn's and the Jesuit's Trial has he not among his other egregious
Untruths Deposed, That he was in Town the twenty fourth of April with Sir
Thomas Preston and Sir John Warner, whenas Six have plainly proved (you see)
the last Perjury, and FOURTEEN the former.

But now, that I mention these St. Omer Witnesses let me appeal to you, Of the
St. Omer Witnesses.
my Lords and Gentlemen, if such Testimony be invalid and not to be believed
(because they have studied under the Jesuits, or witness for their own Party.)
Whether there can be any more Commerce between Nation and Nation, and whether
it lies not in the power of a Villain to father what ridiculous Fact he
pleases, on any man, as committed in the very Streets of Paris, without
p^ssibility of Desproving him, though a thousand persons could testify the
contrary to their own certain knowledge; for there are few there comparatively,
that are not Catholics, and of them also that study, most have bin taught by
the Jesuits? Besides if this Doctrine had bin formerly allowed of, how easily
might all the Cavaliers in England have bin destroyed in the late times? for
(seeing Parties convers chiefly together) it had bin but finding out an Oats
and a Bedlow, and then any Charge must have past muster, if the Testimony of
other Cavaliers were to go for nothing? It Is not bare swearing (as Mr. Corker
well observed) that makes an Evidence credible, but probable Circumstances,
together with an absolute and entire proportion, which is always the
Concomitant of Truth. As for those Youths then, many of them were Gentleman,
and of prime Families too,; many had left the School, and had no more to do
with the Jesuits; nay some (as Oats tells us of Hildesley's usage in page 35.
Ireland's Trial) had Piques and Grudges against them; nor did they averr any
private Intrigue, but a thing obvious to a whole College, which consists of
about 200 persons, and might if false be contradicted to their shame when they
least dreamed of it; I say, they averrd a thing obvious to the whole College;
viz. That Oats was constantly there, but one night, from his first coming to
his Expulsion or going away for good and all. Besides their Testmony was not
single, and barely said, but confirmd by Sir John Warner and Sir Thomas
Preston's not being in Town; by the beforementioned improbabilities of Oats
his admitance to the knowledge of such weighty Affairs; by his extreme poverty
all along; by Mrs Grove and her Maid, where he pretended to have lodged; by the
Mrs. of the White horse Tavern, who denied that any considerable company was
then there, she being at that time in a very low Condition, and just leaving
the Tavern; so that she could not have forgotten so unwonted a meeting, had
there bin any; and lastly, by his palpable and impudent flinshing from his
former Testimony in this Affair; I mean from his keeping himself then close and
private as he publicly declared upon Oath in Mr. Ireland's Trial; and from the
time of his pretended stay in Town after the said Meeting, which was but three
or four days, as he swore in his Narrative and before the Lords also, though
now he would fain extend it to twenty; which two particulars prove
sufficiently, without other Circumstances (as I showed you before) the
downright perjury of the Witnesses, that saw then his Doctorship here so long,
and so publicly also.

And since I have mentioned this Title or Dignity, it is truly so prodigiously
odd and simple, that I cannot pass it by, without some few Reflections: For if
he were thus graduated, it was either out of favor, in relation to his
particular Merits and Service in the present Affairs, Or upon the score of his
Learning. As for the first, Can any one believe, (if there had been a Plot, and
he employed it) that he would have been suffered, in the midst of his
Negotiation and Business, to go out of his way, not only to lose time on so
foolish an Errand, but to render himself suspected by so unusual a Grace? Nor
could he himself hope to make any Advantage by a Dignity, since it was to be
concealed (you may be sure) 'till after the Success of this wonderful Design in
England; and then 'twould be wholly useless, seeing he might (we suppose)
expect far greater Honors and Preferments. Now, if his Learning promoted him,
(and you must remember, That Doctors at Salamanca do defend in the open
Schools, a whole Course of Divinity against every Body that will oppose them)
let any Man that knows Oats, judge of his Doctorship by it; and as for those,
that have no Acquaintance with him, or his Abilities. They are to understand,
that he went to the English College at Valladolid, in April 77. to begin his
LOGIC, and returned Home in November following, as dismissed for his good
Qualities: Nor in truth, was he ever within many Miles of Salamanca in his
Life. In short, We will join issue in this, for the Point may be easily
decided, That he shall choose One, and we will choose another to be sent to this
V^iversity; and if they find him to have Commenced there, or if they shall be
denied the Sight of the Public Registers, or perceive in them Blots, or any
thing tending to a Falsi^ication, we will for the future, own him not only a
Doctor, but to have proved once in his Life, a thing contradicted by us, which
will give no little Luster to his other Evidence.

But to end with him for the present. (though I confess, I have not half done;
nay, (as I mentioned before) there is no end when one reflects on his strange
Assertions and Follies) take this Circumstance as a Demonstration, That there
is not one true Word in all his Charge: And therefore I may here well say to
each of you, --

Accipe nunc Danaum Insidias, and crimine ab uno,
Disce omnes --
Aen. lib. 2. For on the one fide, he has declared in his very Vid Epistle to
the Reader.
Narrative, That it was presented to the King on the Thirteenth of AUGUST, by
the Means of Mr. Kirkby, who on the Twelfth was made acquainted with the
Matters contained in it by Dr. Tongue, as appears in the little Pamphlet
called, The page 1.
Narrative or Manner of Discovery of the Plot to his Majesty. On the other
side, If we consider the various Particulars, and the Number of Persons
concerned, 'twas impossible for him, and Dr. Tongue to digest and methodize the
Whole under a Months time; so that we may suppose it to be begun about the
XII. of JVLY: Nor can we allow less than a Fortnight between his first Debate
about the Discovery, and his falling to work on the said Narrative; so that his
Head was full of it, and consequently more particularly nice and observing,
from the End of JUNE at least, and especially in JVLY, AUGUST, and SEPTEMBER;
For then Protestants knew of the Treasor as well as himself. But now, when he
comes to be pressed about Time, Circumstances, Papers, and the like, in relation
to what he urges against the Prisoners, He is so far (though the Matter happens
within the said Months) from producing any one Note, (as certainly he might
have done, had his Charge been true) that he will come to no positive Day, when
the Accused at the Bar require it of him; and yet in his Flourishes, throughout
his said Narrative, he is so exact, (for nothing there, he knows, can be
brought as Evidence against him) that besides Consults, Accidents, and several
Particularities, He remembers above a Hundred Letters, with their respective
Dates, How, and Whence they came, and Who Subscribed them; though sometimes Ten
or Twelve do it together, according to his Relation: I say, He is so far from
producing Letters or Notes, that at the Bar, he will come to no positive Day:
And thus he has notoriously done in every Trial. For, in Mr. Coleman's, he
shuffles you see, about the 21 th. of August, as soon as he perceived, that the
said Mr. Coleman was absent in that Month; though since his Death, (and no
further fear of the Business) he is again White' s Trial, page 15.
positive. The like you find in Mr. Ireland's about the time of his being in
Town that Month. As for the Jesuit's Trial, he absolutely Hanged (you see) Mr.
Gavan, by not standing (as he first Accused him) to the Latter End of July, and
Beginning of August, when he understood, that the said Mr. Gavan could prove
himself then at Hampton. And here also he would fain have gotten off (you see)
from the 2 d. of September, the Day positive he pretended to have received
Twenty Shillings from Ireland in London. In Mr. Langhorn's, (besides other
Particulars) he was not certain, (though on so remarkable an occasion, and so
little a while ago) Whether he came from Dover by Coach, or on Horseback. And
in the Last Trial, he had not only the Impudence to tell Mr. Marsh, (when the
Dispute was about a Day in August) That it was a great privilege, that he
named the Month; but flew also (as I showed you) from the Fifteenth, (though he
once granted it) as soon as he began to suspect that there would be
Counter-Witnesses. Is not this then (as I said) a clear Demonstration of their
VILLAINY, and LYING all along? for was it possible for him, who had now
Discovered all to the King himself, and was to make it good at a Bar, to go
afterward to Consults with the Conspirators, and not know the Time precisely;
and to see and peruse several of their Papers and Letters, without being able
to produce the least Scrip or Scroll, or to have any Circumstance, that has not
been most evidently disproved? Whenas, on the contrary, notwithstanding the
strict Searches, that have been made in all our Houses, and the Reading of our
secret Letters, and notwithstanding our Examinations before Magistrates, and
our Imprisonments afterward; and by the way these Wretches have had a Sight of
every private Writing, by which they came not only to know our Hands, but had
oftentimes Hints, the better to frame their Accusations: I say notwithstanding
all these Accidents, there has not been found* any ill Letter, any Commission,
any Bill of Exchange, any Money, any Arms, any Horses, or any Thing else
suspicious; but to the Confusion of our Enemies, an Innocence, a Patience, and
a Loyal Zeal beyond Example.

I have been (my Lords and Gent:) the more particular with Oats (though as I
said, I have not half done) to the end you might see not only how impossible it
was, That he should have any knowledge of a Plot, had there been one; but that
his whole Information also is a most vain Fiction; and consequently, if 100 Men
(and all of them of some repute) should vouch and justify his Fopperies, it
could but show us, what Encouragements and Temptations will do; For since he
has most evidently Lied all along, how can their Testimony make him to have
spoken Truth? If therefore upon force you must judge thus of all, that shall
witness for him, though their Credit should be a little Tolerable (of which
I Will assure you, we have no Apprehension) what are we to think of his declared
Coadjutors and Partisans, who are so known, and not one whit behind him in any
impudent or apparent falsity! As for Bedlow's part, nothing can be a greater
proof of it, than that he should at first solemnly profess to the very
Secretaries in his Examination upon Oath, That he knew nothing of the Plot
further than of Sr. Edm. Godfreys Murder. Besides when he was asked, where they
laid his Corpse in Somerset house, he mentioned the Room next to that where the
Duke of Albemarle lay in state; but being caught Tardy there, because it
belonged to my Lord Ossory's Protestant Servants, he went and showed them
another, in which he was yet more unfortunate, it being the common place for
Pages and other foreign Attendants, and had to boot (during the Queens stay)
Centinells still by it. Prance also you see (for I must be very brief in my
Instances) acquaints us of God knows how many, that menton'd the killing the
King to him, and this (as a trivial matter) even, whilst they were buying
Spoons, Candlesticks, and the like. And to confirm the raising an Army by us,
he come's to the very number of men it was to consist of, to wit, Fifty
Thousand, and yet there are not so many Men, Women and Children of our Religion
in England; nor were we to expect much help from abroad seeing the Kings Navy
was not only then in a good forwardness, but all foreign Princes were together
by the Ears, and wanted Recruits as they still do, who are in an actual War.
But considering Dugdale is the Junior of all; for as to Jenison* I shall only
add this at present to what I have said page 57.
before, That he has already demanded a PENSION for his Services; which shows
both his plentiful Condition, and his Aim; I say as to Dugdale, he is no ill
Proficient (I Will assure you) in proceedures of this Nature, Having had* the
luck (as well as the rest of the Fraternity) to be proved in Open Court a
Villain; For at the last Staffor'd Assizes, Mr. Sambige a Protestant Gent,
together with Mr. Philips the Parson of the Parish, represented to the Court,
That Dugdal never mentioned to them the killing of a Justice of Westminster, as
he deposes in Sir George Wakeman's Trial; and least such a Testimony should
endanger the spilling of Innocent blood, they were willing to swear to the
Truth of this Averment; nor could this ill man say any thing then to it, only
(after some days search) he got two wretched fellows of his Gang, who privately
made Oath, That Dugdal had told them, the said Deponents that Story; which
contradicts nothing (had their Depositions been true) of what Sambige and Mr.
Philips attested to his Confusion; and how Mr. Chetwin also (who makes Mr.
Sambige in the Jesvits page 27.
Trial his Author) will avoid this Blow, let any man tell me that can? Besides,
were there no such persons as Mr. Sambige and M. Philips living, is not yet the
Lie most apparent and clear? for how is it possible (as I mentioned before)
That Dugdale that was so greatly concerned in the Plot, and so surprised and
disturbed (as ib. p. 26.
he assures us) at this Murder, least it might ruin the whole business, should
run the very next morning (after Mr. Ewers had forsooth with great Secresy told
him of it) and proclaim to no manner of purpose at an Al^ before any man dreamt
of it in the Country^

Thus stands our Case my Lords and Gent) and thus you see that no good
Protestant can be safe, if such notorious Perjuries shall be countenanced. Nay
if Popery should be thus deprest, could it be, do you think, either for the
Honor or Interest of your Religion, since the History of all Country: as well
as our own, (for no Tittle of this can fall to the ground and be unrecorded)
will like the Ghost of a Murdered man be ever haunting you, which must raise
in yours, and your childrens thoughts great Detestation and Horror? For to what
Height is the Effrontery of these Sons of Perdition come, when they can
threaten Juries for not going against their Consciences, and tell Judges of
WRITS of EASE, if they take notice of most apparent and impudent
Contradictions. Have not they then destroyed all Law? And will not our moderate
and excellent Government (if these Precedents stand good) be the most
despotical and uncertain one, that ever was but to add yet to our Amazement,
who could have ever thought (unless it were to make the folly every where
proportionable) that we who have so eminently hazarded our ALL for the King,
that have so entirely Loved his person and have so constantly even doted on
Monarchy, should be accused as the grand Parricides, and that they that are
generally reputed to hate King, and King-ship, should be now the Sticklers and
Zealots for both. Is there not then some further Trick and Design in this new
Loyalty? And may not the Papists (as the Dogs in the Fable) be thought too
great a safety for the Fold? Yes certainly; for as the Reply, page 562.
Apologist has long ago observed, The Prerogative never suffered; no great
States man has ever been disgraced; nor the Church of England it self, (n^^ the
Libertyes of the People) ever wounded, but a fearful Out cry against Popery has
still preceded. And now that I speak of the Liberties and Rights of the People,
show me an Instance in Story, even in the reputed Worst of Times (and therefore
you may see, what Judgments ever follow the falling upon the Innocent) that
whole Corporations (as appears now in the Buckingham case, and in other Places
also) were ever before publicly Libelled for their Choice, which takes away
the chiefest Liberty and Privilege we can possibly pretend. Therefore for
Liberties sake, for Monarchies sake, for Religions sake; or in short, for the
sake of all that is Good and Holy, put a stop to this present Tempest, which
bearing up Perjury, has not only destroyed all Trade and Commerce among us, but
rendered us a Laughing Stock to the whole world, and shaken the very Basis and
Foundation of our Island.

FINIS.
The Certificate of the City of St. Omer, concerning Titus Oats.
WE the Mayor and Sherifs of the City of St Omer, being surprised at the
Report, That the English Fathers residing with us, had about the beginning of
the Present Year (by the Negotiation of one Titus Oats, in France and England)
contrived and Plotted a wicked and bloody Treason against their natural Lord,
the most excellent* King of Great Britain, and being the more amazed at it,
since they had given through a long ^cries of Years, a rare example among us,
not only of Learning and Piety in particular, but of Obedience in general, to
all Civil Magistrates and Governors; a thing which makes the whole Society of
Jesus highly respected and esteemed, by most of the Christian Princes of the
World: We say that being surprised at this report, we took (as far as we could)
the Examination of the matter into hand, and therefore certify, That it has
appeared to us by the Oaths of several of the best, and antientest Scholars of
that Seminary (the Consisting of 200. Persons.
whole College having offered to make the same Oath) That the said Titus Oats,
was not only effectively in the said Seminary at the end of April and beginning
of May, 1678 but did constantly reside there, from the tenth of December, 1677.
to the twenty third of June following, without ever being absent from thence,
except one night in January, at which time he was at Watten, two Leagues
distant from us* The said Deponents, also have alleged as a reason of this
their knowledge, That they Lodged, Conversed, Drunk, and Eat with the said
Oats, in the said Seminary, all that while, he being at a distinct table
alone, and did parti^ularly take notice that he was there in April and May as
abovesaid, as having seen him at that time constantly perform the Office of
Reader in the Sodality of the Students in the said Seminary, and as being
present at the departure of one Killembeck alias Pool, an English Scholar, who
went from this City the fifth day of the said Month of May New Style, to take
his journey into England. In Witness whereof we have caused the Seal of the
said City to be hereunto put this 28 of December, 1678.

Loco Sigilli J. Ganon.

The Certificate of the City of Liege, in Relation to Sir Thomas Preston.
WE the Eschevines of the high Court of Justice of his most Serene Highness, in
the City and Country of Liege, To all those to whom these presents shall come,
greeting, do certify and attest, That a Petition being presented to us, in our
ordinary Consistory in the Palace of his said Highness* on the behalf of Sir
Thomas Preston Knight and Baronet, residing at the English College of this
City; That whereas the said Sir Thomas Preston during the greatest part of the
Year One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy and Eight, and more especially in the
Months of March, April* May, and June, did constantly reside in the said
College, be the said Sir Thomas Preston having petitioned that we would in
favor of the Truth, hear a great many Witnesses, which he had to produce, we
condeseended unto his said Petition as reasonable and just, and have
accordingly heard upon Oath, fourteen creditable persons, who have all
unanimously upon their respective Oaths, declared and attested that the said
Sir Thomas Preston Knight and Baronet, did reside all the time aforesaid, at
the College aforesaid, and particularly in the Months of March, April, May,
and June, in the Year 1678. and that he was not absent, s^ much as one-night
during the said time; and they further have attested that they knew this to be
true, in that they resided all in the said College* and there saw, and
conversed daily with Him.

Given at our Court of Justice this 28 of March, 1679. By Order of the High
Court of Justice abovesaid. per Bonhomme.
THe like Certificate came from Watten about Sir John. Warner, the Witnesses
names being Albert Bapthorpe William Bitchfielt. Tousaint Vanden Cruys. F.
Caeles. Augustine Elmers Jaques Broos. Nicholas Willaert. Thomas Higgenson.
Marc. Bartolet. Charles Verons.




FINIS.

