Great News from FALMOUTH, OR, A True and Impartial ACCOUNT, OF A Bloody FIGHT
Between the Tinners of Cornwall, And the Kings Forces in the Town of Falmouth;
On Tuesday and Wednesday, the 27th. and 28th. of May.
In a LETTER from FALMOVTH.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

SIR,
ON Tuesday and Yesterday there was an extraordinary Riot in this Town, as
follows: A false Report was spread about the Country, that the French Goods
on Board several Prices in this Port were to be Destroyed. Whereupon the
Tinners and Country Rabble, to the Number of Three or Four Hundred, came into
the Town, and went directly to the Key, Swearing that the Salt and other Goods
which they wonted so much, should not be thrown into the Sea, but that they
would have it; the Officers of the Customs Interposed, and told them the Hazard
of the Enterprise they were going about, to break up those Ships whose Hatches
were Locked and Sealed, and the Ships and Goods the Kings. And to Pacify them,
told them (what was never intended to be Performed) that when the said Gooods
were Condemned, and to be Destroyed, they should have a Public and General
Notice of it, wherewith they were well sattisfied; and going off. When several
of the Townsmen called them Fools, and Eged them on again; whereupon, they
Entered, and brok up the first Ship they come at, Laden chiefly with Salt,
which they Unloded by the beginning of the Night, and then gave over till the
Morning; by which time their Number were Increased to near Two Thousand in all,
Men and Women: The Men Declared for Salt, Wine, and Brandy; and the Women
Declared for Linen, Resolving to Plunder every Ship in the Port.

The Captain of Pendenis sent down (at the Request of the Price Officers) Two
Files of Musketeers to help Guard the next Ship they were to come at: Which
they Entererd notwithstanding, and Assaulting the Soldiers, forced some of
them to make use of Ball, who shot only with Powder before, so that one of the
Ringleaders was shot through the Body, another in the shoulder, a third had
his Belly slit up with a Baggonet, that his Bowels hung out, and several others
Pricked and Wounded.

But this had not Ended, but Increased the Mischief, if they had not bethought
themselves of somge reat Guns that were on Board, which they Mounted and Loaded
presently in the View of the whole Rout, and Running with Lighted Matches as if
they would have immediately Fired amongst them; the Women began to shriek out
and Fly! and the Men by degrees followed them, till they all got out of Town.

So that we are now quite rid of them, being quietly gone to their Respective
Habitations of this Town. Many Joined with them, whom I suppose the Officers of
the Customs will take Care to Prosecute.

Falmouth, May the 29th. 1690 I am Sir, Your Servant, T. C.

London, Printed for Timothy Johnson, at Charing Cross. 1690.


