The Duty and Support of Believers in Life and Death.

A Funeral Sermon ON THE DEATH OF Mrs. MARY SMITH, Who Deceased Feb. 29. 1687/8.

Preached on the Lords Day following, ( March 4.) to the Auditory whereof she
was a constant Member.

Published at the Earnest Desire of her Nearest Relation, and Others.

Isaiah XLVI. 4. Even to your Old Age, I am he; and even to hoary hairs will I
carry you.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill in the Poultrey; and John Smith upon
London-Bridg. MDCLXXXVIII.

To His much Valued and Respected Friend, Mr. Anthony Smith.
SIR,
AS You were pleased to assign that Province to Me, of Preaching a Sermon on
the sad Occasion of Her sudden Death, who not many Weeks ago lay in your Bosom,
but is now in Abraham's; so you with some others, are to bear the blame
(whatsoever happens) of its being Printed. I must appeal to you and them as my
Witnesses, that my Inclinations were contrary to your Requests; and that these
Papers which now see the light, should have been buried in darkness (like Her,
whose loss we bewail) if your Importunity had not plucked them out of that
Grave, which I intended for them, among their fellows. My time is not yet come
(I Joh. 7. 4, 6.
know not whether ever it may or no) to show my self to the world in such a
manner; for in like cases heretofore, there are some who can testify, that I
am not of their number, whose time is always ready, because they seek to be
known openly.

I will not trouble my self here to publish my own Infirmities; the following
Discourse will do that sufficiently; only to prevent any from thinking that I
have done something extraordinary upon this subject, it will be but justice to
acquaint them that fewer hours were left me, wherein to prepare for this, than
what I commonly have for my constant work.

It might have been thought perhaps more proper by some, for Days to speak,
when such Gray hairs were dropped into the place of silence; because they are
less obnoxious to public censure, and more able to encounter it. But I must
now quietly take that Lot, which every Reader is disposed to cast upon me; not
expecting the same kindness and clemency from all, which it is possible that I
may obtain with a few. For it is easy to observe, that the most do pass a
severe or favorable Verdict upon Discourses, according as they have men's
persons in contempt or admiration; and too many oftentimes are kept from
receiving the love of the Truth, by their rooted prejudices against him that
does deliver it.

The main thing about which I am concerned, (next to the occasion it self) is,
that so mean a Performance should follow after such a mournful Solemnity; but I
hope that none will measure her real worth by the very short and imperfect
representation which I have given of it; she has a Record on high, which Job
16. 19.
speaks more fully in her praise than our poor Testimonies here below. Her
honored Name did indeed deserve a more costly Embalming, than I was able to
bestow; others may say only of me, as Christ did of the Affectionate Mark 14. 8.
Woman, that I have done what I could; I have the will to do more, and
therefore sincerely add, that wheresoever I may be called (at any time
hereafter) to preach this Gospel, I shall be ready to publish the same Memorial
of her, as I have done in this Sermon, for the glory of that Grace which was
given to her.

Let not this revive your sorrow, which is designed as an Antidote against it.
Remember that the Thread was spun almost to LXIX, before it broke, and many
thousands come not so near the ordinary limited age of man, as Psalm. 90. 10.
she did. Remember also, that there was the comfortable conjunction of 45
Years, before the hand of God's wise and holy Providence made this afflicting
separation. You have cause to sing of mercy, as well as judgment; do not
overlook the one, by poring on the other.

I shall not forget to lift up an Hearty Prayer for you, That the breach which
God has made, may be abundantly repaired, and filled up by himself; and that
Jesus Christ (the glorious Bridegroom, to whom your late Consort is now more
intimately joined) would not leave you Joh. 14. 18.
comfortless, but come to you: That your Hoary Hairs may be yet long continued
in the way of Righteousness, as an Example and Encouragement to others; and
that God would not at last cast you off, nor forsake you, when Psalm. 71. 9.
your strength totally fails, but in a good old age translate you to a more
happy Eternity.

And while I am thus praying for you, I doubt not your concurrence with me, in
beging of God that this small Discourse may go and bring forth fruit, and that
its fruit may remain; which will be great satisfaction to

March 20. 1687/8. Your Friend and Servant in the Concerns of your Soul, T. C.

The Duty and Support of Believers, etc.
Genesis XLIX. 18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.


THIS Chapter contains the Prophecy which was uttered by Jacob on his
Deathbed, with respect to those things which were to befall his Posterity in
the latter Days. It has been observed of many of God's Servants, that God has
revealed more of the Counsel of his Will to them at the close of their Lives,
than at any time before; but that which was spoken by the Holy Patriarch here,
he was moved to speak in an extraordinary manner, by the direction of an
Infallible Spirit. He mentions particular Events relating to several of his
Sons, and the Tribes which should come from them distinctly: and in the midst
of those predictions he breaks out into this Pathetical passage, I have waited,
etc.

The Words seem to be a sudden Ejaculation, having no strict or necessary
Coherence with what goes before, or follows after: only (as a Learned Man
conjectures) Charnock vol. 2. p. 1169.
Jacob having compared Dan to a Serpent, upon the account of its subtilty,
(ver. 17.) this might mind him of that trick which the Old Serpent put upon our
First Parents, which laid the foundation of their fall, and so he takes
occasion from t^^^e to express his Faith in that Seed of the Wo^^ who was
promised to break the Serpent's Head. However this be, we may reasonably
suppose, That so eminent a Saint, when he found himself almost tired with
speaking to his Children, and the pains of Death taking hold of him, was
willing (like Simeon) with open Arms to receive the expected Messiah, and
desirous to be received by God for the Messiah's sake. This Patriarch is noted
to have been exercised with more troubles than any of his Progenitors; and
therefore he tells Pharaoh that his days had been few and evil, (chap. 47. 9.)
and besides this, he had now the prospect of many Calamities which his Seed
would undergo after his Decease, which might make the present Agonies of Death
more sharp and bitter to him; but he fetches comfort and relief from this great
Consideration, That there was a Spiritual and Eternal Savior provided for him
and his, whom by dying he should come to enjoy.

Some have been very industrious to exclude the Knowledge of Christ from the
Old Testament times; as if there had been no waiting for the Kingdom of God,
and for the Consolation of Israel, before he was Mark 15. 43. Luke 2. 25.
manifested in the Flesh; but we have been taught otherwise by Christ himself,
who gave that Testimony to Faithful Abraham, He rejoiced to see my Day: And
John 8. 56.
Jacob's sight (who lived somewhat nearer to that Day) seems to be clearer than
Abraham's; for in this last extremity of his life, he makes mention Three times
of the Redeemer under three different Titles; he calls him the Angel, (chap.
48. 16.) because he is the Angel of the Covenant, who did both publish and
confirm it; and the Angel of Gods Prefence, who was ^^^e the Beginning with
God, and through whom we have access to God; he gives him the name of Shiloh
(ver. 10. of this chap.) that is, the Person eminently sent of God; and in the
Text he describes him by that high and Glorious Character, the Salvation of
God, which is the Style not only used by several of the Prophets afterward in
speaking to the Jewish Church, but also by Dying Simeon, when the Luke 2. 30.
Infant-Jesus was presented in the Temple.

The Doctrinal Proposition to be raised from these Words, may be this, That it
is the work of Living, and comfort of Dying Believers, to wait for Gods
Salvation.

I shall handle this Proposition in the following Method.

I. Show what is this Salvation which Believers are II. How is this Work to be
done while they Live. III. How will it yield them Comfort when they IV. Apply
the whole to our selves and the Occasion.
I begin with the first Thing, to show, What this Salvation is, which Believers
are to wait for. In general, Christ himself, and the Benefits which come by
him, are comprehended under it.

First, Jesus Christ in his Person may very well be (and indeed is to be most
principally) understood by this expression: His Coming in the Flesh was the
great Promise of the Father, embraced and depended on by all the Believers who
lived before his time: He was the Desire of all Nations; and in a special Mal.
3. 1.
manner the Hope of Israel. O that the s^^^^^ion of Acts 28. 20. Psalm 14 7.
Israel were come out of Sion! was the unanimous voice of that Church in their
Public Worship. Now the second Appearance of this Christ to Judgment, and the
Translation of our Souls to him by Death, with the happy Consequences of both,
(as will be shown in the progress of this Discourse) are things still expected
by such as remain in the Body. Here particular satisfaction should be given to
Three Enquiries.

1. Why is Jesus Christ styled Salvation? 2. Why is he called the Salvation of
the Lord? 3. What is he, who has this Title, yet to do, which living Believers
wait for.
1. Why is Christ Jesus called Salvation? I conceive chiefly for these Two
Reasons; because he is the Purchaser and Dispenser of it.

First; Because he is the Purchaser and Author of Heb. 5. 9.
Salvation; so he is styled by the great Apostle; inasmuch as he deserved,
procured, and wrought it out for us. Our Salvation is founded in his Blood,
bestowed upon the account of his Merit, with a respect to his Satisfaction, and
through the virtue of his Intercession: It is true, we are saved by Grace; but
the Question is, What Grace, and how it comes to be Ephesians. 2. 8.
exercised and conveyed? In relation to this, (though it be originally the
Grace of God) it is said to be the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; therefore
Salvation by Acts 15. 11.
and in Christ, are such very common and frequent expressions in the New
Testament; nay we meet with the same sometimes in the Old Testament referring
to him. So the Evangelical Prophet, Israel ^^all be saved in the Lord, with an
everlasting Isa. 45. 17. ver. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
salvation. What Lord is this, but he besides whom there is no Savior? He to
whom the ends of the earth must look: He to whom every knee shall bow? He in
whom we have righteousness and strength; and in whom all the seed of Israel
shall be justified, etc. Who is this but Christ himself; and what Salvation is
everlasting except his? The same Prophet tells us it was his own arm which
brought salvation, for there was none chap. 63. 5.
to help him in that work: Angels who excel in strength were too weak for such
an Undertaking; a man's redeeming of his brother by any means was much more
impossible; for a combination of all the men in the World could not have been
serviceable so much as to one: Salvation is the Price of Christ's Death, and the
Effect of his Power.

Secondly, Because he is the Giver and Dispenser of Salvation; and he has
Authority so to be entrusted with him by the Father, because it was
accomplished by himself. In this sense he is called the God of our Salvation,
by the Psalmist; this being the Psalm. 68. 19, 20.
great Gift which he received for men; for it is most apparent, that Christ is
the person spoken of, from the foregoing verse, where we have an account of his
v. 18.
Ascension into Heaven in the very words which the Apostle Paul uses on that
Subject. The Prophet Ephesians. 4. 8. Zech. 9. 9.
speaks to the same purpose, Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and
having salvation: The latter part of that verse (lowly, and riding upon an ass,
etc.) does plainly refer to the means and manner of Christ's famous Journey to
Jerusalem, and is therefore applied to him by the Evangelist upon that
occasion: When Matt. 21. 5.
it is said that Christ has Salvation, the meaning is, that he has it to
communicate; for though he is just, yet all the Mercy of God comes through his
hands. For this reason he is called by Zacharias the Luke 1. 69.
father of his forerunner, an horn of salvation, from whence Salvation is more
immediately poured out upon lost and miserable souls. He carried it along with
him whithersoever he went; therefore when Zacheus had opened his doors to him,
he tells him, This day chap. 19. 9.
is salvation come to this house. With respect to this, the times of the
Gospel, which are more especially the days of the Son of man, are honored with
that Isa. 49. 8.
Character of the day of Salvation. It is the Word of Christ, wherein this
Salvation is declared and offered; it is by the Spirit whom Christ now sends
into our hearts, that we come to be interested in it; and it is the same Christ
who will put us into actual and complete possession of it at the last.

2. I am to open, Why Jesus Christ is styled the Salvation of the Lord: Upon
what grounds might holy Jacob give him this peculiar discriminating mark, when
he was making his last Address to God, Thy Salvation? The same note of
Distinction and Propriety is frequently set upon Christ by God himself in the
Prophetical Books, which any one that diligently examines may easily discover.
Among other Reasons of this, these two may be insisted on.

First; Because Christ came with God's Commission; John 6. 38, 39. 40.
how many times does he make mention of the Father's will that sent him? Thrice
together in one Discourse. The whole transaction of the Recovery of sinful man,
was by Divine appointment; the Father and the Son had from Eternity agreed,
together with the Blessed Spirit, about what the Son was to undertake and
perform in time: I will give thee (says God, pointing at Isa. 49. 6.
Christ) for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the
ends of the earth; which Paul repeating to his Hearers at Antioch, renders
thus, I have Acts 13. 47.
set thee, etc. The comparing of both places together, shows that Christ was
constituted and ordained by God, to be what he is, and to do what he did. The
work which he was engaged in, is therefore sometimes called the Work of God,
and he God's Servant in the carrying of it on. Indeed if Christ had not been
authorized by the Father, all his Mediatorial Acts had been invalid; we should
have been still in our sins, and under the curse; we should have been yet
detained in the hands of Justice, and obnoxious to implacable Wrath.

Secondly, Because he succeeded with God's acceptance. Our Lord has finished
his Reconciling-work, by finishing the Transgression which caused the Enmity;
He blotted out the handwriting which was against us, Coloss. 2. 14.
and took it out of the way; which implies the consent and approbation of God
the Sovereign Judge. He had a trust reposed in him, which he faithfully
discharged; a burden laid upon him, which he patiently bore; whereupon he was
justified in the spirit, and 1 Timothy 3. 16. Heb. 2. 9. Isa. 42. 4.
crowned with glory and honor: He fulfilled what the Prophet had foretold
concerning him, That he should not fail or be discouraged, till he had
established judgment in the earth; this implies that there would be a great deal
of difficulty and opposition for him to meet with, but he should conquer it all
by his Omnipotence, and answer the ends of Gods Grace in sending him. All our
Enemies were his; Earth and Hell, and (in some sense) Heaven too, were against
him; but he came off victorious, and God declared him so, by giving him a
Throne to sit on after his Death and Resurrection. God gave him his name Jesus
at the first; Rev. 3. 21. Matt. 1. 21.
and God's advancing of him to his own Right Hand, (a place of the highest
honor) when all was done, is an evidence that he deserves to wear that Name,
for he has saved his people from their sins. God would not have so dignified
his Person, if he had rejected his Performance: Jesus Christ therefore is God's
Jesus, or God's Salvation, as he is both Commismissioned and Accepted by God on
our behalf.

3. I am to show, What Christ is yet to do, which living Believers wait for.
This may be summed up in Two Things.

First, He is to receive our Spirits at the end of our lives; the Prayer of
Stephen is a pattern for us all; When they stoned him (as his last breath was
going forth) he called upon God, and said, Lord Jesus, receive Acts 7. 59.
my Spirit: It is true, he was mightily encouraged to this, by the
extraordinary Vision which he had a little before; He saw the heavens opened,
and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God, in a v. 55, 56.
ready posture (as it were) to grant his request, and to receive his Soul as
soon as parted from his body. Here was indeed a Glorious Discovery made, even
to the Senses of that dying Martyr; but the discoveries which are made to our
Faith, are as real as this, tho perhaps not altogether so ravishing; though now
we see not Christ, yet believing, we may commend our departing Spirits to him,
without the fear or hazard of being refused by him. David in the midst of great
straits and dangers does confidently put up this sort of Petition, Into thy
hand I commit my Spirit; Psalm. 31. 5.
and he urg^ this Argument to back it, Thou have redeemed me, etc. Who so fit
or so forward to do this for us when we dye, as he that has already died to
obtain our Redemption from the Second Death? He who poured out his soul for us,
when he was upon the Cross, does thereby encourage us, now he is in Heaven, to
pour out our souls into his hand; as the poor starved children are said to pour
out theirs into the Lament. 2. 12.
bosoms of their mothers.

Secondly, He is to come again at the End of the World; this is as much the
expectation of Believers now, as his first coming was heretofore. To them that
look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin Heb. 9. 28.
unto salvation. This is the appearing which the Church says Amen to, both at
the beginning and the close of the Revelation. We expect to see that Jesus who
was Revel. 1. 7. and 22. 20.
once veiled in flesh, coming in the Clouds of heaven; we expect to see him who
had only the poor retinue of twelve Disciples, coming with ten thousands of his
Saints: He that lived upon Alms for the maintenance of his temporal life, shall
actually distribute eternal life; he that once stood before Pilate's Bar, shall
sit down upon a Tribunal himself: And he that was Crucified through weakness,
shall be armed with Irresistible power. All this Believers can expect with joy,
because the Day of Judgment is their Day of Redemption. Luke 21. 28. Ephesians. 4.
30.
Who among the Children of God would not be glad to see his Savior again, when
he shall bring his final rewards with him! Who would not rejoice to look upon
him as a Judge, that is interested in him as an Advocate! We look for a very
glorious revolution before that day, with respect to the prosperity and
flourishing of the Church; but at that day there shall be such a change and
renovation of the whole world, as will exceed in glory. It is not our belief,
that Christ will suffer things always to continue as they are; but we believe
that this decaying frame of Nature shall be dissolved, a new Heaven and Earth
spring out of the ashes of the old, every creature be subdued to God, the
public sentence of life or death pronounced upon all mankind, and then the
Kingdom delivered up to the Father. This is what remains to be done by Christ.

Secondly, The Benefits which flow from Christ, may be included in this term of
the Lords Salvation; and there are some such, which believers while alive, are
not possessed of, but waiting for. I grant that they receive several of Christ's
benefits, when they are made believers, yea even those which are the earnest
and pledge of all the rest: They have eternal life abiding in them, as soon as
their spiritual life is begun; if they become the children of God by faith, at
their new birth, then they are at that time the rightful Heirs Romans 8. 17.
of Heaven, and of all that Heaven contains; but still the Inheritance is
reserved for them. They have not 1 Pet. 1. 4.
the perfect enjoyment of all that God has promised, and that Christ has
purchased, though they have the title and the first fruits. The following
particulars will show what they wait for, as the effects of their Savior's
sufferings.

First, (to begin with the least and lowest of their Expectations) A full
deliverance from temporal and external evils; such as pain and sickness,
Providential disappointments and losses, unjust and violent Persecutions, etc.
which they are more or less, at one time or another, subject to in this life.
Though these burdens are comparatively light, yet many times they make a
Believer to groan under them, while he is in this Tabernacle. They lie so heavy
sometimes, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
especially when several kinds of them meet together (like various Rivers which
run into one Sea of trouble) that they make a man bitter in soul, and put him
upon longing for death, which otherwise Job 3. 20, 21.
he would be most desirous to shun. Though these are lesser evils, yet they are
real; and so long as we labor under them, we cannot but look upon our selves
as miserable in part. Who can doubt that our blessedness is imperfect while our
bones are vexed, while Gods arrows stick in our flesh; when so many Diseases
are ready to assault us, and unseen Casualties to fall upon us; where our
riches, and all other worldly glory (like birds upon the wing) are prepared to
fly away from us; where our finest Hos. 9. 11.
garments are so quickly moth-eaten, and our most valuable Goods corrupted;
where our whole inheritance is liable to the spoiler's hands, and the Sons of
blood (if God at any time let them loose) may arise and take possession? How
uncertainly is our health, or ease, or plenty, or tranquillity prolonged, while
we are here! in how small a moment may all the contrary mischiefs overtake us!
But we wait the time, when God will finally save us out of all.

Secondly, Deliverance from the remainders of Indwelling Corruption, and the
Temptations of Satan. Here a Believer is often crying out with Paul, Oh
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from Romans 7. 24.
the body of this death? He has not yet actually obtained such a deliverance,
but he waits for it: I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. We many Ver. 25.
times feel the tyranny and force of sin, though it has lost its constant and
allowed Dominion; we are led into an unwilling Captivity, though we have
renounced the voluntary service. Satan, though he cannot command us, does
frequently overcome us; though we do not yield our selves to him, we are
prevailed upon by him: He entangles us, though we do not run into the snare; he
pursues and overtakes us, when we shun him, and fly from him. How troublesome
and tedious is this to a child of God! that he cannot go from the evil spirit,
nor stifle the lusts of his own heart! What a sad exercise is this to a Saint,
that he should not only have Principalities and Powers to wrestle with, but be
divided against himself! Indeed the sincerity of all those is to be suspected,
who can bear this with any quietness or satisfaction. But the Heavenly state
admits of no such disturbances; we wait for an absolute freedom both from sin
and temptation in the next world.

Thirdly, A Declared Justification from the Guilt of every sin. This was the
motive to Repentance and Conversion, which Peter laid before the Jews, whose
hands were stained with the blood of Christ: That your sins may be blotted out,
wben the times of Act. 3. 19.
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. It is true, that every
sin is now blotted out to every true Believer; but in the day of Christ, he
will show that it is so. The Books when they are opened, shall be visibly
crossed, and we pronounced before Angels and men as Righteous (by the sinless
Obedience of the second Adam) as if we never had offended. There is a private
act of Oblivion (as it were) already past, but then it shall be publicly read
in the hearing of the World. Our pardon is now certain (upon the supposition of
repentance and faith) then it shall be as evident as certain, and universally
known both to others and our selves: We are indeed Justified by Faith at
present, and abundantly Romans 5. 1. John 5. 24.
secured from future Condemnation; but there will be a Judicial Declaration of
our Righteousness at the appearing of our Lord Jesus, which will tend more to
the Honor of God's Grace, and to the Increase of our Everlasting Joy: All that
we have done amiss shall be so absolutely forgiven, that Christ will then
audibly say in the General Assembly of Mankind, Well done; and will Matt. 25.
21, 23.
not that be a joyful sound? We cannot conceive what Glory will redound hence
to God, and what Triumph of Spirit it will cause in us.

4. A nearer view of God, and Converse with him. While we are sojourning here,
we are at a Distance, and so see but darkly, and enjoy but little: We are nigh
to God, in comparison of the Unregenerate part of this World, but we are afar
off from God, in comparison of the glorified Inhabitants of the next. What
signifies our sight of God in the Sanctuary, compared with that sight which
they have in Heaven! How far short does our beholding in a Glass, come of
seeing God face to face! What Communion have we in Ordinances, worthy to be
named with the immediate Fruition of the Divine Presence! We wait for more open
vision, and more intimate fellowship; for such a state wherein God himself Rev.
21. 3.
shall be with us; not the Word of God, and other Instituted Means of Grace,
but God himself: We cannot yet know (by speculation) how great such an
happiness is; but we expect to know by experience; we are like persons standing
at the door, who cannot see what is within the house; Death is the pulling of
this door aside, and then all things will be nakedly exposed to our perfected
Understandings. To what good purpose shall we lift up our Eyes above, after our
Friends have closed them for us here below! What a Glory will be revealed in us
then, which is hid Romans 8. 18.
from us now! How much more of God will be communicated hereafter without
means, than is or can be by them in this present state! We sit under Shadows
now, then we shall sit down by the Fountain of Light.

5. Believers wait for the transforming of their Bodies into the likeness of
Christ's at the Resurrection. The raising, and quickening, and new beautifying
of our Dust, (which, when we dye, is scattered in the Grave) is a work which
requires an exceeding greatness of Power; but yet it is a work which we expect
to be done: We groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to Romans 8. 23.
wit, the redemption of our body: The Redemption of our Bodies from the power
of Death into a condition of endless Life, is called the Adoption, because it
is the manifestation of the sons of God, ver. 19.
as the Apostle speaks a little before, as Christ himself was declared to be
the Son of God, by his chap. 1. 4.
rising from the dead. The same Apostle speaking upon this Subject elsewhere,
says, We groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with our house 2 Cor.
5. 2.
which is from heaven: A Glorified Body may be styled our house which is from
heaven, in opposition to the earthly house mentioned in the foregoing ver. 1.
verse, because it will be of a more spiritual and lasting frame; Distempers
shall make no Breaches in it, and Death shall not pull it down. Infinite
Goodness observes a method herein, which is suitable to Infinite Wisdom; first
God advances the Inhabitant, and then, after a time, he repairs the habitation;
first he unites the Soul more closely to himself, and afterward the Body to
the Soul: This is that admirable Change, which Job says, that he would wait all
the days of his appointed Job 14. 14.
time for; that is, of his continuance in the state of the dead (as an
Excellent Author How 's Bless. of the Right. p. 210, 211, 212.
has largely cleared.) Thus when we lay down our Mortal flesh in the bosom of
the Earth, we leave it to rest in hope of a certain Immortality.

I proceed now to the Second Thing which was Work (of waiting for God's
Salvation) is to be done by Believers while they live. Three Things seem to be
included in it.

1. It includes Fervent Desires: Waiting for Christ from Heaven, and loving his
appearing, in 1 These. 1. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Scripture are the same thing; some things are unwillingly expected by wicked
men; they foresee that death will come, and they are afraid of it; so there is
a fearful looking for of Judgment, Heb. 10. 27.
(which follows after death): This is an Expectation accompanied with fear,
which has a great deal of uneasiness and torment in it; they that have it,
could wish to be disappointed and mistaken: Hope is somewhat more than bare
Expectation, because it implies Desire, and that we have an Affection to the
same thing, which we have a Prospect of. Sisera's Mother was eagerly desirous
to see her Son marching home in Triumph, and therefore she looked out at a
window, and cried out through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long Judge. 5.
28.
in coming? The Creature which groans under the Curse for our sin, is very
desirous of ease and restitution, and therefore we read of its earnest Romans 8.
19.
expectation waiting for such a time. When the Church was waiting for God, they
tell him, The desire of our soul is to thy name, etc. Do we then Isa. 26. 8.
wait for the Salvation of the Lord, from a Principle of Love to him, and to
the Spiritual good things which we expect from him? Can we say (as David did),
That we wait for God more than Psalm. 130. 6.
they that watch for the morning? (Some think that the Psalmist alludes in that
place, to Sentinels in an Army or City, who many times being wearied with their
tedious Service in the night, long till the day breaks, that they may be
relieved and discharged by others). It is a necessary Question, Are our hearts
directed into such a passionate waiting for Christ?

2. It includes steadfast Hopes: It is a Fruit that springs from Faith, for if
that be shipwrack'd, nothing will fix the soul in a waiting posture: To hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lam. 3. 26.
Lord, are things which always go together; so the great Apostle speaks, If we
hope for that which Romans 8. 25.
we see not, then do we with patience wait for it: The Inference is grounded
upon the preceding Supposition, we wait if we hope, but else we do not:
Infidelity overthrows every thing of this kind, as is manifest from that woeful
Instance of the King of Israel, when the Famine was so great in the Land; This
evil is of the Lord, wherefore 2 Kings 6. 33.
should I wait for him any longer? q. d. I have no such confidence either in
God's Power or Goodness, as to think that he can or will remove this Calamity,
though he has inflicted it; I never look for a return of plenty, any more than
the opening of windows in Heaven, as one of his Courtiers expressed chap. 7. 2.
himself afterward. Do we therefore heartily believe the record which God has
given us of his Son? Are we firmly persuaded of Christ's Ability and
Willingness to save? Are we deeply convinced how securely we may trust in him,
how freely we may roll our burdens on him, how boldly we may make our
applications to him, when we are most terrified with the sense of sin and
wrath? As he that comes to God, must believe that he is; so he that waits for
God's Salvation, must believe that there is such a thing, and rest satisfied in
its reality: A steady assurance of that which we expect, will bear up our
expectation; but otherwise it will sink.

3. It includes diligent endeavors of preparation for the thing that we desire
and hope: The Salvation of God is not to be hoped for out of the road of duty:
In the way of thy Judgments (so the Commands Isa. 26. 8.
of God are sometimes called) have we waited for thee: Such as walk irregularly
(in their usual and ordinary course) are not persons in a salvable state. To
him that orders his conversation Psalm. 50.
arigbt, will I show the salvation of God; that is, to him, and him only. They
cannot rejoice in the hope of glory, who do not live in the exercise of grace.
A man that is dead in sin while he lives, may flatter himself with an
imagination of dying the death of the righteous at the last; but the miserable
event will undeceive him, when the time of Reformation shall be no more; I
charge thee therefore (oh sinner!) before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou expect nothing but vengeance from him, till thou yieldest up thy self in a
way of dutiful subjection to him. If you pretend to wait for God's Salvation,
you must show that it is more than a pretense, by taking care to work it out
your selves: Consider those words of our Savior, Let your loins be girded
about, and your lights burning, and you your selves like Luke 12. 35, 36.
to men that wait for their Lord, etc. Are they that give Indulgence to
Spiritual sloth, that live in the customary neglect of unquestionable Duties;
that let themselves loose in their Conversations, to the same vanities with the
children of this world, and perhaps to some of the same vices; that suffer
their lamps to go out (having not Grace in their hearts to supply and feed
them); and behave themselves as if Eternity (like the morrow) would take
thought Matt. 6. 34.
for the things of it self; are they indeed like to such men? Do these
sluggards and licentious persons deserve the name of Waiters? No surely;
Salvation will never come home to any, but such as diligently seek it, and
labor after it; Heaven will not drop into our Mouths, though we open them
never so wide, as long as our hands lie folded together: Our Duties must prove
our hopes legitimate, and our Obedience must justify our Expectation: He that
would sleep in Jesus at Death, must watch with him in his life; and whosoever
thinks of dying to the Lord, must resolve against living to himself.

I come now to the Third Thing, which is to open comfort to Believers when they
come to dye. This may appear in two Respects.

1. A Reflection on our own Act (of waiting) will be comfortable to us at that
time: Hezekiah when he was sick unto death, refreshes himself with the view of
his past Conversation, and appeals to God, Remember now, oh Lord! how I have
walked before Isa. 38. 3.
thee, etc. When Death finds a man in his proper place and work, in that
station and employment which belongs to him, the Terror and Force of it is very
much broken; but when it surprises him in his sin, and comes upon him while he
is fighting against God, no wonder if his Flesh tremble, and his Heart fail: he
cannot look back without sad confusion, nor look forward without dreadful
amazement. A Believer that has lived long in the expectations of a Summons to
remove, and made suitable provision, may calmly shoot the gulf; the exercising
of himself to Godliness beforehand, is a means to prevent all trouble or
affrightment in his passage to Blessedness: Not that any of our Services are
our Saviors, or that we can build a Tower of our own works, whereby to reach
to Heaven, (for multitudes in attempting this, have tumbled into Hell); but the
Fruits of Sanctification Romans 8. 23.
are a kind of First Fruits, with respect to Glorification; and our living unto
God here, is a certain token of our being ordained to live with him hereafter:
If we have kept the Precepts, we may know that we are Heirs of Promise; it
yields comfort as a sign, though not as a cause: The Lord is good (says the
Lam. 3. 25.
Prophet), to them that wait for him; we do not by our waiting merit to partake
of the Goodness of God (any more than a beggar would deserve an Alms, by
standing at our doors) but God has ordered, that we shall be thus qualified
and disposed for it.

2. The consideration of the Object (God's Salvation) is very comfortable to a
Believer, when he is at the point to dye. How sweet is it to think of being
with Christ, when the Soul is standing (like Abraham) in the door of its tent,
ready to depart out of Genesis 18. 1.
the body! What a vigorous Impression must the Powers of the World to come,
make upon the Soul, when it is stepping out of this! How strong a Cordial must
the prospect of Heaven be to a Saint, that is just leaving of the Earth! What
Comfort so great, as to know that our Redeemer lives, when these vile Carcasses
are dying, and the Worms ready to destroy Job 19. 25.
them! How little satisfaction is the having of goods laid up for many years,
to one that must leave them all behind him in a few moments! What miserable
Comforters in a man's last distress, are bags which wax old, and treasures which
fail! Therefore when holy David had been meditating on our common frailty and
folly, Psalm. 39. 6.
(how we walk in a vain show, and yet disquiet our selves in vain, etc.) he
adds, And now, oh Lord! what ver. 7.
wait I for? my hope is in thee: q. d. I cannot hope to be delivered from
death, nor supported in death, nor made happy after death, by such perishing
and corruptible things as silver and gold; but my eye is toward thee, as my
Everlasting Portion, and upon the durable riches which thou have to bestow; the
sense whereof is sufficiently reviving, though I were now drawing my last
breath, and falling into the hand of the Grave. Dying Believers are mightily
supported when they consider how much nearer their Salvation now is, than when
they were first united Romans 13. 11.
unto Christ.

The Fourth and last thing propounded, was the

First, We may learn hence, that it is a mercy to be taken notice of, both by
living and dying Believers, that Christ did not consult the saving of himself;
for if he had, he could not have been the Salvation of God to us. If our Lord
had followed his Disciples counsel, and spared his own life, we must have lived
and died in remediless despair. A little of that self-love in him, which reigns
so much in us, would have ruined all our confidences, subverted our hopes, and
left us to lie down in sorrow without recovery. To what mountains or hills
should we have looked for salvation, if he had declined the drinking of the
bitter cup?

Secondly, This teaches us, that the present world was not designed for the
place of our abode, or ultimate felicity. It is our traveling way, but not our
Country and our Home. Expectation ceases in a state of perfect fruition; why
should we wait, if our hope were in this life, and not beyond it? We must put a
stop to all our desires and thoughts of a future happiness, if the state which
we now are in, were the state of full enjoyment. Take your measures of this
world from the nature and quality of that work, which God has given you to do
in it. We walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7.
and not by sight; therefore here is not our continuing City, or the Center of
our rest.

Thirdly, What a wretched case are the neglecters of this Salvation in! What
will they do in their own last moments, and how shall they escape in the Heb.
2. 3.
last day of the world! How sensibly worse will their condition be, when they
have finished their course, than it is now! and yet what vast numbers of such
fill up every place! men that prefer their own sins to God's Salvation, that
set up worse Thieves and Murderers than Barrabas in competition with Christ, I
mean those lusts whereby they rob God of his right, and destroy their own
souls. Oh, that they would yet learn to be ashamed of themselves, and think of
some of those who have lived in the same times and places with them, who (if
they repent not) will rise up in judgment and condemn them! Before the Tree
falls (Oh sinner) thou may alter thy posture, and turn a waiter for Christ,
who art yet a Rebel against him; for now is the day of salvation. 2 Cor. 6. 2.
I bespeak Conscience to do its office, in observing and recording, that this
day the word of Salvation was again sent to thee; and therefore refuse or
despise it at thy peril.

Fourthly, How should we be instructed by this, to converse with our living
comforts, as dying creatures, as those that are waiting to be gone from us! How
should we rejoice in their society, as tho we rejoiced not, considering that
they are making themselves 1 Cor. 7. 30.
wings, and in a very little while, either they will leave us alone, or we
shall leave them so! How easy is it then to overlove these mortal things! only
He that has immortality, cannot be loved too much. What folly is it to bind up
our lives in the lives of our fellow creatures (as Jacob's was said to be in
Benjamin's) Genesis 44. 30. Col. 3. 3.
when our life, and theirs, is hid with Christ in God, and upon that account
they are always expecting an opportunity to exchange their weary Pilgrimage
with us, for a glorious residence with him! Our best Friends, and Holiest
Relations are not to be reckoned as living fountains, but as leaking and broken
cisterns; and though we have the more matter of thankfulness, the longer we
enjoy them, yet this must not tempt us to presume, that we shall have them
always with us.

Lastly, How should this lessen and abate of our trouble, with respect to those
who are removed from us already! Their time of waiting is swallowed up in an
Eternity of full participation; their work is done, and their reward received;
we are still running of our race, they have reached the mark, and are sat down;
we are praying to be visited with God's salvation, but Psalm. 106. 4.
it is no sin with them to restrain prayer, because they have possession. If
therefore we loved them (as Joh. 14. 28.
Christ says to his Disciples, in reference to his own departure) it should
incline us to rejoice; we should as well bless the Lord, when he takes them
away in Job 1. 21.
mercy to themselves, as when he gives them in mercy unto us. I readily grant,
that this is an Hard saying, and that which will not be digested, and cannot be
complied with, by Flesh and Blood; But I speak of moderating sorrow, not of
extinguishing it; it is unnatural not to mourn, as it is Unchristian to mourn
like men without hope. Many things were represented and described in Vision to
the Prophets of old, which were never really put in practice; and among such
things some have supposed, that That Injunction may be numbered; Son of man,
behold Ezekiel. 24. 16.
I take away from thee the desire of thine Eyes with a stroke; yet shall thou
not mourn, nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down. The limited expression
of our Grief upon such occasions, is agreeable to Nature; but this must not run
so far, as to contradict the Principles of Grace. Grieve not, as if you envied
them the consummation of their Joy, and wished their return to you. If we should
choose death rather than life for our selves (supposing that it were put to our
choice) let it please us, that God in his Providence has chosen this for them.

I can with great courage and boldness recommend this Duty at this time, having
such good grounds whereon to persuade my self of the blessed Condition of Our
Departed Friend; I will not say, that this Sheep of Christ was without spot,
(because this is peculiar to the Lamb of God himself) but without the least
doubt or jealousy of the contrary, I do affirm, that Her spot was the spot of
Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
God's Children; and therefore whatever lamented Infirmity she had, I am sure,
that it ought not to be objected against her Name and Memory by us who dwell
still in Houses of Clay, who, if we say that 1 John 1. 8.
we have no sin, deserve to be branded for Lying Hypocrites. As all that knew
her, so especially we in this Congregation, that survive her, have great reason
to call her back into our Thoughts, as a Worthy Pattern and Example for our
future imitation. She was one that kept the Law as the Apple of her Eye; she
was very tender and cautious in avoiding the doubtful appearances of evil; and
discovered a remarkable hatred of sin, and zeal against it. More particularly,
she was a very strict observer of the Christian Sabbath, and exceeding fearful
of doing any thing, which might but seem to pollute or profane it in the least
degree. (I could wish, that the Generality of Professors took as much care to
abstain from what is plainly sinful upon that Holy Day, as she did to forbear
what was really innocent in its nature, lest it should accidentally give
offense.) She took great delight at all times in approacing unto God, and it
was with a more than ordinary desire, that she desired to join in the last
Sacrament with us before she died, (in imitation of Christ's desiring to Luke
^2. 15.
eat the Passover with his Disciples before he suffered.) As if she had met
with some secret Intimation from God (tho there was no open suspicion) how near
the time drew, that she must dye; and as if after this, she could have said, It
is enough now, O Lord; Let thy Servant depart in peace. She was an Chap. 2. 29.
hearty lover of God's Word and Ways, of his Messengers and People; and she did
not only sit before him as a Reverent Worshipper of him here, but she walked
Joh. 9. 31.
with him in her whole course, as a Conscientious Doer of his will. She
embraced the Doctrine of faith, and lived a life of faith, by which she adorned
the Doctrine; and now I am not afraid to pronounce, that she has received the
end of her faith, the Salvation 1 Pet. 1. 9.
of her soul. While we are yet singing in the tune of Lamentations, I question
not but that her Song is, This is my God, (and my Christ) I have Isa. 25. 9.
waited for him. She that a Week ago sat among us at God's Foot, is now among
Angels and the Spirits of just men about his Throne; she who then stood as a
Learner at Wisdoms gates, has now much more understanding than all her
Teachers, and is a Pillar in the Heavenly Temple; she who kept the last Sabbath
with us, is now keeping an Eternal one with God; and she who then feasted with
some of us at the Table of the Lord, is now an actual Guest at the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. I scruple not to parallel her with dying Jacob in
the Text, for in Christ Jesus there is neither Male Gal. 3. 28.
nor Female; (that is, no distinction as to Spiritual Privileges between the
one and the other.) And she was a true Daughter of Abraham, according to the
Faith, and one of the holy Seed of Jacob; therefore she is now sat down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob (and all the rest of the Old and New
Testament-Believers) in the Kingdom of God. Matt. 8. 11.


What is now the Language of this surprising Providence to us? The voice says,
Cry; but what does it Isa. 40. 6.
cry? All flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field. Here was one of a strong and active, sound and healthful Constitution,
in a few hours (after the fatal Distemper seized her) deprived of Sense and
Understanding, and in a few more deprived of life. When we lose the comfort of
the Lives of our Friends, let us not also lose the benefit which God intends us
by their Deaths. What Joy will there be in heaven where she is, if this Sermon,
occasioned by her sleeping in the dust, prove the awakening of any one Soul to
Righteousness! That word is fulfilled among us this day, One shall be taken,
Matt. 24. 40.
and another left; she is snatched out of the body, and we are continued in it;
boast not your selves of to morrow, Prove. 27. 1.
much less of a week to come; but spend every day, and especially sanctify
every Lords day, as persons who are not sure of living till the next. Consider
how quick a stroke cut off this Servant of God, who within the compass of
little more than a Natural Day, was Well and Dead. Her place in this Assembly
will now know her no more: You cannot tell how soon your Seats (like that of
David) will also 1 Samuel 20. 18.
be empty; empty of you, though they may be filled with others. Remember that
the time is short, and your passage to Eternity may be sudden; therefore
seriously look after the things of your peace, so as to acquaint your selves
with God, and make him your Friend, before you see Death, which to all
unprepared Souls is the worst, as well as the last Enemy.

FINIS.

