A CATALOGUE of remarkable mercies conferred upon the seven Associated
Counties, viz. Cambridge, Essex, Hartford, Huntingdon, Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Lincoln.

Printed by the command of the Right Honorable EDWARD, Earl of Manchester, the
Major General thereof, and the Committee now residing in CAMBRIDGE: And
appointed to be published in the several Parish-Churches of the aforenamed
Counties, upon the fourteenth of April, that Almighty God may by solemn
Thanksgiving, have the glory due unto his Name.

Hereunto is annexed an Order for the more solemn keeping of the Public Fast.

ANNO DOM. 1644.

A Catalogue of remarkable mercies conferred upon the seven Associated Counties.
A Midst the several miseries and distractions under which this Kingdom has
groaned since this unnatural war began by the enemies of our Religion and
Liberties, God has been pleased in his mere grace to raise unto us many means
of preservation: otherwise undoubtedly we had been, long before this time,
under the power of those enemies. Among which means this is not the least, that
God put it into the heart of the Parliament, to associate these Counties for
the mutual defense one of another, and the good of the Kingdom in general.
Neither are the successes which God has been pleased to give the forces raised
by these Associated Counties to be forgotten, but to be had in thankful
remembrance of all that love and fear God. Therefore our desire is, that God
(who is only to be acknowledged in all these deliverances and happy victories)
may have the glory due unto his name: And to that end, a day of public
Thanksgiving be solemnly kept and observed upon the Lords day, being the
seventh of April instant, in all the Congregations within this Association; and
that the people be stirred up by their Ministers to acknowledge the goodness
of God, for inclining the Parliament to cause these Counties thus to be knit
together for the ends aforesaid, and for his blessing given to their forces,
which have been employed in several parts of this Kingdom, and in particular
to call to mind these things following.

1. THe quenching that fire kindled at Laystaff, which would undoubtedly have
hazarded all the East parts of this Kingdom, if God had not by a seasonable
providence timely prevented the same, breaking it in that very conjuncture of
time in which there was a confederacy of the disaffected of those parts to
gather to a head. 2 The reducing Croyland, which was a place strong by
situation, and which had a professed Papist for the Governor, which how
dangerous it was to some parts of this Association, and to the neighboring
parts of Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, and Huntingdonshire, is well known to
those that were subject to their daily plundrings and pillagings. 3 The defeat
given to the enemies at Grantham, where eleven of the Parliament Troops facing
one or two and twenty of the enemies, five of the Associated Troops charging
the right wing of the enemies body, utterly routed them, and had the execution
and chase of them almost two miles, and got five or six of their colors. 4 The
taking Burlygh house, where was also taken the Lord Camdens regiment of horse,
with their colors, three or four companies of Foot and Dragooneers, with all
their ammunition, with about 400. prisoners. 5 The defeat given to the enemies
horse at Gainsborough, to the breaking of near thirty troops of the enemy;
where was slain the Lieutenant General Charles Cavendish: Colonel Heron, the
High Sheriff of Lincolnsh. forced into Trent, with many other Officers and
Soldiers, and there drowned, whereby Gainsborough was at that time relieved
with ammunition, which then it exceedingly wanted; and this battle fought, and
victory gotten, as without any considerable loss to us, so within a mile of
the Marquess of Newcastles Army. 6 The saving near twenty Troops of horse
belonging to the Lord Fairfax, and under that renowned Gentleman Sir Thomas
Fairfax, his son, with which horse he has since performed such notable good
service in Cheshire, and other parts; which said horse were almost starved by
the straight siege of Hull, and could not in probability have been thence
delivered but by the horse of this Association, which was done by fourteen
Troops of horse and three of Dragoons belonging to this Association, there
being nothing in assistance of them, but six Troops belonging to the Lord
Willoughby, and near forty Troops of the enemy under the command of Sir John
Hinderson, who had opportunity to have fought with our horse before we could
come to join with Sir Thomas Fairfax his horse, if he had pleased, but did not
take it. 7 The taking of Lin, a strong town and of great importance, by raw and
undisciplined new raised soldiers; which was a place as likely to have undone
this whole Association as any, which rebelled at such a time as the Marquess
of Newcastle was at the strongest, and so absolute in Lincolnshire, that if he
would have engaged his Army to have come to the rescue thereof, the forces of
this Association then raised, had not been considerable to have made
resistance. 8 The fight at Winsby, where ours being about fifty colors of
horse and dragoons, did encounter near ninety colors of the enemy: both
parties being by estimate between eight and nine thousand horse and dragoons,
the enemy being in all probability about five thousand of that number, where
we gave him such a defeat, that we took and killed about 1100. of them, and
took near thirty of their colors. ^ The taking of Lincoln, where the force of
the defendants were in computation many more then of the assailants, which the
enemy surrendered up to us upon hard terms to themselves, where we got about
3000. Arms, the enemies colors, with good proportion of ammunition, and five
or six pieces of Ordnance. 10 The taking of Gainsborough by storm, the greatest
part of the foot being our men, who repulsed the enemy, got over their works
without any loss, and possessed the town, whereby Lincolnshire (formerly
almost totally under the enemies power) became wholly cleared of them. 11 And
lastly, the taking of Hilsden house, which a week before the garrison of
Ailsbury attempted but could not take, after which time and before we
endeavored it, the enemy sent in two or three loads of ammunition; where were
taken above 200. prisoners, about twelve barrels of powder and proportionable
match, all their arms, and about fifty horse, which service was much to the
ease and comfort of the poor inhabitants of the almost wasted County of
Buckingham, which was oppressed by them, and by the countenance of which house
great sums of money and contributions were raised both for themselves and
Oxford; and a regiment of foot, and the completing Colonel Smiths regiment of
horse was speedily intended. Where also were taken men of quality, Sir A.
Denton, and Colonel Smith, besides two field Officers and diverse Captains.
These things are thus particularly recited (not for vain ostentation, nor that
any honor should be given to any person, no nor to your forces, but) that by
commemorating particulars, your hearts may be enlarged and quickened in
sincerity to give God the glory due alone to him. Let your confidence be ever
more placed in God, and when we again go out, we desire your prayers to the
Lord, professing our trust to be in his Name, and our rejoicing in hope we
shall have his presence to go along with us: in this we rest: And therefore let
the Name of God alone be glorified by all, through Christ for evermore.

A Postscript.
THis Commemoration of mercies conferred upon these Associated Counties, being
printed and ready to be published, according to the purpose expressed in the
Preface; the defeat given to the Forces before Newark did disfwade the
dispersing of the copyes upon these considerations: First, because the hearts
of people being oppressed by this sad providence, were judged unfit to
undertake the joyful exercise of Thanksgiving. Secondly, lest Malignants
should have any seeming occasion administered to blaspheme the ways of Christ,
upon our performance of a duty so unseasonable and unsuitable to our present
condition; giving it out also that this course of ours is but a colorable
cover of our great loss lately sustained by their prevailing power.

But now through some happy change of providence, the Lord of Hosts having
cheared up again the hearts of them who love Sion, by the good success
graciously given to the forces commanded by Sir William Waller, and Sir William
Belfore, the high employment of praising his Blessed Majesty will be
seasonable. And therefore, though we desire to be sensibly humbled under the
remembrance of our sufferings before Newark, (wishing that such especially may
Christianly reflect upon themselves, who have most to answer for in the
miscarrying of that business) yet we account not Gods former favors to be
lessened by our late loss, nor our selves discharged from the debt of
Thankfulness, because now under some cloud of affliction.

And if our enemies (whose custom it is to judge others according to their own
actions) imagine that we have any low unworthy design in this our practice, we
would have them know, that our hearts abhor the abusing, the abasing of any
holy ordinance to serve sinful ends; and withal we profess to the world,
that we do hopefully design the future speeding of our undertakings, for the
good both of Church and Commonwealth, by giving unto the God of our salvations,
the God of our victories, the honor due unto his Blessed Name.

Manchester.

An Order for the more solemn keeping of the Public Fast.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public calamity, to the
great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

Now that more particular notice may be given unto all such as shall offend
herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them, it is Ordered
by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that all Constables, or their
deputies, shall the day before every public Fast, repair unto every house
within their several and respective liberties, and charge all persons that
they strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said
Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of public Fast, walk through their said
liberties, diligently searching for, and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following the works of their callings, or sitting in Taverns,
Victualling and Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe the same;
and they are hereby required to return the names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their liberties guilty of the least offense,
unto the Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance. And all Constables are to observe these
directions from time to time, so long as the public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.
Constables.
I Do hereby charge and command all and every one of you, to use your best
endeavor that the monthly fast may be solemnly observed, according to the
Order of Parliament hereto adjoined, and also that the profanation of the
Lords day may be prevented according to another Order of Parliament for that
end heretofore published. And if any person, or persons, shall wilfully
transgress either of the aforesaid orders by Gaming, tippling in alehouses, or
following their servile employments, either on the Sabbath or Fast day, you
shall forthwith return their names unto me or the Committee, now sitting in
your County, that they may receive such punishment as their several offenses
shall deserve.

And you shall enquire out all unlicensed alehouse-keepers within your parish,
and give speedy notice of them unto the next Justices of peace, that they may
be suppressed.

You shall also, return to the said Justices the names of all them who being
licensed, do yet suffer any disorders in their houses, that they may be
punished. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost
peril.

Given under my hand at Cambridge this first of April, 1644. Manchester.


