A SHORT DISCOVERY Of the Coasts and Continent of AMERICA, From the
Equinoctial Northward, and of the adjacent ISLES.

By William Castle, Minister of the Gospel at Courtenhall in Northamptonshire.

Whereunto is prefixed the Authors Petition to this present Parliament, for the
propagation of the Gospel in America; attested by many eminent English and
Scottish Divines. And a late Ordinance of Parliament for that purpose, and for
the better government of the English Plantations there. Together with Sir
Benjamin Rudyers Speech in Parliament, 21. Ian. concerning America.

London, Printed in the year 1644.

ORNATISSIMIS VIRIS.
OLIVERO St. JOHN (Sollicitatori Regis generali) and JOANNI WILD Servienti ad
Legem; verae Religionis, Iuris municipalis, Patriae debitae libertatis
Assertoribus integerimis

GVLIELMVS CASTLE, debitae observantiae, and gratitudinis ergo, sed praecipue,
ob eximium utriusque desiderium, pro^pagandi Evangelium, apud Americo^* Ho^
suum qualecunque Opusculum humiliter, D. D. D.

AD LECTOREM.
NOn opus exegi, tamen haec quae scripta videbis,
Romanam Cathedram, Hispanos, Ereb^mque movebunt.
Scilicet Americam, sibi soli poscit habendam
Rex Cantabrorum (quod non si^it iste libellus,
Multorum effigies, and fida medulla laborum.)
Nec minu^ infensos Papam, Papaeque Pa^entem,
Hic liber inveniet; Papam retegendo suorum
Impuros coitus, frauds, perjuri^, clades
Indorum immeritas, saeve, and sine fine p^ractas.
Nec quicquam dubito (slygia dep^omta pharetra)
In me missurum saevissima Daemona tela,
Lumen Evangelij audentem suadere Britannis
Laete festinare armata milite class
Gentibus ignotis; in quas bis mill per annos
Vindicat imperium plus quam regale retentum;
Iamque suas (tam sponte suas) vel posse reposci
Et fremit, and frendit, velut atrox Cerberus olim
A^t ego quid fremitus, quid inania tela m^rarer?
Si mode vel quicquam, nostro quocunque labor,
Americis prosim, misere jam lumine cassis;
Vt tandem in se discendant, laqueisque soluti
Tartareis, Christitutissima castra sequantur.
Agnoscantque Deum terrae caelique supremum
Artificem, and Regem, vereque petentibus illum
Depositum credant verum solamen in illo:
Praesentis perdulce levamen, spemque beatae
Vitae venturae, periturae tempore nullo.
Hoc mihi si dederit, pater optimus undique ven^
Divite tellurem, gemmis, auroque, refertam
Non f^occi facio; tanto dignatus honor.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND HONORABLE Court of PARLIAMENT, now Assembled. The humble
Petition of WILLIAM CASTLE, Parson of Courtenhall in Northamptonshire, for the
propogating of the Gospel in America.
IN all humble manner, shows unto your approved wisdoms, the great and
general neglect of this Kingdom, in not propagating the glorious Gospel in
America, a maine part of the World: Indeed the undertaking of the work is (in
the general) acknowledged pious and charitable; but the small prosecution that
has hitherto been made of it, either by us or others, having (as yet) never
been generally undertaken in pity to men's souls, but in hope to possess the
Land of those Infidels, or of gain by Commerce, may well make this and all
other Christian Kingdoms confess, they have been exceeding remiss, in
performing this so religious, so great, so necessary a work.

May it therefore please your wisdoms, to give your Petitioner leave to
propose briefly, (as the nature of a Petition requires) the more then ordinary
piety and charity of the work; the evident necessity, and benefit of
undertaking, together with the easiness of effecting.

A greater expression of piety (your Petitioner conceives) there cannot be,
then to make God known where he was never spoken nor thought of, to advance
the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom. And now again to reduce those, who (at first)
were created after the Image of God from the manifest worship of Devils, to
acknowledge and adore the blessed Trinity in Unity. To do this, is to be happy
instruments of effecting those often repeated promises of God, in making all
Nations blessed by the coming of Christ, and by sending his Word to all Lands:
It is to enlarge greatly the pale of the Church. And to make those (who were
the most detestable Synagogues of Satan) delightful Temples of the Holy Ghost.

It was a high point of piety in the Queen of the South, to come from the
utmost parts of the world to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And so it was in
Abraham, to leave his native country for the better, and more free service of
his God.

And certainly it will be esteemed no less in those, who (either in their
persons or purses) shall religiously endeavor to make millions of those silly
seduced Americans, to hear, understand, and practice, the mystery of
godliness.

And as is the piety, such is the charity of the work, exceeding great, to no
less then the immortal souls of innumerable men, who still sit in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, continually assaulted and devoured by the Dragon,
whose greatest delight is to bring others with himself into the same
irrecoverable gulf of perdition. What those blind and spiritual distressed
Americans are, we were, and so had continued, had not Apostolical men afforded
greater charity unto us, Divisis orb Britannis, by long journeying; and not
without great hazard of their lives, then (as yet) has been showed by us unto
them.

We are not indeed endued with such eminent extraordinary gifts, as were the
Primitive Christians; but yet (if it be duly considered) how fully and how
purely God has imparted his Gospel unto this Island; how miraculously he has
lately protected us from Spannish Invasions, and Popish Conspiracies; how (at
this time) we abound in shipping, and all manner of provision for Sea: It will
be found, that we (of all Nations) are most for the work, and most engaged to
do it in due thankfulness to God.

Nor is the arms of the Lord shortened, or his wonted bounty so restrained; but
that undertaking the Voyage principally for Gods glory, and in compassion to
men's souls, we may expect a more then an ordinary blessing from him, whose
usual custom is to honor those that honor him, and most abundantly even in
this life, to recompense such religious undertakings.

The Spaniard boasts much of what he has already done in this kind; but
their own Authors report their unchristian behavior; especially their
monstrous cruelties to be such, as they caused the Infidels to detest the name
of Christ. Your wisdoms may judge of the Lion by his claw. In one of their
Islands called Hispaniola of 2000000 of men, as Benzo (in his Italian History)
affirms, they had not left 150 souls. And Lipsius justly complains, that
wheresoever they came, they cut down men as they did corn without any
compassion. And as for those that survived, they bought their lives at dear
rates: for they put them to bear their carriages from place to place; and if
they failed by the way, they either miserably dismembered, or killed them
outright. They lodged them like bruit beasts under the planks of their ships,
till their flesh rotted from their backs: And if any failed in the full
performance of his daily task, he was sure to be whipped till his body
distilled with goar blood, and then poured they in either molten pitch or
scalding oil to supple him.

A very strange and unlikely way to work Infidels unto the faith, neither yet
could they (if they would) impart unto others the Gospel in the truth and
purity thereof, who have it not themselves, but very corruptly, accompanied
with many idle, absurd, idolatrous Inventions of their own, which are but as
so many superstructures wickedly oppressing, if not utterly subverting the very
foundations of Christianity.

And although some of the reformed religion, English, Scotch, French, and
Dutch, have already taken up their habitations in those parts, yet has their
going thither (as yet) been to small purpose, for the converting of those
nations, either for that they have placed themselves but in the skirts of
America, where there are but few natives (as those of New England, or else for
want of able and conscionable Ministers (as in Virginia) they themselves are
become exceeding rude, more likely to turn Hethen, then to turn others to the
Christian faith.

Besides, there is little or no hope our plantations there, should be of any
long continuance, since here in England for some years last past, they have
been rather diversely hindered then any ways furthered, how and by whom, your
wisdoms either have, or will shortly find out: but this is evident, that the
proud superstitious Spaniard (who hates their religion, and fears their
neighborhood, will spare them no longer then (to his over-swelling greatness)
shall seem good: And in the judgment of most judicious Travelers that way,
they may (if they will) easily enough suppress and destroy all other our
Plantations, as they did of late that of Saint Christophers, when they were no
way provoked by us, as they will now pretend they are by a latter taking of
Trinidado, and the loss of more then 150 of their men there. At least they
will be sure to be desperately assaulted, as was the Isle of Providence, but
the year last past.

Whence your Petitioner offers unto your Honorable considerations a third
Argument (drawn from mere necessity) that as you tender the happy proceeding of
those (as yet) but weakly settled Plantations: the liberties, livelihood, and
lives, of many thousands our dear brethren and country men: and which is yet
more the prosperous progress of the Gospel, you would be pleased to consult
of such an able and speedy supply, as may secure them against the now expected
cruelty of the Spaniard.

To which needful supply, the better and sooner to induce your wisdoms, your
Petitioner desires your yet a little further patience until he has showed
some temporal benefits that are thereby like to accrue unto this kingdom,
together with the easiness of effecting.

When a kingdom begins to be overburthened with a multitude of people (as
England and Scotland now do) to have a convenient place where to send forth
Colonies is no small benefit: And such are the North-East and North-West parts
of America, between the degrees of 25 and 45 of the North latitude, which at
this time do even offer themselves unto us, to be protected by us, against the
known cruelty of the over near approaching Spaniard.

A very large tract of ground containing spacious, healthful, pleasant, and
fruitful countries, not only apt, but already provided of all things necessary
for man's sustentation, Corn, Grass, and wholesome Cattle in good competency:
but fish, foul, fruits, and herbs in abuddant variety.

If we should look no further then the South of Virginia, (which is our own)
we shall find there all manner of provision for life: besides Merchantable
Commodities, Silk, Vines, Cotton, Tobacco, Deere-skinnes, Goat-skinnes, rich
Furre, and Beavers good store, Timber, Brass, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, and
almost all things necessary for shipping, which if they shall be employed that
way; they who are sent away may (with Gods blessing) within short time in due
recompense of their setting forth, return this kingdom store of silver and
gold, pearls, and precious stones; for undoubtedly (if there be not a general
mistake in all Authors, who have written of these places) such treasure is to
be had; if not there, yet in places not far remote, where (as yet the
Spaniard has nothing to do.) And in case the Spaniard will be troublesome to
our Plantations, or shall (as it is generally conceived) be found an enemy to
this kingdom, there is no way more likely to secure England, then by having a
strong Navy there; hereby we may come to share, if not utterly to defeat him
of that vaste Indian Treasure, wherewith he sets on fire so great a part of
the Christian world, corrupts many Counselors of state, supporteth the
Papacy and generally perplexeth all reformed Churches.

Nor need any scrupulous quere be made, whether we may not assault an enemy in
any place, or not esteem them such as shall assault us in those places, where
we have as much to do as they. The Spaniard claims indeed an Interest, little
l^sse than hereditary in almost all America, and the West Indies, but it is but
by virtue of the Popes grant, which is nothing worth, as was long since
determined by Queen Elizabeth, and her Council; so as for the Spaniard to
debar us in the liberty of our Plantations, or freedom of commerce in those
spacious Countries, were over proudly to take upon him; and for us to permit it
were overmuch to yield of our own right.

Especially, when we may, as now we may, so easily help our selves: For your
Petitioner conceives there is no great difficulty in the preparation here, or
tediousness in the passage thither, or hazard when we come there. The
preparation of men and shipping, in respect of the daily happy expected accord
between us and the Scots, is (upon the matter) already made. And as for money
it is in the power of this Honorable House to give sufficient, without any
grievance, or dislike of the Commonwealth, who (undoubtedly) in the general
will think nothing grievous, which shall be concluded by your wisdoms,
expedient to such a pious and charitable work.

And as for the passage, how can it be thought either tedious or dangerous, it
being ordinarily but six weeks sail, in a sea much more secure from Pirates,
and much more free from shipwreck, and enemies coasts, than our ten or twelve
months voyage into the East Indies. And as for our good success there, we
need not fear it. The natives being now every where more than ever, out of an
inveterate hatred to the Spaniard, ready and glad to entertain us. Our best
friends the Netherlanders being with eigth and twenty ships gone before to
assist and further us. And which is much more, our going with a general
consent in Gods cause, for the promoting of the Gospel, and enlarging of his
Church, may assure us of a more than ordinary protection and direction. That
hitherto we have been less successful in our voyages that way, we way justly
impute it to this, that as yet they have not been undertaken with such a
general consent, and with such a full reference to Gods glory as was requisite.

And so your Petitioner having delivered his apprehension herein more briefly,
than so weighty a matter might well require, he submits all the premises to
your more full deliberation and conclusion, which he humbly prays, may be
with all convenient speed; the only best way under God to make it the better
successful.

WE whose names are here underwritten, having been upon occasion acquainted
with a motion intended to be made by Master William Castle, Parson of
Courtenhall in the County of Northampton, to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament now assembled, concerning the propagation of the glorious Gospel of
Christ in America. As we do well approve of the motion; so we do humbly desire
his reasons may be duly considered: And so good a work furthered their wiser
judgments may resolve upon, to which we humbly submit the same. John Moseley,
D. D. Ra^ Brownricke, D. D. Thomas Bambrig, D. D. Robert Sanderson, D. D.
Richard Alleyne, D. D. Daniel Featly, D. D. Matthius Styles, D. D. Edmond
Stanton, D. D. Stephen Denison, D. D. Edw. Williamot, D. D. Jonathan Brown, D.
D. Jasper Fisher, D. D. Hanniball Potter, D. D. Anthony Clapton, D. D. Thomas
Drayton, D. D. John Grant. D. D.

Ministers of London.
George Walker. James Palmer. Edward Malbury. Joseph Caryll. Edmond Calamy.
Adoniram Byfield. William Price. Richard Maden. James Batty. Matthew. Griffeth.
Ephr^im Paget. Robert Pory. William Ianeway. Nathaniel Barry.
Ministers of several other Counties.
John White, Dorsetshire. William Ford, John Pyns, Somersetshire. Zachery
Caudry, Leistershire. Henry Paynter, Devonshire. Stephen Marsholl, Samuel
Ioyner, Essex. John Ward, Suffolk. Ier. Buroughes, Northfolke* John Rawlinson,
Darby. Moses Capell, William Rhet, Kent. Francis Charliot, Richard Gifford,
Buck. William Englesby, Hertford.
Other worthy Ministers of the Diocese of Peterburrough, where the Petitioner
lives.
Daniel Caudery. Jeremy Whittaker. John Barry. James Cranford. Samuel Craddock.
David Ensme. Edmond Castle. Samuel Male. Daniel Rogers. Benjamin Tomkins.
Richard Cook. Richard Trueman. John Guderick. William Spencer. Edmond James.
John Baynard. George Iay. Francis Press. Miles Berket. Francis Atturbury.
Jeremy Stephens. John Ward. Peter Fawtract. William Malkinson.
THe motion made by Master William Castle* Minister of the Gospel, for
propagating of the blessed Evangell of Christ our Lord and Savior, in America,
we conceive in the general to be most pious, Christian and charitable. And
therefore worthy to be seriously considered of all that love the glorious Name
of Christ, and are zealous of the salvation of souls, which are without
Christ, and without God in the world, wishing the opportunity and fit season,
the instruments and means; and all things necessary for the prosecution of so
pious a work, to be considered by the wisdoms of Churches and civil powers,
whom God has called, and enablad with Piety, Prudence, and Policy, for matters
of public concernment, and of so great Importance. And beseeching the Lord to
bless all their consultations, and proceedings for the advancing, and
establishing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Alexander Henderson. Robert Blare. R. Bailly. M. Gallaspie. N. Smyth. M.
Borthrick.

AN ORDINANCE Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. Whereby Robert
Earl of Warwick is made Governor in Chief, and Lord High Admiral of all
those I^ands and other Plantations, in^abited, planted, or belonging, to any
his Majesty's the King of Englands Subjects, within the bounds, and upon the
Coasts of America. And a Committee appointed to be assisting unto him, for the
better governing, strengthening, and preservation of the said Plantations; but
chiefly for the advancement of the true Protestant Religion, and farther
spreading of the Gospel of Christ among those that yet remain there in great
and miserable blindness and ignorance.
WHereas many thousands of the Natives and good Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, though the oppression of the Prelates, and other ill affected
Ministers and Officers of State, have of late years, to their grief and
miserable hardship, been enforced to transplant themselves and their families
into several Islands, and other remote and desolate parts of the West Indies:
and having there through exceeding great labor and industry (with the blessing
of God) obtained for themselves and their families, some competent and
convenient means of maintenance and subsistence, so that they are now in a
reasonable well settled and peaceable condition. But fearing least the
outrageous malice of Papists and other ill-affected persons, should reach unto
them in their poor and low, (but as yet peaceable condition) and having been
informed, that there has been lately procured from his Majesty several
grants under the Great Seal for erecting some new Governors and Commanders
amongst the said Planters in their aforementioned Plantations: Whereupon the
said Planters, Adventurers, and Owners of land in the said foreign
Plantations, have preferred their Petition unto this present Parliament, that
for the better securing of them and their present estates there obtained,
through so much extreme labor and difficulty, they might have some such
Governors and government as should be approved of and confirmed by the
authority of both Houses of Parliament. Which Petition of theirs the Lords and
Commons having taken into consideration, and finding it of great importance
both to the safety and preservation of the aforesaid Natives and Subjects of
this Kingdom, as well from all foreign invasions and oppressions, as from
their own intestine distractions and disturbances, as also much tending to the
honor and advantage of his Majesty's Dominions, have thought fit, and do
hereby Constitute and Ordain Robert Earl of Warwick Governor in chief, and
Lord High Admiral of all those Islands, and other Plantations, inhabited,
planted, or belonging to any his Majesty's the King of Englands Subjects, or
which hereafter may be inhabited, planted, or belonging to them, within the
bounds, and upon the Coasts of America. And for the more effectual, speedier,
and easier transaction of this so weighty and important a business, which
concerns the well-being and preservation of so many of the distressed Natives
of this and other his Majesty's Dominions, the Lords and Commons have thought
fit that Philip Earl of Pembrooke, Edward Earl of Manchester, William
Viscount Say and Seal, Philip Lord Wharton, John Lord Roberds, Members of the
House of Peers, Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight and Baronet, Sir Arthure Haselrig,
Baronet, Sir Henry Vane junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin Rudyer Knight, John Pym,
Oliver Cromwell, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius Holland, Samuel Vassal,
John Rolls, and William Spurstow, Esquiers, Members of the House of Commons,
shall be Commissioners to join in aid and assistance with the said Earl of
Warwick chief Governor and Admiral of the said Plantations: which chief
Governor, together with the said Commissioners or any four of them, shall
hereby have power and authority to provide for, order and dispose all things
which they shall from time to time find most fit and advantageous to the
well-governing, securing, strenghning, and preserving, of the said Plantations;
and chiefly to the preservation and advancement of the true Protestant Religion
amongst the said Planters, inhabitants; and the further enlargement and
spreading of the Gospel of Christ amongst those that yet remain there in
great and miserable blindness and ignorance. And for the better advancement of
this so great a work, It is hereby further ordained by the said Lords and
Commons, That the aforesaid Governor and Commissioners shall hereby have power
and authority upon all weighty and important occasions which may concern the
good and safety of the aforesaid Planters, to call unto their advice and
assistance therein any other of the aforesaid Planters, Owners of land, or
Inhabitants of the said Islands and Plantations, which shall then be within
twenty miles of the place where the said Commissioners shall then be; And shall
have power and authority to send for, view, and make use of all such Records,
Books and Papers, which do or may concern any of the said Plantations. And
because the well-setling and establishing of such Officers and Governors as
shall be laborious and faithful in the right governing of all such persons as
be resident in or upon the said Plantations, and due ordering and disposing of
all such Affairs as concern the safety and welfare of the same, is of very
great advantage to the public good of all such remote and new Plantations.

It is thereby further Ordained and Decreed, That the said Robert Earl of
Warwick, Governor in chief, and Admiral of the said Plantations, together
with the aforesaid Commissioners, Philip Earl of Pembrooke, Edward Earl of
Manchester, William Viscount Say and Seal, Philip Lord Wharton, John Lord
Roberts, Sir Gibbert Gerard Knight and Baronet, Sir Arthure Ha^elrig, Baronet,
Sir Henry Vane, junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin Rudyer Knight, John Pym, Oliver
Cromwell, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius Holland, Samuel Vassal, John
John ^olls, and William Purstowe, Esquires, or the greater member of them,
shall have power and authority from time to time to nominate, appoint, and
constitute all such subordinate Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers
and Agents, as they shall judge to be best affected, and most fit and
serviceable for the said Islands, and Plantations: And shall hereby have power
and authority upon the death or other avoidance of the aforesaid chief
Governor and Admiral, or any the other Commissioners before named, from time
to time to nominate and appoint such other chief Governor and Admiral, or
Commissioners, in the place or room of such as shall so become void. And shall
also hereby have power and authority to remove any of the said subordinate
Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers, or Agents, which are, or shall
be appointed to govern, counsel, or negotiate the public affairs of the
said Plantation, and in their place and room to appoint such other Officers as
they shall judge fit. And it is hereby ordained, That no subordinate
Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers, Agents, Planters, or Inhabitants
whatsoever, that are now resident in or upon the same Islands or Plantations,
shall admit or receive any other new Governors, Counselors, Commanders,
Officers or Agents whatsoever, but such as shall be allowed and approved of,
under the Hands and Seals of the before mentioned Commissioners, or any six of
them, or under the Hands and Seals of such as shall authorize thereunto.

And whereas for the better government and security of the said Plantations
and Islands, and the Owners and Inhabitants, thereof, there may be just and fit
occasion to assign over some part of the power and authority (granted in this
Ordinance to the chief Governor and Commissioners before named) unto the said
Owners, Inhabitants, or others; It is hereby Ordained, that the said chief
Governors and Commissioners before mentioned, or the greater number of them,
shall hereby be authorized to assign, ratify, and confirm so much of their
aforementioned authority and power, and in such manner, and to such persons as
they shall judge to be fit for the better governing and preserving of the said
Plantations and Islands from open violence and private disturbance and
distractions.

And lastly, That whosoever shall do, execute, or yield obedience to any thing
contained in this Ordinance, shall by virtue hereof be saved harmless and
indempnified.

Sir Benjamin Rudyers Speech, Concerning a WEST INDIE Association, at a
Committee of the whole House in the Parliament 21 JACOBI.
Sir Dudley Digs,
I Do profess, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Judgment, go strongly
with the scope and drift of this proposition; so shall a good part of my poor
fortune when it comes to execution.

For to my understanding, there was never propoundin Parliament, a defigne more
proper for this kingdom, nor of more pregnant advantage to it, whether we
consider the Nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies forces.

As we are an Island, it concerns our being to have store of ships to defend
us, and also our well-being by their Trade to enrich us.

This Association for the West Indies, when it shall be regulated and
established by Act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the violence and
injury of any intruding hand, it will certainly give many men encouragement and
confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberal contributions, toward
so notable, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time we shall see
many new ships built, many brave men employed, and enabled for the service of
their Country, none of this money shall be carried out of the Kingdtme, but
laid out for shippeng, which is the defense of it, and bestowed upon our own
men, who must be ^ed and maintained, though they stay at home. For this, we
shall reap the fruit of whatsoever benefit, Plantation, Traffic, or Purchase
can procure us, besides honor and security.

Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to encounter, the King of
Spain. They are not his great Territories which make him so powerful, and so
troublesome to all Christendom. For it is very well known, that Spain it self
is but weak in men, and barren of Natural Commodities. As for his other
Territories, they lie divided and asunder, which is a weakness in its self;
besides, they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordinary charge.
Insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like the great G^ant, who
was said to have 100 hands, but he had 50 bellies to feed, so that ra^ably, he
had no more hands then another man.

No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Indies, which minister fuel to feed
his vast ambitious desire of universal Monarchy: It is the money he has from
thence, which makes him able to levy and pay Soldiers in all places; and to
keep an Army continually on foot, ready to invade and endanger his Neighbors.

So that we have no other way, but to endeavor to cut him up at root, and seek
to impeach, or to supplant him in the West Indies. By part of which course,
that (...) Queen of most gracious memory, had heretofore almost brought him on
his knees. And this our undertaking (if it please God to bless it) must needs
effect it sooner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdom being united and
concurring in a perpetual supply to this action, so that he will have no free
time given him to rest.

Moreover, this will be a means not only to save, but to fill his Majesty's
Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships
will have little to do, but to guard the Coasts, for the Sea-warre will
chiefly be made at the charge of the Subject.

Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that in short time, both King and
people shall be safe at home, and feared abroad.

To conclude, I shall be very glad to hear any man make Objections against
this Design, so that he do it with an intention to refine and perfect the
work; but if any man shall speak against it with a mind to hinder and destroy
it, I must entreat him to pardon me, if I do scarce think him to be a good
Englishman.

AN INTRODVCTION To the WORK.
THE West Indies as usually known by the name of America, were first found out
by Christopher Columbus, in the year 1493. at the expense of Ferdinand King of
Castile; much furthered by Isabella his Queen, who Pawned all her Jewels to
advance the Christian ^aith, and to augment the revenu^ of that Crown. A
worthy Princely act, as highly to be commended as the late pawning of the
J^wels of the English Crown, is justly to be condemned for the suppressing of
the Gospel in the purity of it, and the exceeding weakening, if not utter
ruining both of King and Kingdom.

But though this New World (for so it may be justly styled, as being of a vast
extent, much larger than Asia, and never heard of before) was first thought of,
and in three voyages (not without divine inspiration and assistance) discovered
by that worthy Columbus; yet one Americus, who after made a more full
discovery, has been honour^d with the name of it. This goodly Country was
first proffered to one of our Kings, Henry the seventh, a very wise Prince, who
yet unhappily refused to be at any charge in the discovery; supposing the
learned Columbus to build Castles in the air: but the motion being afterward
entertained by the said King Ferdinand; Castile, (the least of the three
Kingdoms of Spain) became Commander of them all, and by reason of the
incredible treasure yearly brought from thence, his successors are now become
formidable to all Christian Nations, ye^ are designed by the Jesuits (the
Popes grand Enginiers) to be the sole absolute Monarckes of all Christendom, A
plot yet to be prevented, by our King and State, if timely thought upon, in
sending forth a considerable Navy, whereby we may best suppress the Spaniards
overswelling greatness, and the most subtle designs of Jesuits, who have
bewitched no inconsiderable number of seeming Protestants here to believe, that
the King and Grandees of Spain, intend good to this Kingdom, it being most
apparent, that that Indian treasure by them disposed; first raised, and still
foments these never sufficiently to be deplored combustions in Ireland and
England.

I shall say nothing of the causes, that moved Columbus to undertake this
strange voyage, nor yet how it came to be first inhabited, as being by many,
esp^cially by Acosta so fully related.

Thus much in general is nec^ssarily to be observed, that in respect of
latitude, it is extended well nigh from the South to the North Pole. It has to
the East Europe and Africa, from which it is divided by the wide German and
Atlanticke Sea, sometimes by more, sometimes by less distance of leagues,
nearer to Africa than Europa. To the West it has Asia, and those Southern
parts of the world, as yet remaining to be discovered, how large the Sea is
that divides America from Asia, is as little known, some are of opinion that
it is but a narrow Sea, but it is more probable to prove very wide.

The form of this spacious Country is irregular in respect of its many
turnings and windings, putting out and taking in again both by sea and land,
The North part of it has a Mediterranean Sea, wherein lie those great Islands,
Portu-Rico, Hispaniola, Iamaica and Cuba, every way comparable to England, were
it not for the more constant temperature of this our incomparable Climate.
There are likewise at least a thousand lesser Islands, all lying within this
Mediterranean Sea, which make many parts of the Continent of this Northe^ne
America to be far distant one from another, in regard either of longitude or
latitude, New Foundland, the most North-east part as ye^ discovered, is
distant from the most North-west parts of Calfornia (which are likewise the
farthest) as yet discovered, full 90 degrees amounting to 1800 league, either
of them by little and little drawing nearer the one to the other, until they
come within a degree and an half of the Tropic of Cancer: and then from the
most southern part of Florida to Cullacan bordering upon the South-west seas
of Nova Hispania, (which differ not much in latitude) the longitude both by sea
and land does not exceed above thirty degrees. And afterward in some places
more, in others less; this North America in a great disproportion falls to
the Equinoctial, where from the most E^sterne part of Guiana to the most
Western of Popaian, the longitude is computated at 35 d^grees, as for the
latitude, that also differs very much. The Northern corner reaches to the
53 degree; the Nore-west, so far as it is yet discovered, but to 48, the
maine body of it falling between those corners (which by some are fitly
compared to horns) rises no farther then the 24 degree. The form of the
South part of America beyond the Equinoctial is no less irregular, the
general description whereof I here forbear, as intending in this book to
write only of the Northern part.

Now for the method which I have proposed to my self in the particular
description hereof, it is thus. I shall begin with the most Northern part
thereof, which is New Foundland; from whence keeping the Seacoast, (the
course I intend to observe constantly through-out this Discovery:) I shall
forthwith fall upon our chief English plantations, and so taking view of
Florida lying upon the Seacoast for many hundred leagues, between Virginia and
Nova-Histania, so far as the Mediterranian Sea will permit, I shall (God
assisting) retu^ne again and surveigh the Islands great and small, coming in
between the two parts of the Continent, which (as I said before) in some
places being far more, in others far less, are divided the one from the
other.

Having done with the Islands, I am again to bend Westward, and according to
the Seacoast, to proceed with all the p^rts of that part of this North
America, falling down to the Equinoctial, adjoining to the South America,
much la^ger and much richer then are the Islands, or the Northern side of the
Continent: Though therefore New Foundland, many other Isl^nds, and the next
adjacent Regions of the Nor-east Continent (with which I am to begin) afford
but very little that may invite us thither; yet I hope those who begin to read
this Compendium, will either read it over, or at least passing over these
Countries of much lesser worth, will fall carefully to peruse what here by me
faithfully is related out of many approved Authors, concerning the pleasant
habitations, exceeding fertility of the earth, abundant provisions in all
kinds, and incredible treasure of many other Kingdoms and Provinces, lying
Southward and South-west down to the Equinoctial: Yea, and if it should be
granted (as it cannot be granted without condemning of folly and falsehood, more
than 50 authors who have written more or less of this part of the New-World,
and many hundred witnesses, who in several Islands and parts of this wide
Continent have seen and enjoyed more then I have expressed thereof) yet with
true Christians (who in some good measure understand what it is to live or dye
for ever) the preservation of many thousands of souls out of those millions of
men who now fit in darkness and perish eternally for want of the light of the
Gospel, ought to be of so high esteem, and so prerious in their eyes, as that
though the most, or all of the forenamed invitations should be wanting, yet
they should be content, I say not, to part with all, but with some considerable
portion of their estates, whereby a strong Navy might withal convenience be
s^nt into such places of this North America, as the wisdom of Parliament shall
judge meetest for the propagating of the Gospel. Now to proceed in a
particular description according to the former proposed methed.

New Foundland.
WHen it was first found out by the English, it was thought to have been the
most Eastern part of the North-continent, but afterward it was disco^ered to
be an Island, one of the greatest in the world, a 110 leagues long, and in most
places near as many broad. To the South and East it has the great Ocean
beating upon it. To the North it is separated by a narrow sea from the most
North unknown continent of America. To the West from Nova Francia by the Sea
called St. Laurence Gulf. Concerning the goodness of the soil, and the
fitness for a constant habitation (though M. Whitburne in a book written of
New Foundland does in both the foresaid respects, and some other over highly
commend it: Yet upon better inquiry of those who have formerly written of it as
al^o from those who usually resort thither, I find it to be a convenient
habitation for Summer, but not for Winter by reason of the exceeding coldness,
and the deep overcovering of the land with snow, the waters with hug^ shelves
of Ice, whereby they are debarred of necessary provisions, such (as in somm^r
time) the Island affords i^ great abundance and variety, namely, land-fowle
and water-fowle, fresh fish and salt fish, upon the matter, all the
sustentation that the Island affords. And yet the yearly rich commodity of
seafish, almost of all kinds, which are there usually in great quantities
taken and transported into Europe, cause not only us, but all other
neighboring Nations yearly to resort thither: And because the constant return
of that fi^h commodity is worth 200000l. at the least yearly; there has been
diverse contentions between us English and other Nations, who (whether we
would or no) have taken full liberty of fishing there, and of late it has been
agreed (and in some sort well observed) that every Nation should peaceably
enjoy those Ports and fishing plac^s, of which they should first be possessed.
This great Island afford^th many conveni^nt and safe harboroughs for ships.
Toward the North, the first North^rne Port n^arest to the South, which is cape
Raz is Rennosa lying a little above the 46 degree, then Aqua-Forte two leagu^s
more to the North; then Punta de Farilham as many more.

Much higher near upon the 28 degree are Thorn Bay, then the B^y Conception
half^ a degr^e higher to the North. Then Bay Blanch and Bay Orge lying between
the degrees of 50 and 51. From Cape de Raz on the South Side toward the West,
are as many Ports of far greater note, and much more advantageous for taking
greater store of fish, namely, Abram Trepessa 2 leagues distant from the said
cape: then Chincheca 2 more. St. Marys Haven 6 leagues more, Much more to the
West within 15 scruples of 47 degrees of latitude is Presenea: After which
follow five small Islands, known by the name of Saint Peter, then Port
Basques, then Claire Bay, all safe and convenient Harbors, remote the one from
the other about forty miles.

The most Western cape of New Foundland are de Raye and Anguille, from whence
the Land turns again to the Northeast, from the degree of 48 to 52, in all
which space I read of no Haven but that of St. George 12 leagues distant from
Anguille Promontory; neither yet is that of any great repute, because not safe
to come unto.

It is to be observed before we pass to the next adjoining part of the
Continent, which is New France: that this Island is on all sides (as yet any
thing completely discovered) found to have many other Islands great and small
thereunto belonging, on the North-east side, besides many very small, rather
Rocks than Islands; there are two of a pretty extent of good use and note, to
wit, Bacalaos upon the 49 degree, and Aves somewhat above the 50. To the South
many leagues distant lie four great Islands, viz. Grand Banek, Vert Banck,
Banquereaux and Sable, between the degrees of 43 and 46 (which to have named
may suffice) as being of little worth, save only for fishing, wherein they are
reputed not inferior to New Foundland. Between which likewise and Nova
Francia to the West and North-west, in a kind of Mediterranian Sea (known by
the name of Saint Laurence Gulf) lie the Isles of Britton, Tangeaux, Brion,
Ramees, and Natiscotec, not so big, but as profitable and more pleasant and apt
for habitation than any of the former. These differ much in regard of their
several distances toward the West from New Foundland; but they differ more in
respect of latitude, some part of Isle Britton falling to the 46 degree,
whereas the most Northern part of Natiscotec arises to the 50, between which
two Islands lie the other three, environed with Seas very narrow and shelvy,
rockie, and therefore to be carefully observed by those who trade among them.

Nova Francia.
NOw to proceed with the Continent. The most Easterly as yet discovered, part
of it go^th by the name of New France (not that it was first discovered by the
French, for that was done long before, Anno 1497. by John and his son Sebastian
Cabot, employed by Henry the seventh, King of England, to that purpose) but
because a more full Discovery has since been made by two worthy Frenchmen,
Quarteri and Champl^ri, from whose much approved relations, I shall here
briefly impart unto you what I conceive requisite for us to know.

These two worthy Frenchmen tell us that all the discovery they mad^ of this
part of America (more than ever, as yet has been made) was by the great River
Canada, falling from the West about an hundred leagues into the North part of
St. Laurence Gulf, and by the Southern Ocean Westward.

I shall therefore in this my bri^fe Relation, trace them in their long Voyages
this way, beginning with that part of New France that bordereth on both sides
Canada, where they made their first entrance: Only let me take notice of some
Promontories, lying be^ween the South Ocean and Canada River, not much
frequented, for that the coming in unto them has often proved dangerous, the
seas being in most places very narrow, by reason of the foresaid great Islands,
and many more which formerly did, and now does cause them who trade thither to
steer a more safe course (above the said Islands) more to the North-east,
between them and New Foundland. They are known by these names, Cape de
Esperance, and Bay de Chaleux, somewhat above the 48, Port Gachepe upon the 49,
Cape de Bontoneriers, and Cape Evesque between the degrees of 50 and 49. From
which last Cape begins the fall of Canada, best known, and most usually used
by the West Side of Natiscot^^, whereunto answers on the North-side the River
of Cheschedec more than thirty leagues distant (for such is the wideness of
that River there affirmed to be.) The next cape on the South Side whereunto the
River Magaret on the North answers is de Chate remote from the former near
thirty leagues. Above these somewhat near opposite: But 20 leagues remote from
the former, lie the Rivers Lesquemin to the North, and Montonne to the South.
The farthest navigable parts of this great river are on the North: Tadousac a
good haven at the falling of the heady River Sagu^nay from the North-west as
yet but very little discovered, and the River May on the South Side.

The other part of Canada not navigable with any great vessel (was yet
att^mpted by Quartery to good purpose) and after upon a further search
Champlany is affirmed to reach yet 300 l^agues to the South-west. The
principal places by them observed, are Orleance and Sault, thirty leagues from
Tadousac, then follow Quebec 20, Mary River 60, Lake Pierto 100 leagues more.

Now concerning the goodness of this soil and climate, the condition of the
Natives, and what has been here performed by the French. It may suffice to
know that the land o^ the North side of Canada from the fall of it to the River
Saguenay (as far as is yet discovered,) is found to be mountenous, woody and
barren; besides, the coming up the River on that side is found much more
dangerous than that ^o the South, which also in many places requires careful
circumspection, But then the land is much more fruitful and convenient to
trade for Bevours and rich Furs (the grand commodity here to be expected) by
reason there are more store of Natives to trade withal: In the general, all
this part of the Country is judged to be over cold in Winter, to be well
inhabited, though yet it be constantly affirmed that the Natives might live
very plentifully there, were they not careless in sowing, planting, and making
timely provisions; and so prodigal in spending in two or three months, what
might serve them the whole year. Sure it is that the French have taken a great
opinion of it, for besides many voyages formerly made, they have from the year
1608. to the year 1616. made six voyages under the conduct of the forenamed
Champlany, and it is no less certain that the French have continual trading
thither as finding good return, especially for Bevours skins.

The other part of New France adjacent to the South Ocean, beginning where we
came up in Saint Laurence Gulf, on the West Side of I Will Britton, are Port
Camseau, and Port de Savelette somewhat above the 45 degree of latitude, then
half a degree more to the South follow Bay de Toutes, and Port Elaine; The
first full thirty, the second near fifty leagues from Savelette; then Bay
Senne, Margurite River, and Cape Heve, all these follow one after another for a
degree farther: Yet more to the South-west follow Port de Rosignall, Cape de
Sable, Port Courante, and Cape Forcu, one after another for the space of 35
leagues. From Cape Forcu begins a great Inlet Sea called Bay Francoyse, of
15 leagues wide at the first entrance, but after a while it is narrowed more
and more as it runs backward toward the North-east, full 30 leagues into
the Continent. And into this bosom of Sea are many good havens, but that the
coming up unto them is not so good: They are known by these names, Marys Bay,
Port Royal, and Port aux Mines about five leagues distant the one from the
other.

And here it is to be observed, that the turning in of the foresaid bosom of
the sea near as far to the North-east as the Gulf^ of Saint Laurence,
environeth that part of New France, as the French call Cade. On the South-west
side of Bay Francoyse, are Cape Range, Saint John's River, Port Coquilles, and
the River Croix.

Now the temprature of this part of this Country is better then the other, as
not being so excessive cold, but the goodness of the soil is in the general
not so good as is that part which is called Canada, lying on the South Side of
the River Canoda.

Yet the French have taken so good liking thereof, that the Lord de Monts, and
the Lord de Poutrincourt have made some voyages thither in person, and spent
great part of their estates in settling Plantations there, whereof there was
great hope of good success, until the year 1611. and 1613. the then Queen
Regent of France (who has since proved the Firebrand of Christendom, after
the murder of her Husband Henry the fourth by Jesuits) sent some of that
hellish fraternity thither in favor of her holy Father the Pope, and the King
of Spain, to disturb the Plantations (as no doubt her dear daughter, our now
dreadful Queen) has, does, and will unhappily endeavor to do, ^y the
counsel of her greatest favorites Spanish pentions, especially if we shall
presume to plant or trade in those much richer Southern Countries, which the
Spaniard proudly challenges as his inheritance.

Touching the Native Inhabitants here, I will say no more, but that they are
much of the same condition with those who border about Canada; men of no
religion, living without God in the world, deluded and captivated by Satan and
their Priests (which they call Autonoins.

The Country in Summer affords them sufficient food, but for want of due
provision for Winter, they then are often exceedingly pinched, and sometimes
dye miserably for lack of sustenance.

It is here to be noted, that all this South part of the Continent known by
the name of New France. From Cape Britton to Cape Crux, was in the year 1621.
granted by King James to Sir William Alexander, a Scotch-man, who sent forth
one since to discover it, and gave it a new name of New Scotland, but we hear
of nothing of worth performed by him, or those who were employed by him.

New England.
THe next part of the Continent adjoining to New France, (formerly accounted a
parcel thereof, is New England) lying between the degrees of 41 and 45. The
most No^th-east part of it, (as yet least discovered by our English,) begins
at the River Penobscot, which the French call Pentegovet, near to the River
Haute. The next are the Rivers Kinibequi over against I Will Bacchus 13 leagues,
then Willims Bay 15 more, and Tragabigsana* alias, Cape Anna five more. But the
most safe, and most convenient commings in, as lying nearest to the English
Plantations are Hender Bay, Accomack, and Milford Haven, near Cape Cod, all
within 34 leagues of Cape Anna, opposite to the Bristow Plantation. The Natives
bordering near these Ports have diverse names, and have many little Villages,
whereof Sagadehoc, Mascosqueck, Penobscot, and the Mattahunts inhabiting two
pleasant Islands are chief.

The greatest part of the Country (as our Countryman Captain John Smith
reports) abounds with variety, and store of wholesome cattle, fowls, fish,
fruits, rich Furs, and timber for service; whereunto having added the
excellent fertillity of the soil for all manner of culture, and the sweet and
wholesome temperatue of the climate; He doubts not to compare New England with
the most approved Countries of Europe. And I find his commendation seconded, if
not exceeded by the Company of Adventurers for the Plantation there. For the
goodness of the soil they compare it to Devonshire. For the temperature of
the air to France; but yet upon farther enquiry from diverse of our English who
have been there, and have taken a more exact view lately of this Country: I am
certainly informed that in regard of fertility it comm^th far short of old
England.

And now will I very briefly impart unto you (as far as is requisite) what has
been performed by our Nation in those parts.

In the year 1606. King James did under the Great Seal License a Plantation
there, which was undertaken by some Noble men, and some M^rchants,
conditionally that neither should plant within an hundred miles the one of the
other. The first Colony consisting of an hundred husbandmen, sent at the
charge, for the most, of the Lord Chief Justice Popham, under the government
of George Popham, in the year 1609. entered the great River Saga de Hoc, and
by the banks of the said River settled themselves, where they continued for the
space of one year, and then returned into England, for that they were not able
to provide for themselves, by reason of the death of both the Pophams, by whose
care and charge they were chiefly governed and sustained. But their unexpected
return, was so displeasing to many other Adventurers here, as that for a good
while after, they cast off all care of any further Plantation there.

Hereupon the French fell upon those parts, but they were easily, and suddenly
beaten out by Captain Argall.

After this, with far greater preparation was Captain Hobson sent forth out of
England, with two of those Natives, who were intended for Interpreters, (as
having gotten some little knowledge of our English tongue) in the time of more
than two years abode here. But the voyage was frustrated, by reason that the
Natives then were very much incensed with our English men, because one Hunt an
Englishman, had not long before most perfidiously allured twenty of them into
his Ship, under pretense of Commerce, and so perfidiously carried them away,
and sold them for slaves unto the Spaniard.

A third and fourth voyage was performed in the year 1614, and 1615, by
Captain John Smith, but those neither with any good success, for in the
former, he neither discovered any golden or silver Mines, nor yet found any
such useful Whales as he expected. And in the other voyage, he was taken by
the French Pirates, and by them for a while detained.

A fifth voyage accompanied with a Colony of 19. families, set forth from
Plimmouth in the beginning of September, in the year 1620. and on the
nineteenth of November following, they entered a nooke of the Sea ten miles
from Cape Cod, and there they stayed until the sixteenth of December. But not
liking the place, they removed to another more fertile and more commodious,
over against Milford Haven, where having built them a Town, called Plimmoth,
they have continued for more than twenty years. And since within these twelve
years last past, many hundreths of families have resorted either to new
Plimmouth, or they have made other plantations, as those of Bristall near Cape
Anna, and Connock near Hinders Bay, where they have continued a good while,
every year better and better accommodated with necessary provision for life,
and not without some indifferent intercourse and correspondency with the
Natives, upon whom they have thus far wrought, toward the bringing them to God,
as that they usually acknowledge the God of the English, to be good, but their
god (which they call Tanto) to be naught. And yet for fear of the Devil by
whom they are expressly prohibited, they dare not frequent our Plantatione, nor
confer with our men about Christian Religion, so often as they would. Neither
indeed is it likely our men should be able to do any good upon those (in
respect of a happy conversion to Christ) so extremely seduced and hardened
infidels, unless they were better able to give them Law, and by a holy
violence compel them as it were to come in, which may be done without any
color of injustice, or cru^lty, as tending both to their temporal and
eternal felicity; especially unless they had a greater power and means to
take away their young children, whereby they might become ours, and so be
brought to the knowledge of Christianity, which they might successefully impart
unto their miserable seduced parents, at least they would be sure to sticks
fast to that most blessed and saving doctrine they learned in their youth. And
this rule ought generally to be observed in all other our Plantations in
America, either made, or to be made.

I might add many other general and particular observations concerning New
England, but it would not agree with my former proposal, which was not to
write all of any place, but somewhat of every place. Wherefore (leaving those
who are desirous of farther information to many English Authors, who have more
fully writ of that Country) I proceed to the Dutch Plantation.

New Netherland.
AS the bounds of New England Westward, and by the South ends with the
Promontory Malebare: So the Dutch Plantation begins there, and extends it
self more Westward, and more Southward toward Virginia. Yet was first found
out in the year 1609. by Master Henry Hudson an Englishman, employed by the
States of the Low Countries for a discovery in those parts: After which
Discovery returning to Amsterdam, he was next year by the Merchants thereof
sent forth again with a ship furnished with such commodities as were fittest
to truck with the Natives, for number far exceeding those of New England. The
continent upon the Seacoast from the foresaid Maleb^r bending a good space to
the South-West. And then a little to the North-west has adjoining four
Islands, Petakonocke, Kotget, Christian, and Block; whereof the third
Christian, is of good note for store of timber, abundant foul and fish.
Within the Continent lies the great River Nassaw, whose first entrance is two
miles wide, and for eight miles it cotinneth very Navigable, but after
becomes shallow. The country adjoining on either side is very pleasant and
fruitful, inhabited by the Wapavockes and Nalucantos.

Then follows the River Siccanamos, the country whereunto adjoining is
possessed by the Pequets, professed enemies to the English. Then the River
Virresche, on the West Side whereof bending to the North, lie the Sequini, and
Novasis. Between these Nations, and the Matawaces, who live by fishing* there
lies an Archipellagus, wherein are many Islands: On the North-side of the
Dutch Plantation springs the river Machicham, called the great North river,
which running through one of the widest parts of that part of the continent, as
yet discovered, affords convenient habitation for the Aquamachites, and the
Manahots on the East Side. For the Sanachans and Tappans on the West Side.
Near of this great River, the Dutch have built a Castle of great use to them,
not only for the keeping under of the Natives adjoining, but likewise for their
more free trading with many of Florida, who usually come down the River Canida,
and so by land to them. A plain proof, Canida is not far remote.

There is yet another River, not fully discovered, bigger then the former,
called the South River; It lies westerly by South toward Virginia; The
entrance into it is very wide, having Cape May to the East, and Cape Hinlopen
to the West, lying about the degrees of 41, and from thence the Seacoast
inclines by little and little somewhat more then two degree to the South. A
point necessarily to be observed by those who sail into those seas for
avoiding of shelves and sands. The chief inhabitance lying on the East Side of
this River to the East are the Sicones, and the Naraticons: On the West are the
Minquaans, the Senenquaans, and many more.

And now concerning New Netherlands convenient temperature, the goodness of
the soil, or commodities which either sea or land afford. I need say no more,
but that in all these respects it differs not much from New England, only I
must in these four things give it the precedence, that the land in general is
richer, the fields more fragrant with flowers, the timber longer, and therefore
more fit for building and shipping, the woods fuller of Bevors, and the waters
of Salmon and Sturgeon.

Virginia.
VIrginia is next adjoining westerly to New Netherland, it extends it self
with relation to the Seacoast, from North to South, from the degree of 39 to
33. And it is divided into two parts, the Northern and the Southern; the
Southern was first found out by Sir Walter Raleigh, in the year 1586. And by
him in honor of our most gratiou^ Queen Elizabeth called Virginia; from whence
the other part also is denominated, what success his Discovery had or has, I
shall impart unto you in its due place, so soon as I have done with the
Northern part, which in the year 1606, from the degree 37 to 39. began to be
inhabited by our English, and has ever since continued, sometime in better,
sometime in worser estate, but for some years last past, for many temporal
respects beyond immagination prosperous.

The Summer is here as hot as in Spain, especially in June, July and August,
but it is for the most part greatly mitigated by a brisk Easternely wind, and
other winds coming ordinarily from the Seacoast; from December to March it
freezeth sharply, but is not usually of any long continuance, some years more,
and some years less, (as in other regions) and though here sometime drought,
sometime rain do exceed, (yet do they not so exc^ed,) but that the Inhabitants
affording a due care and endeavor, may and do reap the fruits of the land in
great variety.

There is but one only coming up unto this Norther part of Virginia, which is
by a wide arm of the sea called Chesapea^ke, bounded on the North, and on the
South with two great Promontories, whereof the Northern takes denomination
from King Charles, the Southern from Prince Henry.

It extends it self from South to North (accompanied well near for two
hundred miles with the ebbing and flowing of the sea) so as it is navigable
more than fifty miles; there falls into it, as it passes from the
North-west, five principal Rivers, fed and maintained by many other Rivers,
which I purposely omit, these being sufficient, (lying as they do, some 25.
miles asunder) to fructify and replenish with store of corn, grass, and
other fruits, almost all the known parts of North Virginia, which our English
either now do, or shall undoubtedly by Gods assistance shortly enjoy.

The first River is Pawhatan, which springing out of the Mountains of
Monocham, and afterward increased by diverse other Rivers, becomes so wide
and so deep, as it is Navigable about an hundred miles from its fall, into the
grand stream Chesapeacke, not far from Cape Henry: Either side of this River
is inhabited by diversity of Natives, whereof on the North-side are the
Chicahemans, the Wenankes, and the Paspaheyens, whereof the first are able to
bring near two hundred men to the war, the second an hundred, the third forty.
And here forty miles from Cape Henry lies James Town, our best hold: On the
Southside, the chief are the Nansamunds, consisting of about forty men of war,
the Chesapeackes an hundred, the Apamatucks sixty, and either of these and
others less considerable, by reason of their far smaller numbers, have their
several petty Kings, which they call Weroances.

The second River distant from Pawhatan to the North, is Pamaunke, at first
small, but after greatly increased by the access of other Rivers; all the
Natives on either side this River, cannot bring above 150 men to the war.

The third is Toppahanocke, Navigable about 150 miles, the Natives lying on
both sides of it, whereof the Toppanahochs are not much more than 300
serviceable men.

The fourth is Patowomeke, a very wide and deep River, Navigable 140. miles,
by reason that diverse other Rivers fall into it, and it is on either side, in
regard of the commodiousnesse, and pleasantness of the soil much inhabited,
and is able out of three Villages only, Adigcomoco, Onawmament, Noyowane, to
send 350, and as many more out of others.

The last and least River is called Pawtunxt, the Inhabitants whereof on either
side cannot bring into the field above two hundred men.

There are yet other Rivers, on the other side Eastward, all which fall
likewise into the great River Chesapeacke, but they are of no great note,
because not Navigabl^, but the Natives inhabiting about them, for proportion of
ground, are as many as on the other side; the number of their fighting men are
about four hundred, so as the whole number of their men of war in the North
part of Virginia, do not exceed three thousand, who being no better armed than
with bows and arrows, and not daring to approach our great Ordnance, no nor
our Muskets neither, if there be any store of them, less than three hundred of
our men may easily beat away, and keep them under.

And now I shall acqu^int you with such things as the earth brings forth of
her own accord, as also what grain and other fruits careful husbandry may
produce.

Store of grass in many places there is not, not because the soil is unfit to
yield it, but that it is hindered by the over-shadowing of trees, which almost
in every place grows into great abundance, a thing easily to be amended,
bycutting down good store of them, as appears plainly in some of our
Plantations, where this course being carefully performed: They have besides
store of grass, store of English and Indian grain; yea, I have been credibly
informed by diverse persons of good worth, that they have many fields belonging
to a Plantation, where the ground yields greater increase upon bare tillage
than ours here in England does, with the most chargeable, and most painful
husbandry.

Among the fruitful trees of the wood, the prime are the Oak, Walnut,
Mulberry, Prune Damson trees, of the fruit whereof stamped together, the
Natives make of the dryer part that which serves them as well as bread; and
with the liquid part that which contenteth them as well as beer: They have
also store of Cherries, and Grap^s greater than ours, though nothing so sweet,
which undoubtedly may be justly imputed to the want of due husbandry, in
setting, grafting, and pruning them. It has besides diverse other trees, which
though they bear no fruit, yet are they no less profitable for building and
other uses, as namely the Cedar, the Cyprus, and the Sa^affras.

It sends forth also of its own accord great variety of herbs and roots, very
useful both for food and Physic.

The grain which the Natives set, in the place where great trees ^^ood, a year
or two before they had first burnt them down, and then rooted them up, are
chiefly West- Indian Wheat, and Peaze, which being set in April, (four wheat
and two peaze grains, in several holes distant four foot each from other;) in
August they receive a wonderful increase, every stalk bearing usually two or
three ears, and every ear two hundred, some five hundred grains, which are
as big, and as sweet, as our Rounsevals; but our Countrymen (besides the
Indian grain) do now sow in great quantity our Wheat, Barley, Peaze and Oats,
and receive usually as you have heard, a greater increase than our English land
affords.

The Beasts which the North part of Virginia, of it self offordeth, whose flesh
yield wholesome nourishment, are upon the matter only Dear, of several kinds,
Castors, Hares, and Squirrels as big as our Conneys, and with either of these
it abounds. But besides these, our Plantations do at this present so abound
with Neat and Swine, as that they feed more plentifully on them than they need;
and as I have been credibly informed by diverse worthy inhabitants, that they
can, upon occasion spare sufficent, Beef, Porke, Turkies, Hens, and Salt-fish,
with such store of grain as may sufficiently victual any Navy of ours which
shall be employed that may.

The flying foul there, such as are for prey, are Eagles and diverse Hawks;
for food there rre Partriges, Pigeons Turkies, Black-birds, Thrushes, and in
the Winter (though but little in the Summer) they do abound with Water-fowles
of all sorts, Swans, Cranes, Geese, Ducks, and many more, whom we of Europe
never knew. For Fish, there are Sea-calves, Salman, Trout, E^les, Soles,
Herrings, Mullets, Perch; and of all kind of Shellfish, far greater and
better than are ours.

Now as concerning the condition of the Natives, it may suffice to know that
some few of them, as the Sasquesahanoxs, who lie most Northerly about two miles
from the grand River Chesepeacke, are Giants in comparison of us; that other,
as the Wickocomacks are Dwarfs, though for the most part they are of a
competent stature, borne white, but turning tawny by continual painting of
themselves; they are strong and nimble of body, and well inured to endured
Winter and Summer; In Winter they lie in the woods by a great fire, clothed
with the hairy skins of Dear and Castors, in Summer with smooth skins.

In the year 1606. at the charge of some Nobles and Citizens, under the
Government of Master Neoport, a Colony of about an hundred men, was sent into
this North part of Virginia* The first part where they began to build and
plant, was at Cape Henry, where at the first they were kindly rece^ved by the
Natives, but it continued not long, for within a while they refused to supply
them with any provision of victuals, and in the end they set upon them both by
treachery and force, to subdue them, which they very hardly withstood, being
almost fa^^ished, and had undoubtedly all forthwith perished, had not there
then a new supply of an hundred and twenty more men, and of proportionable
provision happily arrived out of England, under the conduct of the foresaid
Master Neoport, in whose absence Captain Smith was Governor; but this was but
a short refreshing, by reason that a great part of their provision was consumed
by casualty of fire, neither was there any good agreement between the chief
Officers there, or such a continued supply hence as was requisite, so as they
fell again into a very hard condition, being extremely pinched with famine,
and daily assaulted by the Natives, in so much as they were all resolved to
have retured into England, had it not been for the Lord De Laware, by whose
coming with store of all provision, they were comforted and supported: And so
they continued in a much bettering estate, under the Command of Captain^ Smith,
Master Dale, and Master Gates: Captain Smith affirms that at his departure,
he left there near five hundred well provided with Victual, and all manner of
Ammunition; which by the coming of Master Dale and Master Gates was made as
good again. And in this flourishing increasing condition, they continued from
the year 1610, unto 1621, in which year they lost by an unexpected treacherous
surprisall of tae Natives, three hundred and forty, and had been utterly
destroyed, had not James Towe escaped by a Virginian, who had got some little
knowledge in Christianity, but since they have abundantly recovered that loss,
being now more than a thousand, and commanding the Natives as they please: Many
other remarkable passages touching this part of Virginia, are to be found in
Captain Smiths Discourse thereof.

The greater and more fertile part of Virginia is the Southern, found out (as
I said) by Sir Walter Raleigh, and since amply described by our countryman
Master Harcourt, who affirms that there are great store of Dear, Conneys,
and big Squirrils, which afford very sweet and wholesome nourishment, and no
less abundance of Foul, as Peacocks, Partridges, Stock-doves, Cranes, Hernes,
Swans, Geese; as also of Fish, as Sturgeon, Herring, Rays, Mullets, Plaice,
Soles, Trouts, Eeles, and many more, beside infinite store of all kind of
Shellfish, and all of these very useful for man's sustentation: There are
likewise in this Southern part, many Merchantable commodities, besides ample
provision of almost all things necessary for shipping, which with a competent
supply of men and Ammunition from England, might within a short time, by Gods
blessed assistance, command the Northern parts of America, where would be
found silver and gold sufficient, though they never went over the Line, to
abate the over-swelling greatness of the Spaniard, by whom the Papacy is only
supported, and all Protestant Churches at this present so extremely perplexed.
There was in the year 1546, a small Colony sent into this part of Virginia, at
the charge of Sir Walter Raleigh, but finding themselves not able long to
resist the Natives, they returned into England.

A Second Expedition was undertaken in the year 1585, by Sir Richard Grinvill,
who continued not long there, but left a Colony of an hundred and seven under
the command of Sir Raphael Lane, who being greatly distressed by the Natives,
were next year brought back again by Sir Francis Drake.

The last voyage we read of, was undertaken at the charge of the said Sir
Walter Raleigh, by Master With, 1587, who finding the former Colony gone, and
himself not able to make good the Plantation, returned.

Florida.
THE next adjacent Country unto Virginia, to the West and Southwest is
Florida, containing a very large tract of gronnd, not yet fully discovered, it
has the Island Cuba to the South, and runs South-west to the River de
Palmas, about forty miles distant from Panuco, a Province of Nova Hispania. The
temperature of the air differs not much from that of Castile in Spain, it is
for the most part very fertile, but it seems not to have in it any rich
mines, either of gold or silver, or not to have been regarded by the Natives,
who not long since would not take the pains to take up any of the great store
of gold and silver, which was usually cast upon that coast, by reason of many
shipwracks which the Spaniard suffered in bringing such treasure through the
dangerous Straits of Bahema from Nova Hispania, and the South of America; the
soil is as fertile, if not more fertile than any part of Virginia, and
abounds with greater store and varie^y of flesh, fish, foul and fruit, than
that does. Great store of gold and silver is found there, which they who have
written of Florida, impute rather to frequent Shipwreck, than to any Mines
growing there, because they have far the greater store near the Seacoast,
though yet there be a constant report of many golden Mines in the Apalaci
Mountains, which divides Florida, from the South part of Virginia, but it is
certain that many of the Sea-shores afford store of Amber Grise.

The Inhabitants are of a tawny color, of great stature, and well compacted
bodies, very expert Archers, exceeding active, fierce and manly in their manner
of assault.

Their Religion is the same, or not much differing from that of their
Neighbors, a mere worship of Devils, wherein they are greatly deluded by
their Priests, who are great Magicians.

They hate the Spaniard extremely, more willingly they entertain and join
their forces with the French, and other Christian Nations against them. They
consist of many petty Governments, which usually infeft and weaken one another,
in that respect easy to be subdued, though they were better provided for war
than they are.

The Spaniard, as also the French, have made many voyages into Florida.

The first Spanish Expedition was undertaken in the year 1512. from the Isle of
Portorico, by Portius, from whom it received the name, for that the face of the
Country has a resemblance of a continual spring, but this Expedition proved
to be of none effect.

A second voyage was undertaken in the year 1520, by Vasques, from Hispaniola,
who performed nothing memorable there, save only this infamous act of inviting
many of the Natives into his ships, where once ab^ord, he hoysed sail, and
carried them into miserable bondage.

A third voyage was made to as little purpose, by Narvesius, Anno 1526, who
stayed so long in the search of the South-west part of Florida, which is the
most barren part, as they were feign to eat one another.

The most remarkable was undertaken by Ferdinando a Soto, from the year 1536,
unto 1541, in which time he with his Army of nine hundred foot, and five
hundred horse, were the greater part consumed, having not found out (what they
chiefly sought after) any golden or silver mines; the remainder of his
souldidiers, which were not a fourth part of those he brought from Cuba, were
after his death under the conduct of Ludovicus Moscosus, brought into Nova
Hispania, not without great difficulty, being often fiercely set upon, and
prosecuted by the Natives. After which very chargeable and unprosperous voyage
of Hernandus the Spaniard for many years did intermit any further search of
Florida, which indeed was never thoroughly by them, as having searched no
further than that part of the Country, which lies opposite to the Gulf of
Nova Hispania, and not within and beyond the Straits of Bohema, lying toward
Virginia, which is by many degrees the more fertile soil, and most abounding
with treasure, and rich merchantable commodities.

After this the French with two of the Kings ships, every way well provided, by
the procurement of Colinus (that most worthy Admiral of France,) under the
conduct of Ribaldus, set forth to Florida, in the year 1542, where they
arrived within two months at the River of Dolphines, lying about the 30
degree, and from thence following the Seacoast toward the North, they came to
a very safe Port, which they named Port Riall, near unto which they built
Charles Fort, about the degree of 32, near adjoining to the Seacoast of
Virginia, But by reason of great civil war that as then happened very fierce
in France, a long expected supply being not sent from thence, a mutiny arose
among his soldiers, so as Ribaldus, though ha was well entertained, and
supplied by the Natives, was enforced to return into France, after some
discovery made of the North-east part of Florida, not without the loss of some
men, though of more money; And in his return (for want of victuals) they
killed one of their own men, and had hardly ever again recovered France, but
that they were unexpectedly furnished with some victuals by an English ship.

After this the civil war ceasing in France, and Colinus the Admiral
returning again into grace with the King, Laudonerius the twentieth of May
1544, set forth with three ships well furnished for Florida, where he arrived
the twentieth of June, and was friendly received by the Natives, but could not
find any gold or silver Mines, though he spent much travel and time in search
after them, so long as his provision was all spent; And the Natives growing
both unable, and unwilling to supply him any longer, he was resolved to have
returned into France, if the foresaid Ribaldus had not again arrived there
with thre^ small ships out of France; whose expected coming as it was very
joyful to the French, so the Natives seemed to be highly pleased therewith, as
four of their petty Kings, the Kings of Homoloa Seravatri, Almacam, Malica and
Castri, came forth to congratulate Ribaldus arrival, and promised to conduct
the French unto the Mountains of Apalactri, where store of red Metal was to
be had, which they supposed to be gold: But this great hope of the French soon
vanished, by reason of the Spaniards coming suddenly upon them with great
ships every way well prepared, upon whose approach the French stole away to
sea, but were forthwith pursued by the Spaniard, whom though they as then
escaped, yet were they by a violent tempest, after shipwreck and loss of some
of their men, again cast upon the coast of Florida, about six and twenty miles
higher to the North-east toward Virginia, where they were forth with set upon
by the Spaniard, beaten out of their Forts, and almost all cruelly slain, to
the number of six hundred, among which Ribaldus the Governor was one, though
he yielded himself among other conditions, to have his life spared; Laudonerius
(...) ^^me few of the French escaped hardly to their ships (...) returned into
France, having cast off all future hopes of (...)* which was now (...) dispose
of the cruel Spaniard; neither (...) the French (...) (for that he greatly
disliked, if not hated (...), and such were these that were ^laine in (...)
slaughter of his people, as ever af^^^ ^o much as attempt the least revenge of
their blood, which yet two years after one Monsier Gurgius, a private man, at
his own charge with 280 men transported in three ships, w^ most v^liantly
undertaken, and no less happily effected, by the help of the Natives, who upon
his first arrival, out of an inveterate hatred to the Spaniard, their insolent
outrageous opposers, joined with him to the slaughter, and utter extirpating of
them out of Florida; and yet for all this complete victory, the valiant
Gurgius, though earnestly invited by the Natives, would not venture with so
small a force, to stay long in Florida, as knowing very well that the bloody
revengefull Spaniard might in a short time from Cuba, Hispaniola, or other
there near adjoining Plantations, invade him with far greater forces, and
therefore within a while returned, where he found his worthy service to be so
displeasing to the King and his Popish Lords, as he was feign a good while to
hide himself, and to fly for his life, and after this we do not hear that
the French did ever venture into Florida any more.

Neither yet has the Spaniard obtained any strong footing there, for as yet
they have no Town of any note toward the sea of Mexico, and but two which lie
toward the Northern sea, the one (which is chiefest) called Saint Augustines,
the other Saint Matthewes, of great difficulty to be taken by a small Navy, but
of great import, in regard of their great wealth to them that shall take them.
And now will I only describe the Sea coasts of Florida from the Confines of
Virginia unto Nova Hispania, far better known then the Inland countries to the
North of Florida. The nearest River of Florida to Virginia of any note falling
into the Ocean, is the River Iordaine, which lies 32 degrees from the
Equinoctial; from whence, about 20 leagues downward to the South, toward the
West lies the Promonntory of S. Hellen, near Port Royal, which the French
chose for the best and surest place to begin their Plantations; between which,
Oristanum, Ostanum, and Cayagna, whereof the first is distant from S. Hellen
six leagues, the second from the first four leaguesthe third from the second,
eight leagues: but how far Cayagua is from the River Iordaine, is not yet
determined. From S. Hellen to Dos Baxos haven is five leagues, from thence to
the Bay De Asapo three leagues, thence to Cafonusum three, to Capula five, to
Saron nine, to S. Alcany fourteen, to S. Peter twenty leagues. All Bays and
Rivers Westward falling down to the South from Peter Bay, which lies about the
31 Degree to the South, to S. Matthews Town, is five leagues, and from thence
ten more to S. Austines, directly Southward, the land so falling in upon the
Sea, from the degree of 30 and a half to 25, where the coming up of thestrait
of Bahama begins, having to the west side those dangerous Rocks called
Marteries, to the East those called Roques. between S. Austines Town and the
Bay de Mosquito, is fifteen leagues. From thence to the point Ca^evarall, is 16
leagues; from thence to the River Ayz is full 20 leagues and from thence to
Martyrs near as many more; so as from Cape Francis (near S. Matthewes Town
where the land begins to turn directly Southward) to Martires (coming up
from the Gulf of Mexico to the Northeast parts of Florida) is near six
degrees downward to the Line. Not far from Martires Westward, lie Tortugas
dangerous Islands, where the Continent of Florida turns again almost directly
North for near 5 degrees: Between which and Tacobago which lies near to the
top of that great Reach, lie the Bays of Carlos, Tampa, Muspa, S. Joseph;
Muspa is distant from Carlos thirteen leagues, to Tampa from Carlos as many
more, from thence to S. Joseph are fifteen leagues, and from S. Joseph to
Tacobago eighteen: between which at S. Joseph begins a great inlet of the
Sea for more then twenty leagues to the North latitude, and more then forty
four to the Western longitude; in the middle of which lies Ante, a safe
haven, and of great import for those who intend a more full discovery of
Florida, which as yet is bu slenderly discovered toward the West; for between
it and the most Northwest parts of Nova Hispania, which are distant the one
from the other four hundred leagues, we read but of one safe Bay, called the
Bay of the Holy Ghost near Cape de Crus, and some few Rivers for succor and
supply of Navigators.

The first River from Ante one hundred leagues is Nieves, from whence the River
Flores is twenty, from the Haven of the Holy Ghost (which is of all the surest)
To the River Flores is seventy leagues, from which to the River Piscadores is
as many more: where the Gulf of Mexico begins to turn from the West
directly South, from the degrees of 29 to 25.

I might here proceed with the description of Nova Hispania, (a country of
highest esteem with the Spaniard, for riches and fruitfulness;) but having
passed as far as the Northwest Seas of America will permit, I take it to be our
best course to return back again to view the Islands, and the more Southeast
parts of the Continent, lying far nearer, and every way of as good consequence
for the propagating of the Gospel, and the settling of some weak Plantations
which we have there already, for the continual sending forth more Colonies,
and for the obtaining store of treasure, and many rich merchantable commodities.

Cuba.
THE first great Island in our return lying most to the West, is Cuba, having
Hispaniola Easternly to usward, distant from the first Eastern part thereof
which is Cape Mayzi, twelve leagues, to the West it is divided from Nova
Hispania by a long and large interposition of Sea, called Mexico; To the North
it has the Lucayicke Islands, The nearest parts to the South is the Island
Iamaica.

From the East promontory of Mazi to Cape Anthony full West it extends it
self no less then 230 leagues but in breadth where it is largest it exceeds
not forty leagues, where narroest not fifteen, A very large Island and
fruitful soil able abundantly to sustain many thousand men, for the Natives
are well nigh utterly destroyed by the Spaniard, And the few Spanish
inhabitants at this time there remaining are not able to make use of the fifth
part thereof. The Climate is somewhat hot, but yet healthful and reasonable
temperate, it is so over stored with kine as they kill them merely for their
hides, and so with hogs as they know not what to do with them.

It has in it a Cathedral, and a Monestery. To the East thirty leagues
distant; and within ten leagues of the Northern Sea lies a Town called
Baracoa near to which runs the River Mares. To the North West likewise
thirty leagues lies Baiamo, which though it be an inland town yet it is well
furnished with useful commodities, by means of the great river Cante which
falls into the Sea on the South Side of the Island, A fourth Town whereunto
belongs a good haven Porto del Principe lying to the Northside near forty
leagues from Saint Iages; On the Southfide more then fifty leagues from Iages
lies the Town Spiritus Sanctus, And between these lie the great mountains
Tarquino, Cape de Crus, and a great inlet of the Sea, the Land bending to the
North, and to the North-east no less then a degree, but the coming up unto
them (by reason of the many rocks and shelves) is somewhat dangerous.

From hence being more then half the length of the Island unto Cape Anthony
(the most Western promontory of great note with mariners.) On the South Side
also lies the Town Seas, Port Xagua, and Cape Corrientes opportune places to
harbor, and take in water, and wood. The West end of Cuba from Cape Anthony
bends Northward where lie the Organes observed by Saylors to be dangerous
touching upon in regard of many sands rocks, and shallowes, but after the Land
falling into the East not above nine miles from Habana there are two very
convenient Ports Port Puercos and Port Marien, but of all the Ports of Cuba,
Habana, on the Northside near the West end of the Island is far the largest,
the safest, and most renowned. It is strongly Fortified both by nature and by
Art, by a narrow coming up unto it by Sea, and with strong Castles, as it is
thought to be invincible, and therefore hither as to a most secure harbor from
all parts of America the Spanish Fleet meets yearly, and so being gathered
together return about the beginning of September, with there far greater
treasure collected, then considerable Forces to conduct it safely into Spain.
Neither indeed is Habana so impregnable, but that (a Navy Royal landing some
of their Forces at Port Marien, or Port Puercos aforesaid may take both Town
and treasure before the Spanish Navy can put from thence,) if they could in a
seasonable time somewhat about September, light upon the Spanish Fleet. And if
the Grandes of Spain, have (by reason of the large pension of 3. or 4000.
pounds yearly paid to many pensioners here) such intelligence of an intendment
that way, yet though we should miss of the Fleet for one year, we might be
sure to seize upon the Town, and so greatly straighten them in their yearly
returns, and in few years become Commanders of those narrow Seas, through
which their vast treasure is yearly conveyed.

Hispaniola.
HIspaniola lies between the degree of eighteen and twenty one of the North
latitude. The most East end of it at Cape Enganno, is very narrow: the most
West end, between Saint Nicholas, to the North and Cape Dona Maria, to the
Southside, is broader then any other part of the Island. The length from East
to West 120. leagues, the breadth as it is related by Spanish Authors is 60.
leagues where it is widest, where narrowest thirty. The temperature of the air
till noone is somewhat over hot, but after continually temperate. The
commodities of Sugar, and Cow-hides are more abundaut here, then in any of
these Islands. Acosta reports that from hence in the year 1587. were brought
into Spain 9000. Chests of Sugar, and they though kill their Beasts most for
their hides, yet they multiply to fast upon them, and such is the increase of
horse, and hogs, which sufficiently proves the exceeding fertillity of their
soil, there having been neither Neat, horse nor hogs, in the whole I Will,
before it was stored by the Spanish, not above 150 years since.

Now to begin the particular description, of the I Will, of the Towns, Rivers,
and Ports according to the several Provinces, as they lie from East to West,
between North and South. The most Eastern Province called Hygvey is a rough,
and mountainous place, yet well furnished, with variety of fruitful trees. To
the South, lie two small Islands Catilina and Zybo well provided with good
nature and store of cattle, as also the Island Saona of a larger extent, which
though it be not now inhabited, yet it is very commodious for Ships to furnish
themselves with several sorts of provision, it abounding with great store of
fruits and wholesome cattle.

The next province is Iagvagua upon the South Coast, wherein stands San
Domingo, the only chief City of the Island built by Bartholomeus Collumbus
Anno 1494. on the Eastside of the River Osama, but afterward removed by
Nicolas Obando to the Westside. It is neatly built and stately with stones, and
environed with a strong wall. It is the seat of an Archbishop, and the place
where the governor of the Island, and all the Kings officers do reside, and
but that it is not conveniently supplied with water, it might well pass for one
of the best cities in all America. It flourished exceedingly in the preceding
age, but since the finding out of Peru, it has lost much of its spendour, as
being less frequented by Merchants. The inhabitants hereof according to the
Spaniards own relation, does not exceed 600. families of Spaniards, the Moors
and Mungrels (which are begot of Spanish and Moors) amounting to as many more.
It was taken in the year 1586 by Sir Francis Drake with 1200. men, but the
spoil came far short of expectation, there being found great store of brass
coin but little gold. To the North of this prime City, in the same Province is
the City De La Conception, wherein is a Cathedral and a Monastry as also the
Town Gotuy. Not far from San Domingo, the Province of Cayagua begins, and
extends it self on the South coast near 160 miles, and in this Province is
Azna commonly called Compostella very rich in Sugers, and five convenient
havens Nizao, Formoso. Ocoa, Caligna, and (Yagnion, it self,) all greatly
frequented especially Nizao, and Ocoa by the Dutch, for the abundance of Sugar
and hides, until of latter years, trading there has been utterly prohibited,
by the King of Spain, Upon this coast are three little Islands (little better
then Rocks) Beta, Alta, Vela, Frayles, wherein though there be nothing worth
observation, yet are they carefully to be observed for the preventions of
Shipwreck, The next Province to the West, and more to the North is Baoca very
mountains, and so hard of access as it cost the Spaniard very dear before he
could gain it. The most Southwest Province is Hanigvagia very plain,
pleasant, and fruitful, wherein stands Savana just opposite to Baqua, a
small but very considerable Island to furnish navigatours has also in it, Cape
Tuburo, and the promontory Dona, and many safe harbors for Ships. From the
last of these, the Land turning to the East many leagues, admits of a great
inlet of Sea, upon which bordereth Zagua, a Province no less fruitful, and
pleasant then the former, in which stands the Town called Iaguana, well
provided with store of excellent Salt. And near unto the North, is the Island
Guanabo. The most Northwest is Cape Saint Nicholas, where begins the first
Northside Province of the Island Marien, where Christophorus Columbus built
Navidad, hereunto belong two Islands Mosquites and Port Palma the one to the
East the other to the West. The next Province is Lawega Real, extending it
self 70 leagues in length twenty in breadth admirable rich in meadows and
Pastures. Between this Northern Province and Yaquimo to the South lie to
other, Cibao sometime abounding with golden mines, and Maguana with in
comparable meadows, as being almost encompassed with two wide Rivers Niba, and
Yaquen. There are belonging to this spacious Province two Towns of good note
Saint Iago and Port de Plata, besides four convenient havens Cape Francis, Port
Riall, Mons Christi, and Port Isabell. The most Northeast is Samana unto which
belongs one only haven of note bearing the same name.

Lucaick Islands.
TO the North of Hispaniola and Cuba, between them and the Continent of
Florida, lie the many small Lucaick Islands, so near one another, as they make
those Seas very rough, heady and dangerous: besides this, there is nothing
worth noting in them. I shall therefore herein return the Readers whom it may
concern (I mean those who are to pass those seas) to advise with that Map,
which the most judicious Author Mr. De Laet has made and placed in that his
great and exact Collection of all America, almost out of all Authors, Latin,
English, Spanish, Dutch, or French, who have written in this kind: From him
(by whom I have been most assisted in this my short Compendium) they shall
find their several names, and be sufficiently informed, how they fall
between the forefaid Islands and the Continent, which for me here to ins^rt,
would be both needless and troublesome, they are so many, and of so little
worth.

Porto-Rico.
Portorico lying to the North, short of the 19 Degree of the North latitude, is
to the East of Hispaniola near sixteen leagues. To the West of Virgo, Gorda,
and Anagado, the most West of the Carib Islands seventeen leagues, from Cogui
Bocoa, a Promontory of Vnezuella, in the Continent of America, to the Northeast
it is distant one hundred thirty leagues. The Climate is very pleasant, only
sometimes in the months of December and January, it is infefted with too much
rain; in June, July and August, with somewhat immoderate heat, and terrible
tempests, which they call Huracanes. The land for the most part rises and
falls with convenient small fruitful hills and valleys, though the
fruitfulness thereof is much hindered with the overgreat store of Guiabo
trees. The Towns and Ports of this Island are but few: about the middle of the
North side lies Porto-Rico, the only Town of note, built after the Spanish
fashion, and divided into fair streets: it has in it a safe Haven for ships, a
stately Cathedral, and a Monastery: and though it has no walls it is well
fortified by land and sea: yet not so, but that it was taken by our country
man the Earl of Cumberland, who found there a rich booty, and at least seventy
great pieces of Ordnance, which he brought away Anno 1597. It has since in the
year 1625 been assaulted by Henricides the Dutch General, who though he
demeaned himself very valiantly in the attempt, could not obtain it. The other
Ports on the North side of the Island, as Visa, Canaba, and Cabeca, to the East
of Portorico, are not safe, as being exposed to the Northern tempests and
shelves, and sands which lie before them. In the Northwest corner lies Agada,
a very oportune Haven to water in, between which and Portorico the Rivers Cami
and Cabuco fall into the sea. Directly to the West side of the Island, somewhat
about the middle, lies the River Guiabo, by which they pass to Saint Germin
four leagues remote from the Western sea, the Town is but small, and has
been often taken by the French. Between the harbor belonging to it, which is
the mouth of Guiabo and Aguada, directly to the west side of the Island lies
the Rock Zacheo, inconvenient and dangerous. There are other small villages in
the Island but none other of great worth or note.

On the Southside most to the West lies Cape Roxo, near which our English have
found some salt pits very useful for those who travail those parts. From Cape
Roxo lie the havens of Guaima, Xaria; Guadianilla, and Guaiama distant five or
six leagues the one from the other. On the Southeast-side lie the small Islands
Bieque, on the East coast, then are only these two Ports Saint James and
Yabucoa. The prime commodities of this Island are great store of Sugars, Ginger
Cassia, and Neats hides. It did abound with silver and gold, but those mines
are either exhausted, or nelected for want of work men.

Burmudos.
THere is another Island called Burmudos (which because it falls much in the
same longitude with Porto Rico, though many degrees distant to the North in
regard of latitude) I must either here insert or leave out. It lies within a
degree and a half of South Virginia, not so easy to be come unto (in regard
it has but one and that none of the best Ports to land in. Besides it is (as
much if not more then any other place infested with most tempestuous fearful
winds called Huracans. The soil and temperature is far inferior to any part
of Virginia, and yet is it inhabited no less then with a thousand English: Who
no doubt when the wisdom of the Kingdom shall think convenient to send a
strong Navy into America) will be forward to remove and improve their
pla^^^^ion into a more convenient and richer soil.

Caribb Islands.
TO the the East of Porto-Rico begin the Carib or Caniball Islands; so called,
for that the Natives are men-eaters: for the most part, they fall one within
another, sometimes in a double, sometimes in a threefold squadron, from the
degree of eighteen and a half, to somewhat more then the sixteenth degree of
latitude. I will only mention them as they lie in their several ranks from
East to West. Anegado and Virgins, Angotllo and Virgin, Granda, Saint Martin,
Saba and Crus, Saint Bartoline and Saint Estasio, Barbada, Nieves and Saint
Christopher, Antigua and Monserata, Desseada and Gnadalupe, Mary Glande, Sanco
and A^stin. From whence the Carib Islands Dominica, Martimno, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent, Beria and Granada, fall down to the twelfth degree of latitude
by a proportionable bending much like a bow toward the West from Anegado to
Gr^^ada. Only Barbados lies to the East more then twenty leagues out of the
foresaid bow-bending figure. Of these Barbados, Saint Christopher and Nieves
(now in possession of our Countrymen) are most spacious, and in all respects
fitter for plantation) except Dominica, Matinino and Granada) which though they
be not inhabited by Spaniards, yet beside the sustaining of 1000. Savages;
either of them affords the Spanish Navy in its yearly voyage to the South
Continent of America, good stone of provision at very small rates, four
Porkets and six Hens for one hatchet. I say no more of these Islands but this,
though they be thought scarce worth looking after by the Spaniards, yet would
they sustain 20000 men.

I might here pass Westward again, with the Islands of Margarita, Cobana,
Coetz and many more which lie upon the matter directly Westward, not far
remote from Gran^da, Andalusia and Veneuella, the nearest part of the continent
Southward; by coasting whereof to Martha, Nicuragua and so to Nova Hispania, I
might more perspicuously and conveniently have concluded this my present
discovery of the North America, but then I must leave out two great Islands of
good note, and which is of twenty times more concernment the most spacious
Guiana by our judicious Countryman Sir Walter Raleigh and others, most admired
and applauded for health, wealth and pleasure. Though therefore it be somewhat
out of my way, and do a little obscure my proposed method, by the
Mediterranian sea of America; yet I may not by any means leave them out as
falling many degrees on the North side of the equinoctial, unless it be one
part of Guiana, which to the South-east goes over the line somewhat more then
a degree, taken up only with several branches of the great River Amazon, and
many small Islands dispersed in them of no great worth.

The Islands between Granada and Guiana to the South-west are Tabago and
Trinidado: I shall quickly have done with them and from thence begin in a
second Book my discovery of Guiana, and the rest of the Continent; taking it
according to the several regions thereof, as I shall find them nearest
agreeing to the Seacoasts so far as the Mediterranian will permit us, that
is as far as Nava Hispania.

Tabago now in possession of the Dutch, lies to the South-east full thirty
leagues from Granada, and upon eight miles to the East of Trinidado: It has
many good harbors but the coming in unto them, especially toward the West is
dangerous by reason the seas there are very boystrous and not free from sands
and shelves. It is constantly reported by the Dutch (who should best know it)
as having many years possessed it to afford many rare fruits and herbs, variety
of Fowls and Fish, and not to be utterly destitute of foure-footed beasts,
wholesome for nourishment, as having good store of Indian Hogs and Armadillos,
both which afford good food.

Trinidado, now possessed (as is credibly reported) by the Forces of the
present most illustrious Admiral of England, the Earl of Warwick; lies
according to the several far distant parts and corners thereof between the
eighth and tenth degree of latitudge. For though Sir Walter Raleigh (a
judicious Traveller) place point Curiapan, which the Spaniards call Punco de
Gallo, the most Northern part, but in the eighth degree, yet the Dutch
(according to Oviedus, upon more exact calculation) found it to come near to
the tenth degree. Besides this, about fifteen miles to the South there is
another convenient Haven, called Point Blanco; after which, directly to the
South, between the Island and the falling of four or more branches of the
great River Oronoque from Guiana, there is a very shallow narrow sea not above
three miles over, and not above 11 or 12 foot deep; howbeit by reason of four
or five Islands which come between them, that sea is heady and rough.

This Island is according to Herea his observation two hundred leagues from
Hispaniola, sixty from Granada; In length, (according to Oviedus) it is twenty
five; in breadth twenty leagues. Concerning the fertility of the soil Authors
agree not; Herea reports it to be barren in the general, but Sir Walter
Raleigh acknowledges it to be so only in that part which is next adjoining to
Curiapan; but the rest of the Island to be sufficiently fruitful, especially
of Indian grain, and such Roots as the Americans usually make their Bread and
Beer of; besides great store of Dear and Hogs, and other wild Beasts, of
which the Inhabitants may feed plentifully. Good probability there is, that
some Golden Mine^ may be found there, but as yet what has been dug there,
is acknowledged by the said Sir Walter Raleigh, and by another of our
Countrymen Sir Robert Dudley, to be but Marca^ite, which though it shine like
Gold, yet it it of no value. The only great Town in all Trinidad is Saint
Joseph, the Merchantable Commodity there is Tobacco.

The second BOOK.
GVIANA.
AND now being to proceed with Guiana. I know no better course, than to follow
those, who have gone before me: who by ascending and descending the grand
Rivers; I mean Oronoque to the North; Amazon to the South, as also many others
which fall between them, into the east Ocean; have made the only discovery
which have as yet been made thereof: And no marvel, for those great Rivers
do on every side inviron Guiana with the Countries thereunto belonging, so as
by help of their great labor and cost upon some further search; as complete a
discovery in short time may be had of this large goodly Couutry, as of any
other in America, (to the future incredible benefit of our Nation,) who might
long since have enjoyed the inestimable riches thereof, (had the true relation
of incomparable Raleigh, in his Book Entitled Guiana, found that credit, or
his most powerful motives had so timely prevailed with this Kingdom, as was
but requisite when the Spaniard had got but little knowledge, and less
^^re-footing in those parts.) This I write not as conceiving England now too
weak to remove the Spaniard thence: No, I know very well that the power and
wisdom of this Kingdom now met in Parliament, might and I hope would before
this have sent forth such a power and well prepared Navy, as might have driven
him out of his strongest holds in any part of the North America; (unto which
any reasonable near access may be made by water) had not Spanish Factours,
Jesuits from abroad and grand Pensioners at home, raised these present most
cruel and most unnatural, I should rather say infernal commotions in this
Kingdom, and that in Ireland, purposely to divert their wisdom from taking
such a design into any deep consideration, being distracted and perplexed on
all sides.

But to the matter; great and long inquiry has been made by the Spanish,
English and Dutch, to find out Manoa, otherwise called El Dorado, the chief
City of Guiana, and the golden Mountains adjacent, by those great Rivers that
empty themselves into the East Ocean, especially by those the two greatest,
Oronoque and Amazon, both upward and downward; I mean downward near from
whence they arise, upward from their wide mouths where they fall into the Sea.
Of Spaniards, the first of note who attemp^ed the search of Guiana, by the
River Oronoque, were Diego Ordace, a Knight of the Order of Saint Iago; and
Pedro Harnandez de Serpa: but we find nothing of worth, or certainty, to have
been performed by either of them in that search. Only Sir Walter Raleigh
affirms, that he did see a great Anchor of Ordaces ship, lying in a Port
called M^requito, 300 miles within the Land, upon the River Oronoque, a strong
proof he was there.

As for Pedro Harnandez, it is said by some; that taking his journey from
Cumana in the West Indies, by land, toward Oronoque, which may be about 120
leagues; he was set upon, and quite overthrown, by a Nation of the Indians
called W^kery, before he came to the borders of the said River. Others affirm
that he was defeated in the very entrance of Guiana, at the first civil Town
of the Empire, called Magureguary; but of this there is but little certainty.
One Martines and Berea a Spanish Gentleman, and a Commander of great note and
quality, after them proved far more succesfull (if we may rely upon Bereas
own report, as it was taken by Sir Walter Raleigh, from his own mouth) Marianes
discovery briefly hapened thus (I may well say happened, for though never so
true, yet was it but a mere chance.)

The foresaid Voyage of Ordace being utterly lost, by reason his provision of
Gunpowder was at once blown up, through the negligence of this Martines; his
final judgment was, that he should be set into a Canoa alone, without any
victual, only with his Arms, and so turned loose into the great River. But
it pleased God, that the Canoa was carried down the stream and that certain
Guianians met it the same evening; (and having never seen any Christian, or
man before of that color) they carried him into the Country to be wondered at;
and so from Town to Town until he came to the great City Manoah, the place
of Inga, the Emperors abode: Who upon the first sight of him, knew him to be a
Christian, as having seen many in Peru, where he formerly lived, before his
brother Atabalipa Emperor thereof, was vanquished by the Spaniard: At what
time he and many thousands more fled to Guiana; where within half an age, by
reason of the exceeding riches and fertility of that large Country, having
subdued many Nations, he became as potent as ever his magnificent Ancestors
were in Peru. The entertainment of this Martines by Inga, is by himself
acknowledged to have been very free and bountiful; for though he was brought
blindfold thither, and during the time of his abode in Manoa (which was seven
months) he was not suffered to wander any where into the Country; yet Inga
caused him to be lodged in his own Palace, and to be every way well provided
for.

At the end of which time, when he had somewhat learned the language, he
obtained favor of the Emperor to depart, with whom he sent diverse Guianians
to conduct him to the River of Orinoque, all laden with as much gold as they
could bear, given to Martines at his departure: of all which as he arived
near the River side, the Oronoque poni (enemies to Inga) robbed him, save
only of two great bottles of Gords, which were filled with beads of gold
curiously wrought: With these the Oronoque-poni, (who thought the bottles onley
to have contained some food) permitted him to pass dowre Oronoque in Canoas:
From whence he got to Trinidado, and from thence to Margarita, and so to Saint
Ivan de Puerto-Rico; where at the time of his death receiving the Sacrament, he
affirmed the truth of this Relation, and gave his gold beads to the Church. You
have heard the unexpected success of Martines wandering; hear now briefly the
long and difficult travailes of Berea which were purposely undertaken, as they
are recorded by the same Author from hsi own mouth.

Gundizalvus Zimenes having without any good success spent much in the search
of Guiana, by those Rivers of Nuevo Reygno, that fall into Oronoque, left at
his death a very great (...) to Berea, who had married his daughter
conditionally, he with his best endeavor should prosequte his design of
Guiana, which he faithfully performed; for not long after he fell with great
strength and provisions down the River Cassanar rising in Nuevo Reygno, out of
the mountains near the City of Tunia, and falling into Meta another River
springing out of a mountain near Pampalone, in the same Nuevo Reygno de
Granado, where it loses its name as likewise does Meta, when a little above
the fifth degree of North Latitude, it emptieth it self into Bariquan
otherwise called Bariqui c^meto, a River of Venezuella, which after a hundred
Leagues turning and winding, meets and joyneth with the River Huriaparia
which is Oronoque. Where it is to be observed, that though Berea had from his
first setting forth from the River Casanar, fallen near two degrees to the
South, yet he according to Geographicall description in the best Mappes, fell
short a degree in Latitude, and at least seventy Leagues in Longitude of
Macurewarai, the nearest Town of all Guiana, properly so called, and somewhat
more then three from Manoa the chief City: so as keeping his course, as he
(acknowledges he did) down Orinoque, running directly North-East from thence,
there was then no hope of finding what he so eagerly sought for, but instead
thereof received both in his forces and provisions much loss, many of them
perishing by water, his small vessels being split upon rocks, or overwhelmed
and swallowed with the violence of the stream, and many of them killed by the
Natives. The first place of note he arrived at, was the Province of Amapaia,
which he affirmed to be rich in gold, and though for the greatest time of his
abode there (which was six months) he was feircely infefted by the
inhabitants* yet at length, after the concluding of a peace between them, he
obtained eight Images of gold (as curiously made as any in Europe) which he
sent to the King of Spain.

The River of Oronoque running on the East side of Amapaia is said to be twelve
miles broad, and about seven or eight hundredth miles from its fall into the
Ocean. From hence getting over to the South-East side of Orinoque, he sought
very diligently to have found an entrance into Guiana, but could find none,
all places being stopped up with high unpassable mountains. And although he
met with diverse Rivers both on the one and on the other side of Orinoque, yet
he professed he could not learn the name of them, but only of the River
Caroly: neither could he (as he pretended) for want of the use of Geography,
express of what degrees they were, so as he utterly despaired of obtaining any
good success in this voyage, until he came to Emeria, where he found store of
provision, and the inhabitants of a more peaceable and civell disposition. The
petty King thereof was called Carapana, a man of a hundred years of age, who
in his youth had been often at the Islands of Trinidado and Marga^ita, where
he traded with the* Christians there, and learned much from them how to govern
his people. Berea having staid here some good space of time, and having as he
conceived gained sufficient knowledge of Guiana betaketh himself (without
staying any where) down the River Oronoque directly to Trinidado; from thence
not long after he sent back again to Carapana, who directed them to Morequito
Lord of Aramaia, as having better knowledge of Guiana, living four or five
days journey from Magureguaira. This Morequito had some few years before,
brought much gold to Gumana; and withal had so highly extolled the great
riches of Guiana* as that Vedes the Governor of Margarita sought to have
obtained a patent thereof from the King of Spain, but was prevented by Berea;
which so troubled More^uito for (his acquaintance Vedes sake, with whom he had
much ingratiated himself) as that though he feared openly to deny Bereas
request, in sending guides with his men, to trucke with the Guianians for gold:
Yet privily upon their return (which is reported to have been with much store
of gold) he caused them to be mutthered near the banks of Oronoque, one only
escaping to inform Berea of this (...) act, which he conceiving to have been
plotted by Morequito, sent a good part of the men he had at Trinidado, to take
him and to spoil his Country: Before whose coming Morequi^o hearing of it,
fled to Vides for succor; but being within a while demanded in the King of
Spaines name, he was delivered and executed; whose execution so displeased the
borderers of Oronoque as he thought it not safe ever after to venture with a
few men, to traffic that way, neither was his strength now sufficient to make
his way; wherefore expecting sufficient forces from other parts of the
Spaniards dominions nearest adjoining, he staid so long at Trinidado, until he
was surprised by Sir Walter Raleigh in the year 1596. Here then Bereas
discovery of Guiana being interrupted, it is meet I forbear any further
relation thereof, until I have showed you what was performed by our worthy.
Countryman the said Sir Walter Raleigh, in his first expedition thither; after
which (as being after it in time) the conclusion of Bereas discovery; as also
of Captain Kemish, and others who were employed by learned and expert Raleigh,
that way will more seasonably follow.

After six weeks and two days departure from England, Sir Walter Raleigh,
though he staid seven days at Tenerife, one of the Canary Islands in
expectation of Captain Preston, arived at Trinidado, and took it within four
days; where loosing no time in the prosecution of his intended design for
Guiana; after diligent search, the narrow sea between Trinidado and the fall
of Oronoque being so shallow and shelvie, more especially those branches of the
said River; all that was then discovered, (being sound by his Seamen not above
nine foot deep at high water) he was enforced to leave his ships, and with a
hundred men thronged together in two barges and three whirreys to cross that
narrow sea, and to venture up the River by those branches; wherein when they
had rowed four days, his own barge came a ground, so as they were in some
fear, whether they should ever have got her off again; such was the
shallowness of the River when the flowing of sea had left them. After this for
many days more, they wandered here and there for want of a good Pilot, not
knowing which stream to take, (the streams multiplying so exceedingly upon
them) by reason of the many great and small Islands that lie in this wide
bottom of Oronoque computated by the most judicious Geographers, near a
hundred miles wide from South-east to North-west. After they fell upon those
Islands commonly called Trivitivans, the Inhabitants whereof commonly go by
the name ^awani and Warawe^k^, who in regard they are commonly overflowne from
May to September, they live in houses upon trees very artificially built, their
food being Indian bread, f^^h and venisons, prepared before hand.

Here they happened on a Pilot, more expert then the former, who yet within few
days was out of his knowledge where again it was their good hap to meet with
a (...), much more expert, one Martin an Arwacan, whom (...) ^ooke in a Canoa,
with some others going down Amana, one (...) the greatest arms of Oronoque to
Margarita with store of bread; both the Pilot and the bread were of singular
use to Sir Walter Raleigh, and his almost fainting company* without which they
had undoubtedly been much straightned for going any further.

But by direction, they quickly attained unto Arowacy on the South side of
Oronoque, whereof Toparimaca being Lord, entertained them kindly, and furnished
them with provisions* as also with another Pilot, yet more experienced in the
cross perplexed streams of O^onique as they grew higher to Gu^^na. From
Arowacy bending their course almost directly Westward, they pasted by a great
Isle called Arrow^pana, twenty miles in length, and six in breadth, and at
nigh^ cast Ancour at Ocawyta not one third part so big. The next night they
stayed under Putayma Island, from whence they could plainly discern the
continent to the North-West, to be a large pleasant plain between two edges
of moun^aines consisting of Arable and Meadow known (as their last Pilot
affirmed) by the name of the great Valley of Sayma, running in length almost to
Cumana near upon 120. Leagues. The third, fourth, and fifth day they passed
the Isle Manoriparum* and a great part of Arromaia. On the sixth day they came
and stayed at the Port of Morequito, where he was kindly entertained, and
informed concerning the state of those parts from Topiowary, Lord of Arromaia
and uncle to the aforesaid Morequito. The information he received from him
was, that all the Regions thereabout even to Emeria, were called Guiana: though
yet the inhabitants were called Oronoqueponi as far as the mountains of
Wacarima, which they might from thence behold afar off in the Continent,
beyond which he told them, the large valley of Amariocapana did lie, whose
inhabitants were called Guianians. And that into the Provinces which lie beyond
these more to the South, there came some years since multitudes of people
called Oriones and Epuremei, who possessed themselves thereof, having driven
the Natives out of their ancient inheritances; (the Cassiapagots, Eparagots,
and Arawagots only excepted) who were then great enemies to the Spaniard and
possess Magureguaran, a City strongly and stately built, and withal amply
furnished with gold.

From hence in two days they rowed up near to the River Caroli, where the
heady violence of that, and the other Rivers, (as is usual at that time of the
year) permitted them not then by water to make any higher search into Guiana.
Here therefore staying three or four days, their small company was dispersed
by direction of the Commander, to view the several quarters about and above
the said River; which upon their return, they reported in general to be very
fruitful, in well grown Meadows and Pastures; exceeding commodious for
hunting, hawking, fishing, fowling; as having many plains, clear Rivers,
abundance of Pheasants, Partriges, Quails, Railes, Cranes, Herons, and most
other Fowls; Dear of all sorts, Camas or Antas, as big, and affording as good
nourishment, and as pleasant, as our English Beef, Porkets, Hares, Lions,
Tigers, Leopards, and diverse other sorts of Beasts, either for chase or food.
But that which most contented them, was (as being the thing they chiefly aimed
at) the great store of gold and precious stones, the greater and lesser hills
promised them, the very stones glistering like gold; a more then probable
argument, in the judgment of the best Mineralists, that the earth lying a
fathom or two deep, under strong spars or quarries of such stone usually
called Marcasite hides much Treasure. Upon due consideration of the relations
made of those that Sir Walter had sent to review the Inland (agreeing so well
with what he himself had then seen, near the bank of Caroli, which he with
some few musketeers undertook to survey) he confidently affirms Guiana, in
no respect to be inferior to any part of the world.

His own lively expressions (being a Gentleman of as great learning this way,
as any one our age has afforded) is worthy to be read and seriously
considered. I never saw (says he) a more beautiful country, nor more lively
prospects, hills so raised here and there over the valleys, the River winding
into diverse branches, the plains adjoining without bush or stubble, all fair
green grass, the ground of hard sand to march on either for horse or foot,
the Dear crossing in every path, the birds toward the evening singing on
every tree with a hundred several tunes, Cranes and Herons of white, crimson,
carnation, pearching on the River side, the Air fresh with a gentle easterly
wind; and every stone we stooped to take up, promised either gold or silver by
his complexion.

Your Lordship (says he) writing to the Lord Admiral (that then was) shall
see of many sorts, and I hope some of them cannot be bettered under the Sun;
and yet we had no means but with our daggers and fingers to tear them out
here and there, the rocks being most hard of a mineral sparre, as hard or
harder then a flint: Besides, the veins lie a fathom or two deep in the
rocks, and we wanted necessary Instruments to have dug the treasure out.
Which last clause well considered together with what he in his book of Guiana
alleges for himself (namely the violence of the waters hourly increasing,
unseasonablenesse of the year, the smalnesse of his company, the enforced
leaving off his ships more then 400 miles for a whole month, and his
unwillingnesse to let the natives now perceive that the intent of his coming
was the same with the Spaniards, chiefly for gold) may in my judgment
sufficiently answer those, who have and do still question the truth of Sir
Walters high expressions of Guiana's riches, and the most fruitful and
pleasant habitation it affords, for that he made no longer stay there, and
brought no more store of Treasure home with him.

The issue of this worthy Travelour's first voyage was this, Not being able
by reason of the great downfall and over-bearing stream of Caroli, to ascend
any further, (without seeing the Rivers Baraquan, Beta, Daune and Obarro, all
falling from the West into Oronoque: and being distant each from other about a
degree more and more to the South;) though yet in regard of longitude from East
to West they are much alike, either from Macurewarai or the great City Manoa:
He returned in few days to the Port of Morequito, where he concluded with
Topiawa^i; hostages being given on either side, to return with great forces
the next year, and that in the time he should work with the Oronoque poni, to
join with them in an expedition against their enemies the Epuremei, who
possessed the regions that most abound with silver and precious stones. But
here was the unhappiness of the man* (I might rather say of the Kingdom;)
that upon his speedy retur^e into England, not above eight months from his
setting forth, he could not (though he were very gracious at Court) procure a
Navy to be sent within a year to Topiawari, as was promised: Whence it came to
pass, that the foresaid Berea, neglecting no time, did by the assistance of
Carrapana Lord of Emeria, again get up the River of Oronoque with 300 Spanish
Soldiers as far as Caroli, where he built a little Town called Saint
Thomas, consisting of thirty houses of great consequence, to bring under and
keep in the fearful; unarmed borderers of Oronoque, and also for opposing any
other Nation, who should attempt Guiana that way. But Sir Walter (not
understanding of the Spaniards building and strong fortifying Saint Thomas,)
sent forth Captain Keymish with a ship and a pinnace (all he was able to do
at his own charge) the 26 of January in the year 1596, (which being four
months later then he promised and intended,) caused Topiawari and the rest of
the borderers of Oronoque, for fear of Bevea and his Spanish forces, to
withdraw themselves; when Keymish (who first discovered the genuine and best
Navigable stream of the great River Oronoque, within eight days sail and
entrance thereunto, came up to the Port of Morequito, where finding his hopes
of assistance from the Natives frustrated and himself not able to encounter
the Spaniards, he forthwith for fear of surprizall, takes down the River
again, and so in the fifth month after his setting forth out of England,
returnned thither safe again, though without any good success at all. After
this I find no further attempt to have been made by the English upon Guiana,
but that of Sir Walter himself, Anno 1617. when he had been fourteen years
prisoner to the great retarding of his intended prosecution of Guiana. The
success of this voyage was little answerable to the great preparation thereof:
For though he went forth at his own and friends charge, with seven good ships
well manned and provided, yet he brought no treasure home. And no mervaile (for
as he no less truly then boldly writes to Sir Ralph Winwood from Christophers
Island) his whole design, what ships, what men, what Ammunition he would take
with him, as also what time he would set forth hence, and what branch of
Oronoque he intended to go up to Guiana; were all made known to the Spaniard
before he could get out of the Thames by King James, to whom he was enforced by
oath (before he could get liberty to go) to discover the foresaid particulars.
Upon which notice speedy directions were sent from the Court of Spain, to draw
up forces, three times as many as ours were, from Porto-Rico* Nuequo-Reygno,
and other nearest adjoining parts, to surprise them unexpectedly. Yet such was
the courage and resolution of our men, that they went up to Saint Thomas, and
took it, and in it some store of rich Tobacco; but the Spanish forces
purposely abandoned the Town, for the better defense of the mines, so that
ours could not take them, which by reason of Woods lying on every side near
unto them, with 200 Musketeers they easily defended. A more then probable
argument, that the Spaniard was then possessed of those golden mines (then
sought by the English;) else, would they not have left their Town and betook
themselves to the defense of them? And Sir Walter Raleigh in his foresaid
letter makes good proof of it, in naming the men in whose possession they
then were; and he further confidently affirms, that he was sufficiently able
to make good what he writ, by the King of Spa^nes several grants to several
persons; as also by the Spanish Register books, wherein appear the abundance
of Treasure the mines as then discovered afforded, by the great sums thence
arising yearly from the Kings fifth part. And certainly had the Spanish King
not feared, learned and experienced Raleighs future and greater discovery and
prosecution of Guiana, he would never so eagerly have pursued him unto death as
he did; which yet he had not soon effected, had it not been for his
pensioners; here, some noble ignoble English men overpowerfull with King James,
(the reputed Solomon of his time) as now they are much more with his
Successor, much inferior to his father in wisdom.

From that time to this (the English hopes being chrushed in loss of so worthy
a Commander) there has been either none or little venturing from England to
Guiana. But the Netherlands since that, have made so many yearly voyages up
the River Oronoque as far as Saint Thomas (encouraged by the great return
made from thence, not of gold but of rich Tobacco) as that some of their
skillful Pilots, were as well able to direct the best and safest way thither,
as our Watermen are able to describe the passage from Dover to London; the
very cause as is generally conceived, why (being grown so expert in that
River) they were some years since so severely prohibited by the King of Spain
to trade any more there.

You have heard of Guiana as it bordereth Westerly on both sides Oronoque, as
much as can be conveniently expressed in so short an Epitome. You shall now
hear more briefly how it lies to the East Ocean, according to the pincipall
Rivers as they fall between Oronoque and Amazon* The first great River of any
note from Winkebery, the most Southern and best navigable arm or stream of
Oronoque is Essequebe, very broad, but withal very shallow in the mouth of it
where it falls into the Ocean: It is affirmed by the natives bordering upon
both sides of it, to arise within one days journey of golden Manoa the prime
City of Guiana; but both our English and the Dutch, who have diligently
endeavored to make entrance into the continent by this River, have found it in
two or three days not passable, by reason of many great vvaterfals, three
times as high and more heady then is the fall of London Bridge. The Inhabitants
about this River, nearest to sea are called Arwaci, as barbarous but not so
inhumane and cruel as are the Caribs, who possess the more inland Country.
They are continually at war between themselves, yet both great enemies to
the Spaniard, and not to be trusted by us or any other Christian Nation when
they are able to do mischief. The soil especially about 20 miles from sea is
exceeding fertile: the Commodities are Crystal, and a kind of wood very
useful, and much desired for dying the best colors. The next River of note is
Berbice, lying somewhat above the sixth degree, the Land adjoining is as the
former possessed by the Arwaci, but is far inferior in regard of fertility,
and the forenamed merchantable Commodities. The next two Rivers, or rather two
in one is Sarname upon the sixth degree, and I^otera, that falls into
Sarname, three miles before it emptieth it self into the Ocean. The
Inhabitants hereof (being men-eaters, and very false in performing their
promises) are of all others least to be trusted; neither indeed are the
Commodities thereabout of that worth (being upon the matter only Brasil-wood)
as might invite men to venture far into the Country. Twelve miles more to the
South is Marawyny, a River of a wide and deep mouth, affording above twenty
leagues convenient passage for vessels of burden, though yet the coming up
from sea into it is very difficult: The inhumanity and infidelity of the
borderers is as great as the other, and the Commodities the Land affords of
as little worth, and therefore seldom frequented either by us or the
Netherlands. From hence more and more to the South, five other Rivers of
greater note have their fall into the East Ocean. The first is Cajana,
inhabited by the Caribs, whose fall is computated to be twenty leagues from
Marawiny, the head of it to be more then fifty from the South-west. The second
and third Cauwo and Wio, much upon the middle between the fourth and fifth
degree (inhabited by the Yayi and Shebaij) have their rising to the South-west
further into the continent. The most Southern of the five great Rivers is
Wiapoco (inhabited also by the Yayi) lying between the fourth and fifth degree
of latitude, into whose channel many little Rivers fall. The regions in
general belonging to the five foresaid Rivers, are very fruitful, temperate
and pleasant; I say in the general (for they are not in all places alike.) The
sea coasts (to omit further particulars) are more hot, but yet withal moarish,
and therefore less fruitful or pleasant. The Inland being mountainous is
colder, but yet more profitable, the ground that lies between them (both being
in some places of greater, in others of less extent) does far exceed them
both in temperature, pleasure and profit: They abound with all manner of
provision for life, with Cassavi root^, wherewith the Natives (...) a kind of
bread and bear, which they prefer before those made with ours or Ind^an grain;
of both which the soil in general promises great increase. They have also
store of beasts, both for food and chase; namely, Dear of all sorts, Bores,
Hares, Conneys, Tigers, Leopards and Lions; but those that are of greatest use
for food, are their Maypowri, and Baremo, the flesh of the one like our Beef
the other like our Mutton. As for Foul, Fish, fruits, they afford according to
our Countryman Master Harcourt's relation, not much less store or variety,
then is before confidently reported to be found in the Countries bordering
about Caroly, and the other higher streams of Oronoque And though as yet there
has not been any discovery made by us, of any golden or silver mines in these
parts, yet both English and Dutch Travailers that way, affirm, they have seen
two sorts of precious stones, Jaspers and Porpheryes; of both which the Natives
infor^e them there are great store to be found in diverse hills. But this is very
certain, that few places in the world afford more variety of rich materials
for dying, or more sweet and sovereign Balsomes.

The third most Southern River in comp^ssing Guiana, is that of Amazon, so
called (not as some have conjectured, for that the Women have killed, or
expelled the Males, not admitting any society with t^em, but only for one
month, in the year, for the continuance of Procreation, but because both Male
and Female, usually go in long hair hanging down below their (...).) This
great River is observed to vent it self, by so many arms or streams, far
distant the one from the other no less then six degrees, viz. from the River
Arowary, lying above Cape de Noordneere, upon the third degree of the North
Latit^de, unto the River Ta^ieuru, as many to the South beyond the Equinoctial.
Yet because the discovery as yet made, (or at least made known to us) of the
several f^lls of this great River are small and confusedly delivered. I shall
reserve the deseription of them, and the regions adjacent, with the condition
of the Natives, to my next Book, as having so near intercourse and respect to
So^th America.

I h^ve done with (...), my d^scription must now proceed with the co^tinent and
Islands adjoining where I (...) they lie Westward from the Island Granada, by
the America M^d^terranean Sea.

Margarita, Coetz, Cobana.
THe nearest parts of the continent to Granada, the most Southern of all the
Charib Islands is by Herr^^, styled Nova A^dalusia, but now better (...) by the
names of Cumana and Venesuella, a spacious Country, but not the fifth part of
what formerly has been reckoned, to belong to Nova Audalusia. In the passage
from Granada to Araya, the first part of note belonging to Cumana, about 17
leagues distant from Granada to the South-west, lie Testigos eight rocks
rather then Islands. As also, the Isle of Margarita, Coets and Cobana, not long
since very famous for exceeding store of rich pearl: I shall briefly dispatch
them, and so proceed with Cumana, which is yet more to the South-west.

The greatest and chiefest of these three Islands is Margarita, just about the
eleventh degree to the North of Cumana, six or seven leagues between which lie
the two other Cobana and Coetz. According to Herrea it is distant from
Hispalinola 170 leagues; the length of it is said to be sixteen leagues; the
fertility of the soil is said to be very good, but this the late Netherland
Navigatours deny: In former times the great abundance of pearl obtained by
continual taking of Oysters, made this Island of greatest fame and report,
insomuch as the Kings of Spain, for the better securing the Pinaces employed
in the Oyster fi^hing, b^ilt two strong Forts, the one to the East, the other
to the South.

But now the pearly Oysters, by reason of the Spanish insatiable and
unseasonable taking of them, do upon the matter utterly fail, the Island is
of small note, and less resort: The chief Fort of it was taken and demolished
1626 by Heredices the Dutch Admiral, who carried from thence eleven pieces of
Ordnance.

The other two Islands Cobana and Coetz, which fall between Margarita and
Cubana, are but small ones, and at this time of as little regard, though
formerly of great esteem with the Spaniard for the great store of pearl they
afforded: It is ^redibly reported that for many years, the Kings fifth patt,
which was imposed upon the Traders, came in Cobana only to no less then 15000
Ducats yearly.

Cubana and Venezuella.
ANd now to the continent: The first place of note in Cubana, is the promontory
of Araya, in the same parallel of longitude to the West end of Margarita, but
distant in regard of latitude to the South six or seven leagues: Upon the
winding in of this promontory, between it and the gulf Cariaco, which for
many leagues is extended into the continent, are found large pits of excellent
and durable salt; of which the Dutch made great use, until many of their men
were there unhappily surp^^ed and crue^ly cut off by the Spaniard: Since which
time, the better to debar them and other Nations from supplying themselves
from thence with that most necessary commodity, he has built a very strong
Fort.

On the west side of the gulf two miles distant from Sea* is Cumana, a pretty
large Town; from whence the Land beginning to t^rne again to the North, has
besides others these four safe and convenient Havens, Bordones, Saint Fayths,
Commonagot, and Oychyre. From which last and most Western part Oychyre unto
Cape Salinas, the most Eastward, near Bocco Del Draco where Cumana begins,
are at least seventy leagues: The breadth of it according to Spanish Authors, in
most places is forty leagues unto the South: In former ages it was well stored
with Natives, of which the tenth part are not now to be found; the Spaniard
having several occasions to transport them elsewhere, and to make unmercifull
execution of them.

It should seem by the long stay and large preambulations* that Ortelius and
Sedenus two Spanish Comanders made in this Country, that but small store of
gold and silver is to be found here; neither is there any great provision of
sustentation for life* except it be of Fish, Fowl and honey, with which it
abounds. Over against the West end of Cumana, a degree remote to the North
lies Tortugas and Blancas, distant five leagues one from the other, which for
that they afford little el^e but Hogs and Goats hard to be taken, being
overrunne with exceeding sharp briers and thorns are seldom gone unto.

The next part of the continent bending to the Northwest is Venezuella, a ^ar
greater and r^cher Country; It consists of many Provinces* and has in it
many Spanish Towns and commodicus Havens.

The soil in general is so fertile, as it affords two crop^ yearly; the
Pastures and Meddowes thereof are so many and ^o rich as they plentifully
sustain great store of wholesome Cattle as well Neat as other: The great s^ore
of Cow and Ox hides usually brought from thence sufficiently prove the same:
It is also generally reported to afford in diverse Provinces good store of
treasure, especially gold of the best sort.

Before the coming of the G^rmanes into this Country (to whom the Emperor
Charles gave it, in regard of their great service against the Protestants) the
Country was full of Inhabitants; but by reason of the covetousness and cruelty
of those Germans, whose intent was not to plant, but to make spoil of the
Natives, they were well nigh utterly rooted out, and are not now much increased
by a latter possession of the Spanish, but Tigers and other wild beasts have
overrunne it. Spanish Authors make mention of several Provinces belonging to
Venezuella, but they do not so clearly prescribe their several limits, as is
requisite. Therefore proceeding in my discourse, according to my usual method,
in following the Seacoast, I shall briefly acquaint you with such Spanish
Towns as are near adjacent to the Seacoast, or near upon the same degree of
longitude, though far distant in regard of latitude from North to South,
which is the breadth of the Country.

The most Eastern promontory of Venezuella is Cordeliera, within five miles of
Port de Guaira; whence within fifteen miles is the strong Tower called
Cara^as* and from thence within two miles is Blanco, all convenient harbors
for ships: Then follow Tur^ane and Burburate two other commodious and safe
Havens, the former whereof affords good water, and is distant from Blanco
thirteen miles; the other store of salt, and is remote from the said Blanco
fifteen miles: Within the Land above two leagues from the Seacoast lies
Carvaleda, a Spanish Town of some note, and from thence about four leagues is
Saint Iago a greater Town, where the Governor of those parts does usually
reside. From Port Burbarata about seven leagues within the continent directly
to the South, the Spanish of latter time, has built Nova Valentia; from whence
fifteen leagues more to the South is Nova Zerez of a later standing both well
accommodated with wholesome provision in a competent measure: From Zerez to Nova
Segovia, another Spanish Town directly to the South is twenty leagues; it
joyneth upon the River Bariquicemet^, which falls after a great circuit of
ground into the River Oronoque: the Country hereabouts is very barren but the
mountains with which it is surrounded are conceived by the Germans (who built
that Town) to be well stored with gold, and this opinion of theirs is upon
good grounds strongly confirmed by others of better judgment who have written
of those parts. Tucunio that is exceedingly commended for the sweetness of the
Air, the temperature of the climate, the super-abundant variety of victual,
and store of gold it yields, is yet eleven leagues more to the Southwest,
distant from the nearest place of the North Seacoast fifty, from Nova Granado
150 leagues; in which long passage two parts are very pleasant and fruitful,
the third very rough and ill provided.

Now to return to the Sea coast and so with relation to the longitude of
Venesuella; to survey the middle of this Country as it extends it self to
the South. Not far from Burburata lies a little gulf called Triste, from
which Port Etsave is a league distant, whence the Land beginning to wind upon
the North sea continues (for the space of 55 leagues) so to do by somewhat
proportionable gaining on the Sea: Only a little above Coro (the only City
here) the Land turning two leagues to the South, and then again twelve to the
North-west, admits a great inlet of the Sea; which falling somewhat near to
the gulf of Venezuella, laying on the other side, makes a kind of Peninsula
called Paragoana containing in the circumferance about 25 leagues: The Cape
whereof to the North is San-Roman, a promontory of great note; and between the
Southwest end thereof and the foresaid gulf, lies the great Lake of
Maracaybo, extended into the continent in length 35. (...) breadth ten leag^es
over; the mouth of it being a mile and a half wide, joined with the gulf of
Venequell; whence though the Sea daily flow into it, yet does it empty it self
by a constant ebbing.

The Islands over against this part of the continent some leagues remote in
respect of latitude; are first Bonary, near a degree distant to the North, it
is of eight miles circumferance, well provided with store of hogs and horse; as
also with one safe Haven on the Northwest end thereof, from hence 39 leagues
farther to the west, and fourteen to the North from Coro, the only City of
Venezuella is Curaca, far less but more fertile. It has a Haven on the
North, but not very safe, especially for great ships.

The last is Araba, nine miles remote from Quarac^o to the West, and eight from
Cape San Roman to the North. Let us now consider the Spanish Towns adjacent to
this Seacoast, and more remote into the Land; Coro which is built in the
foresaid Peninsula, having a Bishop seat in it, goes by the name of a City,
and is indeed the onley place of note near adjoying to Sea and chief Town of
Venezuella; it has belonging to it two Havens to the West and North; that to
the west though not very good, is far better then that of the North.

The Country round about is well stored with fish, flesh, foul and sugar
Canes: One thing it has peculiar, such store of wholesome and medicinable
herbs, as it is said to need no Physician* From Coro directly to the South,
between the North Seacoast the Lake Maracabo and near Valent^a, lies
Portilla de Carora in the fertile Vale of Carora; a large space of ground near
two leagues from the pleasant and fruitful fields of Coro, to the no less
pleasant and fruitful Vale of Carora is mountainous and unfruitful, inhabited
only by Savages, called Xizatiaras and Axaguas.

In the bottom of Maracabo is Lagana a Spanish Town, surrounded between two
Rivers with well levelled grounds, which might serve to good use being
abundantly stored with Dear, Coneys, and great variety of Foul, but that it
is overrunne with wild Beasts, especially with Tigers: Beyond which eightteene
leagues more to the South is the Province of Xuruara, and beyond that ten
leagues more somewhat near to the southeast is the Port of Guiacas; of both
which we read of nothing much worth noting; but only betwixt these and the
rich Provinc^ of Tucuio 25 leagues distant, a short passage may be had into the
great Kingdom of Granado: The south side of the Lake Maricabo is inhabited by
the Pocabuyes and the Alcohalads, two Nations of a milder temper and more
tra^table disposition then are most other Natives; both are confidently
reported to possess great riches, and a ^oyle every way well furnished for a
comfortable sustentation of life.

Terra Firma.
ANd now having finished Venezuella, we are to proceed with the next adjacent
part, called Terra Firma, as being first ^ound after the Islands; It is thought
by Cieca who has wrote of it, that it extends it self from about Martha,
which is in the eleventh degree of the North latitude, within a degree of the
equinoctial, for the space of 400 leagues.

The breadth of it (as it is taken according to the seacoast, from Cape Vela t^
Panima directly West) where it is widest does not exceed three hundred leagues:
Between which not many leagues distant from sea, though far remote the one
from the other, arise four high Mountains running the length of this Region,
and all Peru and Chyly are usually known by the name of the Andion mountains,
where they are narrowest; they are two leagues over, in most ten, in some more
then twenty; but ^he^ between these mountains lie many large well levelled
plains, which being continually watered from the many small brooks and wide
Rivers issuing from them, make many exceeding fruitful Provinces, except it be
some places where over great abundance of waters tu^neth them into Mores and
Fens.

The Climate in general is very wholesome; but in regard of heat and cold
little can be said of it in general (the mountains and the plains differing
so much) these being for the greatest part of the year somewhat over hot,
those over cold; yet so, as having recourse to both according to the several
seasons of the y^ere they prove very convenient for habitation, and are for the
most part as well stored with gold and precious stones, as any part of A^erica
whatsoever. When I have set forth so much of this Seacoast as shall be
requisite at once, I shall then by an orderly falling down with the continent,
within a degree or two of the equinoctial, particularly acquaint you with the
places where the foresaid treasure, and many other useful commodities are to
be had.

Cape Vela the most Eastern Province of Ter^a Firma is distant from ^oro in
Venezuella sixty leagues; from whence to Rio de la Hacha are eighteen, thence
to Martha thirty, thence to Cartagena five and thirty more. These three are the
only Haven Towns of note belonging to the East part of this Country, though
yet there be many other Ports and Rivers which may and do affor^ safe harbor
for shipping: Short of de^la Hacha to the East is River Ranceria; beyond it to
the West four leagues is Port Ramada; then follow the mouth of the five great
Rivers Buhio, Pera, Palamino, Don Diego and Anchon de Quag^c^icho, remote the
one from the other a league or two: Between these and Martha Port do
intervene Concha and Los Anchones two convenient Havens (though nothing
comparable to that of Mart^a) which in the year 1587 was certified to the King
of Spain by Baptista Antonella his own Geographer to be mo^e safe and
convenient for the Spanish Fleets yearly passage into those parts then
Cathagena if any considerable cost were bestowed upon it* and that merely for
want thereof, it has been twice taken by the English with small forces.

Between Martha Town and the falling of the great River Martha, which is
near about the midway Cape Agnia, and the navigable Rivers of Gayra and
Ciennagoy places of note, do intervene: So on the other side between it and
the Port of Carthagena, the sandy Island of Zamba and other shelvy places (by
avoiding the coast and striking to Sea) are carefully to be avoided, until
ships man more safely put in from Sea to Canoa* but two leagues from Carthagena.

As for the Port of Carthagena it self (were it as well provided as the
foresaid Baptista advises his Majesty of Spain to have it done, it might upon
better ground be esteemed impregnable. But for ought I can read or hear, a
strong Navy which can spare to land, but 2000 or 3000 men (where they shall
find opportunity) may take the Town and all the rich treasure in it, as well
as it has been formerly taken by our Countrymen with far less strength
when it was less^ fortified: but of this strong Port more hereafter.

From Cartagena where the Sea begins to decline from the North to the
south-west, for the space of 35 leagues until we come to the gulf of Uraba,
into which falls the great River Darion; we read only of some small Islands
as (Caramari, Bara and Tortaga) to be observed to avoid for the dangerous
access unto them, rather then for any good to be gained from them; yet there
are two safe and convenient Haven^ between them.

Hitherto of the sea coast of Terra Firma to the said gulf, where on the West
si^e the Islands of Panima, a narrow neck of the Land continues and yet
seperateth it from Nova Hispania, where the North continent begins to arise
some degrees to the North. Let us now pierce into the continent of Terra Firma,
and view it according to its several governments, with as near a relation as
we may to the foresaid Ports, whether more near adjoining or further remote.

The f^^st government takes its name from Rio de Hacha, (the first Port town
to usward) it is but of small extent, for it reaches not above eight leagues
into the continent; but stored with Spanish fruits, golden mines and precious
stones of diverse sorts; and were it not withal over-stored with wild beasts in
the field and Crocodils in the Rivers it might well be reckoned one of the best
habitations of Terra Firma: Besides, Rancheria and Ramada, which as Haven
towns I mentioned before, we read of one Spanish town called Tappia, well
furnished with Cattle. This Province is separated by the mountains of
Buritaca from the government of Martha, of far greater extent somewhat more
then 110 leagues in length from East to West, and not few less in breadth from
North to south: The particular Provinces belonging to this spacious government
do much differ in diverse respe^ts. The Valley of Tayrona seven leagues distant
to the East of Martha, and the Province of Buritaca ^ight mo^e, are fertile and
very rich in gold and precious stones, neither are they ^^oubled with overmuch
heat or cold: But the Valley of Upar wherein stands Cuidad, at the head of
the River Pomp^tao, remote from Martha fifty leagues, separated from Burita^a
though it be somewhat fertile yet is it over cold. The Land for three leagues
compass, adjoining to the Town of Martha (from which the whole government
takes denomination) is very healthful and pleasant but withal very ill
provided with victual (unless Oranges and Lemons and such like Spanish
fruits, or that the native fruits which the Pine and Guiavah trees there
plentifully affo^d) may suffice. The Provinces to the West of Martha toward
Carthagena, namely Bonda and Poziguica are much of the same condition,
healthful but not fruitful.

The rest of this government down to the South is environed with two great
Rivers (with Martha to the West, and Pompatao to the South-east) which being
remote the one from the other more then forty leagues, for the space of two
degrees of latitude North and South, until the River ^ompatao turning directly
to the West, at length falls into the greater River Madalena (for so it is
here styled) though it self also be but an arm of Martha. Now for that in so
large a tract of ground (which the long continued distance of the foresaid
Rivers sufficiently prove) no mention is made of any other Spanish Town but
only of Tenerifae, which is within forty leagues of Martha where Madalena
falls into it and Tamalameque fifteen leagues below more to the South,
bordering near thereunto, it may and is probably conjectured that here may be
found ^ood habitation.

A third government adjoining to the seacoast is Cartag^na, so called from the
chief Port town of all Terra Firma. This government is more spacious and
populous then either of the former, but withal it is in the general less
healthful and less profitable, as being for the most part either taken up
with waste unusefull Mountains, or being pestered with many fennes and bogges,
by reason of the continual overflowing of Martha and and other smaller Rivers
of their Valleys, that otherwise might be much more beneficial for the grazing
of Cattle; From the falling of that great River into the sea where this
government begins to the East, no mention is made of any Spanish town
toward the seacoast until we come to ^artagena it self, which City is
inferior to very few or none in all America. It is reported not only by
Spanish Authors Herea, Bap^ista and others, but also by the Dutch, who have
lately more exactly viewed the situation of it to be very strong; it stands
in a kind of Peninsula two miles from the maine sea which upon that coast
(unless in some ^ew channels (...)) dangerous by reason of many shallowes,
sands and shelves; the coming up to it (though no farther remote) is likewise
difficult both by water and land.

The water passages are three, all narrow and shallow, serving only for small
Vessels, and withal strongly fortified. The land passages that are as many are
very narrow made caw^y-wise so as but few can go a breast to force their way,
being opposed by several strong Forts, and ^o make their way on either side
the cawceys is impossible, being all of them so compassed with deep ditches and
unpassable bogges: And yet for want of fresh water, they continually fetch from
Galeera where the great ships ride, a great Navy may easily keep them from
thence, and so enforce them in a short time to yield for want of water. Nor is
it impossible but that this City may be taken by the water passages, if good
store of small Vessels well manned and otherwise provided shall be employed
therein.

The next town distant from Cartagena to the south-west is Toku, where great
store of precious balsome (either by distilling of it self, or by incission of
certain trees) is yearly gathered and conveyed into Europe. It is confident^y
reported by Monardes to be no way inferior, but rather more sovereign, for
the curing of many diseases, then was the balsome of Egypt and the East
Countries, in all Authors so highly commended. The Climate is much more
healthful, the soil more fertile and useful to feed Cattle, as being six
leagues from sea, not mountainous, and yet not taken up with flagges and
bulrushes, and other such like increase of Marish grounds, as are Carthagena
and the more near confines thereof.

Now to look yet further into the continent, just opposite to the government
of Martha directly to the South, from the eighth degree of the North latitude,
begins the Kingdom of new Granada, which extends it self unto the second
degree upon both sides of Madalena, more especially from the rising of the said
River to the midway before it comes into Martha, it is said to be 130
leagues ^ong, and between thirty and twenty broad. The Land is not only
pleasant and healthfu^l but generaly very rich, abounding with much treasure
and ample provision for livelihood. The most unusefull parts of this great
Kingdom, is the next adjoining to the government of Martha that is taken up
with the waste Opion mountains, that permit not (without great difficulty and
many days travail) entrance to Merida, Pamplona, Saint ^hristo^hers and other
the Nort^erne parts thereof no less wealthy then pleasant.

But then this difficult passage may be avoided* by making use of the constant
flowing of Sea into the wide mouth of Martha, which conveniently conveyeth
ships of great bulk for forty leagu^s unto Tenerif^, where Magdalena falls
into Martha, and then in small Vessels of fifty or sixty foot long and four or
five foot broad, they may with ample provision of men, victual and ammunition,
pass up the River Magdalena until they come to the rich inhabited places of
Granada: Of which the Provinces of Mus^^ and ^olyma on the East side, the
Province of Arbi on the West side of Magdalena are nearest to the Opi^n
mountains.

The Provinces to the Easterfide, in which stand four Spanish Towns,
Placentta, Trinidad, Tudela and Palma* are somewhat too hot, by reason that the
Sunbeams do very strongly reflect upon them by a continuation of exceeding
high mountains yet more to the East. And yet withal they are over moysty, the
water falling for six months in the year ^oo fiercely from those mountains
and the River Magdalena to which they border being so subject to overflowing:
The soil nevertheless does aff^r^ two plettifull Crops and feeds much
Cattle.

Neither are the mountains adjoining to these Provinces thought to be utterly
desti^ute of treasure; but certain it is, they abound with Emme^ald and Berril
stones.

In the Province of Arbi on the West side of Magdalena, over against ^lacentia,
in the sixth degree of latitude lies Senora, constantly reported to be richly
furnished with golden Mines as is Maraquita with silver Mines, standing in the
fifth degree over against Trinidad.

Near upon the same d^gree of latitude fifteen leagues to the East of
Trinidad is Tunia, a healthy, wealthy, and well provided Province for all kind
of sustentation, necessary ^ot only for life, but even for the abundance of
many delights; in which respect it is so well inhabited by the Spanish, as that
it is able to bring 200 horse into the field. And in no respect is the Province
of Bogota inferior, in which Saint Faith the Metropolis of all Granad^ is
situated 22 leagues directly to the South, inhabited with 600 Spanish Families
being the usual residing place of the Deputy, Bishop, and all their Officers.

Beyond this City to the South-east, I find mention only of one more called
Saint John's, remote near fifty leagues; for nothing much commended but for the
store of gold it affords. To the North-east fifteen leagues from Saint Faith
lies the Town Tocaymai, near adjoining upon the River Paty, where it falls
into Magdalena equal to the foresaid Provinces Tunia and Bogota in regard of
all provision necessary and delighfull, but much to be preferred in respect of
the wholesome, wel-pleasing temperature of the Climate, beside some Bathes
which by long experience have been proved right good, for the curing of many
dangerous diseases.

Having thus briefly discovered Granada, I conceive it most convenient, for the
more clear description of the next adjacent government, which is Popaian; to
begin with it as it lies on the South-west of Tocayma and Saint Fe, and as it
bordereth near upon the rising of the River Magdalena and so falls for two
degrees directly South to the equi^octiall, where it is devid^d from Peru, and
then returns back to the West rising of the great River Martha, distant from
that of Magdalena full forty leagues.

Hereby having continual referrence to the chief City (...) it self, seated
not far from the head of the said West (...), we shall the better understand
and the situation of the whole government.

The first Town of Popaian nearest ^djoyning to Granada is Saint Sebactian,
standing within three leauges from Onda the highest Inland Port belonging to
Magdalena, much frequented by the Merchants of Cartagena and Martha, in respect
of the exceeding profitable importation of the necessary Commodities of Europe
into these parts, and the transporting of abundant treasure from hence. This
Town stands from Saint Fe of Bogota in Granada thirty leagues, from the City
Popaian 35; the fields about it are fruitful, and have many silver Mines in
them.

Above the rising of Magdalena in the Valley of Ney^^, the Natives are so
numerous, as that they hitherto have stoutly defended themselves against the
Spanish, and enforced them to retire from some Towns they had built there:
Timana in the most South-west part of the said Valley of Neyva (forty leagues
from Popaian) the Spanish as yet with much ado hold; but thrive very well, by
reason of the richness of the soil to fe^d Cattle, and the abundance of
sugar and honey which it affords.

To the North-west of Timana, and as many short of Popaian, upon the rising of
the West arm of Martha here called Cauca stands Almager, in a hilly Country,
yet fertile and very rich in golden Mines. Hence the government of Pop^^an
extends it self either directly to the West or to the North. It is
convenient I first finish the Western part, as being in this book to fall no
farther to the South, which will bring us by the confines of ^eru to the South
sea of America, the knowledge whereof may much further us in the better
understanding, not only of the situation of its governments, but also of the
other parts of the North America, that yet remain to be described.

To the West of Almager about twelve leagues, begins the Valley of Mastel,
whereunto bending somewhat to the South are the Valleys of Abades and Madrigal
adjoining. Of which this only can be certainly affirmed, that they are of
great extent, full of many little Villages, and those well peopled with the
Natives, a good sign, they are not unfruitful.

Beyond these Valleys stands Pasto in the ri^h Vale of Atris remote from
Popaian fifty leagues. The rest of the Province of Pasto reaching yet fifty
leagues more to the West* even to the South sea of America is very mountainous,
in which there be many rich mines, but it is well known to be very barren
either for grain or Cattle.

The Promontaries Rivers and Havens of this large Province of Pasto, upon which
the South sea beats are Saint Mathews Bay, Cape Fr^ncis and Los Quiximires
nearer bordering to Peru.

Higher to the North where the Sea gains greatly upon the Land Eastward, are
Port Manglares, the River Nicardo and Saint John.

To return where we left to the the rising of the River Ca^ca, fifty leagues
before it comes to the North sea* where it is called Martha, upon both sides
whereof lie the better part of Popaian. From Almaguer where this great River
first springs on the East side thereof lies the Province of G^anaca, on the
West the Valley of (...), both rich in treasure and exceeding fit for the
feeding of Cattle. Between these, with the falling of the River for the space
of ten leagues before we come to the City of Popaian. on either side do
intervene two other Va^^eys Cocomici to the East and Barauca to the West, much
of the same condition with the two former.

The Metropolis of Popaian it self, stands from the Equino^tiall two degrees
and a half to the North* from the Meridian of Toledo in S^aine toward the West
seventy degrees and thirty scruples; it stands in a very healthful Climate
and fruitful soil it has two Winters and Summers, and both so t^mperate as
it injoyeth a kind of perpetual Spring and ev^ry year affords two plentiful
Crops; the fields on both sides the River Cauca are very large, affording ample
maintenance for innumerable Cattle, and incredible variety and store of most
delicate fruits, besides the first risings of the Andion mountains to the
East, and the Tamban mountains to the West, yield abundance of cour^e gold.

Abo^t 22 leagues from Popaian do^ne the said River Cauca one leag^e on the
West side of the River l^eth Cak^* a Spanish Town of great trade, in a large
fruitful Valley in some places twelve leagues wide, known by the same name,
whether great store of treasure and other ^ich Commod^ies are continually
brought from rich Peru and C^y^y, out of the south sea especially by the Bay of
Bonaventure, remote 28 leagues, which great distance of place is a great part
of it taken up with the wide rough and little inhabited mountains of Timba,
and by many boggy places, caused by a frequent fall of many waters, which make
the passage very difficult with horse; but this defect the Spanish supplieth by
the help of poor Indians, whom they cruelly enforce for five days hard
travail to bear upon their shoulders through thick and thin, through shar^e
cutting stones and piercing thorns near upon a hundred weight, and yet
affords those miserable creatures not necessary sustentation.

Between the te^i^ories of Cali and the south sea mountain, more to the
North-^est mountains is the Province Conchi, inhabited by a Giant-like people
in regard of stature, but otherwise as little to be fe^red as the rest whom the
Spaniard has driven higher into the mountains on both sides the River Cauca
or has brought into miserable slavery.

Twelve leagues on the West of Cauca from Cali lies Carapa a hilly Province,
but every way convenient for habitation.

As many more down the said River on the East side begins a far greater
Province, fifteen leagues in length and ten in breadth, in which stand^th
Cartago* between two very pleasant Rivers w^erein are found many small pieces
of gold continually washed from the mountain^s adjo^ning. Those parts of this
Pr^vince near bordering upon the lo^est banks of Cauca are very fenny*
o^ergrowne with reeds and bulrushes; and yet Cartago seven leagues remote from
that River and many other places, are constantly reported to be exceeding rich
and healthful* though yet for the greater part of the year they are usually
subject to extraordinary rain and thundering.

Between Carthago and Ancerma twenty leagues, distant almost (...) North upon
Cauca* beginning here to be better known by the name of the great River
Martha, do intervene three other Provinces on the West Copia, in which
stands Acerma of greatest note next to Popaian, distant to the North 50
leagues.

This Province in general is mountainous (except the Valley of Ancerma
pleasant and fruitful) and the adjoining Rivers falling from the mountains
afford much gold in little grains mingled with the sand thereof: Picera, Pozo
and Pancura, Provinces on the East of Martha, are of less extent, but more
level and more inhabited, and no less pleasant or profitable.

To these Provinces yet more North, toward the City of A^tioch (the most noble
part of all Popaian and nearest to usward, toward the mouth of Martha) on
either side the River do intervene to the West Cartamma, and the spa^ious
Valley of Nore, wherein stands the City Antiochia, environed with high hills,
but withal sweetly watered, with many little Rivers falling from them: To the
East are Arma and Cartamma, of which four last recited Provinces, it may
suffice briefly to know that they on either side the River are of at least
thirty leagues in length, and in most places ten in breadth, no way inferior if
not exceeding the forenamed Provinces of Popaian, either for their temperature
of Air, or fertility of soil, or the store of treasure that their m^untaines
and Rivers afford.

Panima.
THus have we passed over all Terra Firma both by sea and land except Panima
the most Western part, which is very narrow* in every place, and serves as a
neck to continue the continent of America between the North and South sea; I
shall briefly finish it having but few places or things of any great
consideration to write of it.

The length of this last government of Panima, may be taken either according to
the North Seacoast, from the aforementioned gulf of Uraba to the closing of
it with the River Viragua, (from which the most Eastern Province of Nova
Hispania takes denomination) or else Southward, as it is extended from the
River Dari^n, that falls into the said gulf and the South sea: the length in
either respect is upon due computation found not to exceed ninety leagues; the
breadth where it is widest does not exceed thirty, where narrowest, as from Port
Bel^ to Panima (would mountains and Rivers and overgrowne Woods permit the
shortest cut) it would be found fully 8. leagues from sea to sea.

My greatest care in perusing this government is to take special notice of the
Seacoasts, for besides the famous Ports, Rivers, Islands, Promontories both on
the North and South side of this neck of ground, nothing is much worth the
noting; for three parts of it lying between the River Darien and the
South Sea, are taken up with exceeding high mountains and those unfruitful
and unfit for habitation (being overrunne with wild beasts) besides the plains
and Valleys adjoining to either, though they be more fruitful yet very
unhealthfull, insomuch as though formerly they were well inhabited by
Spaniards, yet now they are for the most part deserted.

On the North from the gulf of Uraba (where I left my description of that
Seacoast) unto the River Chagre, the most Western belonging to Panima
government (not above forty leagues distant the one from the other) there are
found many safe and convenient Ports, beside other places worthy consideration.

Within the narrow Uraban sea, five leagues to the South-west of it stands
Darien, a Town after it was first raised in the year 1510. well inhabited,
but it continued not so above ten years; for the Inhabitants in regard of the
unhealthfulnesse thereof, betook themselves to Panima, the chief Town of all
the government upon the mouth of the gulf.

Where the sea begins to turn again to the North lies Port My; and then
ten leagues further Port Acla, both convenient Havens within, but somewhat
dangerous to put into, by reason of the small Islands Gorde de Pinas, and
others near adjoining. From Acla to Nombre de Dios, sometime a famous Port
Town (still a safe Haven) are reckoned twelve leagues; between which fall the
Ports of Comagra and Cativa, the Rivers Sanquo, Mays, Sardina and Sardinula.

But of all the Ports Port Belo (which is by the procurement Baptista
Antonellus, was raised out of the ruins and dispeopling of Nombre de Dios, five
leagues distant from thence) is the greatest, safest and every way most
convenient for the mutual trading of the North and South Sea, by the River
Chagre, many rich and necessary commodities of Europe being from hence
continually transported to Panima whence the gold and silver of Peru and Chily
are returned hither twice every year.

It was taken by Sir Francis Drake before the Town and Fortifications
thereunto belonging were one quarter finished: And since in the year 1601 when
it was fully finished, it was surprised with two ships and a pinnace by
Captain Parker (who found there in respect of the place) but a very small
booty not above 10000 dollers; for that within a few days before 120000 were
from thence conveyed to Carthagena.

The passage from this port Town to Panima upon the South sea is not above
eighteen leagues (and in summer time not hindered by Creekes of sea) not eight,
so that as there is no great difficulty with a considerable Navy to take Porto
Belo, and to secure the Navy there: so would it prove no long march nor any
hard enterprise to take Panima (consisting but of 600 Families, little
experienced in martial affairs and with it if the attempt be seasonably made)
five or six millions of money, if we may give credit to the foresaid
Antonellus, the Spanish Kings Geographer, or to our own Countryman Master
Harcourt.

This City (for so it is usually styled) being the seat of a Bishop and the
common residing place of the Governor and his chief Officers, stands in a
very unhealthfull Air, and no less barren soil* being almost destitute of
corn grass, and other provisions necessary for life, unless it be with
Oranges and Lemans and diverse other wholesome and well pleasing Indian Fruit.
And yet for all this it wants not store of all kind of victual, continually
supplied from other places, by reason it so abounds with treasure, in hope
whereof the Spanish Merchants make that the chief place of trading by the
River Chagre out of the North* and by the River Chepo out of the south sea:
Both which though they come short of the City, yet are they of very great use,
to bring the Merchants Commodities so near which are afterward much more
easily conveyed thither by land.

Conce^ning the land passage from one sea to the other* a most remarkable
attempt of Captain Oxenhaw (a countryman of ours) Anno 1573. must not be
forgotten* for though in the conclusion it proved not succesfull, yet it may be
a great encouragement of singular concernment to those who with greater
strength shall make the like enterprise. It was briefly thus; Captain Oxenham
(induced by the fame of the vast treasure, which fortunate Drake obtained in
those parts) provided a ship of a 120 Tun; in which having with him near a
hundred men, (the winds favoring him, he came sooner then he could well expect
on the North Seacoast of Panima) where getting as near as he could
conveniently, for the shortest cut over to the North sea; he landed his men,
drew up his ship into a cranny, where he left her and his great Ordnance,
covered all over with bows. Then he and his men taking sufficient victual,
with two field pieces, and other necessary arms, after twelve leagues march,
they came to a River which falls into the South sea, where he built a barge
45 foot long; in which he conveyed his men into an Island called the Isle of
Pearls (close by the side whereof, they who come our of the South sea to
Panima, must needs pass.) Here they closely concealed themselves for ten
days; at the end whereof they seized upon two Pinnaces coming from Peru,
wherein was little less then 200000.li. of gold and silver, besides great
store of rich Pearls they took from the Islanders; both which they might
certainly have conveyed to their ship (and so into England) had not both
Captain and soldiers in their coming back in three particulars dealt very
foolishly. First, in too sudden discharging the two Pinnaces they had taken by
whom the Governor of Panima being much sooner informed of the exploit then,
otherwise he could have been, made the more quick pursuit after them, with
twice as many forces as they had, Secondly, in casting the feathers of hens
they had pillaged over board, whereby they gave perfect notice to the pursuers.

Of the particular River they returned by, of which before they were very much
to seek. But most of all did they forget themselves in an unseasonable
contention concerning the dividing of the prize; the Soldiers refusing to
bear it upon their shoulders over the land, unless the might know how much
should come to every man's particular share; which demand of theirs being as
undiscreetly denied, the convention lasted so long* as the forces from Panima
came upon them* recovered the treasure* and cut them all off, or took them
prisoners, whom they forthwith brought to Panima and there cruelly executed,
some few escaped, whom by reason of their youth they spared. Beyond Panima to
the South Sea, are some but not many Ports and Rivers.

To the South-east is the River Chiepo, the River de Labalsa, Saint Miguels
gulf, Port de Pinas, and the River Balsas; near about which, grows great
store of timber fit for shipping, whereof singular use may be made in the South
sea.

On the South-west are two Ports, Perico and Nata, whereof the first is not far
remote, the other twelve leagues distant from Panima; from whence as being the
most Western parts of all Panima governments: I am now to proceed with the
Province of Veragua, as nearest adjoining to the West, formerly belonging to
the government of Nova Hispania, but now in the jurisdiction of the Governor
of Guatemala; since, that Province and many more thereunto belonging, are upon
the matter, exempted from the Viceroy of Nova Hispania. I might here (following
H^rea and others) fall upon the general description of the government, in
respect of the Climate, Soil and of the several commodities, and
discommodities of the same, but to what purpose, seeing it is evident, and all
Authors agree, that in particular they differ extremely; I shall therefore in
my particular descriptions of them, taking them according to my constant method
as they lie by the North Seacoast, pass through them from sea to sea* where
it can be done conveniently and as I proceed* I shall endeavou^ in all respects
to give you such account of their several qualities and conditions as is
requisite.

To begin therefore with Veragua, as it has Panima government to the East, so
Costo Rica to the West, fi^ty leagues in length* and where it is narrowest 25
in breadth, from the North sea to the South* which on both sides it is bounded.

The Soyl^ for the most part is barren, as being mountainous and full of
briers, unfit for grain and pastoring, yet very rich in all kind of metals,
especially with gold. The inhabitants are many, very stout men, and great
opposers of the the Spaniard, The first who found out Veragua was Christopher
Columbus, who at his first ariva^l found some opposition by the Nati^es, but he
soon pacified them with toys; (and as Her^a reports) for 36 brass bells he
gained 80. li. whereby we may easily guess that an a^ple return he there made
for things of very small worth.

The north Seacoast belonging to this Province affords but few good
harbors; the nearest from the coast of Panima is the River ^elen, distant from
Port B^lo 2^ leagues; near which it built the Town la Conception, where the
Governor resideth. A second is a little within the River Veragua; from which
the Province is denominated. The last a pretty large gulf called Caravaro.
Between which and Belen lies an Island ten mile^ from the continent called
Escudo, an Island carefully to be observed, in regard of the many rocks and
shelves that are about it. The Spanish inland Towns, to omit all the poor
Hamblets, possessed by the Natives are only Trinidad and Saint Faith, the one
three, the other twelve leagues remote.

From la Conception close to the South sea is Carlos, another Spanish Town
five leag^es from Saint Faith; over against which and to the East and West of
it are 20 small Islands, or rather rocks, which go by the name of Zebaco; so
as in the South sea of Veragua we read of no good Haven, but only Port G^era
near cape Maria, in the South-east corner thereof. The next adjoining Province
lying as Veragua, between both seas 40 leagues in breadth, and (if Herea reckon
right) 90 leagues to the West in length, up to the continent of Nicaragua is
Costarica, much of the same condition of the former, mountainous and barren,
but full of rich mines. To the North sea it has only Saint Hieromes Port, to
the south it has four convenient Havens, Borica, Saint Lazaro, Para, Nicora.
The inland Spanish Towns of this Province are Carthago, standing much about
the middle of it, ^0 leagues from either sea. Arames i^ within five leagues
Eastward to the South sea, and Nicora one of the aforesaid Havens.

A third Province belonging to Guatimala is Nicuragua, this as the two former
takes its breadth from sea to sea, but in a double p^oportion* in some places
eighty leagues over, though in length Westward to Gua^^mala Province it
exceeds not fifty.

The Climate in summer is ^ver hot, in winter over cold* the soil is level,
fit to feed Catte^l but not to bear Corn, Hogs, Fish, Cotton, Salt, and goodly
timber it yields great store. Herea makes mention here of a kind of Trees
called Zeybis, so mighty big about, that five men joining hand in hand can
hardly fathom one of them. The Inhabitants of this Province are much civilized
by the Spaniard, can speak their language, have learned their trades, and are
very subject unto them, the Contalles only accepted, who keep themselves in
Woods and mountains.

The most observable thing here is the lake Nicuragua, whence the Province
takes name, both in regard of its large circumference, being (as it is
reported) no less then 130 miles, it has a constant ebbing and flowing, and
though the head of it be not above four leagues from the South sea, yet in
has intercourse only with the North sea, that is in distance fifteen times
further, the falling of this great lake in no small streams, is in the midst
between the eleventh and twelfth degree of the North latitude, where the
continent again begins to extend it self for five degrees at least more to
the North, not without some turnings and returnings from East to West, from
whence taking in again with as many windings and turnings for 120 leagues to
the North-west, the Sea breaks in again between the Province of Honduras and
Yucatan; another part of the continent, which inlet of sea is called the gulf
of Honduras.

Now then (keeping my self to my proposed method) I am first to piscover the
Ports, Rivers and Islands of this North Seacoast, before I come to speak of
this or any other of the Provinces contained in the circumference of the many
long and large reaches thereof.

The first sea Port to the North of Nicuragua is called S. John's Port, the
middle stream where the said lake venteth it self. A second is called Yaropo,
between which and Saint John's p^r^* being somewhat more then 20. leagues
distant, many little Islands do intervene; in which distance there is no safe
putting in to land. Upon the 13. degree of latitude falls the river Yare,
affording a convenient haven; and a little above that latitude, though many
leagues short of it in respect of longitude, is Saint Catalina, better known
to us by the name of the Isle of Providence, appearing in the Map no more
then a small spot* not above two miles broad nor five long; yet so fertile and
so well accommodated with all provision* as for these many years last ^ast, it
liberally sustained more then 1000. English men, until the Spaniard fearing
their over near approaching to these parts, where the usual passage and
constant receipts of all their treasure was (I mean Cartagena, Panima, and
Porto Belo in Terrafirma, and Havana in Cuba) after many assaults displanted
them; which seems to me, (all things considered) a great wonder, they did not
long before put their full strength upon it; and it is no less to be wondered
at, that they should offer, and perform such reasonable quarter, not only as
is constantly reported, of permitting them, but also in supplying them with
shipping, to transport them into Virginia, New England, and other English
plantations they neither fear, nor regard as being far remote. Above Yare
half a degree is the gulf of Ni^uesa, a good harbor for shipping* and ten
leagues further, somewhat about the 14. degree is the promontary of Gracias a
Dios bending to the East, from whence the Continent winding in again to the
West for near 50. leagves, many pernicious Isl^nds, very remarkable for the
shipwreck of many, do intervene the Islands called Viciosas lying upon the
15, the Isle of Baxos upon the 16, and Millan upon the 17 degree of the north
latitude; and that which makes the passages to these parts more dangerous, is
that to the East and North-East, they are beset with Roncador, Serrana,
Seranilla, Sancanilla and some other rocks, besides many shallowes and sands
that require expert Pi^ots to avoid them* yet by Gods providence and their care
they may be safely passed. Between the Islands Viciosas and Baxos are two
Bays* Honda and Cartago, to both which the coming up is sandy and shallow.
Near adjoining to Boxos is Cape Camoron, then 20. leagues further to the west
is Cape Honduras, between which (the land bending like a bow to South and then
to north again) falls the goodly river Guiapa, whose streams by the small
pieces of gold they bring with them, evidently declare the Mountains adjoining
to have store of such treasure.

To the North of Honduras, where that gulf begins, begin many Islands
known by the name of the first and chief (...) harbors, and worse coming in
unto them, they are in most places ten leagues from the continent, and follow
one upon another for at lest 30. leagues to the south-west.

In the middle space whereof Xagua a good haven falls into the sea from the
continent: from whence for full 30. leagues unto port Cavallos, on the West of
the pleasant River de Sal is found no safe harbor, b^t Cavallos is an
exceeding convenient and safe harbor against wind and tempest, yet not so well
fortified, but that it was twice taken easily by our Countriman Master Newport
Anno 1591. and by Sir Anthony Sherley 1616. This gulf de Honduras or Guanios,
(for it is known by both names) does yet run for forty leagues further, though
still narrowed more and more, by reason that Yucatan another part of the
continent being a very long and large Peninsula, falls in and joyneth with
the Province of Honduras; in the narrowing whereof lie the River Vlva, Cape de
Puntas, and Port de Higueras; just in the breaking off another smaller gulf
called Dulce. I shall now from the discovery of the Seacoast fall to describe
so much of the continent as lies between Sea and Sea.

Upon the North sea for 150. leagues does the Provice of Honduras extend it
self, in breadth here and there more or less then 80. leagues, in the general
a very rich and goodly Country; for the Valleys thereof afford three crops of
their Indian grain, and two of our wheat, besides a continual supply of
grass, so as it is ever green, flourishing, and affords great store of
provision for man and beast.

The Spanish Towns belonging to this Province, taking them as I proceed in my
description from East to West; are first Trugillo, a league remote from sea,
standing between two Rivers, whereunto belongs a port strongly fortified by
nature and art; which though it was taken by our English Anno 1576. yet was it
in vain attempted by them, under the command of Sir Anthony Sherley, in the
year 1596. the region about is temperate both in winter and summer, the soil
exceeding fertile, maintaining great store of Cattle, grain and great variety
of excellent fruit: The Vines here in great abundance bring forth Grapes in
wonderful plenty twice a year. The Town lies to the North-east of port
Cavallos forty, of Validolid the chief City fifty leagues. A second Town
thirty leagues to the south of Trugillo is Saint George, in the rich Valley of
Olancho, whereunto the hills adjoining are lately found so full of gold mines as
that the Governor of Honduras and Nicuragua have often drawn their Forces
into the field and fought for it, until the King of Spain was pleased to
decide it, by adjudging it a parcel of this Province.

The chief City forty leagues to the south within the Land is Valadolid, where
the Governor and his Officers, a Bishop and his Cathedral men reside, very
amply provided for with all kind of provision that the goodly Valleys near
adjoining afford, and greatly enriched by the gold and silver mines there
lately discovered.

Upon the North sea in the Valley de Naco, every way comparable with Valadolid
but for unhealthfulnesse; four leagues severed lies the Haven Town de
Cavallos in the fifteenth degree of latitude, and between them somewhat more to
the West are two other Spanish Towns that yield many mules and great horses,
as does also the Country about Cavallos (whence the name is taken.)

The government of Guatimala and two other small Provinces* Saint Salvator and
Gulpho Dolce, lie one after another to the south of Honduras toward the south
sea, in few places less then thirty leagues in breadth, in respect of
fertility, ^^ore of Cattle and grain, they come not far short of it* but
much in regard of healthfulnesse and the temperature of Air and season; they
being in some months over hot, in most infested with too much rain, and which
is the usual consequence thereof with incredible multitudes of pestilent
Flies, Bees, Horners, scorpions, and other though small yet deadly venomous
serpents.

Besides these provinces, especially Guatimala so properly called, is
extraordinary subject to continual Earthquakes, horrible thundering and
lightning and which is much worse, to usual breaking out of flames of fire,
from the sulpherous mountains* which sometime cast them down in huge lumps to
the overwhelming of the Towns and Villages adjoining; but never are these
strange breakings out of fire, but to the great annoyance of man and beast, by
the loathsome smoke and vapors that necessarily issue upon them, not without
much spoil of Corn and fruits, by reason of many thousand quarters of ashes
which at those times are thickly dispersed round about.

The chief City in these parts is Saint Iago de Guatimala, fourteen degrees in
la^^tude, 93 in longitude: From the Meridian of Toledo in Spain, to East
whereof stand Trinidad and Saint Salvador two other Spa^i^h Towns; the first
36. the second forty leagues remote, both very convenient for trading out of
the South Sea.

From Nova Hispania and Peru, by the port Acaxulta in a very safe channel, and
not above five or six leagues from sea, the two most Eastern Towns of
Guatimala are Saint Miguel, 22. leagues from Saint Salvador, within two leagues
of Fonseca Bay. Then Xeres eighteen leagues farther, near to the lake of
Nicoagua; which having a short recourse to the sea, affords a good Haven
called Port possession; between which and port Guatimala, that goes up to
Saint Iago for the space of eighty one leagues; there are no other considerable
Havens then have been mentioned.

The Havens and Rivers about Guatimala to the West, that we may here make an
end with the South sea coast belonging to this government, are ^oatlam,
Govetlan, Colate Haziaclan, belonging to Soconusco, a Province extended upon
the south sea, westward thirty leagues in length, and as many in breadth toward
Verapaz and Chiapa, two midland Provinces to the North: The Inhabitants thereof
not being very many, and having few Spaniards among them; live plentifully* by
reason of the great store of Cacao, a fruit like Almonds, which the Merchants
of Nova Hispania fetch from thence at good rates* as being of great use and
high esteem as well with the Spaniards as Natives inhabiting those parts, both
to eat and drink, but especially to drink, it yielding a liquor exceeding
wholesome and pleasant, with some composition they use makes it no way
inferior to high-country white wind or Shery-sack. Out of this Cacao commodity
in this little Province* the King of Spain has for tribute every year at
least 400 frayles of them, every frail being worth thirty silver Royals.

The next Province to the North of Soconusco, and the South of Yucatan, having
Chiapa Province, to the West is Verapaz, so called, for that the Natives came
freely in upon the preaching of the Gospel, but having so little profited
therein* under such covetous corrupt Tutors, as they know scarce any thing
aright of Christrianity, and would be very glad they could be freed from such
tyrannical Lords. The middle part of it is somewhat temperate, the residue is
extreme hot and extremely perplexed with Mosquitos* usually swarming in other
parts of the Indies which are hot and over moist as these are. Neither does the
soil (by reason of eight months rain, which most an end happens
continually) yield any store of Indian wheat, but little or none of ours; and
yet it brings forth abundance of medicinal herbs, beautiful flowers* and
trees most useful and profitable both for nourishment and building* but
withal it harbors many wild beasts; as Lions, Tigers, Bears, but very few
for the use of man. Nor yet (so far as I hear) have gold or silver mines
been here discovered by the Spaniard.

The most Western Province of all Guatimala, bordering upon the East of Nova
Hispania is Chiapa, full forty leagues long, and almost as broad every place
from South to North, in regard of over great heat and moisture* of great store
of wild beasts and dangerous serpents much like Verapaz; as also in respect of
the innumerable profitable Trees there, the fruit whereof affords toothsome
and wholesome nourishment, the bodies special timber, the gum (which in great
quantities come from them) precious Balsome and sweet odours, the bark, gum
and fruit very rich materials to dye colors of the best esteem with us. But
herein it far exceeds all the Provinces of Guatimala, in that being
competently provided with grain, it does breed and maintain great store of
excellent Horses, Kine, Sheep and Swine, besides incredible variety of the best
Fish and Foul, only for Mines it must give place to Honduras Province.

Thus I have passed through the government of Guatimala; I am now come to make
entry upon those Provinces that appertain to the royalty of Nova Hispania: For
the right surveighing whereof, I must of necessity again fall to discribe the
Seacoast* so by surrounding in Yucatan, a long and wide Peninsula, save only
in the neck of it where the gulss of Honduras and Mexico come nearest together
(of no less then 25. leagues compass) the sailing on either side of it is
dangerous, by reason of many scattering Islands, rocks shelves, and sands. From
the coming up again of Honduras gulf on the South-east of Yucatan to the
North-east, these are very carefully to be avoided, as most pernicious, Elbob,
Lamanary, Zaratan, Pantoia, Quitazuwenho, which last signifies as much as, now
take heed; It lies in the eighteenth degree of latiude, a full degree more to
the North then Guanima Isle, just opposite to cape Honduras, but much of the
same longitude with them; so as though the gulf on either side toward
Yucatan, or Honduras be not safe to sail in; yet by the channel thereof more
then twenty leagues broad in most places is safe and navigable. From
Quitazuwenho to Cape Conche, the most northeast of this Peninsula, and nearest
to the Island Cuba are near seventy leagues, between which comes the Island
Coznmel and many petty Islands called Mucheres.

The North and North-west Seacoast of Yucatan are no less dangerous then the
North-east; as being also full of sands shallowes and rocky Islands, known by
the name of Alcranes and Negrillos: which though they be far remote from land,
yet they make the passage dangerous to come into the best ports of Comill on
the river Ligartes on that side, being themselus not very good.

From hence to the west, the continent falling down again more and more to the
South for three degrees, viz. from above 21. to 28. all this coast (as the
other) by reason of the Isle of Sands Desconsidla and Triangulo and some others
no less sandy, but much more rocky, is hazardous and make Cical and Telichaque
(the best Havens hereabouts) to be less frequented. Neither yet is the Sea
channel here adjoining so deep and free from sands, as is safe for ships of
any great burden to fail in. The land within this long and wide Peninsula, is
for the most part neither temperate nor healthful, save only in the
mountainous places, nor so much inhabited but only to the North end of it,
where stands Merida the chief Town about twelve leagues from sea, the
Governor and Bishops abode, accompanied with 100 Spanish Families. Another is
Vallidolid, 31. leagues to the East of Merida, where a great Monastry of
Franciscans stands, and where the Natives of the region adjoining are said
far to exceed all others, being at least 50000.

A third Town fifty leagues to the West of Merida is Campeche, where Captain
Parker our Countryman, Anno 1596. with some hazard but greater honor seized
(in sight of all the Inhabitants) upon a ship laden with gold and silver and
other rich commodities, and brought her away, though they made all the
resistance possibly they could.

A fourth Town is Salamanea, in the neck of this Peninsula, not much differing
in respect of longitude, though nearer a degree in latitude from port Real; it
belongs to the Province of Tabasco, of which I will say no more, but that it
is very slenderly inhabited though yet it be of large extent, no less then
forty leagues, bordering upon the North-sea called the gulf of Mexico, as many
in breath toward the South adjoining to the province Verapaz and Chiapa. The
reasons whereof given by Authors are, that this Country is as intemperate and
unwholesome as any other thereabouts, and affords but slender sustentation,
and but few Merchantable Commodities. The only Spanish Town in this Province
is called Senora Victoria, in remembrance of the great Victory here obtained by
Cortesius, the over prosperious, because the over cruel subduer of this and
all the Country hereabout.

The next Province to the South is Chiapa, much upon the same breadth and
length; whereof also little is to be said, but that it is a more pleasant and
healthful, more abounding with the rare, though usual fruit of Nova Hispania;
and which is Neat, Sheep and Swine the horses are of such an excellent breed as
they are sent for as far as Mexico, the Metropolis of Nova Hispania, no less
then 200. leagues distant. Here are likewise many Eagles and other Fowls of
prey, that now live upon such wholesome and toothsome Foul as may be better
employed for man's sustentation, and by their means more easily taken. Ximenes
makes mention of one monstrous Bird, having one foot like a Goose, and the
other like a Faulcon, that lives by prey taken both in the water and Air.
There are in Chiapa many Natives distinguished by the names of Zeques,
Zeltales, Quelcnes and Secaulands, and among either of these there are many
Villages well inhabited. The only Spanish Town of note is Cuidad Real,
seventy leagues to the North-east of Guatimala, and as many from Senora in
Tabasco.

From Chiapa westward follows the Bishopric of Guaxaca whereunto the
Provinces Misceca, Tucepeque, Zapoteca and Guazacoalco are annexed, which take
up all the continent between both seas. From the great River Guazacoalco unto
the River Alvarde on the North side, distant the one from the other fifty
leagues.

As much more from Tecoantepeque a small port, to Tequanapa a safe Haven in the
wide and deep River Onatepec, between which lies the famous port of
Agutulco, taken with much treasure by Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1578. and by
Captains Candish 1586. This Bishopric with the Provinces annexed are in the
general (though mountainous) very fertile and healthful, but the Valley of
Guaxaca (that Crotesius the Conqueror of this Country and the regions
thereabout chose for his inheritance) does exceed imagination in regard of
fertility both of grass and Cattle, Corn and pleasant fruits, Fish and
Foul. Besides that it contains in it many gold and silver mines, much
Chochaneel and Silk, strong incitements to make it so fully inhabited as it is,
both with Spaniards and Natives; the Natives being reported to exceed 150000.
And though Mistica and the other annexed Provinces, be not every way so
beneficially accommodated, yet are they so well provided with necessaries,
streams abounding with golden oar, small pieces of gold washed from the
mountains, and other Merchantable Commodities, that they also are well stored
with Inhabitants; of whom this is very remarkable, that they use the Jewish
Ceremonies in particular, Circumsicion, which they* affirm to have received
from their Ancestors.

The chief Spanish Town there is Auteguera standing in the heart of the
aforesaid incompararable Valley Zapoteca* (and Nixapa two other Towns, fall
short of it full twenty leagues, the one to the North-east the other
South-east:) Agaculco a great Haven town upon the South sea stands directly
to the South somewhat more then thirty leagues. The Bishopric of Tlascula is
next to Guaxaca more to the North-west, though extended also through the whole
continent from sea to sea, no less then 100. leagues in length* in breadth to
the South Sea but 18. where we read of no Haven of note but to the North-sea,
here called the gulf of Mexico, being full 80 leagues; there fall many Rivers
convenient for ships to harbor, lade and unlade; as namely, the Rivers De
Banderas and Zempoal, Almeria, Saint Peter's, Saint Paul's and de los Cazon. The
first Banderas, being within five leagues of the famous River Alucrado in
Guanaca: The last not above three leagues from the River Panuco in the Province
of Panuco; which two differ full sour degrees in latitude; but the only ports
of note and now of use with the Spaniard are Vera Cruz and Saint Iuan-Uullua,
both very convenient and strongly defended, but the latter as being somewhat
more healthful, and coming up to the Town with sufficient water to bear
ships of greatest burden, is at this prefect of greatest employment; and
therefore every day more and more fortified by the Spaniard. Sir John Hawkins
in the year 1568. came into this Haven, where he found 22. Spanish ships
richly laden, which though he might have certainly seized upon, yet he
condiscendered to mean conditions, whereof the chief was the victualling of
his ships; yet neither that nor any of the other were performed, but they with
a new Navy from Spain falling upon him unexpectedly after agreement made, put
him so to it, as he had much ado unvictualled, with two ships only to escape,
and for want of provision was enforced to set 100 of his men on land who all
perished, either by the inhumanity of the Savages who killed and eat them, or
through the cruelty of the Spaniard, who to revenge themselves under the
prentence of Religion put them to death.

This large Bishopric of (...) with the Provinces annexed do (as others)
differ much in respect of temperature and fertility, the temperature and
fertility arising not so much from the farther or nearer approach to the
Zod^acke as from the mountains and Valleys, the mountainous parts in many
places, eight leagues over being temperately cold and less fertile; the
Valleys (whereof here are many) Achisco and Saint Paul's being chief,
exceedingly fruitful but over hot: I make no question but that here also are
some rich mines, though as yet few have been discovered. But of this I am well
assured, that the Native Inhabitants are here more then usually to be found in
any place, whose conversion to the true knowledge of Christ, ought in the first
place to be considered by us.

The Spanish Towns of note here (take them as we pass from East to West) are
Sigura, and the two Haven Towns (of which I spoke before) all three strongly
and statety built, as also well provided with pleasant and profitable fields
round about them. In the Bishopric it self stands Rubla los Angelos, the
Valley of Altisco, inhabited with 1500. Spanish Families now the chief City
where the Bishop resideth. 22. leagues from the Metropolis of Nova Hispana, and
within a little of the twentieth degree of North latitude; between which Mexico
more to the North-west intervene Guaxacing and old Clascala, from whence all
the government has its name.

And now we are to come unto the heart of Nova Hispania, even to the great City
Mexico, the center of the Archbishopric (from whence it is denominated) and
upon which government (under the command of the Victory) all the rest depend.
As it lies to the West of Tlascula, so it has to the North the wide Province
of Panuco, to the West and North-west Mecoacan, of as large extent; the length
of this Archgovernment is taken from the Inland confines of Panuco to the
South Sea, where it is in breadth but eighteen leagues, though yet to the North
it be reckoned at sixty: In which large tract of ground there are many petty
Provinces, now known rather by their names then Dominions: It may therefore
suffice only to name them with some small touch of what they have in peculiar.

To the North of it are Lateotalpa, wherein lies the rich silver mine of
Puchuca, fourteen leagues from Mexico. Then Meslitlan, a Country abounding with
Alum and Iron: Then Tula, whereunto belongs another silver mine called
Guaxana^o, sixty leagues remote; all three well provided of all necessary
provisions for life, and affording many Merchantable Commodities.

To the North-east the Provinces of Panpautlat and Tup^dx, are neither
healthful, by reason of the excessive heat, nor much inhabited in regard that
lying so level with the sea, the many creeks which come from thence makes the
Country adjoining barren and unusefull, fit only to breed innumerable swa^^es
of Musquitos, a kind of pestilent flies, which as they are rise in many other
places of the West Indies, so are they here exceeding troublesome to the
Inhabitants.

The lake of Mexico in the surrounding bosom whereof the City stands to the
North, being more then eight leagues in length, and in most places five in
breadth, is on every side well planted and well inhabited: Culuala as is
reported consisting of 20000. Families* Yztacapalpa of 10000. some others 4 or
5000. A strong argument to believe the regions round about to be exceeding
fertile. Eight leagues to the South of Mexico beyond the lake is Zalateco,
where is a plantifull silver mine. As are also Tasco 22, and Zumpango 40.
leagues to the South. Beyond which yet more to the South, eighty leagues, from
the Metropolis somewhat above seventeen degrees of North latitude lies
Acapulco, the most famous port belonging to the South Sea.

Of all America concerning the City Mexico it self, it may suffice to know that
it is the greatest and richest of all this new World, standing as was formerly
noted, upon the North side of the lake, about the twentieth degree of latitude,
and according to Herrea 130. in longitude from the Miridian of Toledo, no less
then 1740. leagues distant the one from the other, it consists (according to
the relation of Cortesius) who first conquered it) of three streets, whereof
the least to the West is a mile and half; a second to the North is three; the
greatest to the South is full two leagues in length, it is credibly reported to
be now inhabited with 4000. Spaniards, and 3000. Natives, a small proportion in
respect of what was formerly related. But then it is now far better built and
beautified, with a stately Cathedral, many Churches, Monasteries and Schools
for learning.

The temperature of this City differs little from the regions adjacent, in
the moist months annoyed with too much rain, in the dry (which are November,
December, January, February and March) much more infested with dust, that being
raised by sudden whirlwinds, gets up into their nostrils and produces many
diseases, especially Fevers.

There are yet two other things here very observable: First, that this great
City, either through the negligence or avararice of the Viceroy and his
Officers; in not dispending what was yearly allowed for repairing the mounds of
the lake, was in the year 1629. miserably overflown, to the drowning of many
thousand Inhabitants, and to the loss of the greatest and best part of their
household stuff and other goods, which were either driven away or corrupted by
the waters.

A second thing here to be noted, is that this* last year (as it was
constantly reported in London) the Viceroy of Mexico and with him all Nova
Hispania were revolted, and in open Rebellion against the King of Spain; which
if it shall (as yet it is verily believed) prove true, it will be of high
concernment to this Nation or any other, into whose hearts it shall please God
to put an effectual desire of dispossesing the Spaniard of his usurped
stewardship. so unfaithfully employed (in respect of the fincere promoting of
the Gospel in the purity thereof) and so tyrannically exercised, in regard of
incredible oppressions, rapines and murders there (as their own Authors
confess) inhumanely committed by them.

Now for the two other greater Provinces under the command of Mexico
government: Panaco to the North, the Mechoacan to the South-west: I will
briefly set down so much as is of any concernment to be known.

That part of Panuco which is said to be both in length and breadth fifty
leagues; toward the Archbishopric of Mexico is very habitable and fertile,
and in times past of great note, for silver mines (that are now thought to be
near exhausted.) But the other part which bends to the North-east for fifty
leagues to Florida, so far as it is yet discovered, is found overgrowne with
woods, and barren. The Spanish Towns here not greatly inhabited beside Panuco
it self (by them called Saint Steven) are Saint Iago, 25. leagues to the West,
and Lewis de Tampice, eight to the North, not far from the gulf of Mexico.
The most western Province belonging to the Mexico government is Mecoachan,
lying between Mexico and the Provinces of Galaecia, bending into the continent
toward the North sixty, and being bounded to the South, by the South Sea full
80. leagues: whereunto belong the Port town called Zacatulca, thirty leagues
from Acapulco, then Saint Iago and Malaccan 50. more from thence to the
North-west. There are belonging to this large Province two other little ones
Taximaroa within 30. leagues of Mexico, and Colima to the South-west, upon the
confines of Galaecia, 50. leagues from Valad^lid the chief City of Mecoachan.

This Colima is constantly reported to be very healthful, apt for grain and
Cattle, but abounding with the choicest fish and fruit, and not without some
gold mines, though it has more brass (which is there so common) that since
the Spaniards coming thither, they make all those instruments of brass that
we usually make of iron. And though this South-west part be the best of all,
yet is there none (unless high to the North not yet so fully discovered) but
is as rich, and every way as convenient to be inhabited.

Besides Valadolid (which the Natives call Guagangareo, standing upon a great
lake as big as that of Mexico) there are many other Spanish Towns of note.
First, Leon very famous for the golden mines that have been found about it.
Then Salaya, St. Miguell and Saint Philippo, up to the North both of Mexico and
Valadolid, though between them bending still Westward (all built by the
Viceroyet, many league distant the one from the other) of great use to secure
the vast treasute which is constantly conveyed from the most plentiful silver
mines of Elerema and many other (of which hereafter) against the Pocacars, the
most barbarous of all Savages, who live as wild men in Woods, and cannot as yet
be brought under by the Spaniard, though yet in has been long endeavored,
not without great loss on either side.

Galaecia.
I Am now come to Nova Galaecia to the West of Mecoacha^ bounded to the West
with the sea of California; but to the North and North-west, though large and
spacious Countries are discovered, yet it is concluded by the learned in this
kind, that there rests much more to be discovered.

This government has annexed unto it diverse other Provinces, Guaidala^ara,
Xal^sco, Zacatecas, Chiametla, Biscaia; as also California, C^bola, Quivira and
Nova Mexico; of which when I have briefly spoken, you have all that I thought
fit in so short a compendium to communicate touching the Northern America.

Guadalaira the principal and most Southern Province of Galaecia, is bounded
to the East, with some parts of the Provinces of Mexico and Mecoachan, to the
West with Xalisco; to the North with Zacatecas, where the most plentiful
silver mines are thought to begin; but of late it is found that about
Guadaliarae the chief, and indeed the only Town here, there are more
plentiful silver mines, ^ere they as the other so well searched, which for
want of men they have not as yet been discovered. And it is further to be
observed that this inland Province is for temperature and fruitfulness in most
respects second to none. Xalisco is to the West of Guadaliara, upon that
Sea-cost called Mare Pacificum, that is, the still sea. The only thing of
observation here is an herb, which the Native call Curcas, highly extolled by
Monardes the great Herbalist, to be of singular use against most diseases.

Cametla likewise lies upon the same seacoast, but a degree or two higher to
the North: The great store of Inhabitants which Herrea mentions to have been
there, show it to be ferti^^. And Ybara, who in the year 1554. built Saint
Sebastian the only Spanish Town there, found many silver mines and of late
more have been discovered.

Culacan a degree more to the North, bending to the West and coasting upon the
foresaid sea, was found out by Nonnius Gusmanus, who Anno 1531. did build a
Town there called Del Espar^u Sancto. This Province (as the former) is very
fruitful and rich in silver mines; the women here are reported to be very
comely and beautiful, and to go modestly attired, a thing not usual in these
Countries.

Cinoloa yet four degrees further to the North, in the full extent of it
toward the West was discovered by the same Gusmanus; but I do not read of any
thing (which after his long travails and search) was worth his labor: The
maritimate places belonging to these Provinces in North latitude, of no less
extent then from the 19. to the 27. degrees, are Cape de Corientes at the
turning of the continent, then Port de Singuiquipaque upon the 22. degree, then
Saint Sebastian in Chametla, Saint Miguel in Culica, the Rivers de Pascua, and
Petatlan in Cinaloa, still higher to the North.

Calfornia, though it be esteemed to be of very large extent, yet has it not
been as yet discovered. Sir Francis Drake in his admirably happy voyage,
compassing the World, fell upon it (and was from such Savages as there
inhabiting more kindly entertained then he expected) he took possession thereof
in the name of the Queen of England: A good presage, that the most remote parts
being seized upon, the rest shall be possessed by us, in his good time who is
the only disposer of the earth.

The Inland Provinces Zacatacas, Topia and Nova Biscaya, lying between the
Calfornian sea and the upper part of the gulf of Mexico: Between Cullacan and
Panuco, of the same latitude upon the Tropicke of Cancer, and between Cinaloa
and the River Escondido, four degrees higher to the North, near the 28.
degree of the North latitude, contain much ground, more rich then any, in
regard of the many silver mines; but yet poorer then any, in regard of the
small sustentation they afford for the life of man. Ybara employed by Velascus,
Anno 1554. discovered in the Province of Zacatecas, five exceeding rich silver
Mines; one that is known by the name of the Province, forty leagues from
Gua^dalaira; then those of Ellerena, Saint Martin, Avinno and Dios, which last
being near to the rising of the River Panuco, at least 100. leauges from the
North-sea is somewhat fertile. The abundant store of treasure taken forth of
these rich mines may be guessed at by the 600. Spaniards, who are here
continually employed in digging, and by the tax of the fifth part, amounting to
50000l. yearly. The other mines belonging to Topia and Biscaia, E^dehe, Barbara
and Iuan, afford as much treasure and better provision for life.

Cibola, Quivira and Nova Mexico, three other Provinces, are yet much more to
the North by many degrees. From the most Southern parts of Cibola to the most
Northern of Nova Mexico not less then fifteen, so as they must needs be of a
very large extent (the longitude being considered with the latitude.) But the
relations of these most Western North parts of America are so variously
reported and so contradicted, as little can here be set down for certain.

A Friar Mark de Niza, (in a relation to the Viceroy) tells wonders
concerning the riches, the stately buildings, the most pleasant inviting
habitations in Cabola: But Vasquius de Cornado, who thereupon was presently
sent away to make a further discovery with 150. horse and 200. foot, finding
nothing worth his great travail and cost, certified so much to the Viceroy,
with an ample expression of his, and his soldiers detestation of the Friars
fained relation.

Quivira (which Gomara and Herrea likewise place in the 40. degree of the north
latitue, is by both said to be barren, and not much inhabited. The greatest
riches here that serve to feed, and cloth, and carry them, are infinite number
of beasts, resembling in regard of their greatness, our greatest horse and
Oxen, and their Pels (are said) to afford wool not inferior to some of ours.

Nova Mexico is (as I said) placed yet many degrees more to the north-west; of
which (unless I would endeavor to delude the Reader) to write little or
nothing, is to write best. Gonsalez de Mendoca in a little Narrative (Printed
at Madrill, anno 1589.) makes a strange relation of what had bin lately
performed by one Augustinus Ruyz (one of his own more hollow, then holy
fraternity) how by his powerful Preaching to Savages (not much inferious to
his Founder Saint Francis, who is said to Preach to wild Beasts) converted
instantly two great Provinces of Nova Mexico, Concht, and Tiguria. But withal
he confesses that for the killing of a zealous (it might more truly he said
of a foolish over-venturous Friar amongst men, who in regard of the knowledge
of Christ are but beasts) one Anthonius de Espiro, (I cannot think him to be
inspired with any better spirit then that of The Antichrist of Rome) made
flaughter of more then forty thousand poor, silly, ignorant Indians, who had
never learned to distinguish what their hollow Fathers were better then other
cruel, merciless, Spaniards.

He tells us of many thousands converted to the Christian faith by the
Preaching of Friars (no better inspired then was the foresaid Anthonius.) A
strange thing that a few ignorant Friars should do more in a few days, then
all their Spanish Clergy did in one hundred and seventy years in places far
nearer.

He tells us also, as does his brother de Benavides (in a more late
Narrative) of the conquering of Peri, Tebe, Queres, Tompires, and many more
sained Provinces of Nova Mexico, and of the exceeding progress of the Faith in
those parts. All which* and many more, their incredible expressions are fit to
be cast off, being in all probability but the subtle fictions of Spanish and
Popish Factors, who (like travelers) take liberty to lie; and (like Lap-wings)
to devert and carry us from those known places as are every way convenient for
habitation and yield such increible yearly Revenue to the Spanish King,
Monarch (who would be of Christendom) that all the reformed Churches of
Christendom, for the present extreamlybleed for it; (witness England and
Ireland) which are now set on fire and ready to perish (unless the great God
of Heaven and earth be pleased to put in and redeem both, from the most
detestable imaginations and most bloody contrivements of Spanish Pentioners
(the Popes grand Engeneers) who have ca^tivated our King, and seek to undo the
whole Kingdom, that they may have their yearly 3 or 4000 li. Pensions
continued.

But he that dwells on high sees and laugheth their wicked Councels to
scorn. And I doubt not but the wisdom of this present Parliament (inspired
and assisted from above, will find out these wicked men (the prime troublers
of our Church and Kingdom) and bring them here to condign punishment.

Which I have good cause confidently to believe, because they are so forward
and zealous (as appears by a late Ordinance) to propagate the Gospel in
America, the only best way to continve it here in the purity and power of it;
which is and shall be my constant prayer to God for these so extremely
distressed Churches and Kingdoms.

The Southern Description of America (God permitting) shall shortly be set
forth in another Book.

FINIS.

