A CATALOGUE OF Several sorts of Bibles, Testaments, Common Prayers, Singing
Psalms, Book of Homilies, etc. ( all Printed at the Theater in Oxford) that are
to be exposed to Sale (by way of Auction or who bids most) in smaller or
greater Numbers, and at such moderate Rates as will be manifestly Beneficial to
the respective Buyers; at the Auction-House in Ave-Mary-Lane over against the
Black-Swan near Ludgate Street on Wednesday the 10th of December, 1685.
1 BIbles for Churches, with Bishop Usher's Cronolgy; and Index; of the
Imperial Paper. 2 -- Ditto, of the Royal Paper. 3 -- Ditto, of the Fine Paper.
4 -- Ditto, of an Ordinary Paper. 5 Bibles Folio small, with Common Prayer,
Apocripha, Singing Psalms, Chronology, Index; of Fine Paper. 6 -- Ditto, of an
Ordnary Paper.
Bibles in Quarto.
7 BIbles Superfine Paper, with Chronology, Index. 8 -- Ditto, of a Middle
Paper, with Chronology, Index. 9 -- Ditto, of an Ordinary Paper, with the
Chronology, Index. 10 -- Some with Service and Apocripha, and some without.
Bibles in Octavo.
11 BIbles in Large Octavo with References, and Chronology. 12 -- Ditto, in
Small Octavo with References, and Chronology, Fine Paper 13 -- Ditto, of an
Ordinary Paper. 14 Bibles Small Octavo without Notes, Fine Paper. 15 -- Ditto,
of an Ordinary Paper.
Bibles in Twelves.
16 BIbles in Large Twelves without Notes. 17 Bibles in Small Twelves without
Notes.
Testaments.
18 TEstaments in Quarto, Paper Fine. 19 -- Ditto, in Octavo Fine. 20 -- Ditto,
in Octavo Ordinary. 21 Testaments in Octavo, Long Primer. 22 -- Ditto, in
Twelves. 23 Testaments in Octavo Brevier Letter. 24 -- Ditto, in Twelves
Brevier Letter.
Common Prayers Folio.
25 COmmon Prayers for Churches of an Imperial Paper, and Large Letter, and 39
Articles. 26 -- Ditto, of a Fine Paper, with 39 Articles and Canons of the
Church. 27 -- Ditto, of an Ordinary Paper. 28 -- Ditto, of an Ordinary Paper
for Clerks, in Quarto Great Print. 29 Common prayers in Octavo Large Fine
Paper. 30 -- Ditto, in Octavo of a more Ordinary Paper. 31 Common Prayers in
Twelves, Large Letter Fine Paper. 32 -- Ditto, of an Ordinary Paper. 33 --
Small Print Fine Paper. 34 -- Small Print Ordinary Paper. 35 Common Prayers in
Twenty Fours. 36 Common Prayers to bind with Bibles in Octavo. 37 -- Ditto, to
bind with Bibles in Twelves. 38 -- Ditto, without Reading Psalms to bind with
Bibles. 39 Singing Psalms to bind with Folio Common Prayers, for the use of
Clerks. 40 -- Ditto, to bind with Bibles or Common Prayers in Octavo. 41 --
Ditto, to bind with Bibles or Common Prayers in Twelves. 42 -- Ditto, to bind
with Common Prayers in Twenty Fours 43 Book of Homilies, with the 39 Articles
of Large Paper. 44 -- Ditto, of Ordinary Paper.
Pictures.
45 CUts for Bibles in Folio, Quarto and Octavo, containing one hundred eighty
Cuts. 46 Cuts to bind with the Testaments, in Octavo for the use of Children.
That for the farther Satisfaction and encouragement of the Persons that design
to buy a Book of the sevral abovementioned sorts of Bibles, Testaments, Common
Prayer, Bound and in Quires, some of each sort shall be exposed to view for one
whole Week, to all Persons that please to some to the abovementioned Place of
Sale.


