AN Impartial EXAMINATION AND REFUTATION OF THE Erroneous Tenants OF THOMAS
MOOR; In his dangerous Writings, entitled, CLAVIS AUREA, etc. Wherein he is
not ashamed to infinuate his being the Elias mentioned in Malachi; denies an
Hell, or future Punishment, and boldly asserts the inevitable Salvation of all
Men.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. School.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
NOT doubting but I have exposed my self to the Censure of some, for taking
notice of so inconsiderable a Writer, and endeavoring to refute Errors so
obvious to the Judgment of every person that has learned but the Alphabet of
Christianity, I think my self obliged to prefix the Reason of my undertaking
this unpleasant Task. I have been diverse times assaulted by a particular
Friend, of long acquaintance, with these pernicious Writings of Thomas Moor;
who, having been unhappily seduced thereby is grown so great an Advocate, as
not only with great Zeal to defend, but disperse them very industriously with
his own hands in diverse parts of the Country: and after some endeavors by
personal Conference to recover him (though with too little appearance of success)
he earnestly desired me to make particular Remarks in writing for his and
others satisfaction; expressing at the same time a willingness to recede, if I
or any other person could fairly overthrow those defended Principles which he
esteemed impregnable. Though I did not readily, nor the first ti^e in any
measure, comply with his request (having always had an aversion to the
Polemical part of Theology, of which, if I mistake not, the World is too full
already); yet upon further thoughts, together with the observation of T. M's.
insulting strain, because his Books were never yet answered, I did at last
endeavor it: and because some (of better Judgment than my self) have thought
my Remarks worthy of public view, as being adapted to the present Atheistical
Times, I have submitted my own mea^er Opinion to theirs in that behalf; and
heartily desire they may, through Divine Blessing, in some degree answer the
end for which they are (I hope sincerely) intended. I have not the vanity to
think them so correct, as so secure me from the lashes of captious Critics,
there having been scarce ten days passed since I first undertook thus to
gratify my Friends Curiosity; and by reason of many avocations I had not
leisure to transcribe the blotted Original, which may be some excuse for
Errata's in Printing. I hope this small Incursion into the Province of others
will not give offense, or be adjudged a breach of Privilege; as this is the
first time, so it is, at least, probable it may be the last. When a Foreign
Enemy invades our Confines, we excuse the irregularity if others, beside the
well-disciplin'd Militia set an helping-hand to oppose him; and when the grand
Enemy appears most audacious to strike at the Safety and Happiness of Mankind,
such Liberty seems to be no less allowable: Yet I can truly say, I had much
rather have sit still, and seen some other person of better capacity engaged
herein. What, with the increase of Atheism and Immorality (too much connived at
heretofore) on the one hand, and an exorbitant Zeal for promoting Parties and
Opinions on the other, that the Ancient Footsteps of Christian Piety and
universal Charity have been greatly obscured, and are in no small danger of
being totally defaced, is the sad experience of Reformed Christendom at this
day: And 'twere heartily to be wished, that all who sincerely profess and agree
in the Fundamentals of the same Faith, would forget their former and present
Heats, bitter Invectives and terms of distinction (as Deformities unfit to be
carried with them into the other World) and every one become emulous of setting
the first step toward an hearty Reconciliation: This seems to be the best
Expedient against the destructive Wiles of the common Adversary, and far more
honorable than to defend, with a partial Resolution, the utmost extent of
their several fortified Opinions in such things as themselves own to be either
merely indifferent, or, at most, not essential to Salvation. But, kind Reader,
pardon my boldness and prolixity. That the same Omnipotent Goodness which once
disposed the Original Chaos into Order and Harmony, would at last effectually
interpose to heal our manifold Breaches, and establish Peace and Truth in our
Borders, to the great Happiness of this and succeeding Generations, is the
sincere desire of

Your hearty Well-wisher, T. C.
April 10. School.
A Succinct Refutation OF THE Erroneous Tenants of Thomas Moor, In his
dangerous Writings, entitled, Clavis Aurea, Mystery of Iniquity, etc.
NOT to trouble my self or the Reader with a tedious recitation of, or
particular descant upon, the many miscellaneous expressions and tautologies in
the several parts of this bold Author's unhappy Writings, I shall endeavor
impartially, and in as few words as may be, to represent the plain scope of the
whole, and then to make some very brief Remarks thereon.

The Marrow therefore (or rather Venom) of these no less dangerous than
uncommon Notions, plainly offers it self under these particulars, viz. 1. That
all mankind (though for the most part living and dying in an hardened course of
sin and unbelief) shall be saved. 2. That Faith is given after this life to
such as die in impenitency and unbelief. 3. That there is no Hell, or future
state of eternal punishment; but by those terms, so often used in sacred Writ,
are meant only the troubles of this life. 4. That Man in his primitive
Innocence had not, nor now has, in any measure, a free will or choice in
himself: but that Adam's fall, and the greatest particular transgressions ever
since, were by Divine Predestination and compulsion. 5. That the Children of
the flesh ( Romans 9. 8.) are all men in the flesh, whether good or evil; and the
Children of Promise are the Souls of all men that ever were, are or shall be,
not one excepted of what Nation or belief soever) in their separated or
unbodied state. 6. That the Elijah prophesied by Malachy is yet to come; and
that the said T. M. (though somewhat cautious with a seeming modesty) is that
very person. 7. That this extraordinary Hypothesis had extraordinary proof of
its certainty, viz. Divine Revelation; as the Vision of a fiery transparent
Globe, a Dove, Comet, etc.


To begin with the first [ -- That all mankind shall be saved. -- ]

This T. M. grounds upon ( Romans 11. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 32.) and
from thence infers, That all the literal Jews, though avowed Enemies to the
Gospel, and dying in unbelief, are notwithstanding interested in God's Electing
Love, and consequently saved: Taking this for the clear meaning of that part of
St. Paul's Writings, and a Truth impregnable, he proceeds to confirm it by
several Arguments and parallel Scriptures. But because the forementioned
Quotation from ( Romans 11.) is, and he acknowledges to be, the only hinge or
foundation of his Hypothesis, I shall in the first place endeavor to touch
thereupon. Therefore,

First; The plain scope of the Apostle in those words, seems to be (For I dare
not assume this bold Assertor's infallible strain, than which no greater mark
of a Satanical delusion) That he would re-mind the converted Gentiles, of their
former miserable State whilst Strangers to the Gospel, and fix on them: the
most humble sense of the greatness of their present Privileges, their own
unworthiness, and the danger of ingratitude, carnal security, and a careless
using those inestimable Talents committed to their charge. And he heightens
this so necessary Momento from the tremendous Example of the obstinate Jews,
who by an exorbitant Zeal for, and confidence in the Externals of their
Religion, were justly left to so great Blindness, as to reject, oppose and
crucify the true Messiah (the End and Center of their Typical Worship) whom
they pretended to wait for. Act 13. 27.
Having a little before spent a whole Chapter in vindicating the Divine
Justice, in these great and arduous Points, against the bold and groundless
Cavils of such as would be ready to impeach it, the better to confirm the
believing Gentiles in their Title to the Privileges of the New Covenant; and
well knowing the great propensity of Humane Nature to Pride, Ostentation, and
Carnal Security, he does by diverse Metaphors, and strong Arguments, very
pathetically endeavor to fortify them against the same Stumbling Block, which
had been so fatal to the other. For though these degenerate Branches of
faithful Abraham had thus stubboruly and wilfully excluded themselves from the
fullness of their Idolized promises; yet the Gentiles being ingraffed into the
same Root or Principle of Faith with the Primitive Jewish Ancestors (who lived
and died in the true Faith of the Messiah) were not to insult over them, but
from their Fall should rather be excited to the greater caution, humility and
fruitfulness (as before hinted): and the rather, because this rejection of the
whole Unbelieving Race of literal Israel, is not to be esteemed absolute; it
being very probable that God may hereafter in his due time, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. ver.
and by some extraordinary Dispensation of his Providence, powerfully convince
and convert a remnant of them to the Christian Faith. Nevertheless he will not
thus own or respect them considered as literal Jews, but as Gospel Believers in
common with the Gentiles, both together making up the spiritual Israel, the
true Universal Church peculiarly purchased by Christ, justified solely by Faith
in him, and sanctified, governed and preserved by the happy influence and
conduct of the Holy Spirit. For all ( i. e. both Jews and Gentiles, which
include the whole World) having sinned, verse 32.
and being concluded by God in Unbelief, as to their own natural or moral
capacity, are equally made partakers of the same rich Mercy and free Grace of
God in the Gospel. This seems to be the plain drift of this profound Apostle,
as well in the forementioned verses at in the two former chapters, and diverse
other parallel places of his Epistles; and particularly of this to the Romans.
One while he tells us Romans 2. 28.
-- He is now a Jew that is one outwardly --; chapter 9. v. 6.
that all, not Israel that are of Israel --: at another place, Gal. 6. 15.
that Circumcision avails nothing --; and chapter 3. v. 28.
-- that there is neither Jew nor Greek, etc. but all are one in Christ Jesus.

Secondly; The best and safest way of expounding this part of St. Paul's
Writings, is to compare it with the general scope of other Scriptures, and
especially with the assertions of the same Apostle in his other Epistles, who
doubtless best knew his own meaning. If in this, or any other part of his
Writings he ever intended to suggest the certain and inevitable Salvation of
all men, or that the Jews dying in Unbelief and Enmity to the Gospel, are
notwithstanding elected and saved; we should not find him in the same Epistle
so pathetically lamenting their dreadful condition, as to wish himself accursed
from Christ for their sakes --; Romans 9. 2, 3.
nor giving such cautions not to treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath,
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every one
according to their deeds --; chapter 2. v. 5, 6.
nor would he have used holy policy, such condescension, such unwearied pains,
undergone such trials and hardships in the service of his great Master (much
dearer to him than his life,) Act. 20. 24
viz. propagating the Gospel, and establishing its Converts in their holy Faith
--; becoming to the weak as weak, -- etc. 1 Cor. 9. 22.
that by all means he might save some --; earnestly exhorting them so to run as
that they might obtain the prize --; and for their greater vigilance and
circumspection enforcing on them the Example of his own Spiritual Warfare, by
which he kept under the relicts of corruption, lest when he had preached the
saving Gospel to others, himself should be cast away --; 24, 25, 26, 27. verses.
nor would he have spoken of the differing Effects of the same unchangeable
Word of Life, as being the savor of death unto death in them that perish, and
of life unto life in them that believe and embrace it --: 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
nor yet mentioned any thing of the Gospel being hid from such as are lost and
judicially blinded by the God of this World --; 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
nor dehorted the backsliding Galatians from those works of the flesh
(particularly mentioned) with a positive assertion, that all those who commit
such things (with allowance and perseverance) shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God --: Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
nor would he have exhorted the Church at Philippi not to be terrified by their
Adversaries, which was to them an evident token of perdition, -- etc. Phil. 1.
28
nor told them afterward, with weeping, of some that walked contrary to the
Gospel, being Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction --:
Phil. 3. 18, 19
nor would he have comforted the Thessalonians under their sore troubles and
persecutions with a Memento of Christ's glorious Coming, to give them perfect
rest, and an entrance into the heavenly Kingdom; as also to take vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, etc. who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, -- etc. 2. These. 7. 8, 9.
It Is needless to enumerate the many concurring Testimonies of the other
Apostles, and of our Savior himself in the Records of the Evangelists, lest I
should seem too tedious in a point so clear, that the contrary Assertion (as T.
M's.) must strike at the whole scope of Scripture, and show a degree of
obduracy beyond comparison. What is urged of Christ's giving himself a Ransom
for all, -- etc. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
and being the Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe, -- etc.
chapter 4. v. 10.
shall be considered hereafter under the fourth Head.

Thirdly; This Doctrine of Universal and Inevitable Salvation, not only
subverts the many harmonious Testimonies of Sacred Writ, but the Dictates of
right Reason; inasmuch as it ranks the most pertinacious Miscreants hardened
Sinners and inveterate Persecutors, with the truly pious regenerate and
faithful Professors of Christianity. The scattered Relicts of Reason implanted
in Humane Nature, have in all Ages suggested the punishment and reward of Vice
and Virtue, among such as had not the advantage of the Divine Oracles: And some
of them, who lived in those dark Times and Places, have been so exemplary in
Moral Seize, (if Humility, Mortification, etc. may not deserve an higher
Epithete) as to shame the far greater part of Christians, though dignified with
more excellent, yea inestimable Privileges. Romans 2. 14, 15, 26, 27.
What can be more absurd than to equal a bloody Nero, (living in the height of
wickedness against God and Man, as his only Element, and dying wholly void of
remorse) with a pious self-denying (I had almost said, Divine) Seneca: or St.
Paul, that great Apostle of the Gentiles, and unwearied Instrument in
propagating the Christian Faith, with a malicious apostatizing and persecuting
Julian? If it be objected, that this Argument centers Man's Salvation in Works,
and lessens the Glory of God, who intends only the exaltation of Free Grace:
this will be found but a very weak Subterfuge. For, as on the one hand, the
beginning, progress and accomplishment of the Blessed work of Salvation in
every Soul is wholly supernatural, and none of the concurring faculties of
Man's most noble rational part, when truly subjected to Divine Grace, may have
the least claim or pretense in the matter of Justification: Romans 3. 23, 24.
Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
So, on the other hand, that Faith which does not work by Love, and incline the
Soul to sincere returns of Universal Obedience, or at least desires after it,
is but empty, fictitious and unprofitable. The genuine tendency of the New
Birth, is to breathe in the heavenly Air. Grace effectually operating will
endeavor to return some streams, at least droppings, of Love toward the
immense Ocean from whence it came. Though the imperfect Obedience of finite
Creatures cannot add to, nor their most obstinate Disobedience detract from the
Divine Perfection: yet we may as well imagine that the Scriptures of undoubted
truth, are no better than one aggregated fallacy, and designed for no other use
than to amuse the World, as that Mankind shall be saved upon terms differing
from, or contradictory to what God himself has prescribed. If he has enjoined
Faith and Obedience, and made them so essential, that without the former (which
also includes the latter) it is impossible to please him: Heb. 11. 6.
Doubtless there can be no greater indignity offered than to imagine, yea
promise, and as it were insure Salvation to all such as stubbornly persist in
Unbelief, Disobedience, and open Hostility against both the Author and the
Terms of Grace.

Fourthly; Such a Doctrine tends to the utter subversion of all good Principles
and Practices, whether Moral, Legal, or Evangelical, and rendering the World as
wicked as Satan or corrupt Nature can suggest. Though it must be acknowledged
that Evangelical Obedience is, or ought to be grounded on the ennobling
Principle of Love, rather than a servile fear of Wrath and Damnation: yet so
great is the Degeneracy of Humane Nature that there is no small need of those
terrifying Methods, as preparatory to the sweet Consolations of the Gospel:
And, indeed, most commonly the work of Regeneration begins with the Terrors of
Legal Convictions; which nevertheless do often prove abortive, either as they
grow remiss, and suffer a backsliding into former sensuality, or fix Man upon
the sandy foundation of his own feeble Performances, as the ground of his hope
and confidence. But if all Mankind shall necessarily be saved, without any
respect to their Obedience or Disobedience, Faith or Unbelief; what need then
of all the pains in Preaching, or propagating the sweet and delectable sound of
the Gospel; or of the care, study, zeal, or endeavors about Religion in the
World? To what purpose did Christ leave that clear and positive assertion. That
except a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God --? John 3.
3.
or enjoin us to enter in at the strait Gate, etc. or tell us, that wide is the
gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go
in thereat --? Mat. 7. 13.
What need of seeking first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof
--? Mat. 6. 33.
of becoming new Creatures --? 2. Cor. 5. 17.
or of growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ --? 2. Pet. 3. 18.
How greedily would the practical Atheist, ( i. e. every profane dissolute and
licentious person (catch at such a Doctrine, had he not a secret Remembrancer
in his own bosom that deals more faithfully with him when suffered to speak;
and sometimes without leave! To such T. M's. Notions would be the most welcome
they ever met with, if they could but arrive at the same pitch of certainty as
to their future Happipiness, and so take first a full carouse in the sweets of
this World, (as they erroneously esteem the height of wickedness and
sensuality) and afterward possess the unthought of Joys of the World to come.
May the laudable and united Endeavors of Superiors at this time prove
effectual to the suppressing both of speculative and practical Atheism,
blasphemous Libels, and fundamental Errors, so audaciously propagated of late
Years, to the great shame and detriment of Reformed Christianity.

The second Head to be examined is,

That Faith is given after this Life to such as dye in Unbelief.

This is but a superstructure upon the same Foundation. For if all Men are
necessarily saved; if Faith be essential to Salvation; and if a great part of
literal Israel, and many others dye in Unbelief, then Faith must be given after
this Life. This is T. M's. own way of arguing. Clav. Aurea. p. 9. But that this
is no less absurd and contradictory to the scope of the holy Scriptures, will
easily appear. For,

First; The short and uncertain Life of Man in this World, is, and ought to be
esteemed the only time of probation in order to his future state. And indeed
it is no small favor, to have such a gracious Reprieve from the Sentence of
Eternal Death due to Adam's Transgression: To have the Tree of Life, though
forfeited, freely exhibited again, and the former loss in the first Adam
recovered with unspeakable advantage in the second, by all that through Faith
lay hold on him. That this Life is the only season of Grace, is evident from
the five rejected Virgins in that well known Parable of Christ, who had slipped
the proper time for furnishing their Lamps, and securely deferred it till the
Bridegroom's Coming: also from his seasonable Caution to the Unbelieving Jews
-- to walk while they had the Light --; Joh. 12. 35.
together with his assertion to the same obstinate Jews, dying in their sins
--; Joh. 8. 21.
Whither I go ye cannot come --. As Death leaves, Judgment finds us: For if
there had been any middle state of probation, doubtless the Apostle Paul would
not have been altogether silent in this case, when he tells us, It Is appointed
for all men once to dye, but after this the Judgment --. Heb. 9. 27.
And if St. Peter had thought the work of Faith and Repentance so indifferent
in this Life, or attainable in another, it is scarce probable he would have
pressed it so earnestly in his Advice to the scattered Saints -- to use all
diligence that they might make their Calling and Election sure --. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Solomon advises to an industrious improvement of the present time, because
there is no knowledge nor wisdom in the grave whither we are all hastening --.
Eccl. 9 10.
The good King Hezekiah in his thankful acknowledgments to God after a signal
Reprieve from the Jaws of Death (and we may suppose him to have had as right
apprehensions of that dark and silent state, as any Man) utters these
expressions -- The grave cannot praise thee; death cannot celebrate thee; they
that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy Truth --. Isa. 38. 18, 19.
What can be understood by that Scripture Metaphor -- as the Tree falls, so it
shall lie, whether, -- etc. but that this Life is the only acceptable time, the
only day of Salvation --, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
and if once passed, is irrecoverable for ever; and that death when ever it
strips us of these Tabernacles, will fix our Souls in an unchangeable state,
either of Happiness or Misery, according to the bent of our hearts and lives in
this World? And notwithstanding T. M's. sophistical Inference and confident
Conclusions, I heartily wish that neither he, nor any others, may neglect the
great and essential work of Faith, whilst conversant in the paths of time; lest
a future remembrance of the present opportunity prove an aggravation of
Torment, when all hope and comfort shall be cut off for ever.

Secondly; It Is very absurd to imagine that Faith shall be given to Souls
already possessed of an eternal state, since this imperfect state of Mortality
is the only proper time for the exercise of it. Faith is indeed the most
precious Jewel to poor bewildred Mortals on this side Jordan. Hereby they may
sometimes (like Moses from the top of Pisgah) get a glimpse of the promised
Canaan for their present consolation and support, whilst sojourning in the
Tents of Kedar --. Psalm.
But when they are once safely arrived on the other side, and have reached the
sweet Air of the upper Regions, leaving behind all the filthy Garments and
heavy cloggs of corruption, Faith, which was before so valuable, becomes
swallowed up in fruition; and they will no more need or make use of it, than a
Man restored to perfect strength will the Crutches with which he was formerly
supported in an accidental Lameness. And for such as dye wholly without Faith,
what middle state shall we imagine them to be lodged in, that can capacitate
them for the exercise of this essential Grace? Since the Scriptures mention but
two Receptacles for the spirits of all Men, when dislodged from their earthly
Prisons; viz. the eternal bosom of Divine Love, where Faith ceases, as having
attained its end; and the Society of accursed Angelical Spirits; where Faith,
if present, could not be less unsuitable? Therefore, waving further Arguments
in so clear a case, I proceed to consider the third Assertion, of the same
blasphemous strain, often repeated in the several Writings of the said T. M.
viz.

That there is no Hell or future state of Eternal Punishment; but by those
terms we are to understand only the troubles of this Life.

It seems needless to enumerate the many undeniable Testimonies in holy Writ,
for clearing the certainty of a future eternal Punishment: Since nothing can be
more plain, though T. M. is not afraid to smooth over with inconsistent Glosses
some of the most Remarkable; Luke 16.
as the Parable of Dives and Lazarus and of the Goats on the left Hand
Sentenced to everlasting Punishment; Mal. 25. ult. verse 41.
together with the Form of that dreadful Sentence, -- Depart from me ye Cursed
into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: -- The Advice to
Pluck a right Eye, etc. rather than to have the whole Man cast into Hell Fire,
where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched: -- The Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, mentioned in the Apocalypse, into which all whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life shall be cast, etc. -- All which, he will have to
be no more than Bugbears to frighten the World, or at most but figurative
Expressions to signify the Troubles of this Life. His suggesting a Double
Eternity [or everlasting] Clav. Aur. p. 12. one during the Continuance of the
Body on Earth, and the other hereafter in the unbodied State; is so ridiculous,
as also his Application, that it needs no Answer. Without running into nice
Disputes about the Locality of Hell, or the Kind of Fire, etc. (which are at
best, but opposing Humane Reason to Divine Wisdom and Authority, and a very
dangerous Step toward Atheism.) It is most certain, from the whole Scope and
Harmony of the sacred Records both of all the old and new Testament, that there
is a real, not imaginary Hell, or State of eternal Punishment allotted to all
obstinate and finally impenitent Sinners: And whether we ought to esteem the
Scriptures of unquestionable Verity, a Cheat, and Christ himself (who is the
Way, the Truth and the Life) Joh. 14. 6.
an Impostor, or T. M. is not difficult to Determine. But,

First, If there be no other Hell than the Troubles of this Life, Then the most
eminent Servants of God, have generally been the greatest Objects of his Wrath,
and many of the most hardened Sinners felt little or nothing of it. What do we
find more frequent, than that the best of Gods Children have been most sorely
exercised with Afflictions in this Life, and yet out of a gracious End, and as
a Badge of his Paternal Love --, Heb. 12. 6, 7. Rev. 3. 19.
to Purge away their Dross, that they may come forth as tried Gold -- and be
better fitted for the highest Manifestations of his Grace and Favor: whilst
others who make choice of their good things in this Life have been suffered to
go on in an uninterrupted Course of sensual Pleasures without any remarkable
Check, Crosses or Calamities to the Period of their Lives? Something of this
Nature the Royal Psalmist observed; and records as a stumbling Block to him for
a time, When he beheld their Eyes standing out with Fatness --; That they were
not in Trouble, etc. but had more than their Hearts could Wish, whilst he was
plagued all the Day long, and chastened every Morning: But when he went into
the Sanctuary, and there Recognized his Interest in God, he knew the Reason of
these differing Dispensations; that the former had but a miserable Portition,
and that his, though attended with the Cross, was far more Elegible: Therefore
in the Conclusion, he Addresses himself to God. Psalm 73. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
14, 15, 23, 24.
-- Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have upholden me by my right
Hand; thou shall Lead me by thy Counsel, and afterward Receive me to Glory
--.'It Is most certain, that the Sufferings of this Life in the highest Degree
which Christians can Experience, are not worthy to be compared with their
future Glory --; Romans 8. 18.
and therefore they have Cause to bless God instead of Murmuring or Repining:
Yet, to Imagine that such shall be Coheirs of the same eternal Happiness, who
not only enjoy the Quietness of this World's imaginary Pleasures, but Live and
Die in an unregenerate Course, wholly void both of restraining and sanctifying
Grace, is to make them the special Favorites of God; and does much more
derogate from divine Goodness and Purity, than to Believe that he will Inflict
infinite Punishment for finite Sins; for the latter is not only warranted in
and by the Scriptures, but it is agreeable to right Reason; That the absolute
Sovereign and Creator of all things, should Impose such Laws upon his Creatures
either as to Rewards or Punishments, as seem best to his own unsearchable
Wisdom and Pleasure. Such Foolish and Atheistical Arguings as seem to Impeach,
Limit or Direct the Supreme Being, are briefly yet sufficiently Refuted by the
Apostle Paul, Romans 9. 20, 21. 2 Col. 2. 8.
and may be ranked with that dangerous Philosophy and vain Deceit, against
which he gives a seasonable Caution.

Secondly, Next to an impartial Search into the Divine Oracles, (too much
neglected and no less perverted) I would wish T. M. and every other Person,
that does but so much as Hesitate at the Belief of a future Punishment, to make
it their Business to Converse with such dying Persons, as have been most
negligent in the great Concerns of another Life; and especially with the most
bold and daring Atheists, (who turn all Religion into Ridicule, and by a kind
of Infernal Philosophy which their grand Master is always ready to furnish them
with, appear as Champions not for, but against the Truth; whilst the feeble
Nexus of Health, or uninterrupted Union between Soul and Body lasts, and they
can Swim in temporal Pleasures:) Such hesitating Person or Persons may then, if
not Case-hardened, chance to meet with some more effectual Convictions, than
whilst they are partially Busied in defending their own erroneous Notions. When
the dark Shades of Death appear, and the Soul apprehending the nearness of its
inevitable Separation, has the clearest Idea's of things, and can no longer be
cajoled into a servile Compliance with the Organs of Sense, then is the fittest
time to mark its Apprehensions of a future State. As some have anticipated the
Joys of Heaven, and been so brim-full at the Soul's taking its flight from this
earthly Prison, that they could scarce contain it: So, many others who in the
Series of their Lives have seemed wholly void both of the Fear and Belief of a
future Hell, have had such plentiful foretasts of it in their own Breasts, and
so powerfully preached them to others, as was sufficient to have overcome the
most Stoical Apathy in any Spectator. How have they then Confuted their own
former Principles and Practice with the most passionate Clamours, the bitterest
Reflections, and the evident Tokens of Intolerable Torments! What would they
not then give for a little Respite, to Convince the World as well by Practice
as Words of their former Mistake! What a dismal thing must it needs be with
such inexpressible Horror, and as it were, the Beginnings of Hell, to Lanch
forth into the Ocean of Eternity! Then there will be a certain, but a terble
Conviction of all those, who now either professedly or practically disregard a
future Punishment, though they may at present seem so Confirmed in their
Stupidity, as not only to Reject Moses and the Prophets, etc. but if possible,
a Messenger from the Dead.

The next Erroneous Assertion to be Examined, is,

Fourthly, That Man in his Primitive Innocence has not, nor now has, in any
measure a free Will or Choice in himself: But that Adam 's Fall and the
greatest particular Transgressions ever since were by Divine Predestination and
Compulsion.

That our first Parents in their primitive State of Paradisical Innocence, were
endowed with a freedom of Will or Choice, in respect to their Obedience or
Disobedience to the Divine Commands; and though not absolutely free Agents
because under the Limitation of a righteous Law, (not impossible to be
performed) were in no wise constrained to Violate or Infringe it, without their
own voluntary Deviation; and that God, the Fountain of all Grace and Goodness,
though in his unsearchable Wisdom and eternal Foresight, permitting and
providing an Expiation for Sin, neither was, nor could be in any respect the
efficient or impulsive Cause thereof, is very agreeable to the Scope of the
holy Scriptures, and the sense of the ancient Christians. Aug. lib. 1. de Orig.
(...), cap. 4. Ambros. lib. 1. (...) cap. 1.
But this Doctrine it seems is strange to T. M. who tells us in his Mist. of
Iniq. p. 24. That he cannot imagine or believe that God could certainly foresee
Adam's Fall, if an equal power was given him to stand or fall; and the reason
he gives, is because he [ viz. T. M.] cannot plant in his Mind any Idea of the
way and manner of such foresight. Doubtless they who will attempt to measure
out Infinite Wisdom, Knowledge, Power, or any other of the Divine Attributes by
the narrow limits of depraved Reason, had better never meddle with things of so
sublime a nature. And indeed it is much more safe and commendable, not only for
such, but for all persons, to avoid prying too curiously into the unsearchable
depths of the Divine Counsels, the Eternal Essence, Purposes and Decrees of the
incomprehensible Trinity, as also their wonderful manifestations in time in the
mysterious work of Creation and Redemption; whereby it is so easy for frail
Man, whilst blinded with the thick foggs of these lower Regions, and especially
without great caution and humility, to run into a Labyrinth of Error, and just
that God should suffer him so to do. Without soaring so high after speculative
Knowledge, we have sufficient ground for admiration and praise, whilst we
consider That the Tree of Life is not wholly lost; that God has not left
Mankind in this miserable estate* altogether destitute of help and hope; Col.
1. 15. Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 3. 14. Col. 1 16. John 1. 3. Romans 5. 15. 16, 17, 18 19.
Mat. 11 28.
that he who was the first born of every Creature, the corner stone --, the
beginning of the Greation of God --, by and for whom all things were made --,
is also the Restorer of the fallen state of Mankind; that he is indifferently
exhibited to all (both Jews and Gentiles) as the free Gift of Divine Love, and
not only invites every Soul that is weary and heavy laden to come unto him for
Rest, but is both able and willing to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God through him. In a large acceptati^n he is the Savior of all Men, by
purchasing that gracious and general Reprieve before hinted at, and not only
upholding the sinful State of this World, but exhibiting the Terms of Salvation
indifferently unto all Mankind, and setting them, as it were, once more upon
their own Feet, in a way of temporary Probation: And to all those, who from the
sinful Life of fallen Nature, attain not only to the restored Life of Reason,
but become united to him by Faith and Love (which necessarily include
Obedience) he is an effectual Savior. Thus far all agree: But then what
unhappy Controversies have ensued, about the extent of the humane Power and
Capacity, in moving toward embracing or improving the Means of Grace thus
freely offered. And whilst some are ready to center all in the strength of
Man's natural Will, and so to make him a complete (...), both as to the first
reception and progressive Acts of Faith: T. M. with an unparalled boldness
runs into the contrary Extreme* and would have him but a mere Machine, wholly
destitute of Will, Power, Choice, etc. or at least of the voluntary Exercise of
all those ennobling Endowments (though rectified by, and made subservient to a
supernatural Principle of Divine Grace) and in all his Efforts toward good or
evil, acted merely by Compulsion and fatal Necessity.

He affirms [ Mist. of Iniq. p. 30.] -- Judas inevitably betrayed Christ, and
destroyed himself --: And [ ibid.] -- Men are predestined and compelled to
die in Unbelief, before they are born --; And -- Blasphemies, Murders, etc.
are compelled on Men -- [Addit. to Clav. Aurea. p. 21.] When the grand Enemy of
Mankind can no longer hold the World in Atheism and open Hostility against the
exhibited Means of Salvation, he will not stick to put on a more plausible
disguise, but like an Angel of Light transforms himself into any shape, that he
may, if possible, carry on his own Work with equal Success: And no wonder if he
drive unwary and aspiring Man, whilst resting in his own Wisdom, into many
dangerous Delusions. What need is there of soaring so high into the Arcana of
Heaven, or to ravel the Divine Councils for Predestination, etc. since all
things essential to Faith and Practice are made plain, and by a wonderful
Condescension, suited to the meanest Capacity; if Man will but first lay aside
that over-wise Serpentine Subtilty, which is the proper effect of the forbidden
Fruit, and with a genuine Sincerity submit to the Divine Teachings? The former
is that infernal Wisdom, branded by St. James with the Epithetes of sensual and
develish; Jame^ ^. 15.
which always either wholly rejected or perverted the true Simplicity of the
Gospel, and tends to nothing but Strife, Discord and Confusion: 1 Cor. 1. 19,
20, 21.
The latter is of an higher and more noble Extract, takes the Word of God upon
its own Authority, silences all Carnal Reasonings, compares the more abstruse
Part with what is more plain, and always tends to Union, Love and Harmony.

As to what T. M. so often blasphemously urges of God's being the Author or
positive Cause of all and every particular sin, etc. so many far more Learned
Pens, having sufficiently cleared that Point and solved all T. M's Objections,
which he deduces from Scripture (as the hardening of Pharaoh, etc.) to touch
thereupon seems but actum agere, and therefore rather to be omitted in so brief
a Discourse as this. That the Omnipotent Creator could have anticipated Man's
Fall, and endowed him with an unchangeable Perfection, never liable to fall or
be corrupted, is past all Question; but that it pleased the unsearchable Wisdom
of the Supreme Being, to place him in a mutable Station, pronouncing Happiness
or Misery upon such and such Conditions, and certainly foreseeing his voluntary
Deviation to provide an All-sufficient Medium, for his recovery (thereby
centring the whole Work of Salvation in the Riches of Free Grace, by and
through a Redeemer) should lead us to the highest Returns of Love and Gratitude
that we are capable of, and not into Critical, much less Sensorious
Animadversions. What the Fall of Angels was, what the Cause thereof, and why
Irreparable; as also by what means the blessed Ones were sustained, are Points
almost too lofty to meddle with, especially since not very material to the
present purpose. Though the Eternal Fountain and Primary Cause of all things
must be supposed to have perfectly foreseen, as it were, uno intuitu, all
particular Motions and Events before the birth of Time; it will not thence
follow, that he must be the efficient or enforcing Cause of Sin. He is indeed
after a sort, the Causa sine qua non; for without him, Angels and Men had never
had a Being, and consequently never sinned: Yet this can in no wise make him
the positive Cause. Sin is a Nonentity (at least till committed) a privation,
defect, disorder, or preternatural State of rational Beings; as might be
illustrated from many plain and familiar Comparisons. It Is sometimes
represented by Darkness; and what positive Cause is there of that? When the Sun
recedes from our Hemisphere, the Night and Darkness ensue; and must the Sun
therefore be the Cause of Darkness? The Supreme Being having no Law but his
immense Perfections, can no more swerve from his own rectitude than cease to
be. That there is an admirable Connection in the whole Course of his Providence,
not inconsistent with the Creatures Liberty, yet still harmoniously
accomplishing his immutable Decrees: That all kinds of ataxy quoad hominem,
proceed from the Free-Actings of the Humane Will, yet by Divine Permission:
That God forces not the Will in Conversion, but by a supernatural Work
graciously inclines it; yet neither forces nor inclines the Heart in any
measure to sin, but only leaves it to that corrupt Frame and those vicious
Habits wherein it is settled: And that there is an excellent agreement between
the Primary and all second Causes, to the glory of the Divine Justice, as well
as the unsearchable Riches of Free Grace, has been so amply and learnedly
Discussed by others, that to insist further thereupon would savor highly of
Ostentation.

From our Savior's Parable of the Talents, and an impartial comparing of many
other parallel Scriptures, it is most evident that God's expectations of
obediential Returns from every Man, are proportioned to the measure of Grace
which he gives; and that the faithful Improvement of that measure, is not only
accepted by him, but attended with greater enlargements from his inexhaustible
Fullness: Whereas the neglect or mis-improvement of that measure, though never
so small, (as in the case of the single Talent) causes the open hand of Divine
Bounty to be withdrawn, all gracious Experiences to wither and vanish, and
gradually leaves the Soul to an obdurate Frame, under the just Sentence of
Condemnation. Man therefore, in respect to his own Happiness or Misery, either
Temporal or Eternal, is not so much a Machine or merely passive, as T. M. would
insinuate; nor is he in any wise compelled to make this or that choice. Aug. de
Civit. Dei, lib 7. c. 30. Anselm de concord. great. and liberi arbitrii.
For though he has not a natural strength or capacity to find out, choose and
persevere in the narrow path that leads to Eternal Life; yet he has a Talent
supernatural, a common Gift or measure of Grace freely bestowed on him, as an
Universal Benefit, accruing by and from the second Adam; which so far as he
resigns or subjects to his sensual part, he wilfully shuts the Door of
Salvation upon himself: But if he faithfully improve this single Talent, by
denying his sensual Lusts and the dictates of depraved Reason, and becomes
sincerely resigned to the Divine Conduct; then to him that thus has ( i. e.
rightly uses) more shall be given, and he shall have abundance; Mat. 25. 29.
like a Branch abiding in the true Vine, he shall be always fruitful, through
spiritual Virtue conveyed from that Eternal Root; and thus growing from
strength to strength, shall at last (as the Royal Prophet says) appear before
God in Zion. Augustine. de corrupt. and great. c. 14. Id. Enchirid. ad Laurent.
cap. 103
That the tenders of Divine Grace, which are universally extensive, do not
prove universally effectual, must be imputed to the perverseness of Man's Heart,
which obstinately opposes the way of Life and Happiness, and resting in that
serpentine Wisdom, before hinted, forms to himself some vain and delusive Ideas
instead thereof; so that (as the Prophet positively affirms in the case of
rebellious Israel) Hos. 13. 9.
his destruction is only of and from himself.

If T. M. thinks I put too great Stress upon the Parable of the Talents,
because 'twas but a Parable and not a Reality (as he alleges in diverse Places
against the Parable of Dives and Lazarus; of the Sheep and the Goats, etc.) He
may remember, that 'twas our Saviors delight to exhibit in Parables the
greatest Mysteries of his Kingdom, yet not leaving those familiar Comparisons
so obscure, but that the meanest Capacity might apprehend his gracious Design
therein; for we scarce read of any that stumbled at them, but the over-wise and
self-confident, to whose lofty expectations indeed they were not so well
adapted; nor may we any more imagine, that he did or would thereby impose
destructive Fallacies upon lost Mankind whom he came to save, than join with
the obstinate Pharisees in censuring him for an Impostor, Blasphemer, or
possessed with an Evil-Spirit. The sweetness of his Deportment and
Condescension in explaining, inculcating and applying what he delivered, did
sufficiently evince that his Parables were of great weight, that he had no
design thereby to amuse or deceive his Auditors; but on the contrary, that
believing they might have Life through him. Joh. 5. 40. cap. 7. 37. cap. 10. 9.
But the next thing in T. M's new Systeme of Divinity is,

Fifithly; That the Children of the Flesh (Romans 9. 8.) are all Men in the
Flesh, whether good or evil; and the Children of the Promise are the Souls of
all Men that ever were, are, or shall be (not one excepted of what Nation or
Belief soever) in their separated or unbodied State.

This is indeed agreeable with his Doctrine of universal inevitable Salvation,
and equally true. That the Apostle Paul in this and many other concurring
Places intended to distinguish two kinds of Persons, as vastly differing in
their Principles, Practices and Ends, as light and darkness, is evident beyond
all reasonable exception. How often do we find him using Ismael ( Abraham's Son
by the Bondwoman) as a Type of the unregenerate part of Mankind; and Isaac the
promised Heir, as a lively Representative of all those who truly lay hold on
the Promises of God by Faith, whether under the Legal or Evangelical
Dispensation (the Object of Faith being still the same, viz. the Messiah!) And
that he limits the true Israel or Seed of Promise to the latter, i. e. the
faithful and obedient Servants of God, and not to the Lineage of Abraham
descending from him in Isaac by natural Generation; is also clear from the
scope of the foregoing Verses. When he had first testified his unparalled
Sorrow for the obstinate Blindness of the literal Israel, reckoned up those
transcendent Privileges wherewith they were dignified beyond all other
Nations, and showed their Priority of Right to the Gospel; he tells us, That
the Word of God has not been altogether ineffectual, though for the most part,
rejected by these natural Branches; verse 6.
and adds a Reason -- For all are not Israel that are of Israel: neither
because the Seed of Abraham are they his Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed
be called --: And lest any should think he meant only the literal Offspring of
Isaac, he explains himself further verse 7.
-- That is, they who are the Children of the Flesh are not the Children of
God, but the Children of the Promise. -- etc. If Isaac therefore (once
intentionally Sacrificed, and in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be
Blessed) be considered as a Type of the Messiah, the spiritual Israel will
appear to be all those who are truly obedient to the Faith of the Gospel; and
the Children of the Flesh all those (whether Jews or Gentiles) who either
remain in the gross Pollutions of unsanctified Nature, or exalt the imperfect
typical Righteousness of the Law in opposition to Christ the end thereof. Thus
much seems plainly imported in the Apostles result verses 30, 31, 32.
-- The Gentles have attained to the Righteousness of Faith --; but Israel has
not attained to the Law of Righteousness --; because they sought it not by
Faith, but by the works of the Law --; which he further clears cap. 10. v. 4.
-- For Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes. The same learned Apostle in his Epistle to the Galatians (who were
ready to look back from the ennobling Principle of Faith, to the sandy
Foundation of the Law) more largely illustrates this Point in several Chapters,
and after a very copious distinction between the fleshly and spiritual Seed,
lays down this comfortable Conclusion. Gal. 3. 29. cap. 4. 28.
-- If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham 's Seed and Heirs according to
promise. But let us consider a little how this agrees with T. M's. Sophistical
Invention [Second Addition to Clav. Aur. page 29.] -- That all Men are damned
or lost in the Flesh, and all Men are saved in the Spirit --. And [ Clav. Aur.
p. 10.] -- The Children of the Flesh are all Men in the Flesh, Good or Evil;
and -- etc. as before recited. The Apostle Paul does not say, We are now the
Children of the Flesh, but in the other World we shall be the Children and
Heirs of Promise: Nor does Christ tell the obstinate and unbelieving Jews, whom
he pronounces Children of the Devil, Joh. 8. 44
that they should hereafter be the Heirs of Promise; but declares positively,
that whither he went they could not come: Neither does St. John say, -- We
shall hereafter, etc. 1 John 3. 2.
but -- Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, now, in this present State of
imperfection, whilst we are clogged with the relicts of Sin; though as born of
God we sin not [ i. e. not by choice and approbation; not by habitual
Subjection, nor by Guilt's imputation:] cap. 1. v 8. cap. 5. v. 18.
and though we have this assurance of being now the adopted Children of God (in
distinction from the unregenerate World, which lies in Wickedness, Verse 19.
i. e. habitually enslaved to Satan the wicked One) yet we have higher
enjoyments in reversion than our present minority is capable of, knowing that
when he (who is our Life, our Head, etc.) shall appear, we shall be like him.
The next thing to be examined is,

Sixthly; That Elijah, prophesied by Malachi, is yet to come; and that T. M.
(though in some places seemingly modest and cautious) is that very person.

That the Elias or Harbinger foretold by Isaiah, Isa. 40. 3, 4
agrees with this of Malachi, and was, at least, partly fulfilled by the Coming
and Ministry of John Baptist, is past all contradiction; since no less than
Christ himself plainly decides it in the affirmative --; Mat. 11. 7, 8. to the
15 v. chapter 17. v. 12.
This is that Elias which was to come (having before spoken of John): and
afterward -- Elias is come already --. But whether there may not be a second
Coming of Elias to forewarn and prepare the stupid World for Christ's second
Coming (because Malachi describes a very terrible day succedaneous to Elijah's
coming, Mal. 4. 1, 2. 3, 5. Rev. 14. 6.
wherein the wicked should be consumed,) I dare not determine; having never
pretended to Criticism, much less Infallibility, in what is left obscure. But
supposing a certainty of that (which very learned men have thought probable) I
think I may very safely conclude that T. M. cannot be the person; and that for
several Reasons.

First; Because it must be supposed that the Testimony of this eminent Prophet
( viz. Elijah or Elias) will be consonant to, or at least consistent with
Malachi's Prophecy, which has a special respect to, and seems as it were
calculated for the time of his manifestation. Now Malachi speaks of a
remarkable decision between the righteous and the wicked, and of their several
rewards as different as their Principles --; that Christ the Messenger of the
Covenant should come suddenly to his Temple, and that the former should then be
owned and valued by him as his Jewels --; Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 16, 17, 18. ver.
12th.
that all Nations should call them blessed --; chapter 4. v. 2.
that the Sun of Righteousness should arise unto them with healing under his
wings --: But the latter, i. e. the wicked, should be trodden down as Ashes
under their feet, and consumed like Stubble in that day which should burn as an
Oven --; chapter 4. v. 1, 3.
and then it follows, that Elijah the Prophet shall be sent before this great
and dreadful day of the Lord. -- verse 5.
But T. M. ranks the wicked and the righteous together, as to their future
reward, thereby contradicting the scope of Malachi, and consequently cannot be
the Prophet intended by him.

Secondly, Because, when Scripture Prophecies have a double accomplishment,
there is usually some Harmony or Proportion between the several times, as also,
the scope, nature and manner of their respective consummation. Thus there are
many Prophecies that directly, or as it were, specifically refer to the return
of the two Tribes and half from their seventy Years Captivity, and the
rebuilding of the Temple; which also, though more remotely, point at the
flourishing State of Christ's Kingdom, when he shall (as Malachi says) come to
his Temple, i. e. collective Body of his Saints. Now this twofold
accomplishment does thus far harmonize; in the former there was an eminent
Reformation, a careful perusing the Records of the Law, and a reestablishing
the purity of Gods worship, under the happy conduct of Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. And
in the latter there will be a perfection of Holiness, beyond all present
Comparisons. Likewise, if a double accomplishment be assigned to this Prophecy
of Elijah's coming, viz. John the forerunner of Christ in his Incarnation, and
some other eminent Messenger to precede his second glorious Coming; John's
Ministry we know strictly enjoined Repentance as essential to Salvation,
branding those he judged most refractory for a generation of Vipers, and so
closely laid the Ax to the Root, that he denounces Destruction to all that did
not bring forth good Fruit --; Mal 3. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10,
nor may we suppose that a second Elias will be more remiss, or not enjoin
Repentance and Faith, as essential Qualifications to meet Christ at his next
coming. But T. M. suggesting a certainty of Salvation to all that live and die
in Impenitency and Unbelief, seems of all Men that ever yet appeared upon the
Stage of this World, the most unqualified to be that Prophet.

Therefore, Lastly, A Word or two to his extraordinary Visions (as he will have
them) by which he overcame his former reluctance, and was in some measure
settled in the Belief of his being the Elias, etc. [p. 13, 14, 15, 16, of his
Disp. concerning Elijah.]

The particulars of his Visions, which he mentions, are 1. A Globe of
transparent Fire, about the bigness of the Moon at full; from whence proceeded
the form of a Sword, and at the end thereof Flames of Fire. Afterward a Dove
vanishing out of his Sight. And lastly, an universal and prodigious Comet, in
the Year 1680/1.

As for the two former, that they might be the Chimera's of a melancholy and
overthoughtful Brain, is not very improbable, from the many instances which
Authentic History affords; and that only in respect to a depraved disposition
of the Blood and Spirits: but especially what strange delusions may not Men run
into, when confiding in their own strength they Soar too high and tempt the
Divine Protection to be withdrawn! But supposing them to be real, what ground
can any Man, rightly possessed of Reason, gather from thence for such
extraordinary Conclusions? Perhaps any one that has read of Meteors and their
Production might easily solve the Phoenomenon of the fiery Globe by natural
causes, Viz. Nitro-sulphureous Particles of Air driven together by the exhaled
moisture of the Earth, and then fired by the attraction of Calorifick Atoms.
without running into such presumptuous and unaccountable speculations. But
that which seems to be of greatest stress with T. M. is, That these particular
Visions happend to him at such times as he was most wavering, and so beset with
clouds of Diffidence that he could not be satisfied without Miracles; and not
only so, but the Dove was the very kind of Vision which he had with a strange
curiosity imagined to himself, and as it were desired for the confirmation of
his Faith. Now, granting all this, what can be more reasonable, than that Man
wilfully leaving or perverting the ways of God, and the Rules prescribed by
him, should be given up to the strong Delusions of Satan? 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians.
2. ^.
And why may not the titular God of this world, the Prince of the Power of the
Air, be permitted to show something extraordinary for the promoting his own
work in the World? Why may he not exert the utmost of his limited power near
the period of his infernal Kingdom? 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. 2 These. 2. 8, 9, 10.
Mat. 24. 23, 24, 25.
Especially since we are not only cautioned against his most plausible
Angelical Transformations, but assured that he will in the latter days do great
things by his Emissaries confirmed with Signs and Wonders to deceive, if
possible, the very Elect? So that these Miracles rather afford ground of
Suspicion than confirmation of T. M's new Hypothesis: And I would heartily wish
him to consider with all possible humility and seriousness, whether that heavy
and repeated Anathema denonunced by St. Paul against such as should dare to
Preach any new Gospel, 1 Gal. 8. 9.
may not extend to all those that strenuously endeavor to pervert the old: and
whether we have not incurred those dreadful Sanctions in the close of John's
Apocalypse, Rev. 22. 18, 19.
against adding to, or detracting from that abstruce Philosophy; since he has
been so bold to explode the Lake of Fire and second Death, therein often
mentioned.

If he dare think me his Friend, and is yet capable of weighing things
impartially, for I would charitably hope his Error is more seated in his
Judgment than his Will, the best Advice I can give, is, instead of defending,
speedily to recede from these his imbibed Notions, with such Testimony of
profound humility as we read of in the Case of Job (who doubtless, had far less
need of it, though not altogether excusable from an extreme in
self-Justification) Job 40. 4, 5.
-- I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth: Once have I spoken, but I will not
answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further: -- cap. 42. v. 6.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes --. This seems the
most probable, if not the only way to extricate himself from the Gall of
bitterness -- Acts 8. 23.
and to find Mercy in the great day of Christ's appearance.

FINIS.

