THE CHRISTIAN PILGRIM IN HIS Spiritual CONFLICT, And CONQVEST.

AT PARIS M.DC.LII.

APPROBATIO.
UTI finis Praecepti, it a and Consilii, Charitas de cord puro, and
Conscientia bona, et Fide non ficta. Ad quam cum facilitate assequendam, and
securius retinendam, compendiosam and Regiam viam sternunt Documenta, quae in
hoc libro, cujus Titulus est, The Christian Pilgrim, in his spiritual Conflict
and Conquest, continentur: quia in illo nil Fidei Catholicae repugnans, aut
bonis moribus contradicens, invenitur; sed Doctrina pia, sana, and solida; ad
quam legendam and sequendam, omnes, qui repleri consolatione, superabundare
gaudio, fervere spiritu, crebro suspicere in Caelum, puras manus in oratione
levare, suas solicit observare conscientias, and Sanctorum sequi Vestigia
cupiunt, sunt invitandi.

Datum Duaci Januarii 17. anno 1652. Stilo Novo. Fra: RUDESINDUS BARLO, Sacrae
Theologiae Doctor and Professor in Collegio Vedastino Duaceno*

The same Approbation Englished.
THE End of the Counsel, as well as of the Commandment, is Charity out of a
pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. Which to obtain
with facility, and retain with security, the Documents contained in this book,
entitled, The Christian Pilgrim in his Spiritual Conflict and Conquest, Show a
plain and compendious way; For therein nothing is found dissonant to our
Catholic Faith, or repugnant to Piety; but a holy, sound, and solid Doctrine:
To the perusal and practice whereof, all they are invited, who desire to be
replenished with comfort, to overflow with joy, to be fervent in Spirit, to
aspire frequently toward Heaven, to lift up pure hands in prayer, to preserve
their Consc^ences unspotted, and to follow the steps of the holy Saints.

Given at Doway January the seventeenth 1652. Stilo novo. Br: RUDESIND BARLO,
Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the Vedastin College Doway.

devil capturing a soul

1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about, seek^ng whom he may devour: whom resist, steadfast in
Faith THE SPIRITVAL CONFLICT: OR The ARRAIGNMENT of the Spirit of Self-love
and Sensuality, at the Bar of Truth and Reason.

First published in Spanish, by the Reverend Father John Casta^iza, a
Benedictin Monk of ON A: Afterward, put into the Latin, Italian, German,
French, and now lastly into the English Tongue, according to the Original Copy.

With many profitable Additions and Explications.

The Second Edition

Job 7. 1. Man's Life is a Warfare upon Earth.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LII.

Ephesians 6. 10, 11. MY brethren, be strong. in our Lord, and in the power of
his might,

Put on the Armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the Wiles of
the Devil.

James 4. 7. Be subject to God; resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Matthew. 26. 41. Mark 13. 38. Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation.
1. Cor. 16. 13. Stand fast in Faith, quit you like men; be strong, etc. He
shall not be crowned who fights not valiantly. 2. Tim. 2. 5. A Lively
pourtraict of the Spiritual Conflict.



To the right Reverend Fathers, Religious Dames, and devout Brothers and
Sisters of the holy Order of Saint BENNET.
THIS little book is presented unto You; not because the Translator follows the
epidemick custom which enforces the complement of a Dedication; or expects
any return of temporal profit from you; or stoops you to so low a Patronage, as
to become Gossipps to this adopted child; which are the vulgar ends of almost
all presents of this nature, whereby the Receivers are rather engaged than
gratified:) But merely as an humble oblation of Filial duty and respect. For he
pretends not to cast in his mite, or bring a gift to your spiritual treasury,
but only to pay a little parcel of his larger debt, and to give you an account
of some hours of his time, which he acknowledges should be all employed in
your service. Besides, he but restores unto you, what was your own before, by
another and a nearer title of Confraternity; and only new clothes a Spanish
Monk of St. Bennet's holy Order, with your English habit, (a thing both usual,
and hitherto very succesfull unto you, hoping thereby to make him the better
welcome; and not doubting but he will speedily, easily, and efficaciously
insinuate himself into your affections, whose daily practices have so great
sympathy with his divine doctrine.

For what are (or surely should be,) the continual endeavors of a true
Benedictin Monk, (and indeed of all devout Christians) but to quell and conquer
the world, the flesh, and the Devil, according to the Principles of Truth; to
subdue sense to reason; to make his very passions, (by taming them,) useful,
and his affections, (by fixing them upon the right object,) isntrumental to
the attaining of perfection; and to study self-knowledg, practice self-hatred,
and persevere in self*deniall? that God may be the sole possessor of his heart,
the only mover of his affections, and the all ruler in his whole man, having
now no self-will left to hinder his holy operation.

And this is the only drift of this devout Treatise; which may therefore fully
serve you (and all pious Pilgrims traveling to their heavenly home) for a
clear glass, wherein you may see your own souls without flattery, discover your
spiritual blemishes without partiality, learn the rare secret of rooting out
vices, implanting virtues, improving all accidents to your best profit, and
trimming up your interiours to your highest advantage for the sweet
entertainment of your beloved Spouse, without overmuch pains or prolixity.

You are (I say* to look upon this small book, as upon a Compendious summary of
Christian perfection; or as a little storehouse, well fraught with the
Original seeds and simples of all spirituality, from whence other devout
druggists, cunning in compositions, have since furnished their larger shops,
and extracted many ample and indeed some excellent volumes. But because Art is
long, Life short; and this life is lent us to learn the Art of living well;
what pity is it, that our lives should be more spent in reading, than
profiting; that men should take more delight in writing, than instructing; and
that we must be forced to seek a few precepts in many sheets, which may be
plainly set down in a few pages? Yet such is the strange itch of writers now a
days, that the number of books which are extant upon all subjects, seems to
exceed that of the readers, whose arms may be as well tired in turning over the
vast multitude of volumes, as their brains confounded in studying them: So that
it were to be heartily wished, that that grave S. Thomas of Aquin. who being
asked, which was the speediest and best way to become learned* Answered, To
read only one Book.
Doctors advice were now revived and followed by spiritual persons; which is,
That they would only (or at least chiefly) betake themselves to the serious
perusal of some one good Author, for their Guide, Governor, and Conductor in
the way of the Spirit; if they mean speedily, and securely to arrive at their
desired port of perfection. All other Books, should serve as certain solaces of
their appetites, some changes of diet, or holy divertisements in devotion; but
this (which they have advisedly made choice of) should be their Souls Daily
bread, and the ordinary, familiar, and natural food and sustenance which it
should strive to chew and digest. This (I say) should be their School of
Defense, where they are to learn the right use of their spiritual weapons; how
to Train, Muster, and Order the Army of their unruly passions and affections;
how to stand upon their guard when an Alarm is given, or an assault made by
their enemies; how to apply fit salvs to their sores, when they are worsted and
wounded in the skirmish; and finally how to behave themselves in all emergent
occasions of troubles and temptations, or other accidents whatsoever.

And though I presume not to propose unto you this Brother of yours, as a more
absolute master in this Art, than your famous and renowned Abbots, Gersen,
Cisnerius, Blosius, and many other excellent and experienced Champions of your
Order, with whom he will not enter into the least competition: Yet I may In the
40. chap. of this Book.
with him safely promise, that whosoever shall faithfully and perseverantly
practice what he here prescribes, shall find this Book, though very little in
bulk, yet large enough in virtue and substance to conduct him to the happy end
he ayms at, to his soul's unspeakable comfort and content.

Neither is he to be disesteemed for the plainness of his expressions; for his
intent being to touch the heart, rather than to tickle the Ears, he delivers
solid sense in undisguised words: And the Interpreter, being to present a true
draught of his Original, and not to take upon him the privilege of a
Paraphrast; could not shape the quaint language of these profane times to the
divine notions of his Author, without evident danger of sacrilege: and
therefore purposely avoids all curiosity of speech, which oftentimes in these
high matters, rather puzzles, than edifies; and more amuzes the devout Readers
understanding with niceties, than moves his affection to true piety, or makes
him resolute in the performance of his duty; which ought to be the only end and
aim of all spiritual writers; and he is most happily and sufficiently
eloquent, who hits this mark, and works this holy effect; as no doubt but this
Religious Author will do in their zealous souls, who make the right use of his
doctrine, in order to their spiritual advancement, and unio^ with God; whom
holy S. Denis styles, the Father of unions, and who by thesweet bands of love,
draws his intelligent creatures to himself, the essential and eternal Unity.
To the which lead and conduct us, o God, one in Trinity, and Trine in Unity;
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.

An advertisement, To the devout Reader.
YOu may justly seem to mervail, why this golden Tract is now said to be taught
the English tongue, which was ^^ove fifty years since transplanted into this
Printed at Lovain, in the year 1598.
Island, out of the gardens of certain Italian manuscripts. But if you will
take the pains to confront both the Copies, and compare them with their
Original Spanish, or else with the Printed at Doway in the year 1612. and
reprinted at Witezburg, 1641.
Latin pattern, you will easily perceive this, though not the better, yet to be
the far truer Translation. For besides very many and material differences, the
33. Chapter is in that edition altogether foreign to this Authors work; and
the whole six last Chapters, (which are most excellent and useful branches of
this little tree) are absolutely lopped off, and (as it seems) purposely
skipp'd over; the Conclusion being in each of them one and the same.

The reason of which omission, as it is obvious to every understanding (which
considers that to be directed to Religious women; and some of these left-out
Chapters, Dedicated to the Nuns of S. Andrew 's in Venice, by Hierome Count of
Portia.
to concern chiefly the Priestly function;) so it seems to carry with it
sufficient grounds where upon to build an excuse for the so doing; because
women are incapable to make use of that kind of devotion: But if a Translators
duty be well looked into, (whose chiefest praise consists in faithfulness and
sincerity,) we shall no where find that any such privilege of defalkation from
his Author's Text, or of addition to the same, does at all belong to him:
Neither do I hereby glance at the least thought of accusation against that
first pious Interpreter of this Treatise in our Mother Tongue, who without all
doubt delivered it to us, as it was given him; But only render an account of my
own fidelity in Copying out my Author's Original; and withal desire such
pious women, who shall peruse these excellent Devotions, that The 37. Chapter.
How to offer up devoutly the Sacrifice of the Mass.
they will rather patiently admit one Chapter, (which concerns them not,) to be
inserted into their books; than uncharitably to desire the razing out of the
least tittle, which may be profitable to any one.

And you are to be furthermore advertised, that this Spiritual Conflict has
been very often printed in the French language; Into which it was also
translated by the Religious men called Fulians; and this These Fulians are
reformed Monks, following S. Bernard as their Patron, and St. Bennet as their
Patriark and lawgiver; men of great esteem for their sancti^y of life,
eminency of learning, and exercises of charity.
Edition of theirs, was (as it truly deserved) received with the highest
applause and liking of all those worthy and illuminated divines of that age;
and namely of that famous and blessed Bishop of Geneva, Francis de Sales, the
mirror of his time, and most skillful conductor of souls in the way of the
Spirit; who usually recommended the reading and practice thereof to his dearest
Disciples tending to Perfection.

One of which, a man of no mean rank and quality, undertook another Translation
of the same Treatise, out of an Italian Copy, (which he dedicates to the same
holy Bishop of Geneva,) augmented (as he says) with 27 Chapters, (though they
are indeed, either bare subdivisions of some one Chapter of our Author into
diverse, (as for example, Our third chapter is there divided into three several
ones;) Or else they are more ample explications of that Doctrine, which is
concisely delivered in the Text; and so may with more propriety be termed These
Theatins, are so called from their Institutor, John Peter Garaff, who was first
Bishop of Theate, in the Kingdom of Naples, and afterward Pope Paul the
fourth men also renowned for their sanctity.
Commentaries than added Chapters,) and written by the Reverend Fathers,
commonly called Theatins. And because the endeavors of these pious men serve
much to the elucidation of this Subject, and savor of a sincere spirit of
Devotion; I have also made use of their pains for your profit; and transferred
hither (by way of Explications) whatsoever in that Edition seemed pertinent,
and conducing to the illustration of our Author: Yet still punctually
observing the Text, and division of his own original Spanish, and the Latin
traduction of some learned Divines in the University of Doway, where it was
approved and reprinted in the year 1612. If you make your best advantage of
these my labors, your own souls will receive the true comfort, and I the full
reward I look for.

TO THE Devout Champions, fighting in this Spiritual Warfare;
The Translator wishes happy Victory, and the reward of eternal Felicity.
TO you, dear Souls, is this little work most fitly addressed; who in this
deplorable age, (when the deluge of all vices, and an universal inundation of
wickedness covers the face of the Earth, and to which that may be applied,
almost as properly as in the time of the general flood, All flesh has
corrupted his way;) having happily left the broad and beaten path of perdition,
and estranged your selves from the pernicious Contagion of the times; employ
all your diligence and endeavors to preserve your souls pure and clean from
all worldly filth and infection, and whatsoever may displease the eyes of your
Heavenly Spouse; and take all possible pains that Gods sacred Image, stamped
upon you in Baptism, but defaced, or at least much darkened through human
frailty and infirmity, may be again restored and imbellish'd within you: An
enterprise so high and heroique, that no tongue of man can worthily praise or
express it.

Take courage valiant Champions of Heaven, and faint not in this holy pursuit,
having Angels and Saints for your helpers and favorers, and the Almighty
himself, stretching out his powerful hand to conduct you with safety and
security through all the throngs of difficulties and dangers; and leading you,
as it were, over the bellies of the Amorrheans, Cananeans, and all other
uncircumcised and profane people, into the true Land of promise, the happy Land
of Paradise, replenished with Milk and Honey, the blessed Land of heaven,
full-fraught with eternal and unexplicable solaces and sweetnesses.

You are also suited with such excellent armor of proof, both offensive and
defensive, taken out of the rich storehouse of sacred Scripture, and the
wholesome doctrine of the Catholic Church, as will not only render you
invincible against all opposition, but make you glorious conquerors, and
triumphers over al your hellish adversaries.

It only remains, that you seriously apply your selves to learn the use of
these weapons, to get the art and dexterity of fighting to your best advantage,
and to study well the manner of these spiritual skirmishes, that so you may
give home-blows both with point and edge, and handsomely ward off those which
are made at you by your enemies: And then you may be confident of an assured
victory.

And though this holy Science of Fencing is largely taught, and plainly set
forth by many spiritual and skillful Masters, both ancient and modern: yet the
whole doctrine thereof is so briefly and familiarly comprised in this little
Book, that I know not of any other instruction which can be presented you in
this kind, more to your purpose and profit; (especially if you want leisure or
convenience to turn over many or greater volumes;) since you may here find the
collected substance, and as it were, the marrow and cream of all the choycest
precepts, concerning the aforesaid necessary trade of training up your selves
in the true and practical knowledge of your spiritual weapons.

This ministered me the occasion to translate it, that it might be accommodated
to your benefit; and to this I was urged and led on by the ardent desire of
advancing your good, to the utmost extent of that small power which the Divine
goodness has imparted unto me.

Receive it therefore gratefully, and embrace it willingly, O most Dear Souls,
as an expert Tutor of arms, and excellent Schoolmaster of the Spiritual
Conflict: by whose directions and documents you may fight undantedly, and
infallibly foil not only the Flesh and the World together, which wage such
cruel and continual war with you; but also all the powers of darkness, and
malice of the Devil, from whom neither peace nor truce can ever be expected:
waiting with patience and perseverance for that happy hour, in which it will
please your loving Lord to give you a full deliverance, to banish all war unto
the utmost bounds of the earth, to bruise the Bow, break the Weapons, burn the
Buckler, and withdraw your desirous souls from this place of tumults and
alarms, to the quiet residence of eternal peace and felicity. To which his
Divine goodnes^ grant we may all at last joyfull^ arrive.

THE SUBJECT OF THE SPIRITUAL CONFLICT.


THis Book, (correspondent to it is title), is of wars, fights, and combats,
not against the lawful powers of this world, but against the Ephesians. 6. 12.
Against the rulers of the darkness of this world, etc. 2 These. 2. 4 Showing
himself as if he were God, etc. Psalm. 11. 1. Truth is diminished amongst the
children of men. 2 Timothy 2. 5. No one shall be crowned, who fights not. 1 These. 3.
3 We ^re appointed hereunto, etc. Job 7. 1. Man's life is a warfare. 2 Timothy 2.
12. If we suffer, we shall also reign,
usurped authority of the Prince of darkness; who sits enthroned, as sole
Monark of this inverted Universe, in opposition to God and all goodness;
tyrannizing and trampling down all virtue, piety and religion; clipping Faith's
sacred wings, and blinding her with sin and sensuality; destroying and driving
out all justice and sincerity from amongst the sons of men, and endeavoring to
substitute double-harted fraud, with all sort of profaneness, impiety, and
infidelity, in their stead.

The necessity of fighting against these monsters, is a sufficient commendation
of this our holy enterprise; For we are put here expressly for this purpose; All
men are included in this Spiritual Warfare, nor is there any exemption from
combating, where there is the least expectation of conquering, or hope of being
crowned. How highly then does it concern each Christian, to learn so to combat
that he may conquer, if he attends ever to be crowned?

The Sum of this desired Conquest, Ephesians. 4. 25. Depose all lying, etc. Coloss.
3. 8 Depose all these, wrath, malice, blasphemy, etc 1 Pet. 2. 1. Romans 6. 12
13, 14. Let not sin reign in your mortal body, etc.
consists in deposing the devil, and setting up God in our souls; in subduing
Sense to Reason's empire; in bringing the Animal man under the feet of the
Intellectual; in raising up the Intellectual man to his proper Sphaer which is
his Creator; and in uniting the Spirit to it is true object and Center, which is
the Divinity.

The way to arrive at this high and happy Union, is by continual and
indefatigable tendencies of the soul to God, in the track of sincere and solid
Devotion.

This solid Devotion depends upon Religion, as the branch on it is tree; and
since there can he but one right Religion, as there is one only Faith, one law,
one Lord, one Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 4. 5 One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc.
so there can be but one real Devotion, and all others must needs be concluded
unsecure, superstitions, hypocritical, hypocondriacal.

Now lest we should miss this right way, or mistake this real Devotion, we may
here fitly, at our first entrance into these holy list, take a general view of
this Animal, Sensual, and Carnal man, which is to be destroyed; of this
Counterfeit Hypocritical, and Hypocondriacal man, which is to be undeceived;
and of this Spiritual, Supersensual, and Perfect man, which is to be brought
into us, and built up within us; that so framing a right I dea of the end we
aim at, we may follow those means, which appear most proportionable for the
attaining thereof.

THE ANIMAL, CARNAL, AND SENSUAL MAN


Is he who gives up the raynes of his Reason to the entire conduct of
Sensuality, and puts his soul into the devils power, (by submitting to all
sinful suggestions), to be driven and dragged on uncontrollably to all Ephesians.
2. 2 You walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince
of the air, etc. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The animal man perceives not the things of
God's Spirit, etc. Philip. 3. 19. Whose God is their belly. James. 3. 15. This
Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly* sensual, devilish, etc. Jude v.
19 Sensual, having not the Spirit. Ps. 31. 9.
wickedness. He walks after the world's perverse course and custom, living in
all things according to his own lust and liking; acknowledging no other
Superior than his own all-swaying affections, no law but that of his own will,
no God but his belly. He easily yields to all his untamed passions and
appetites; glutting his senses unrestrainedly with all alluring objects; and
making pleasure his only end, heaven, and happiness. Briefly, he is all earth,
all sin, all sensuality; in whom is nothing of the Spirit, of grace, of God:
his Understanding is a dungeon of darkness; his Memory a Magazin of bestial
imaginations; his Will a confusion of base and brutish affections; and his
whole man totally depraved and degenerate; resembling the filthy swine, the
unclean goat, and the unbridled horse and mule, which have no understanding.

THE HYPOCONDRIACAL, HYPOCRITICAL AND COUNTERFEIT MAN.
Tinnit: inane est.

Tinnit; Inane est.



Is he who makes a great show of sanctity and devotion, but has Ps. 143. 5.
Touch the mountains and they will smoke
nothing of substance, sincerity, and solidity. Touch him, and he turns into
smoke; sound him, and you shall soon find him to be but a windy cask, Nahum,
20. 2. She is empty, void, and waste. 1. Cor. 13. 1. As sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. Mat. 6. 2. to the 16. Luke. 18. I am not as other men are.
tunnd up with air, an empty echo, a hollow noise, a flatuous an^ foolish
nothing. He wilfully mistakes the means for the end, and places perfection in
pompous forms, Pharisaical fashions, and external practices: If he prays, it is
in public; if he gives alms, he sounds the trumpet; if he fasts, he disfigures
his countenance; if he seemingly punish his body, it is to deceive more surely
under the guise of sanctity; finally, all his actions rather savor of
self-satisfaction and hypocrisy, than have any sense of true piety. Yet he ever
pretends to high lights of the Spirit, finds out new and unheard of ways of
walking with God, sleights all that is common, though never so commendable, and
catches at all that is curious, though never so dangerous. Thus he loses
himself in his own Chymerical conceptions, and pretending to refine ancient
piety, becomes puffed up with secret pride and presumption, and grasps nothing
but froth and vanity

THE SPIRITUAL, SUPERSENSUAL, AND PERFECT MAN,


Is he who walks not in the ways of this wicked world, nor follows the tenants
of flesh, and blood, but of Reason, Religion, and Understand^ng. Romans 8. per
totum If you live after the flesh, you shall die. 1 Cor. 3. 16. You are the
temple of God, and Gods Spirit dwells in you, etc Romans 8. 36 Ps. 44. 22. For thy
sake we are mortified all the day long, etc. Coloss. 3. 5
His only end and aim is the Perfection of God's love in his soul; his
unwearied endeavors are bent against Satan, Sin, Sensuality, and all
Selfishness; his main study, is to make his body obedient to the Spirit, his
Spirit to Reason, his Reason to Faith, and All to God; and his daily practice
is self-mastery and Mortification. And having,

1. Trampled down the Man of sin,

2. Laid a sure and solid groundwork of Devotion,

3. He faithfully applies himself to fight under Christ's banner, and learns
exactly the right use of his spiritual weapons,

4. He carefully eschews his enemies Ambushes,

5. He keeps himself to the continual practice of prayer, introversion,
recollection, abstraction, annihilation, contemplation,

6. He courageously climbs up to the mountain top of Perfection,

7. And lastly he sweetly reposes in divine love and Union; as is more amply
held forth in these following Treatises.

Galathians 6. 8, 9, etc. What things a man shall sow, those also shall he
reap^ For he that sows in his flesh* of the flesh also shall reap corruption:
But he that sowet^ in the Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap life everlasting.
Psalm 125. 6. They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joyfullness.

Going they went, and wept, casting their seeds.

But coming they shall come with Exultations carrying their Sheaves.

^he INDEX of all the CHAPTERS of this Spiritual Conflict: OR, Arraignment of
the spirit of Self-love and Sensuality:
^. I. WHerein Christian perfection consists: and of four things necessary to
obtain it. page 1 ^ap. II. Of Diffidence or distruct of our selves. p. 10 ^ap.
III. Of Confidence in God. p. 14 ^hap. IV. Of Continual exercise: and first,
that the Understanding is to be carefully kept from Ignorance, and from
Curiosity. p. 20 ^hap* V. Of the will: and the end to which we are to direct
all our actions. p. 29 ^hap. VI. Of a twofold Will in man: and the continual
combat between them. p. 38 ^hap. VII. Of the fight with Sensuality: and of the
inward way of the Will to acquire Virtues. p. 43 Chap. VIII. What he must do,
who feels his superior Will or Rcason, overcome by his Sensuality. p. 52 Chap.
IX. That we must not avoid the occasions of the combat^. p. 57 Chap. X. Of the
fight against sudden temp^ations. p. 60. Chap. XI. Of the fight against our
flesh, and fleshly Concupiscence. p. 64. Chap. XII. How to fight against slack^
and negligence. p. 7^ Chap. XIII. How to govern our S^suality. p. 7^ Chap. XIV.
Of the order to be observed ^ fighting against our enemies. p. 10^ Chap. XV.
What course he must take w^ is conquered, and grievously wounded ^ his enemies.
p. 10^ Chap. XVI. That we should keep o^ hearts ever quiet and joyful in our
Lord* p. 10^ Chap. XVII. That pious purposes ^^ sometimes the deceits of the
Devil ^ hinder our progress in virtues. p. 111* Chap. XVIII. How the Devil
endeavou^ to draw us from the way of virtue. p. 11^ Chap. XIX. How our Enemy
endeavors to make our virtues isntrumental to our ruin. p. 144. Chap. XX.
That we must never flatter our selves, as having subdued our enemies, but must
often return to our wonted exercises, as if we were yet Novices in this
Spiritual Conflict. p. 199* Chap. XXI. Of Holy Prayer. p. 200. Chap. XXII.
What inward (or Mental) Prayer is, and what Contemplation; and the use
thereof. p. 208. Chap. XXIII. How we may join Contemplation to this inward
Prayer. p. 211. Chap. XXIV. Of another manner of Prayer, by way of Meditation.
p. 214. Chap. XXV. Of a way of Praying by the intercession of the Blessed
Virgin. p. 215. Chap. XXVI. How to pray and me^^tate by means of the boly
Angels and heavenly Citizens. p. 219 Chap. XXVII. How to meditate upon the holy
Cross, and Christ our Savior banging thereon, to excite and move our
affections. p. 222 Chap. XXVIII. Of sensible devotion: as also of spiritual
dryness and desolation. p. 236 Chap. XXIX. That the worthy frequenting of the
most B. Sacrament, is an esficacious means to conquer our passions. p. 245
Chap. XXX. How to excite in us affections of love, by the sacred Communion. p.
249 Chap. XXXI. Of spiritual Communion. p. 259 Chap. XXXII. Of Thanks giving.
p. 262 Chap. XXXII^. Of the perfect oblation of our selves to our Lord God. p.
263 Chap. XXXIV. How to petition for Divine grace. p. 270 Chap. XXXV. Some
short Observations concerning Meditation. p. 273 Chap. XXXVI. An exercise
before the sacred Communion. p. 278 Chap. XXXVII. How we may devoutly offer up
the sacrifice of the Mass. p. 281 Chap. XXXVIII. An exercise after the holy
Communion. p. 286 Chap. XXXIX. A daily examination. p. 289 Chap. XL. Being a
Conclusion of the whole work. p. 294.


Lord, we have fixed our hopes on thee.


Then let us nere confounded be.


I Kings. 15: 18. Thou shall fight against them until their utter destruction:
(With the four weapons of the Spiritual
Combatant; Diffidence of thy self* Confidence
in God, Continual Exercise, and Devout Prayer.


THE Spiritual Conflict: OR, Of the Perfection of a Christian life.
CHAP. I.
W^erein Christian Perfection consists: And of four things necessary to obtain
it.
IF thou heartily and seriously The importance of this knowledge.
desire, (o dearly beloved in Christ,) to reach the sublimity of Christian
perfection, and to be truly united to thy Lord God, by becoming (...) spirit
with him, (which is the most profitable employment, and the most excellent and
divine enterprise imaginable;) It highly imports thee to understand in the
first place wherein this perfection of spiritual life consists.

2. For some there are, who for Some place perfection in austerity.
want of this necessary consideration, imagine that this high perfection is
placed in leading an austere life, in the maceration of the flesh, in the use
of hair-cloth, in much fasting, watching, and the like rigorous exercises, and
bodily afflictions.

3. Others, especially women, judge Others in reciting many prayers.
of their progress in spirituality, by their daily recital of many prayers,
their assisting at many Masses, their frequent Confessions, and Communions.

4. And there are very many, (ye^ Others in their exact observance.
even some of them, Religious and cloistered persons) who persuade themselves
that perfection consists in frequenting the Quire, in the exact observance of
silence, and solitude, and in well-ordered discipline.

5. Thus some by these pious practices, All which are good means, but not
directly tending to perfection.
some by other external exercises, tend to this desired perfection; but are
all wide of the direct way leading unto it: For though these outward and devout
employmen^ conduce very much toward the attaining it, yet in them alone, and
their exactest observance, it consists not: It Is true, that the discreet use of
them, is doubtlesly a forcible means to obtain the Grace of the holy Ghost; to
fortify us against our fleshes frailty; to shield and arm us against the
deceits and assaults of our common and cruel enemy: and finally to perform our
practices of piety (especially whilst we are new-champions and Novices in this
spiritual conflict) with more sweetness and alacrity: Yea they produce plenty
of fruits to them also who are well-experienced and skillful combatants in this
holy warfare; who therefore afflict their body, because it has been
isntrumental ^ the offense of their Creator; therefore love silence and live
in so^tude, to shun all ocasion of sin, and to attend their heavenly
me^itations with more quiet and tran^uillity, being untangled from the ^orlds
impediments; they are de^out and diligent performers of the ^ivine office; they
are fervent and requent in works of charity, in prayer, and holy Communion; and
all this for no other reason than God's honor and Glory, and to unite
themselves to him, by the sacred bonds of sincere affection.

6. Yet they who rest here, and And they that rest in these lower exercises are
in great danger;
place their end in these outward exercises, do often times endanger their own
Salvation; and this not by reason of the exercises themselves, (which are truly
and naturally holy, and warranted by the practice and example of many great and
glorious Saints,) but for that they are so totally attentive to these lower
exercises, as they leave their inward man in its natural affections, and
unrescu^d from the snares of the devil. For the deceitful fiend, finding them
gone astray in following their affections to those devotions, gives them not
only peace but also pleasure in the pursuance of them; they seem to taste they
very sweets of Paradise, yea to walk and talk with God, and hear his divine
whispers in their Souls; such is their vain persuasion! And are sometimes so
absorpt in their curious and deep fancies of meditation, that they conceit
themselves even separated from the world, severed from all creatures, and rapt
into the third heaven.

7. But how dangerously all such As may appear by the rest of their actions,
Souls are deceived, and how wide they are strayed from the right way of
perfection, will easily appear by the rest of their actions: For they are
commonly very singular, curious, censurers of their neighbors lives and
conversations, and prone to murmur at their proceedings: And when themselves
are advertised of their own errors, or never so little hindered from their
accustomed exercises, (which they frequent chiefly for fashion's sake,) or
barred from the ordinary use of the Sacraments; you shall presently perceive
them fall into passion, unquietness, and despair.

8. And if it pleases God, (to the And especcially by their want of
resignation in time of affliction.
end they may truly understand their own state,) to send them some infirmity,
or permit some tribulation to befall them, (for such trialls are his
touchstones, whereby he proves his servants sincerity,) O how soon shall you
discover the false foundation whereon they built the edifice of their feigned
devotion? how rotten is their inward man, and how full of secret pride? For
they refuse to resign their wills, and to humble their hearts under God's
powerful hand, in all the changeable courses of prosperity and adversity: They
will not, according to the divine example of God's humble suffering Son,
subject themselves to all creatures, nor take their seeming enemies, (that
which truly they are) to be their true friends, as being instruments of God's
goodness, pomotours of their perfection, and helpers in the reformation of
their unmortified passions: which is an evident sign of their dangerous state.
For the eyes of their souls are dazzled and corrupted by gazing upon these
outward actions, (though good,) arrogating to themselves, I know not what
degrees of perfection; and from thence falling into self-conceit, they judge
rashly, and contemn others. Nor can they be recalled or cured, unless God
himself strikes strongly at the door of their hearts, and dissipates the
darkness of their interior with the divine rays of his gracious light; making
them see their own danger, and seek the remedy: For a great and manifest
sinner is more easily reclamed, than a seeming Saint; whose secret iniquity, is
shrouded under the appearance of virtue and piety.

9. Thus then it is manifest unto True perfection therefore, consists in the
knowledge of God and our selves.
thee, (o my beloved,) that spiritual perfection consists not at all in the
aforesaid practices and persuasions. Know therefore that it is placed in no
other thing, than In the true knowledge of Gods goodness and greatness; and
of our own baseness, misery, and nothing, and of the pronenesse of our
natural affections to all malice: Also, in the hatred of our selves, and the
love In the love of God, and hatred of our selves; In resignation to Gods will,
and denying of our own.
of God: And lastly, in the absolute denying of our own will, and entire
resignation of it to the divine will and pleasure: That is, that we totally
submit our selves, not only to the Almighty God, but even to every one of his
creatures for his sake; and this for no other end, than only to please his
divine Majesty, who deserves to be purely served, highly honored, perfectly
praised and glorified by all.

10. This is the Abnegation which All which Christ has taught us by word and
example.
Christ our savior so often inculcated; This is the Obedience, to which God's
son invites and directs his faithful followers, both by his words and by his
example; This is the desirable Cross, which his diligent servants are to lay
on their shoulders, and so follow the steps of their Savior; This is that
love, which our Lord so seriously, frequently and carefully recommended to the
whole world, and especially to his Disciples, as his particular friends and
children, after his last supper.

11. If then (my dearly beloved) thou intendest to attain to this high And we
must also do it, if we mean to purchase victory.
perfection; thou must use violence to thy self, and vanquish thine own
affections both great and small; thou must affect this fight, and instruct thy
mind to wage this holy war. For the crown of victory is conferred only upon the
stout and lawful combatants. Nor is there any thing more glorious to our
selves, or more grateful to God.


12. For as this battle (we now treat of) is the greatest, and of most
difficulty; so is the ensuing victory most glorious to our selves, and most
grateful to God: in so much as if thou overcommest, subduest, mortifiest, and
rootest out thine own disordinate and unruly affections; thou offerest up to
God a more agreeable sacrifice, than if (neglecting this) thou should whip
thy body till it were embrued in it is own blood, or fast beyond the austerity
of the strictest Anchorites, or convert thousands of Infidels and sinners to
Christ's faith and perfect penance: For though the conversion of souls be in
it self more dear to our Lord God, than the renouncing of our own wills in
small matters, yet it is thy part to will and do that chiefly and most
carefully which He most strictly requires of thee: And this is undoubtedly the
serious mortification of thy untamed passions, wherein thou shall better please
him, than in any other highest and holiest employment.

13. Being thus instructed, (o dearly But to obtain it, we must provide four
necessary weapons.
beloved,) wherein Christian perfection consists; and that to obtain it,
thou must adventure upon a cruel and continual war, if thou intendest to be
a conqueror: It befits thee like a stout Christian champion, to arm thy-self
with Four necessary weapons,

which are, 1. Diffidence of thy self. 2. Confidence in God. 3. Continual
exercise. 4. Devout prayer.

Of all which weapons, I shall (by Gods assistance) now briefly treat,
according to their several orders.

CHAP. II.
Of the diffidence, or distrust of our selves.
THis diffidence of thy self, may be obtained by three manner Distrust of our
selves, which is gotten; First by a deep sense of our own nothing.
of ways: First, by a deep sense of thine own baseness and misery, truly
acknowledging that of thy self thou can not do the least good thing: For
man can no more effect any good or meritorious work by his own power, than a
stone (if I may say it) is able of it-selfe to ascend upwards: and he has
almost the like inclination to evil, as a heavy stone has to the Earth's
center.

2. The second way to get this self-distrust, 2. By Prayer.
is to demand it of him, whose gracious gift it is, with humble and earnest
prayers: And to prevail in thy petition, thou must first yield that thou truly
want it, and that of thy self thou can never attain to it: and thus
totally naked, present thy prayer with a constant faith, and a courageous hope
to be heard, and to obtain this desired diffidence of thy self. But let thy
prayer increase in daily fervor, and expect with perseverance the divine
pleasure in the grant of thy petition: and then be confident, it will sooner or
later be granted unto thee.

3. The Third is, That as often as thou 3. By often reflecting upon our own
weakness.
failest and fallest into sin, thou presently turn thy souls eye toward thine
own baseness, misery, and inabilily to act any thing that is good; for until
this be truly known, and humbly acknowledged by thee, never hope to be secure
from falling.

4. Whosoever therefore aspi^es to And this self-knowledge, is leston mus^ needs
be learned.
a blessed union with the increated verity, must first study this necessary
lesson of selfe-knowledg: For God permits the proud and presumptuous to fall
sometimes into some grievous sin, that so they may be forced to confess their
own frailty, and impotency: and according as their pride is greater or less,
so is their fall more or less grievous: in so much, as if there were no pride
in man, (as there was none in the sacred Virgin Mary) there should likewise be
no fall into any sin.

5. Wherefore presently upon thy And we must be careful to rise speedily
after our fall.
fall, hasten thy thoughts to an humble reflection upon thine own nothing; beg
instantly and ardently of thy Lord God, his true and inward light, to see thy
own frailty and infirmity, and to keep thee from more dangerous fallings for
the future.

EXPLICATION.
THis distrust of thy self (my The great necessity of this distrust in our own
strength,
dearly beloved) is so necessary for thee in this combat, that without it, thou
can not only never hope to obtain thy so-much-desired conquest over thy
enemies, but not so much as to surmount the least of thy passions or
imperfections. Thou art therefore seriously and frequently to reflect upon the
corruption of is enforced by the corruption of our nature;
thy natural inclination, which makes thee apt to conceive a good opinion of
thy self and thine own actions, and to persuade thy self that thou art
something, when as indeed thou art nothing at all. Weigh further And the
weakness thereof;
the vanity and presumption of such self-conceits, and the weakness of thine
own forces; and consider how And by considering how this acknowledgment
pleases God, and how much presumption displeases him.
displeasing the one is to the divine Majesty, and how pleasing the other; for
our Lord loves a free confession of our own frailty, and a real acknowlegment
of our total dependancy upon his power and providence, from whose bounty and
benignity all grace and goodness is derived into our souls; since being left
to our selves, we can neither think nor act any one thing which has the least
degree of worth or merit.

Wherefore study well this first Thou art therefore to study this fundamental
lesson.
and fundamental lesson, as being a matter of highest importance, and yet the
work of God's holy hand, which he teaches his dear friends, sometimes by his
heavenly inspirations, other times by permitting them to fall grievously, and
to be tempted violently, and by other ways unknown to thy self: and be sure
to make serious use of the three proposed ways in the precedent chapter; by the
due performance and practice whereof, and thy concurrence with God's
never-wanting grace, thou may confidently hope to attain it.

CHAP. III.
Of Confidence in God.
THou see then how useful and Self-distrust is: but yet if thou enterest the
field to fight with that only weapon, thou must look to be either speedily
vanquished, or basely put to flight. Wherefore having fitted thy self with
this first armor, Distrust of thy self; let thy 2 Confidence in God, which is
obtained
next diligence be employed to get a pious Confidence in God, begging, hoping,
and expecting from him all good, and help whatsoever. In obtaining whereof,
make use also of these three advices.

2. For first thou art to crave it instantly, 1 By prayer.
and ently and humbly of the divine Majesty.

3. Then, thou art to consider his 2 By considering the divine power, wisdom
and goodness, by which he can, knows how, and is willing to help.
wonderful power, and contemplate his infinite wisdom, from whence thou will
conclude, that nothing is either impossible to him, or difficult. Then weigh
his boundless goodness, which is ever ready to pour plentifully upon the^
all necessaries for thy spiritual proficiency, and all things useful for thy
gaining an entire victory over thy enemies. For how can it be possible that
this holy and heavenly Shepherd, who for full thirty-three years space has
so carefully run after this strayed sheep, so lovingly recalled her home to
himself; so painfully sought her, and so dearly bought her with the price of
his blood, and loss of his life; should avert his eyes of compassion from her
when she cries, calls, and converts her self unto him? Oh, how can he forget
his own promise, and not lay her upon his sacred shoulders, and celebrate a
Feast of joy and jubilation with his heavenly Citizens for her happy reduction?
Or who can imagine, that our loving Lord God, who so much desires to dwell in
our hearts, and feast in our souls; and to this end, is ever knocking at those
doors for admittance, that so he may replenish us with the Heavenly Treasures
of his graces; should then shut his ears, when we open to him our hearts, or
should refuse to give us admittance, when we humbly and earnestly invite him
to our banquet?

4. And thirdly, For the obtaining 3. By meditating upon holy writ.
this holy confidence and trust in God; make use of the infallible truth of
sacred Scriptures: which frequently and manifestly tell thee, that who so place
their Confidence in their Lord God, are never confounded.

5. There is also another way to get this Distrust of our selves and An other
means is by thinking on our own frail^y, and Gods omnipotency at the beginning
of each action.
Confidence in God; Which is, never to set upon any work, before thou first
make reflection upon thine own frailty, and thy Lords omnipotency. For if
thou observest not this order in the beginning of thy enterprises, thou shall
find thy self oftentimes deceived, even when thou think to have undertaken
them in the best manner: because pride and presumption are so inherent in our
nature, that our whole live's diligence, is scarcely sufficient to drive them
out; and therefore thou must so order thine actions, that still the thought of
thine own nothing, and God's all sufficiency, and readiness to assist thee,
go before them. And here, look diligently to thy self, that thou be not
deceived: For oftentimes when thou imaginest to have truly attained to this
Diffidence in thy self, and Confidence in God, thou art far short of it; as
thou may easily perceive, by the remaining motions of thy mind, and frequent
fallings into imperfections: Whereby we shall not be foolishly dejected at our
frequent fallings.
For if these relapses make thee sad, unquiet, and in a manner desperate of thy
spiritual progress; it is an evident sign that thy confidence is in thy
self only, and not in thy Creatours goodness: And if thy sadness and
despair be great, great also is thy confidence in thy self, and little is thy
trust in God; as on the contrary, if thou have a true distrust of thy own
self, and a perfect confidence in God only, thou will not much marvel at thy
own frailty, nor be vainly dejected at thy frequent fallings, which proceed
from thy own weakness, and therefore hinder not thy confidence in God's
goodness. So that thou will conceive a holy anger against thy self for thy
sins, and with an humble sorrow for thy offense, wilt trust hereafter less
to thy self, and more in God; and with a new-enkindled zeal, and greater
courage than before, wilt follow thy begun enterprise to get the victory in
this spiritual warfare, and pursue thy enemies even to death.

6. And would to God these A necessary caveat for all spiritual people.
truths were diligently dived into by some, who seem to be spiritual; and
yet they no sooner fall into defects, but they presently become impatient, and
cannot be quieted, till they have recourse to their ghostly Father, rather for
their own solace, than for any true devotion: when as the prime motive of their
coming to him should be to purge their souls from sin by absolution, and to
obtain new strength against their enemies by the sacred Communion.

EXPLICATION.
AS we can promise to our selves By God's assistance we can do all things.
nothing but faylings and fallings, because we are of our selves nothing; so
also we may certainly promise to our selves from our God an entire victory over
all our enemies, if we arm our hearts with a lively confidence in his divine
Majesty. But Wherein many are deceived,
many deceive themselves in supposing that the pusillanimity and disquiet
following their fall, is an effect of virtue, because it is accompanied with a
displeasure for their offense; when as indeed it springs from pride and
presumption, and is founded in selfe-confidence, and conceit of their own
strength, to which they too By reason of their pride and presumption in their
own strength.
much trusting, find by the woeful experience of their fall, that they are
truly weak, and really nothing, and thereupon they become troubled and
astonished, as at a new thing; and so lose their courage, seeing that prop
which sustained their vain confidence, fallen down to the ground. But this
befalls not them who are truly humble; For they confiding in God alone, nothing
presuming of themselves, when they chance to fall into any fault, feel indeed
a true grief in their souls; but are neither disquieted nor astonished, seeing
clearly (by the light of truth) that this proceeds from their own misery,
frailty, and presumption.

CHAP. IV.
Of continual exercise: and first, that the Understanding is carefully to be
kept from Ignorance, and from Curiosity.
IT has been hitherto declared, The third spiritual weapon, is continual
exercise;
how much this Distrust of our selves, and trust in Gods goodness, help us on,
in our spiritual conflict: But they alone are yet insufficient to gain the
victory, and keep us from relapses; and therefore besides these two, a third
weapon is necessary, which we above termed Continual Exercise; and this
chiefly consists in the rectified use of our Understanding Which consists, in
the right use of the understanding.
and Will.

2. First therefore the Understanding is to be carefully kept from two great
evils, Ignorance, and Curiosity: From Ignorance, that it may be pure and
clear, and so we may The understanding is to be kept from Ignorance,
see what is necessary for the taming of our passions, and overcomming of our
affections.

3. And this light may be obtained two manner of ways: First and chiefly by
earnest Prayer, invoking First, by prayer,
and imploring God's holy Spirit to infuse this light into thy soul. Secondly,
Secondly, by a diligent search into our own actions.
by daily practice of a profound and accurate search into all thine own actions
and affairs; not only as they appear outwardly, but rather as they are truly
in themselves. Do but make trial of this exercise for a time, and thou will
come easily to understand what things and actions are good, and what are evil;
as also what are truly good, and what are only in show, promising much by
their outward splendor, but performing indeed nothing, nor any way conducing
to the quiet of thy conscience.

EXPLICATION.
THis point, [which is, to estimate This search into all things according to
their true worth, will open our eyes to see the meanness of all worldly
vanities.
all things according to their true and real worth and goodnesse] being well
practiced, will open our eyes to see the poorness of all such toys which
worldlings most desire and delight in; It will show us, that earthly honors
and pleasures, are mere vanities and afflictions of spirit; That injuries,
infamies and affronts, patiently suffered, are the harbingers of true
happiness and glory; That afflictions are indeed freindships, and that seeming
crosses are followed with certain contentments; That to despise the world, is
better than to be master of it; and that to be willingly obedient for the love
of God, to the meanest creature, is a more magnanimous action, and the sign of
a more generous spirit, than to command the greatest Kings; That the humble
ackowledgment of our own nothing, is more acceptable to the divine Majesty,
than to dive into the height and depth of all sciences; That to quel and
conquer our own appetites and imperfections, though they be never so small,
merits more praise, than to force the strongest holds, than to triumph over the
greatest armies, than to work the greatest miracles, or raise the dead out of
their graves. All which things, and others of like nature, are not sincerely
discerned by us, because before we enter into our selves to weigh them well as
we ought, and as they truly are, we permit our fancy to be prevented,
prepossessed, and surprised, with some sensual affection toward them; which
so darkens and dimms our understandings, that they are rendered incapable to
judge of those objects rightly and impartially, as they should, and they truly
deserve.

4. Wherefore give an attentive Text. A necessary caveat; to keep the will from
fixing it is love
care (o dearly beloved) to what I shall now tell thee, for it will much
further thee to fight successefully: The means to know the true nature and
properties of all things, which occur in thy daily transactions, is by taking
special care to keep thy Will pure and free from all motion of love and
affection, which look not directly upon God himself, or upon the means leading
unto him. For to the end thy Understanding may rightly distinguish good from
evil, it must first consider it, before thy Will has made it is election or
Until the Understanding have first pondered the object.
reprobation of it; because when the Will has fastened once it is affection upon
the object, the Understanding is hindered from coming to a true knowledge
thereof; by reason that the consent of the Will intervening, leaves it so
involved and obscured, that it appears far fairer to the Understanding, than
it is in it self: And hence it happens, that the object being thus falsely
represented to the Will, becomes too too passionately beloved and embraced,
without the due enquiry of its real goodness: And by how much the desire or
love of the Will is more vehement; by so much the Understanding is more grossly
clowded in its judgment; and being so deceived invites the Will to a^ increase
of affection toward it. So that these too chief powers of man's soul,
miserably deceived and misled, walk continually as in a circle, from this
darkness into others, and fall from one great error, into others more
grievous.

5. Take heed therefore of fastening thy affection upon any thing And the same
caveat is necessary also in holy things.
whatsoever, before it be well weighed and examined by the Understanding, and
recommended to God in prayer; that so thou may truly discern, whether it be
good or evil. And to this I exhort thee, not only in all indifferent things,
but even in them also which are good and holy; for though they are evidently
good in themselves, yet they may prove otherwise to thee by reason of some
circumstance of time, place, measure, or obedience: Whence it often happens,
that many have endangered themselves in their most laudable and holiest
exercises.

6. Thou must also warily retain The Understanding is to be also weaned from
Curiosity,
thy Understanding from Curiosity; lest it draw that into the soul, which may
retard it in the intended purchase of victory. For a curious enquiry after
earthly things, which are impertinent to thy spiritual purpose, though it may
be sometimes permitted, yet, it is generally the poison of the spirit: Restrain
therefore thy Understanding to thy utmost, and strive to make it simple and
foolish. And made simple and foolish to worldly things.
As for the changes and chances in the world, whether they be great or small,
if they concern thee not, consider them not. And when thou needs must hear or
behold them, let thy Will always contradict them. Yea even in the knowledge of
heavenly things, be sober and humble, and content thy self in the only desire
to know thy crucified Savior, and his blessed life and death. Abandon all
other things; for so thou shall yield to thy Lord a most grateful service, who
puts them into the list of his best friends, that desire no more knowledge than
what is sufficient to inflame their hearts in the love of his goodness, and
hatred of their own wickedness, for in the search of all other knowledge,
nothing but self-love and a certain pernicious pride, lies secretly lurking.

7. If thou thus weanest thy Understanding How highly this conduces to
perfection,
from these curiosities, thou shall happily escape many ambushes of thy
enemies: For the wicked spirit, marking the unchangeable will and resolution of
those travelers tending to spiritual perfection, not to yield their consent
to sin; lays his crafty plots first against their Understanding, that so he
may by little and little get the mastery And how cunningly the devil plots
against i^,
over it, and the Will together. To this end, he suggests to the learned and
sharpwitted, sublime and subtle conceits; that they may think themselves
already united to the divinity, and so forget themselves, and give over the
correction of their own consciences, the resignation of their wills, and study
of their own nothing: And thus they are ensnared By suggesting pride to our
understanding;
with pride, and make to themselves a certain Idol of their own wisdom in
their Understandings; and are so highly puffed up and perplexed in these vain
thoughts, that they now persuade themselves, not to stand in any need of others
counsel or direction.

8. O the danger that these souls Which is far more dangerous, and more
difficulty cured, than that of the Will.
are in! and how hardly are they cured? by reason that the pride of the
Understanding is far more perilous than that of the Will: For he that is
proud only in Will, omits not all obedience, but submits his judgment
sometimes to others, which he preferres before his own, and believes it to be
better: But he that is puffed up with the pride of his Understanding, and
assuredly believes his own opinion to be better than that of others; ah! what
hope is there of his cure? How shall he be brought to submit to another
judgment, when as he thinks himself the wiser man? For when the Understanding
(which is the souls eye, and should both see and correct its secret pride,) is
it self blind, and blown up with presumption; when light it self is become
darkness, and the very Rule crooked, thou easily conceivest what follows, and
what the end of those things is like to be, which depend upon such principles.
Wherefore take timely care to prevent this pride, before it pierce thee to the
marrow; yield not up the reins to thy understanding, but subject it to
counsel, and submit thine own sense to others judgments; become a fool in
thy own conceit for the love of thy Lord, and by this means thou shall be
wiser than Solomon.

CHAP. V.
Of the Will: and the end, to which we are to direct all our actions.
IF thou desire (o dearly beloved) 1. A will to do well, suffices not:
to become one spirit with thy Lord God, it is not enough to have a pious and
prompt will to do good works; but even that good thou do, must (by his
divine help and motion) be totally referred to Gods honor, and to please him
only. In But our actions must be performed only to please God.
this thou must look to have a strong conflict with thine own nature, which in
all her actions and omissions seeks her own commodity and complacence,
especially in things spiritual: Hence it is, that when any good thing is
proposed to be performed as from Gods will and pleasure, she readily
undertakes to perform it; but yet not as a thing pleasing to God, or proposed
by him, but rather because she considers the commodities and content which man
reaps by doing the will of God.

2. Wherefore, to the end thou Which that thou may attain to,
may wrest thy self out of this dangerous snare of the Devil, and pernicious
stumbling block cast in the way of perfection; and by degrees get a custom to
do or not to do, because God will have it so, and with an intention to please
him only (who should be the entrance and end of all our actions;) listen
diligently to these following advices.

3. When a thing is presented unto Apply thy understanding to Gods will,
thee to be performed, which is agreeable to the divine Will: first lift up
thy Understanding unto God before thou appliest thy Will to execute it; thus
thou shall clearly discern, that it is his divine pleasure thou should
perform it; and that thou should do it solely for his Honor and good
liking: And that thy will is drawn and moved by the divine will to effect this
work for this only end and intention, because God will have it so, for the
honor and glory of his own most sacred Majesty.

4. So likewise, when thou would omit or refuse the things not willed And
take heed of being deceived;
by God; resolve not rashly upon this omission, until thou have directed the
eye of thy Understanding to the divine will (as is even now declared.) And take
particular care over thy self, lest thou be deceived; because it may many
times seem to thee that thou actest or omittest this or that, for Gods will and
pleasure, when indeed it is otherwise; for because nature is subject to seek
herself.
nature does so secretly seek her self in our enterprises; that those very
things, which thou think please or displease thee only for the love of God,
are principally willed or refused for thy self-interest.

5. Wherefore in the very entrance into any action whatsoever, dispoile thy
self to the utmost of thy power, of all intentions which has the least
mixture of this proper interest: nor do thou adventure to act or omit any
thing, till thou feel and find thy self inwardly moved, to begin and go
on with it, for Gods only will and pleasure.

6. But if thou want time and This intention of doing all for God, is to be
always made in the entrance to any work.
leisure to make this intention, and to ponder the causes moving thee to do or
omit every work; take care to do it when occasion gives thee permission; and
then from thy intention, to seek only Gods good pleasure and honor in each
one of thy actions and omissions: Now in other affairs, which admit of more
deliberation, let this formal and express intention be made at the beginning
of thy putting hand unto them: as also in things of longer durance, this
intention is to be often renewed; And to be renewed in the progress of it,
lest after right beginning, some crooked intention may chance to creep into
thy mind: And thus thou may shun the secret deceits of thine own Nature,
which is too prone to seek her-self, and to invert thy well-made intentions,
and in stead of Gods honor, strike in for her own interest.

7. So that a champion who is not Lest self-love creep in, and so change and
corrupt it.
very vigilant in this doubtful fight, may (as you see) often begin good
works, and intend to perform them punctually according to the divine will and
liking; and yet afterward, almost unawares, the same works may begin to please
himself so much for his own sake, that he may wholly forget Gods glory and
honor. And thus by little and little he may become so changed, bewitched, and
abstracted, with the pleasure, profit, and honor, redounding to himself from
these works; that if these private conveniences chance to be abstructed, by
means of sickness or other accidents whatsoever, he presently remains much
troubled, contristated, and disquieted; nor can he without great difficulty be
drawn to his first pure Intention, of doing what God would have him for his
only divine honor and glory.

EXPLICATION.
WHence it manifestly appears, He that does all things purely to please God,
remains in perfect indifferency;
that he acted not as moved by God, nor was his intention purely for God: For
whosoever follows Gods motion, and desires to satisfy him alone, fixes not
his affection upon one thing more than another, but is ready to have this, do
that, or leave the other thing, in what manner, time, and circumstance it
pleases God: So that he remains in such an indifferency, that whether he has
it, or has it not, he is equally pleased and pacified, always quiet and
content; because however it falls out, he has what he desires, and enjoyes the
end he aimed at, which was no other, than And has always what he desires.
to be conformable to his Lord God.

8. In all thy actions therefore, and omissions, carefully cherish this Text.
Therefore this right intention is of high importance,
right Intention; for it is not to be expressed, what strength, efficacy and
comfort it will afford thee; in so much as the very least and meanest thing
thus performed, (to please God, and for the honor of his name,) are of more
merit and higher value in his sight, than the most heroicque works which are
done without it.

EXPLICATION.
BUt if sometimes the disposition 9. This purity of intention may be kept even
in things aiming at our own good.
of thy soul seems to call upon thee to act any good thing which points more
directly at thy own good than Gods only glory; [as, To avoid eternal
punishment, or to obtain the bliss of Paradise:] Yet even in this also thou
may propose to thy self this perfect end of the divine will; who is well
pleased that thou should not descend into hell, but enjoy his heavenly
Kingdom: And thus thou will keep alive in thy And it puts such a worth upon
our actions,
heart this holy motive upon all occasions whatsoever, of the importance
whereof, I need not enlarge this discourse; It being most certain, that as the
most holy and heroique That the best action without it is lost, and may be
sinful; And the smallest action with it is most acceptable to God.
work becomes not only defective and utterly lost, if it be not done for a good
end, but may become even sinful if it is end be sinister: So on the contrary,
the smallest and least action, has an inestimable price and value when done
with an intention looking simply upon God, and his good will and pleasure; in
so much, that a single penny bestowed on the poor, is more acceptable to the
divine Majesty, because it is given purely to please him; than if the same
person should liberally profuse all his temporalities for any other end
whatsoever, as, to gain thereby the joys of heaven; though this end is not
only good, but very much to be desired.

10. This exercise, (of accommodating all our actions purely and only to
please God, to sigh always after God, to seek God in every thing we do or
omit, and to aspire perpetually to God with lively and lovely affections, as to
our most amiable and only good, which deserves in himself that all rational
creatures should honor, serve, and love him above all other things,) may seem
at first very difficult, but use will render it If this exercise seem hard at
first, yet use will render it easy,
facile; and the frequent consideration of Gods infinite worth, will so inflame
the Will in the production of the aforesaid acts of fervor and affection, that
we shall with much ease and speed get a habit of doing And soon beget a habit
in our souls;
all things for his only sake and respect, who only deserves it. To which also
the ensuing reflections upon our own obligations to do it, will not a little
conduce.

11. For who can choose but be Especially if we consider,
persuaded to search and will Gods pure honor, with an entire resignation to
the ordinances of his divine How dearly our Lord has loved us.
providence in all things, if he often call to his remembrance, how much he
has first honored and loved him? As in our Creation, he made Which appears
in our Creation, Redemption,
us of nothing to be like himself, and produced all other creatures in order to
our service: IN our Redemption, he sent no Angel, but his only Son to pay our
ransom, not by the corruptible value of gold and silver, but by the infinite
price of his own precious blood, and by his dolorous and disgraceful death. IN
our Preservation,
Preservation, each hour and moment, fighting our battails for us against our
enemies, preventing and accompanying us with his heavenly grace, and leaving
with us his dear Son, always ready for our support and sustenance in the
Holy Sacrament of the Altar, THESE verily And many other benefits,
and many more, are evident tokens of the high price he puts upon our meanness
and misery, and of the love which our great Creator bears to us his poor and
caitif creatures; and are in themselves such inestimable benefits, that none
but Which are so great, that none but God himself can comprehend them.
his own divine understanding is capable to comprehend the least thereof: And
how much then are we bound in exchange, to do for so excellent a Majesty, who
has done such things for us? For if worldly Potentats, receiving honor from
private persons of lowest rank, think themselves bound to return them
reciprocal honor, what ought our vileness endeavor toward the supreme
Monarch of the Universe, who so highly courts and cherishes us.

CHAP. VI.
Of a twofold Will in man; and the continual fight between them.
THou must take notice (my dearly 2. Wills. Rational, and Sensual.
beloved,) of two Wills in man: The one of Reason, which is therefore called
Rational and superior; The other of Sense, and so is named Sensual,
inferior; and sometimes, sensuality, appetite, concupiscence, flesh, passion,
and the like. And though each one of these is in man; yet because the use of
Reason truly makes us and denominates us men, we should never own any thing,
which our mere sensuality dictates, till our superior and rational Will
gives her joint consent.

2. From this diversity springs all The Rational is seated between Gods grace,
and our sense.
our spiritual conflict: For our superior Will and Reason being middled
between Gods Will, which is above it, and our Sensuality, which is under it,
still tempting and enticing it to naughtiness: therefore both of them, that
is, Gods Will and our own Sensuality, strive to get this our rational Will, to
side with them, and sometimes that, othertimes this, renders her subject and
obedient to them.

3. But this battle is of no great And the truly virtuous persons yield
promptly to Gods will,
difficulty to them who are either truly virtuous, or downright vicious. For
they who are virtuous, come no sooner to the knowledge of Gods holy will, but
they presently yield their consent, and bridle their brutish sensuality: And
the wicked do And the vicious to their sensuality.
contrarily according to their appetite, checking the divine will which
contradicts it. They therefore chieflly feel the brunt of this battle,
(especially at first,) who have been great sinners, and are now resolved upon
amendment, and to this end sever themselves from worldly and fleshly delights,
the better to love and serve their Lord Jesus Christ for the future. For the
inward feeling and strokes of Gods will, which their But they who of sinners
are become converts have the greatest conflict;
Reason receives from above; and the cruel contradictions and adverse motion of
their Sensuality, which it must necessarily suffer from below; are so powerful
on each side, that the poor Reason is between them both brought into extreme
straits and perplexities.

4, Wherefore let none think to Who must therefore resolve to bear patiently
the loss of their pleasures.
gain the victory, who is not instructed, prepared, and resolved to support
patiently all such pains, as he shall endure in leaving his past pleasures: For
this surely seems one of the chief causes why so few attain to true perfection;
because, feeling grief and trouble in the beginning of their conversion, and in
the quitting of their depraved affections and desires, they stand not fast to
their resolutions, but yield to their enemies, who treacherously invade them,
not making manlike resistance with the sword of Reason; but rather like
cowardly soldiers, they skulke away, throw down their arms, yield themselves
to the mercy of their enemies, and become again their bondslaves who will now
more than formerly tyrannize over them.

EXPLICATION.
ANd amongst these, one may Diverse sorts of unmortified souls.
pick out some, who indeed neither take away, nor detain their neighbors
goods wrongfully; but yet have their affections fixed excessively upon them
which they possess justly: so likewise they will not purchase honors
unlawfully, but they love and desire them passionately; They will keep the
commanded fastings punctually, but care not to mortify their gluttony; They
will live continently, but are loath to leave pleasing company, which hinders
their union with God, and greatly retards them in their tendance to perfection:
From all which, and the like petty-affections, Whose affections are accompanied
with much imperfection.
it follows, that their good works are performed with a certain irksomeness of
mind, and are accompanied with diverse self-interests, and secret imperfections,
yea with self-conceit and good liking of their own actions, and with a longing
desire to be liked and loved by others: But all these, not only make no
progress in the way of spirituality, but even return backwards, and And who
make no progress in spirituality,
are in eminent hazard to fall into their former follies; because they are
neither inamoured with true virtue, nor grateful to their loving Creator, who
has freed them from the tyranny of the Devil: They are moreover stricken with
Ignorance and blindness, since they But are full of ignorance and blindness.
neither understand nor see their ow^ danger, but falsely and foolishly fancy
themselves to be in a state of security.

5. And here thou may perceive a Text. A danger in the choice of spiritual
exercises discovered.
very perilous and pernicious deceit, which very few take true notice of: For
many beginners in a spiritual course, out of self-love make choice of such
exercises as are most pleasing to themselves, rather than most profitable unto
their souls: when as indeed, they ought to begin with the knowledge of their own
natural affections, and the naughty desires of their sensuality; and to make
their first and fiercest encounter with these enemies: and so long falling on
and following this fight, till they be entirely subdued to Reasons Empire, as
far forth as in this life is possible.

CHAP. VII.
Of the fight against Sensuality: and of the inward way of the Will, to acquire
Virtues.
AS often as thou feel thy self assaulted by the motions of 1* When
Sensuality rebels*
thy Sensuality, convert thy mind quickly to thy Lord God, and resist
manfully: And that thou may become a conqueror in this combat, furnish thy
self with these several ways and wards against thy foes. 1. Look presenly to
thy reason that it consent not. 2. Recall that motion again and again, and as
often conquer it.


2. First, let the temptation be no sooner felt in the senses, but that thou
forthwith put a precept of obedience upon the Superior Will or Reason, that it
yield no consent unto it. In the next place, when thou have happily vanquished
and discomfited any such temptation; excite the same again in thy self, and
again repel it with the like fervor: Yea, do it yet again and again, that so
often thou may have occasion more zelously to hate it, to reject it, to
contemn it: And this way is to be used against all temptations, and unruly
affections of thy Sensuality; except only what concerns carnality: whereof
hereafter in its due place.

3. Lastly, let it be thy exercise to 3. Produce acts of those virtues which
are contrary to these vices.
produce frequent and fervent acts of those virtues which are contrary to the
temptations of these vices: For example: Art thou tempted to impatience? Recall
thy mind home into its inner room, and thou shall there perceive, that this
temptation to impatience, does incessantly strive and sight with thy Superior
Will or Reason, to terrify and drive it out of the field, or incline it to
consent: Therefore thou must contradict and resist the said temptation with
redoubled fervor of thy Reason; and never leave off this resistance, till thou
see thine enemy conquered at thy feet, and become thy Captive.

4. Yet here thou art to be adver^ized, But beware of thy cunning enemy, who
sometimes suppresseth these motions.
that our enemy perceiving us ^o constantly and continually to op^ose our
selves against his suggesti^ns, passions and affections, cease ^ometimes (out
of his treacherous ^unning) from stirring them up: And which is more, when they
are ^aised, he sometimes suppresseth them; lest by the frequent fight of our
Reason against them, we should get the habit of those virtues which are
opposite to those passions.

5. It imports thee therefore to For then it is thy part to excite them.
be weary, that thou let not slip this occasion of acquiring these virtues:
And if thou have made a truce with thy foe, and art at peace with thy passions;
yet reduce into memory thy past and overcome temptations; and excite the ill
suggestions which have formerly molested thee, yea and carry thy self so
toward them, as if thou seemedst to consent, and yield them the victory: And
with all mark the motives, arguments, and reasons suggested by thy enemy;
examine what he aims at, what he would have of thee, and to what thou art
inclined; and when thou see thy Sensitive part stirred up, and evil thoughts
ascending, increasing, and almost domineering over thy Reason, which is even
ready to give her consent; Then draw back thy foot, and violently excite good
thoughts in thy soul in opposition to those evil suggestions, boldly denying
them further entrance or longer continuance. And fight the battle over and
over, so And to fight afresh with them,
often and so long, till thou feel in thy self, that thou art now a
conqueror of thy self.

6. But we must yet furthermore Till thou gettest a perfect hatred against them.
take notice, that though we have gallantly fought, and happily foiled our
enemies; we are in no security, till we hate them perfectly. And to excite,
increase, and perfect this our due hatred against them, we must so often (as
aforesaid) stir them up, and provoke them to the combat, thereby to take
occasion of contemning, despising, and abhorring them, (that is our evil
affections,) with the greater indignation; till we at length come to have a
true and constant hatred against them.

7. Now, for the adorning of thy And the way to plant virtues, is to practice
acts contrary to these defects.
soul with vertures, the former fights and exercises against unruly passions,
and evil affections, suffice not; but thou must frequently and fervently
undertake the practice of those affections, and acts of those virtues, which
are contrary to those now-extirpated passions, and overcome vices. As thus: One
gives thee occasion of impatienc^: It is not enough for thee to conquer and
quell this motion according to the now-delivered doctrine; but thou should
moreover desire, that the same person may, in the same manner, more and more
move and molest thee; yea, thou should force thy self to feel content in
that trouble; and make resolutions to suffer more of the like nature, or
greater of any other: And which is yet above all this, thou must constrain thy
self to converse lovingly, speak sweetly, serve cordially that very person,
whose occasion thus moves thee to impatience.

EXPLICATION.
THe reason why such contrary The reason why such contrary acts are so
necessary,
acts are necessary to perfect our virtue; is, for that the root from which the
vice buds forth, can by no other acts so fully be extirpated. Therefore, (to
continnue in the same example,) although when we are slighted and contemned,
we yield not to the motions of impatience, but beat it down with the three
forementioned weapons; yet if we habituate not our selves to make this contempt
pleasing unto us, and to rejoice therein, we shall never be freed and exempt
from the vice of impatience; which (by reason of our natural pronenesse to
seek the increase of our particular reputation,) is founded in the abhorring
Is, for that whilst the root of vice remains alive in us, it will still bud
forth, and choke up our plants of virtue.
of all contempt: And so long as this vicious root remains alive, it will be
still putting forth, and make our virtue languish and droop, yea and sometimes
choke it up: besides, that it puts us to perpetual danger of relapses upon all
occasions which are represented unto us: whence it is clear, that without the
practice of such contrary acts, we can never obtain the true habits of virtues.
And you are further to be instructed, that these acts must be so fervent,
frequent, Therefore we must make many acts, contrary to the vicious habit,
and numerous, that they may be capable to destroy totally the vicious habit;
which having got the possession of our heart by many vicious acts, must be
thence extracted by many acts of contrary nature, that the desired virtuous
habit may be let in and implanted. Yea, I That we may implant the habit of
virtue:
moreover advertise you, that more good acts are required to obtain a habit of
virtue, than vicious acts to get the habit of vice, because those are not
assisted, (as these are,) by nature corrupted with sin. I add to all this, that
if the virtue which you practice, requires it, you are to make outward acts
conformable to the inward: And these acts must be external as well as
internal. Text. Which is indeed full of pain, but very full of profit.
as, (in the aforesaid subject,) you must use words of love and sweetness; and
strive to find out, and lay hold on some occasion, of serving him, whom you
take for your opposite and enemy.

8. And although these practices are full of pain, and seem to be so coldly
performed by thee, that thou perceivest them to go against the hair; yet omit
them not in any case: For if they are painful, they are also profitable;
making thee valiant and bold to fight these holy battails, and preparing thy
way to the victory.

9. Thou art moreover to be advertized, And this diligence must be used al so
against the least evil motions;
that not only these great and grievous temptations, and manifest wickednesses,
are to be stoutly resisted; but even the least and lightest passions and
disordered motions: For these are but forerunners of the greater, opening the
door for them to steal in upon us and oppress us at unawares, and so to
precipitate us into all vices: And it oftentimes falls out with them, who
slight these petty temptations, and care not to use diligence in resisting
them: that when they afterward least suspect it, much more grievous
suggestions, do suddenly, violently, and dangerously invade them. Yea, and
against lawful affections, when they are not absolutely necessary.


10. Lastly, thou must also resolve to skirmish with thy lawful affections, and
deny thy self even in thy honest desires, when they appear not to be
necessary: For this will render thee an experienced soldier in this spiritual
warfare, and a most grateful servant to thy Lord and Savior.

11. And now I tell thee plainly, For this is the way to become truly
spiritual.
(my dearly beloved,) If thou will try and train up thy self (in thy ghostly
quarrel,) according to this prescribed method; thou shall soon feel, (Gods
grace assisting thee,) a happy and total change into spirituality. But if thou will needs follow other exercises, though seeming most excellent, and performed
with such present gust and sweetness, as if thou had the full and familiar
conference and company of thy Crucified Jesus: never persuade thy self, that
such delicious ways, are the direct path to perfection.

12. For as our vices spring fo^m Because all vice springs from the yielding to
sense,
this fountain, that our superior Will or Reason submits her self to the
inferior feelings of Sensuality: So on the contrary, Virtues are ingenerated
in our souls, by due submission of this Will to the divine Will; and And all
virtue by subduing and submitting our Will to Gods.
as our will can never be truly good and grateful to God, (though it receive
from him never so holy and heavenly inspirations, and be driven by the impulse
of his Will to all its works and omissions) unless it consent to the divine
operations within it self; so it cannot be termed bad, and separated from God,
though never so much tempted and troubled by the Sensuality, but only by
consenting unto it.

CHAP. VIII.
What he must do who feels his Superior Will or Reason, overcome by his
inferior Will or Sensuality.
IF thou sometimes find (o dearly beloved) that thou prevailest nothing at
all in the fight of thy Reason against sense; because thou feel not an
efficacious ardour to root out ill affections; Be not troubled, but stand As
long as thy Reason consents not to Sensuality, fear not.
fast, and still pursue thy fight with courage and constancy: For as long as
thy Reason keeps her self from consenting to these motions of Sensuality, so
long thou have the better in this battle, and art master of the field.

2. Nor is it necessary that all thy affections and motions of Sensuality do
entirely submit to thy Reasons For victory consists not in feeling no motions,
but in not yielding.
empire; neither does our victory consist, in feeling no perverse passions in
our Sensuality: But it suffices, that our Will and Reason (though Sensuality
storm never so much) can always act or omit, do or not do, will or desire,
when, how, where, and as she pleases: In so much as the Devil himself, and
the whole world together, can never alter this our resolution.

3. And if it sometimes happen, But if thy enemies surprise thy reason,
that thy enemies suddenly and violently rush in upon thee; and so surprise
thy Reason, as to give it no respite to have recourse to such wonted ways of
devotion, whereby it might suppress these motions: Then briefly make use of
thy tongue, and say: No, no, I believe thee not, I will none of thee, I will
never consent unto thee. And so behave thy self in this exigent against thy
inward foes, as one would do being oppressed unawares with outward enemies: For
his sword prooving useless in his defense, he strives to step backwards, that
so he may get ground and time both to draw his sword, and also to drive his
enemy away therewith: And do thou in like sort, O spiritual champion; first
give back, thereby Then give back to gain time and strength.
to gain time to think upon thy nothing, and that of thy self thou can never
conquer thy cruel enemies: And then buckling up thy self with hope and
confidence in thy God, who can do all things, make a gallant assault upon thine
enemy; saying, Lord help me, O my God give succor to thy servant; O Jesu, O
Mary, the most worthy Mother of my Redeemer, deliver me from this danger.

4. But if thou have time to breath And if thou have time, help thy self with
consideration,
upon it, then thou may support thy Will from consenting and yiedling, by the
succor of thy Understanding: fetching strength from the Consideration of those
means, which may help her against her enemies: As for example; If a great and
grievous Impatience has laid hold on thee, (by reason of some accident or
affliction,) in so much that it seems more than thou will or can do to bear
or dissemble it any longer: help thy self presently with these following
thoughts.

5. First, whether or no thou have First, whether thou have deserved this
affliction.
any way deserved, or given just occasion, that this adversity should befall
thee: If so, rest contented, be no longer troubled; for it is most just and
equitable, that thou patiently bear the blow given to thy self, by If so,
rest contented.
thine own hands: But if not, Then turn thine eyes to thy other sins, If not,
think on thy former sins not yet fully punished.
for which neither thy loving Lord has yet chastised thee as thou deservest,
nor thou afflicted thy self as thou ought: And thence conclude,

Secondly, That thy m^eke and merciful m^ker, has exchanged either the
eternal pain, which thou shou^dst have endured in Hellfire, or else the
temporal punishment, due to thee in Purgatory, into this easy and fatherly
correction: And what then is more reasonable, than that thou embrace it, not
only with a willing mind, but also with a grateful acknowledgment for so
bountiful a benefit. Yea, though they were; yet selfe-denial and sufferance is
the way to heaven.


6. Thirdly, But if thou think, (which God forbid thou should) that thou
have done sufficient penance for thy petty-offences: then refl^ct with thy
self, that none can enter the heavenly Kingdom, but they must pass through
the narrow gate of self-denial, and of patience in tribulation; for thus Gods
holy Son himself, and all his blessed Saints ascended to their glory.

7. Fourthly; Nay, put case thou And if there were another way, yet thy duty to
God binds thee to choose this,
could find out some other way to get to heaven; yet thou art obliged by the
law of love, and duty, not to do nor desire it: For the Son of God chose the
way of thorns and crosses by which he would enter into his glory; and this for
thy love, and that thou should imitate him, who left thee this exact pattern
of perfect patience.

8. Lastly, know for certain, that As being most grateful and pleasing to his
Majesty.
amongst all the pious motives and meditations, which thou make use of in
these or the like events and necessities, for the comfort and confirmation of
thy Will; this seems to be one of the most efficacious: To think what a joy and
content it is to thy Lord God, how he likes and loves thee, when he beholds
thee fight so stoutly for his sake. For nothing surely can be more grateful to
thy Creator, than that thou kill, and cut up by the root, all depraved
desires; and plant true virtues in their places, and this merely for that thou
well know it to be his holy Will and pleasure.

CHAP. IX.
That we must not shun the occasions of these combats.
ANd now (my dearly beloved.) 1. The way to get true virtue, is not to avoid,
but to seek the occasions of combat.
I add to all these means hitherto mentioned for the acquisition of virtues,
this as a short and certain memorial: That thou neither fear nor fly, the
offered occasions of fighting against thy passions. For if thou art desirous to
have the habit of any virtue, (as of Patience, for example,) thy way is not to
shut thy self up from conversing with men, or to shun those things, (whether
words, actions, or cogitations) which move thee to Impatience. No, thou As for
example, to get Patience shun not the company,
must not shun them, I say, but seek them out, desire them, and love their
company and conversation who are the causes of this thy disquiet. And as often
as thou shall have occasion of intercourse with them, prepare thy self, and
make ready thy Will to receive joyfully and endure patiently all tribulations
and troubles, which they can any way bring upon thee. And this is thy only way
to accustom thy self to Patience.

2. In like manner, If thou art Or the employment which is tedious to thee.
weary of any work, which grows tedious and troublesome unto thee; (either for
that the person who commands it displeases thee, or because it is of it self
offensive, or that thou art thereby hindered from some other employment, which
thou would more willingly embrace) yet omit it not upon any terms, but
rather set sooner upon that work than any other, be it never so painful or
displeasing: And although the leaving it undone seems to settle and quiet thy
mind, yet still see thou desist not from doing it: For thus thou shall become
more and more instructed in the way to get perfect Patience: Nor is that
supposed quiet, at all solid, because it springs not from a heart sincerely
purified from all disorderly passion.

3. And I teach the same lesson, And the same rule is to be applied to
troublesome thoughts.
concerning such thoughts; as sometimes trouble and contristate thy mind: To
wit, that thy aim be not utterly to expel them, but kindly to entertain
them, and treat them as grateful guests; because the trouble of their company,
inures thee to the patient suffering of all contrarieties. And whosoever shall
otherwise instruct thee, (o my beloved,) commands thee to fly that very thing
in affliction, which thou seek to obtain by fighting; that is, the virtue
which thou desire to gain, by conquering thine enemies.

4. But yet a young, and unexperienced Yet a young Scholar, must be wary in
waging this war;
Soldier in this spiritual conflict, must warily enter the list to wage this
war with wicked thoughts: and therefore I counsel him sometimes to oppose
them, othertimes to exchange them for others, according as he perceives this or
that way best profits him in the acquisition of virtues; but never so But never
desert the field.
to fly from them and totally leave them* as to seek to be quit of all trouble
and irksomenesse which thence arises; For though by this flight, he cuts off
the occasion of impatience, yet he gets no strength or constancy of heart,
against the next rising motions thereof.

5. Whence it follows, that if the same Sergeants of Impatience do at ^or
then he will still be unprovided.
another time, seize on him; he is soon terrified, and quickly conquered;
because he was unprovided of arms convenient for the combat; that is, he had
not fortified his mind, with customs, counsels, thoughts, and resolutions to
keep perfect patience in all events of Adversity. This way is useful against
all imperfections, carnality only excepted.


And this way of warring, is very profitable, not only against Impatience, but
all other Imperfections; (the carnal still excepted,) whereof shall be
hereafter treated.

CHAP. X.
Of the Fight against sudden temptations and passions.
HE that is not yet accustomed diligently consider them with his Understanding,
then earnestly desire them with his Will, and finally always expect them with a
ready, resolute and prepared Mind.

2. The manner to ponder such First, thou art to ponder them in thy
understanding, And foresee what is like to befall thee.
adversities by the Understanding is this: Mark thine own state, calling and
condition, as also the place and persons where and with whom thou art like
daily to converse: thus thou may easily foresee what may probably befall
thee, and how thou must carry thy self, and fortify thy mind, against any
sudden surprisall of thy passions. And if some accident not foreseen chance to
happen, then besides this former strength already gained by that first
resolution to bear all cross events with an evennesse of mind, thou may thus
farther help thy self.

3. When thou perceivest that thou But if some other cross happens not
foreseen; fly to the thoughts of Gods love and providence,
art slighted, scorned or any way injured; presently enforce thy mind toward
thy Lord and maker, and weigh his immense bounty and infinite love to thee:
from which thought it will forthwith occur to thy understanding, that he is
the chief cause of this thy trouble and tribulation; and that he expressly
permits it to befall thee, that thou may learn to bear it patiently for his
love, and so may draw nearer, and be more perfectly united unto him.

4. And after thou have thus concluded with thy self, that it is his divine
will and pleasure thou should suffer it patiently; then reflect thy thoughts
back upon thy self, and begin to chide thy soul, and tell it: Ah, why
strivest thou to cast off this cross, which neither this nor Who sends it, or
permits it,
that enemy, but thy most loving Lord, and heavenly Father has laid upon thy
shoulders? Then turn to the Cross or calamity which presses thee, salute it,
praise it, embrace it, and receive it with all possible joy and alacrity.

5. And although the rising passions And be constant though almost conquered.
be so unruly and violent, that they suffer not thy mind to elevate it self to
God, but leave thee wounded, and almost vanquished; yet persevere in thy well
made resolution, and proceed on as if thou were not worsted in the skirmish.

6. But amongst all the remedies But the best remedy against sudden motions,
is to cut off their causes.
against these sudden and unexpected motions, this seems most effectual; To
take away timely the cause from whence they proceed: As, If thou feel thy
mind much troubled, when thou can not obtain such a thing, which thou
affectest: presently, away with that love to it, exclude that thing from thy
mind. But if thy trouble and vexation arises not from the thing, but from the
person who hinders, helps, or procures it; and this party is so highly
displeasing to thy humor, that the least thing as coming from him is
troublesome to thee; then the speediest and best remedy is to conquer thine
own inclination, and compel thy will to yield him true love and affection.

EXPLICATION.
FOr besides that he is a Creature, framed as thou art, by the All-powerfull
hand of God, and redeemed by the same precious ransom of thy dear Saviors
blood; he furthermore presents thee with a happy occasion, (if thou can love
it, and lay hold thereon,) to make thy self even like God, who is good and
gracious to all.

CHAP. XI.
Of the fight against our flesh, and fleshly concupiscence.
IN this war with thy flesh, (o my 1. In this war, thou must change thy
weapon; And therefore, Before the temptation assailes thee, call it not; But
avoid all occasions of procuring it, Which are five, 1. Conversation.
dearly beloved) thou must change thy weapon, and fight in a new posture,
contrary to the former. And therefore thou art to take particular notice of
three times: to wit, the time going before the temptation, accompanying it, and
following it.

2. Before thou feel the temptations of this kind, fight not with them, but
diligently fly the occasions; and cut off all causes which procure them: As
First, all conversation, though never so little dangerous.

EXPLICATION.
BEcause this enemy is not to be affronted, but avoided by all possible means,
and we are to dread the encounter of any person whatsoever, whose presence may
put us in the least danger; nor are we to trust our not feeling presently the
stings of the temptation, for this This enemy assailes us sometimes by stealth.
accursed vice makes its approaches most commonly by stealth and under hand,
and hurts us by so much the more grievously by how much it pretends truce and
amity, whereby we neither distrust its treachery, nor stand upon our guards to
defend our selves vigorously: So that there is oftentimes more cause of fear,
when the haunt and familiarity is continued under the pretext of lawfulness,
as of And under the pretext of lawfulness, etc.
kindred, of obligation, of compliance, or even of virtue in the party beloved;
for then the poisonous pleasure of our sensuality, intermixeth it self with
this affection, (which But sensuality may mix it self with thy affection, and
ruin thy soul.
is in its own nature good and holy) and insensibly distilling into the heart
and penetrating by little and little into the very marrow of the soul, at last
darkens and obscures the Reason; till it be brought to slight all dangers, and
so by degrees fall either into open ruin, or at least into such troublesome
temptations, which are afterward very hard to be conquered.

Secondly, All pleasant aspects Text. 2, Aspects.
upon any such persons or things, all show of familiarity, all loving Salutaon,
all pressing of their hands with thine, or the like levities: But if thou have
some affair which must necessarily be transacted with such a one, dispatch it
with all speed and gravity. Thirdly, Take heed of idleness, 3. Idleness.
and take a particular and perpetual care, never to act or think any thing
unbeseeming thy state and vocation. Fourthly, Be punctual in obeying 4
Disobedience.
thy Superior, never contradict him in any thing, but be ever ready to execute
his command. Fifthly, Judge 5. Vain-Complacency.
not rashly of thy neighbor concerning this vice: yea, though his sin be
manifest, and cannot admit of any excusation; do thou condole with him, but
neither disdain nor despise him. And turning his imperfection to thy own
profit, humble and contemn thy self; debase thy self even to the dust, and
trembling with awful fear, beg heartily the divine assistance, that thou be
not likewise tempted, lest thou likewise fall. For, if thou art ready to judge
and slight others, God will punish thee to thy cost, and permit thee to fall
into the same vice, that so thou may learn truly to know and humble thy
self, and suppress thy own pride and presumption: For if thou art proud and
fallest not, thy Salvation is much to be doubted of. Lastly, mark seriously,
and beware of vaine-complacence in thy self, upon the feeling of any sensible
grace, or spiritual comfort: or inward delight in devotion, persuade not thy
self that thou art therefore more perfect, or that thou shall henceforth have
no enemies to fight withal; but remain still careful, and ever fearful.

3. In the time accompanying thy In the time of temptation, mark the cause of
it; whether external, and fly from it,
temptations; weigh whether they proceed from an external or internal cause:
by external causes are commonly understood, conversation, speeches, reading,
or whatsoever may provoke to this vice: against which the only, present, and
perfect remedy, is to omit all such exercises and fly from these occasions: For
there is no fighting with these temptations, as is aforesaid, but the best
security is to fly far from them, lest they infect thy soul with their
contagion: By inward causes are meant, Or internal.
either the body which is over full of sap and strength: Or the mind, which is
infested with filthy thoughts, coming either from our own evil customs, and
neglect of our senses; or else from the enemies suggestion.

4. The first of these inward causes, And prevent it by fit chastisements of
the body,
which is from the body's fullness, must be prevented with fastings,
hairecloths, watchings, and the like chastisements and austerities, as Reason
dictates, or Obedience directs. The other inward causes coming And by hearty
prayer,
from filthy fancies, are best remedied by holy prayer, pious meditation,
diligent labor, and continual employment, in affairs convenient for thy
state.

EXPLICATION.
THy Prayer may be made in this or the like manner; When thou first
apprehendest the approach of the enemy coming to assault thee with such
fancies, recurre suddenly to the sacred Crucifix, saying, O my Jesu, my sweet
Jesu, succor me with speed, that I be not subdued, and embracing the Cross
with thy Savior upon it, kiss and cherish again and again his holy feet,
and speak with heart and affection: O blessed wounds, o chaste and comfortable
wounds, o sacred and sugared wounds! wound this wretched and unworthy heart of
mine with thy pure and perfect love, and free it from these present and
pressing motions of impurity, etc.

But I would not advise thee to Text. Yet not according as some books prescribe.
choose such points of meditation, which many spiritual books prescribe for
remedy of these temptations: which are, to consider, First, the fowlnesse of
carnal vices, and their insatiablenesse: Then the great shame and danger which
must of necessity accompany them; and lastly, the loss of fame, and
consumption of goods; temporal discontents, and eternal damnation: For though
these are good mediations, yet they are not conducing to the conquering of
these temptations: For since that Flight, in the judgment of all, is the
Sovereign remedy against this disease; therefore every such thing is Which may
give new occasions to impurity.
to be avoided, which gives any occasion to impure cogitations: But in these
forementioned meditations, howsoever the understanding tires i^ self in
detesting these sins of carnality; yet at the same time, it fastens such
fancies in the memory, that there are just grounds to fear the falling into
delight thereof.

5. Wherefore, let the matter of But by meditating on Christ's death and passion.
thy meditations for this purpose, be rather taken from the passion and death
of our Savior Jesus. And if evil temptations of that nature, do also in
these pious meditations intrude themselves (against thy Will) to trouble thee;
and notwithstanding thy vigilance, yet still drive on their plots, and invent
new devices against thee; (which may perhaps befall thee as well as others) yet
be not out of heart, nor leave off thy well-begun meditations; nor stay to
dispute with these flying thoughts; but proceed constantly in what thou art
about, leaving and laughing at the other fancies, as if they nothing concerned
thee. And this is the only and best way to conquer im^ure cogitations, though
never so ^mportunate and troublesome.

EXPLICATION.
ANd thou may conclude thy meditation, with this or some such colloquie: O my
sovereign Creator and sweet Redeemer! disingage me from mine enemies for thy
bitter passions sake, etc. And be sure not to permit thy fancy to return or
reflect on the vice, since the only memory thereof is accompanied with very
much danger.

6. And take heed of holding any Text. Dispute not with carnal temptations,
argument with them, whether thou have yielded thy consent or not; for this is
a covert deceit of the Devil, who under this mask of good, lies waiting to
ensnare thee, and bring thee into inconvenience. Which at another time, when
thou enjoyest thy quiet, and art free from these troublesome temptations, will
be easily perceived by thee, and taught But discover them to thy Ghostly Father.
thee by thy ghostly Father: To whom thou art faithfully to discover all and
every such thoughts, and not to be ashamed: For humility is here mainly
necessary, if we mean to complete the victory.

7. As concerning holy Prayer, And make no actual and particular reflections
upon these temptations.
(another remedy against this carnal^ malady, and all other spiritual diseases)
know, that it must be made with often lifting up thy mind to God, virtually
intending to pray for victory over these thine enemies without any actual
reflection upon the temptations; Beware therefore of descending to particulars
in thy prayers, or to show as it were their malice, and thy misery, by
reflecting upon special circumstances: for this may endanger thee to fall into
new delectation. And this will suffice thee for thy defense in time of
temptation.

8. And after the carnal temptation After the temptation is past, stand upon
thy guard.
is past, think not that thou art presently safe and secure from the like
assault: but stand upon thy guard, and do not so much as ever remember those
objects which occasioned thy temptations, though never so much disguised with
the appearance of virtue or piety; For all this is a secret persuasion of our
corrupted nature, and a craft of the Devil to ensnare us, and allure us to
delight.

CHAP. XII.
How to fight against slacknesse, and negligence.
THat thou may secure thy self, (o dearly beloved,) from this pernicious
vice; employ thy whole diligence and endeavors, to correspond readily with all
holy inspirations, Follow holy inspirations speedily.
and to decline all earthly comforts, curiosities, and superfluous affairs,
not directly belonging to thy state and calling.

EXPLICATION.
COncerning which prompt and speedy correspondency with Gods holy inspirations,
take this Rule: Be sure not to defer the To begin a good work speedily, and
in it is due time,
enterprise and beginning of that thing, (which thou art certainly satisfied
thou ought to do), in it is due and fit time: For I assure thee, this delay
in the beginning of thy work, will prove an unrecoverable loss in the
progress thereof: because this first short lingering, calls on a second, which
invites a third, and that is attended by another, and so thou will pass on to
admit of more, to Is of great consequence to overcome sloth.
which thy sense will consent more easily than to the first, as having now
tasted the bait, and swallowed down the seeming pleasure of this protraction:
whence it follows, that thou either entrest upon thy exercise when it is too
late, or wholly omittest it, because thou art totally disgusted therewith. Thus
by little and little, and almost insensibly, creeps in this evil habit of
Negligence, and in the end we content our selves with this conceit, that we
will do it another time more carefully and diligently. Take heed therefore of
this most subtle enemy, Negligence, which not only infects the Will, by
making it abhor action; but also blinds the Understanding that it apprehends
not the vanity of these ill-grounded maxims, to fancy the doing of our duty
another time more devoutly and diligently, which we may now perform; and yet
voluntarily leave it, or negligently delay it.

Wherefore having courageously And having courageously set upon it, carefully
prosecute the same.
begun thy good work, continue it carefully, prosecute it diligently, and end
it devoutly; yet not so hastily as to hurt or prejudice the perfection thereof,
or to imitate the error and idleness of them, who out of sloathfulnesse think
upon nothing but to make a speedy end of what they have enterprised; little
caring to do it well, but only striving to dispatch it quickly, that they may
the sooner enjoy their over much-desired quiet and repose.

2. And because there is no better Text.
remedy to recall one fallen into this sluggish vice, than thus to settle him
to some good work; (though the sloathfull man, loathes all such employments;
having more thought upon the labor, which he must undergo, The fruit of good
works must be discovered,
than the fruit which follows it:) Therefore this good must be discovered, and
made apparent unto him; and he must be given to understand, that one hearty
elevation of the mind to God, or one only bending of the knee humbly to the
earth for his honor, is more worth than all worldly wealth and treasures.

EXPLICATION.
ANd that as often as we make a diligent have to speed a good work, by using a
certain force and violence to our selves, so often the holy Angels bring
crowns of glorious victory from heaven to adorn our souls: and that God by
little and little takes away from the tepid and negligent, those graces which he
had formerly given them, increasing them to his faithful friends and followers.

And as for the pain which is to Text.
be taken in the prosecution of virtuous practices; it must be so dexterously
And the pains disguised.
hid and disguised from him, that it may seem less and lighter than it is.
As; If thou should perchance employ thy self in the exercise of pious
meditation for the space of one whole hour, and that seems too long to thy
lazy disposition; use a pious fraud, and persuade thy sensu^lity, that after
half a quarters time well spent in prayer, thou will presently leave of: And
again when this short space is past, get thy body to have patience a little
longer, before thou ceasest thy devotions; and thus continu^ng from space to
space, the whole hour will soon be overpassed, and thy sloth easily shaken
of.

4. But if indeed thou find a real Unless there be a real disability.
disability of body, to bear such labors; thou may lawfully leave it off
for a time; till by degrees, it becomes accustomed to perform these practices
of piety, with more fervor and alacrity.

EXPLICATION.
THis I tell thee, as condescending the best, though the But the best way to
get a custom of enduring, is to expect crosses continually,
most difficult way, is to get before it, expect it, and cheerfully embrace it
at the first encounter; whence thou will find, that all tediousness in the
performance thereof will be turned into perfect quiet and content, since what
thou do, thou do voluntarily and willingly: whereas if on the contrary thou
seek to shun labor, it will And not to seek how to shun them.
not only seem irksome when it comes to be performed, but formidable
beforehand to thy apprehension; so that thy very qui^t will be subject to
trouble, and the fear of this surprisall will continually alarm thy fancy;
thou will abhor all pains-taking, as a thing loathsome, and still dread the
occurrence of such occasions, persons or objects, as are like to impose it upon
thee.

6. Marvel not that I so much press this point, and inveigh against
Negligence, is highly prejudicial to perfection,
this vice of Negligence; I do it, for that it is seldom perceived, and yet
highly prejudicial, because it persecutes and pursues us most secretly, and
subtly, it falls upon us not by force but flattery, it gnaws the very root of
all spirituality, and insensibly gangrens the marrow of our piety and devotion:
And our enemy has no better or more alluring bait to And the most alluring
bait of our enemy.
entice any one into his treacherous ambushes, especially them who aim at
spirituality: Be thou therefore vigilant, (o my dearly beloved,) pray heartily,
perform good works diligently, and delay not the spinning of the wool for thy
nuptial robe, until the marriage day be come, when thou should be ready
and arrayed to go before thy dear Spouse. Reflect, that thy God, who
Therefore take timely care to prevent it.
gave thee the morning, does not promise thee an evening; therefore improve
each moment to thy profit, and remember the strict account which will be
exacted thereof. I And account that day lo^^, in which thou have done no
goodaction.
conclude, and counsel thee to give that day for lost, (though thou have
dispatched never so many affairs,) wherein thou have gotten no victory over thy
enemies, nor thanked God for his benefits.

CHAP. XIII.
How to govern our Sensuality.
THy Sensuality (o dearly beloved) in all thy commerce with earthly creatures,
be sure to have thy heart Keep thy heart disingaged from earthly creatures,
free and disingaged from them; and often elevating the eye of thy affection to
thy God, look upon him, hidden in that creature as in his own work: and then
refl^ct, that thy same Lord and love, is within thee also; and thou may begin
to confer with him in this sort. O my merciful maker, and eternal Lord God;
thou art ever present with me; Thou art more within me than I am in my self:
and I ungrateful and forgetful wretch, remember thee not, love thee not,
honor thee not.

2. At other times, elevate thy And contemplate thy creatours greatness;
thoughts to the contemplation of Gods incomprehensible perfections; and
rejoice in those his goods, greatnesses, and glories, more than if they were
all thine own. And be more glad, that he is incomprehensible in his Majesty,
than if he were within the reach of thy understanding and capacity.

3. And when thou remarkest any And reduce all ^reated ^erfection to him, the
fountain,
main perfection, either of Grace or Nature, in any man or woman, (as wisdom,
understanding, piety, justice, and the like,) lift up thy self to him who is
the bountiful bestower; and consider them not as they are in that creature,
but reducing them to thy Lord God, say: Behold these, o my God, are rivulets
flowing out of thee, the true, living, eternal and increate fountain; these
are the rewards of thy servants, issuing out of the immense Ocean of thy
ineffable bounty.

4. But when the beauty of any And all earthly beauty to heavenly glory.
creature allures thee to any delight and complacency; pass presently from
earthly beauty, to the thought of supernall glory, and therein only taking
pleasure, say: O my God, when will the happy day come, that I shall take in
thee only my whole delight?

5. Another remedy against suchlike Mark well the craft of the Devil.
surprises of pleasure, may be; To ponder presently with thy understanding, how
cunningly the Devil, (who only seeks to kill, or at least to wound thy soul
mortally,) lies lurking under this bait. Which when thou perceivest, tell him
boldly: Ah, thou cursed serpent, how craftily and covertly, do thou lie in
wait, to infect me with thy poison? And then lift up thy mind to Godward,
saying: O the goodness of my God, be thou eternally blessed and praised,
which have discovered my hidden enemy, lying in wait to destroy my soul!

6. But in other accidents, which But when things which are unpleasant befall
thee, think upon God's eternal decree.
go against the hair, and rather procure pain than pleasure, thou may thus
exercise thy self: when something happens which is of hard digestion to thy
Sensuality, (as heat, hunger, sickness, blows, or the like,) elevate thy mind
to that eternal will, who would have it so, and even from all eternity decreed
that thou should suffer this or that calamity, at this very time, thus
grievously, and with these circumstances, as thou now endurest the same:
Therefore full of hearty joy say within thy self: Now is thy divine will, (o my
eternal Lord and love) accomplished in me; whereby thou would from all
eternity, that I now in this manner, measure, and number, should receive and
carry this cross: and I acknowledge all this to be for thine honor and glory,
and my own souls welfare and salvation.

7. And make use also of such like So likewise in any sudden or dismal chance,
thoughts, upon all dismal occasions of wind, weather, and the like; which are
out of man's power and providence to hinder or prevent. So, when thou read
any thing which tickles thy fancy, turn presently all thy delight to thy Lord
God; and conclude, that he infallibly is hid under those words, and now by them
sweetly discovers himself unto thee. And in like manner, when good thoughts
occure with complacency And in all felfe complacency.
and delight, as proceeding from the reflection upon some good and virtuous
action; turn thy mind suddenly to thy Lord God, and adoring him with all
possible humility and reverence, acknowledge that good to have sprung from his
grace, and therefore thou gratefully returnest it his glory.

EXPLICATION.
A larger Declaration of the foregoing Chapter, concerning the government of
our outward senses.
THat thou may rightly study senses; it imports thee to use all exactness of
custody, all curiosity, care, and diligence, and a perpetual and
never-intermitted practice; because the appetite which sits as Captain The
appetite is violently bent to seek it is pleasure,
and chief commander of our corrupted nature, is violently and inconsiderately
bent to search after worldly solaces, earthly pleasures, and outward
contentments; but being of it self unable to acquire them, makes use of the
senses, as his Soldiers And makes use of the senses to obtain it.
and natural instruments, to apprehend their objects; from whence drawing
their images, it imprints them in the soul, and proceeds on to pleasure, which
(by reason of the sympathy between it and the flesh) dilates it self through
all those senses which are capable of such pleasure: and from hence is derived
the common contagion which infects and corrupts both body and soul. Secondly,
Now if thou art truly sensible of the danger of this poison, apply speedily The
Antidot against this poison,
this antidote which I have here prepared against it. Beware of giving up the
reins to thy senses, or letting them run at random after the unruly fancy of
their leading appetite; and never make use of them in things tending to mere
pleasure, without any further good end, profit or necessity; but if unawares,
they have gotten And how to curb the senses roaming abroad,
vent, and are roam'd too far abroad, either recall them back, or else so
regulate and curb them, that whereas they had at first basely yielded up
themselves, and were become wretched prisoners to vain pleasure, they may now
bring home some noble spoil or other from each object, and place it as a
trophe in thy soul, where she recollected within her self displayes the
banners of her affections toward heaven in the contemplation of her Creator:
Which thou may thus practice: So soon as any object is presented to one of
thy outward senses, separate in thy thought, the spirit which is in that
creature, from the creature it By separating the spirit of each object, from
the thing it self material;
self, and conclude that it has nothing of it is own nature which can charm
thy sense, but that all is the work of God, whose Spirit bestows invisibly
this being upon it, gives it this goodness, and indues it with this beauty,
and with all other its prerogatives and perfections: Then rejoice heartily that
thy God is the only cause and source of so many and so great excellencies,
which he eminently contains in his divine essence, and whereof these are the
least and lowest images.

3. So when thou find thy sense fastened upon some creature which Whether it
be a creature which has only a Being.
has only a Being, reduce it in thy thought to it is first nothing, looking
with the interior eye of thy soul upon thy Sovereign Creator there present,
who beautified it with this Being, and taking pleasure in him alone, thou
may say: O Divine and desirable essence! how does my heart leap with joy
that thou alone art the infinite beginning of all created Being.

4. In like manner, when thou Or has a Vegetation, and increase;
take notice of Trees, Plants, Herbs, Flowers, and such other things; thy
understanding will soon distinguish, how they have no life of themselves, but
from that quickening Spirit, which falls not under the sense of thy fight; to
whom thou may thus breath forth: Behold the true life, from which, in which,
and by which, all creatures live and increase: O the lively and lovely
contentment of my heart!

5. Also, beholding brute-beasts, Or has sense and feeling.
let thy spirit soar up to thy God, the free bestower of all their sense and
motion, saying: O prime mover of all things, yet remaining in thy self
immovable; how great is my joy in thy firm stability!

6. Moreover, when thy sense is Or is endued with rare beauty;
touched and tickled with some rare Beauty; separate with all speed that which
appears to the eye, from the inward spirit which appears not at all; and
considering, that all the outward fairness, springs only from the invisible
Fountain; say with a gladsome heart: Oh! the jubilation of my Soul, when it
thinks on that eternal and immense beauty, which is the original source and
essential cause of all created comeliness!

7. Furthermore, upon the consideration of any perfection in Creatures, Or
excellent perfection;
first making the aforesaid separation, then break forth into these-like
expressions: O rich treasury of all virtues! What contentment do I feel, that
all good is derived from thee, and by thee only? and that all goodness,
compared to thy Divine perfection, is a mere nothing.

8. Stretching forth thy hand to Also, when thou undertakest any action,
any action, imagine thy Lord God to be the first cause thereof, and thou only
the living instrument of his Divine Majesty, to whom thy Soul may thus power
forth it self: O Sovereign Lord of this Universe! how truly do I rejoice
that I can do no one thing without thee, and that thou art the prime and
principal agent in all good actions.

9. Taking any refection of Meat Or refreshest thy body with meat and drink,
or Drink; reflect who gives that gust and savor to that Creature, and taking
no other content than in him only, say: Be joyful, O my Soul, that there is
no true satisfaction out of thy God, and that in him only thou have a full
abundance of all pleasure.

10. If some delicious smell be Or smellest delicious odours
welcome to thy sense; stay not there, but ascend to him who is the source of
all sweetness, and with a heart softened with comfort, say: Alas! O my Lord, as
I am truly glad that all sweetness proceeds from thee, so grant I beseech
thee, that my Soul being truly despoiled and uncloathed of all earthly
pleasure, may purely soar up to thy delicious Paradise, and render a
perpetually pleasing odor to thy Divine Nostrils.

11. When thou art taken with the Or art delighted with musical harmony,
Musical harmony of some excellent voice or instrument, turn thy soul to thy
Savior, and speak to him: O my Lord and my God, how do I joy in thy infinite
perfections? O what an admirable harmony do they make not only in thy self,
but also in the heavenly Citizens, and in all other thy Creatures?

12. Thus may thou (my dearly Or any other sensible object.
Beloved) raise up thy spirit from all sensible objects to the contemplation of
the divinity, as has been hitherto declared. It remains, that thou be now in
like manner instructed how to pass from the same sensible objects to the
meditation of the Word incarnate, by frequent reflections upon thy Saviou^s Life
How to raise thy Soul by the same objects, to contemplate the Word Incarnate.
and Passion. And to this effect, all things of the whole Universe will
conduce; by considering in them (as before) that Sovereign and Supreme good
which is the efficient cause of their whole being and beauty; and thence
passing on to the admiration of his immense goodness and greatness, who being
the absolute Lord of all these things, would vouchsafe to descend so low as to
become man, and to die for man, permitting his own Creatures to arm themselves
against him their Creator. Many things will also particularly represent to the
eyes of thy Soul, these sacred mysteries; and put thee in mind of the several
instruments of his severe sufferings: As for example, by the sight of poor
cottages. Of Rain.
Poor cottages will remember thee of thy Saviors stable and cribb: If it
raineth, thou will reflect upon that Divine moisture, distilling from his Body
in his bloody agony: The ^tones which thou beholdest, will Of Stones.
put thee in mind of the Rocks rending in sunder at his Death; the Earth Of
the Earth.
will seem to tell thee how it then trembled; and the bright-shining Sun, how
it is light was then obscured. Of the Sun. Of the Water, etc.
If thou considerest the water, thou will fall into contemplation of that which
issued out of his opened Side; and the like of all other objects: So, when thou
tastest Wine, thou may think of Christ's In tasting Wine.
Vinegar and Gall; when sweet odours delight thee, how ill savored In sweet
Smells.
were the carcasses upon Mount Calvary where thy Savior suffered? Clothing
thy self, reflect how the In clothing thy self.
eternal Word put on our humanity, to adorn thee with his Divinity; In
uncloathing thy self. In hearing Noyses.
Uncloathing thy self, how he naked, was naild to the Cross. Hearing a noise
or acclamations of People, remember those abominable outcries; Away with him,
Crucify him. When the Clock strikes the hour, In hearing the Clock.
think how thy Savior's Heart panted in the Garden at the apprehension of his
approaching passion; or seem to hear and count the cruel strokes of the
scourges, or blows of the Hammer fastening the Nails through his Body to the
Cross. If In time of Sadness.
sadness and sorrow seize thee, whether by reason of thine own sufferings and
sickness, or out of compassion to others, conceive, alas, how little is all
this, compared to the incomprehensible Anguishes, Distresses, and Dolours,
which pierced the Body and Soul of thy dear Savior.

13. Having thus showed thee the Other ways to meditate upon sensible Objects.
way how to elevate thy understanding by means of all sensible things to the
Divinity, and to the mysteries of the Word incarnate; I will now add other
means and method^ of meditation, drawn from the same sensible objects; that as
the Soul's gusts are various, so the spiritual diet may be diversely dressed
and served up for their sustenance: though this variety may be also very
useful, not only to the simple, but even to elevated Souls well advanced in
the way of the Spirit, which are not always equally disposed to sublime
contemplations. Neither need'st thou fear, that this variety will any way
confound thee, if thou art ^overned by the rule of discretion, and the
direction of thy ghostly Father, which thou art carefully and ^umbly to follow,
not only in ^his, but in all other thy under^akings.

14. When therefore objects most By considering how mean the best of them are
in themselves.
pleasing to the eye, delicious to ^he sense, and desirable to flesh and blood,
shall be represented unto thee; mark well, how mean these things are in
themselves, though never so highly courted and cherished, extolled and esteemed
by worldlings: how the best of them is no better than dirt and dung in respect
of Heavenly happiness, for which thou art designed, which thou desire, and
to which thou aspirest.

15. When thou gazest on the As the Suns brightness.
Suns glorious splendor; know for certain, that thine own Soul is far more
bright and beautiful than it, if she be in her Creatours grace and favor:
otherwise, that she is more obscure and abominable, than darkesome and
dismal Hell it self.

16. When thou castest up thy corporal eyes to the Heavens; eleva^^ The
Heavens greatness.
those of thy Soul to those higher and holyer mansions of the blessed Sain^^
and Angelical spirits, and there fix and feast thy thoughts, as in the happy
mansion prepared for thy eternal abode.

17. When thou hearken'st to the The Birds melody.
Birds warbling notes; or other musical charms, soar up in spirit to the
sweet harmony of Heaven, where Alleluja's do forever resound, and beg of thy
dear Lord, that thou may become worthy to chant forth his perpetual
praises amongst those heavenly quiristers.

18. When thou walk on the way, Walking abroad.
ponder how each one of thy paces, is a step toward thy death.

19. When thou markest the Fowls Marking the swift flight of the Fowls.
of the Air, how swiftly they glide through that yielding Element, and the
running Waters hastening to their original Ocean; think how thy life slips
away, and thy Soul runs on to eternity with greater speed and celerity.

20. When impetuous Winds are In time of Winds, Thunder, Storms.
raised, or Thunder and Lightning rage in the Skies, remember the ^earefull day
of Judgment, and ^rostrating thy self at the foot ^f the Crucifix, adore thy
Savior, and implore his gracious assistance, that thou may now make such
good use of the time he lends thee, that thou may be then prepared ^o appear
courageously before his dread Majesty.

21. As concerning diverse Accidents, Also upon all other Accidents and
Occasions. As of grief and sorrow.
which are personal and peculiar to thy self; thou may thus behave thee.

When Grief or Sadness has seized thy Heart, when melancholy oppresses thy
mind, or when any inconveniency troubles thy body; raise up and resign thy
spirit to the supreme and eternal Will of God, who is pleased this molestation
should even now, and thus, touch and torment thee for thy good, and his own
glory; and be glad of this occasion to serve him according to his own Decree
and Disposition.

22. When thou castest thine eyes When thou look upon Christ crucified.
upon Christ's sacred Cross, consider it as the banner of thy warfare; from
under which thou, may not step aside, without eminent danger of being
surprised by thy sworn enemies; but following it closely and valiantly, thou
have certain hope to conquer them, and climb up to heaven, laden with their
glorious spoils and trophies.

23. When thou see the image, Or the image of the Blessed Virgin.
representing the holy Virgin mother; turn thy heart toward her, now reigning
in Paradise; and give her thanks for having been ever ready to perform the
divine will; for bearing and bringing up the Redeemer of the world; and for
never denying her favor and succor to thee and all spiritual combatants
humbly imploring it.

24. So let the pictures of Saints, seem as so many representatives of And the
pictures of Saints.
stout champions and Soldiers, who by their courages and conquests, have made
thee a free and safe passage to follow them, imitate them, overcome with them,
and be crowned with them in eternal glory.

25. Let the Churches, which thou Or entrest into Churches
frequentest, put thee in mind that thy soul is Gods temple, and should be
therefore kept most purely, and prepared most perfectly for his coming.

26. Finally, let each creature, all Finally, make all objects and accidents
instruments to thy perfection.
objects, and every accident, be so spiritualized and distilled by thy
understanding from their earthly and material dross, that they may serve thee
as true instruments to the perfection of thy soul, and become powerful helps
to thee, (contrary to thine enemies intention) in thy tendance to divine union,
which is the only end thou aimest at.

How to regulate the Tongue.
1. And because the tongue has a near assinity with our senses, (for we
willingly discourse of those things wherein we take delight) I will here
(before I descend to the following doctrine) briefly show thee how thou art to
regulate, bridle and master this unruly member.

2. Much prattling proceeds ordinarily Much talk proceeds from presumption.
from a certain presumption, which persuades us that we are very knowing in the
things we talk of; and so pleasing our selves in our own conceptions, we
endeavor to imprint them in the hearers hearts with soperfluous repetitions
and replications of the same subject, to appear thereby more masters of Reason
than others, and as if they stood in need of our instruction. Few words cannot
express the evil which ensues upon overmuch talking; for it is the parent of
idleness, an argument of ignorance, the door of detraction, the instrument of
falsehood, and the blaster of all true devotion and spiritual fervor.

3. Wherefore I advise thee, in the Therefore avoid long discourses,
first place, not to enlarge thy self in long discourses, before unwilling
hearers, which is to break the laws of civility; nor yet before them who are
willing to hearken to thee, lest thou exceed the bounds of modesty.

4. Avoid also, all patheticall and And passionate expressions;
passionate expressions, and an overhigh elevation of voice; for both these are
generally odious to the hearers, and always arguments of thine own vanity and
presumption.

5. Speak not at all of thy self, of And all talking of thy own affairs,
thine own affairs, of thy patentage or kindred, unless in case of evident
necessity, and then also with all possible brevity, simplicity, sincerity, and
modesty: and if another seem superfluous in such speeches concerning himself,
be thou edified thereat, but imitate him not, though his words tended to his
self-abjection and accusation.

6. Discourse not of thy neighbor, Or of thy neighbors.
nor any thing concerning him; unless a just occasion urge thee to defend him,
or speak well of him.

7. Show a willingness to talk But speak willingly of God.
always of God, and particularly of his love and liberality, yet still with
profound reverence for fear of failing; and therefore take more content to hear
others discourse, than to talk thy self; and conserve what good words are
delivered in the cabin of thy heart.

8. As for all other discourses, let the only sound strick thy ears, but keep
thy mind fixed upon thy God; And if thou needs must lend an ear because thy
answer is expected, yet let thy souls eye glance up to heaven And ponder in thy
heart, what thy tongue is to utter.
where thy Lord and love is, and first examine briefly in thy heart what thou
intendest thy tongue should utter, whereby thou will quickly resolve whether
speech or silence be now more to the purpose.

9. Lastly, thou will find by experience, (my dearly beloved,) that The praise
and profit of Silence.
Silence is an excellent and useful weapon for thy spiritual combat, giving
courage to fight, constancy to continue, and confidence to overcome. It is his
sure friend, who distrusts himself, and trusts in his God; it conserves us in
devotion, and comforts us in the exercises of our duty: And surely the bare
consideration of the disasters caused by inconsiderate talking, is a sufficient
motive to make us in love with silence, to which that thou may habituate thy
self, make frequent use of solitude and retirement from fruitless company,
and frivolous conversation; whereby instead of men, thou shall have Angels,
Saints, and God himself for thy companions and comforters. Finally, reflect
upon the conflict which thou have undertaken, and considering how much thou
have to do, thou will find little leisure to spend in idle talk.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the order to be observed in fighting against our enemies.
IN thy spiritual combat against

First, enter into the cabinet of thy Mark which are thy greatest enemies,
heart, and let thy inquisitive thoughts search and examine with exact
diligence, which be the affections that there bear the greatest sway, and with
what thoughts and motions thou art most frequently tempted, and troubled.

Secondly, And having found thy And single out the fiercest to fight with:
foes, turn thy weapons against that single enemy which then actually molests
thee, most nearly endangers thee, and is now ready to graple with thee,
oppress thee, and ruin thee.

Thirdly, But in time of peace with But when they appear not, seek them.
thy passions, when no enemy appears in field, to provoke thee to battalle;
begin thou with them; and make thy strongest onset upon those which have
chiefly indomaged thee, most frequently foiled thee, and wrought thy greatest
confusion before thy Lord God.

CHAP. XV.
What course he must take, who is conquered, and grievously wounded by his
enemies.
IF thou chance to fall into some When thou art fallen, rise with all speed.
all speed to God; and first reflect upon thine own baseness, and heartily
hate thy self. Then recollecting thy spirits, and converting thy self again to
thy Creator, confess to him thy ingratitude, and say with an inflamed heart:
O my Lord, he hold I have done Pray with fervor.
like my self: For what better could be expected from me, than baseness,
fallings, and sinfulness; I am sorry, O my God, with my whole heart: and I
confess, I should have done far worse, and fallen more grievously, had not
the hand of thy goodness, kept me, stayed me, and upheld me; for which I
render thee most humble thanks. And now (O my loving Lord,) do thou like thy
self, according to the treasures of thy mercies; and let me not live out of
thy grace, nor ever offend again thy most sacred Majesty.

2. Having thus sincerely poured Be not over-solicitous or fearful.
forth thy heart in the presence of God, be not solicitous and thoughtfull
whether he has forgiven this thy sin, or no: for such a curiosity savours of
pride, endangers thee to fall into the snare of Satan, renders thee unquiet,
and consumes time to little purpose: Therefore, cast thy self purely into the
paternall bosom of thy merciful Lord, resume thy wonted exercises, and take
up thy weapons again, as though thou had not fallen. Yea, should thou
chance to fall many times a day, and receive many grievous wounds from thy
enemies; yet never despair, never grow faint-hearted, or over-fearfull of thy
self; but still stand upon thy accustomed guards against all new assaults; and
do the same things with no less confidence, the second, third, fourth time,
and as often as thy need shall require, as thou did at the first.

3. This kind of exercitation, by so much the more displeases the Devil, by
how much he well knows it is highly pleasing to God: and for this reason he
moves all his engines, to make us tepid and slack in frequenting it. Do thou
therefore use But be diligent, and use violence to thine own Inclination,
violence to thy self; and the more difficulty thou find, by so much more
redouble thy diligence in doing it; and esteem it not a thing over-irksome, to
renew it diverse times in one and the same fall; And if after the first, next,
and third relapse, thou feel a grievous trouble, confusion, and diffidence
in thy self; yet still endeavor, by all means, to recover the inward quiet of
thy soul, Recovering the quiet of thy soul, and reconciliation to thy
Sovereign.
and then reconcile thy self to thy loving Lord: For that disquietnesse of
conscience remaining after the sin committed, is not any sign of thy sorrow
for having offended thy Savior; but rather of fear, for thy own private
damages, which thou have thereby deserved.

4. Now the way to recover this The way to get this quiet, is to forget thy
fault.
quiet of mind, may be this: Having truly turned thy self to thy God, and
humbly craved pardon for thy sin; think no more of it, but forget it totally
for the future; and fix thy thoughts only upon thy Lords infinite love, by
which he earnestly desines to unite thee to himself, and make thee partaker of
his eternal beatitude. And when by this or the like considerations, thou have
settled thy mind, and stated thy heart in tranquillity; turn thy thoughts
again to contemplate thy fall, and do as thou were directed in the beginning
of this Chapter: And when thou go to confession, (as thou should
frequently do,) recall all thy fallings and defects into thy memory,
discovering them faithfully, and confessing them simply, to thy Ghostly Father.

CHAP. XVI.
That we should keep our Hearts ever quiet, and joyful in our Lord.
EXPLICATION.
AS when we have lost the quiet of our Heart, we are to use all possible
endeavors to recover it, (as is aforesaid:) So thou must know No accident, can
justly deprive us of quiet.
that no accident whatsoever can with any just reason deprive us of the same.
For it is most true, (and thou have been often told it,) that we must be angry
with our selves for our sins, yet our grief must be governed with
discretion, and accompained with tranquillity, and our sorrow must produce acts
and resolutions of amendment of our lives, not of disquiet and anxiety in our
selves. As for other painful and unpleasing accidents, as the sickness,
death, yea and eternal damnation of our dear friends; or the scourges of
Plague, Famine, War, Saccagings, Burnings, and other evils, falling upon our
selves; though as they are things contrary to our For thoug^ we must needs
abhor things contrary to nature, Yet we may love them as coming from Gods
permissio^, And so conform our selves to his holy will.
nature, we must needs reject them; yet we may by the efficacious working of
Gods Grace, not only desire them, but even be delighted with them, as being
the just punishments of the wicked, and exercises of virtue to the good, for
which ends out loving Lord permits them to befall us.

Thus conforming our selves to Gods holy Will, we may quietly and peaceably
pass through the midst of all this lives bitternesses and contrarieties. And
take this for a truth, that all Disquiet of mind, is displeasing to our dear
Lord; because it is never without some imperfection, and evermore proceeds from
some perverse root of self-love-

1. To obtain therefore this quiet of Text. Thou art to appoint a sentinel.
Heart in thy Spiritual Conflict; thou must (O dearly beloved) appoint over
thy self a faithful Scout-watch; which, as soon as it discovers any thing
tending to thy trouble and disquiet, may suddenly shoot off the warning piece,
that thou may timely betake thee to thy Weapons for thy defense.

2. And if it falls out, (as too often it does,) that through some sudden
assault, thou art grievously perplexed; presently setting all other If thou art
surprised with perplexity, return with all diligence to quiet thy Heart.
things aside, pacify thy interior, and endeavor to regaine a quiet and
joyful Heart: for this being done, thou will be better enabled to prosecute
other affairs, which will take small effect, so long as thy mind is troubled
and unquiet: Besides, the enemy draws from thence an occasion to tempt thee
more violently; For he fears this sacred quiet and peace of the Soul, (as
Gods Tabernacle wherein he works his wonders,) and therefore he shadows his
wiles with the show of good, that he may the more deceive us; exciting in us
sundry pious affections, and holy desires: The cunning whereof is discovered by
their fruits and effects; which is the bereaving our Hearts of all their joy
and content.

3. So soon therefore as thou have And therefore admit of no new affections,
understood by thy scout-watches sign, of some new affection which demands
admittance into thy heart; beware of opening unto it, before thou have blunted
the edge of thy Will from any desire thereof; and made an humble offer of it to
God, with an acknowledgement of thine Before thou have offered them to God;
own ignorance and blindness, whereby thou art incapable (without the light
of his heavenly Grace, which now thou implorest) to judge of this good motion,
and to determine whether it comes from his glorious Majesty, or from some
earthly cause and consideration.

4. And be ever mindful of mortifying And mortified thy will and desire;
the pronenesse of thy nature, before thou adventure upon any good desire,
though sent from God himself: for such works which ensue upon
selfe-mortification, are more grateful unto him, than those which are done
following the desires of thy greedy Nature. And this mortification of thy will,
does generally better please him, than the work it self.

5. Thus, driving out vain and vicious affections; and not rashly admitting of
the good, till first thy own nature with all her passions and desires be
stilled and mortified; Thou may be sure to remain in Which is the surest way
to remain in peace.
peace, and to keep the bulwark of thy Heart in perpetual security from all
thy foes without, and from reprehensions, and selfe-afflictions within: which
grudgings of conscience, though they seem very good, and to come from God,
because they blame thee of some defect; yet they are sometimes suggested by the
Devil: but the only way to know their off spring, is to examine their
effects; For if such selfe-reprehensions keep thee humble and quiet, and spur
on thy diligence to do good Works, without lesning thy pious confidence in
God; then receive them as inspired by him, who thus knocks at the inner door of
thy Heart to teach thee selfe-knowledge. But if they make thee unquiet,
pusillanimous, unapt to good Works, and diffident of God, (especially at the
time when thou feel these interior reprehensions and afflictions in thy
self;) conclude as a certain truth, that they come not from thy Creator, but
are suggested by the deceiver: and therefore hearken not to them, but persist
merrily in thy devout and accustomed exercises, as if thou did not at all
feel any such suggestions.

CHAP. XVII.
That pious purposes, are sometimes the deceits of the Devil, to hinder our
progress in virtues.
BEsides these hitherto discovered former sins: which he therefore suggests
unto us, The Devil suggests desires, to fight against former faults, that thou
may neglect the present,
that our minds being taken up with this employment, may forget their daily and
more dangerous enemies, and wage no war against them. But he that will take due
care of his own spiritual safety, must in the first place, fall to work with
his next neighboring vices, and set them farther of: For through the neglect
of this, we fall into many miseries; as they must needs do, who are still
wounded afresh, and yet think not of seeking for any salves to cure them.

2. Because these purposes being And fall into self-complacency,
esteemed as if they were real performances; we fall into selfe-complacency
and secret pride; in so much as we cannot digest a hard word, much less any
blows; and yet we attend our high contemplations, and there we can make
resolutions to endure patiently, and purely for Gods Love, all the pains of
Purgatory. And for that our inferior will or sensuality, feels nothing in it
self that troubles or grieves it, but looks only upon such calamities as are
to come hereafter; we very soolishly and rashly conceit our selves, to be
some of them who are perfectly patient, and that we actually suffer many great
matters for Gods Sake.

3. Wherefore, O my beloved, that thou may avoid this deceit, resolve,
Therefore thou art to fight actually with thy nearest foes,
not only in thy mind, but buckle thy self actually to fight with thy nearest
foes, which thou find most troublesome, and most strongly to oppose thee:
And thus thou shall plainly perceive whether thy purposes be true or false,
strong or weak: But I may not advise thee, to wage war against those enemies
which now trouble not thy quiet, unless thou plainly foreseest, that they are
ready to assault thee: For then thou may lawfully and profitably fight them,
before they fall on thee; that so And not to irritate them which are quiet,
thou may have the more strength and courage at the time of the Battle.

4. Yet persuade not thy self, that by this foregoing skirmish with thy
enemies, thou have already vanquished them, unless thou have been for a long
time exercised and versed Unless thou art well versed in the acts of that
virtue.
in the acts of that virtue: in which case, thou may resolve to fight against
past grievous sins, though thou can not yet conquer some less defects; the
Divine Providence so permitting, to preserve thee in the humble acknowledgement
of thy own weakness.

5. But whosoever is careless in Be not careless of small defects.
overcomming small defects, and yet thinks he can easily vanquish the
greatest, is notoriously vain, and presumptuous, and even already falling into
the snare of the Devil.

EXPLICATION.
I Advise thee here, (my dearly beloved,) to take special notice Three things
make our designs fruitless.
of three principal occasions which render our designs fruitless, and defraud
our pious purposes of their desired and expected effect: And this Doctrine will
teach thee how to make good purposes as thou ought.

6. The first occasion, (which was also touched briefly in the foregoing Text,)
is, that we ordinarily purpose 1. The relying upon our strength.
to do a good action, or to avoid the doing of evil, more trusting to our
strength, than to Gods assistance: And this pride, (whence this deceit
proceeds,) so hudwinkes the eyes of our Soul, that we see it not at all, and
are therefore justly permitted to fall and fail of our expectation, that we
may thereby truly come to the knowledge of our own nothing, and learn to ground
all our good designs upon the Divine Goodness, Grace, and Power, and not at
all in our own strength or endeavors.

7. Another occasion is, that when 2. The want of force to go through with them.
our will enters upon a design, it wants force and efficacy to go through
with it: (although it seems otherwise to us, because our design eyes the
beauty of that virtue which we aim at, rather than the difficulty which
intervenes in the getting it,) So that it is no great mervail, that such
ill-grounded designs fall down to the ground, and melt away into nothing upon
the first sight of the virtue.

8. The third occasion is; That we 3. The no^ levelling at the right end.
address not our designs to their true and proper end, to wit, the pure
Service and Honor of God; For we make them oftentimes, in our afflictions, or
in time of distress and desolution, rather to find thereby some solace in such
contrarieties, than only to please our Lord God; who therefore lets us fall
afterward, that we may discern this deceit, and learn, to our cost, to aim
at nothing else in all our actions than his holy Will and Pleasure.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Devil strives to withdraw us from the way of virtue.
MOreover, the Devil makes 1. Another deceit of the Devil,
use of an other subtilty, to draw us from the path of virtues, into the
precipice of vices. As thus: A certain person falls into a sickness, which he
desires to support Exemplified in a sick person.
with patience; The Devil, (seeing that if he thus persevere, he must needs
get the habit of patience) suggests unto him diverse motions and desires, to do
this or that good Work, if he could once have health restored: and that he
could serve God better; advance his own perfection more effectually; and
assist others more charitably, if he were sound, than he can do being sick:
And these conceits en-kindle more and more in the breast of the sick person,
till they make him weary and impatient of his sufferings; as being thereby
hindered from doing such heroique actions: And by this deceit, the Devil casts
down a Soul from the practice of Patience, (in Falling into impatience upon
pious pretenses,
which it first exercised it self) into open Impatience against this
infirmity; yet not as a thing which is in it self displeasing, but as it is a
hindrance, retarding her from the Execution of those good Works, which she
unquietly desires to perform.

2. Nor does the enemy rest here; but having brought the sick person to this,
proceeds on in his plot, and And over-earnestly desirous of health.
takes away from him the aforesaid suggestions (of such good Works as he
could bring about if he enjoyed his health) when the sick person perceives it
not; leaving in him only an ardent desire to recover his health: and if this
follows not as he would, he falls into grievous sadness and great impatience.

3. The best remedy of this, is, that The remedy, is to admit of no purposes
which thou can not presently practice.
when sickness or other adversity has seized on thee, thou take care to admit
no motion or desire into thy mind, which thou can not forthwith put in
execution: otherwise it will make thee solicitous, and leave thee in
unquietness.

EXPLICATION.
ANd thou ^rt in this case, to Because perchance they would not have their
effect;
persuade thy self with all patience, humility and resignation, that perchance
thy now-made in^entions, would not have the effect thou imaginest; because thou
art far weaker than thou think: Or, that God Or that God would not receive
them.
by his secret judgments unknown to thee, by reason of thy demerits, will not
receive this good from thee; but rather that thou humble thy self under the
sweet and powerful hand of his holy will. So likewise, should thou be
hindered by thy ghostly Father, or any other occasion whatsoever, from following
thine Therefore, trouble not thy self, when thou can not perform thy
desires;
own fancy in thy accustomed devotions, and particularly in receiving the
sacred Communion, trouble not thy self with over-earnest desires, but truly
divested of all self-will, cloth and content thy self with Gods good pleasure;
Saying sweetly; If the all-seeing eye of divine providence, found not in me so
great ingratitude, and so many defects, I should not be now deprived of so
great a blessing as is the receiving of my sweet Savior in the blessed
Sacrament; but humbly acknowledging that my loving Lord, does thus discover
unto me mine own unworthiness, his holy name be ever blessed and praised. O
my God, I place my whole confidence in thy divine goodness, and hoping thou will accept of my will, which I force and conform to thy disposition; I here
open to thee my heart, ready to obey thy holy command, disposed to do what
thou inspirest; enter into it, I beseech thee, and endow it with Spiritual
comfort, and courage against its enemies, and then do with it, O my Creator
and Redeemer, that which is most agreeable to thy divine Majesty, and let thy
sacred will be now and always my only food and nourishment, since I desire
nothing more, o sweet spouse of my soul, but that purged and freed from all
things whatsoever displeasing to thee, I may be ready, adorned, and prepared
for thy coming, and willing to follow thy blessed disposition in all things
whatsoever. But rest secure, that thy good will is acceptable to God.


If thou punctually performest these precepts, rest secure, (my dearly
beloved,) that all thy good desires to do well, which nevertheless thou can
not compass; (either by reason of thine own nature, or the craft of thy enemy,
or God himself not permitting it, to prove thy resignation to his holy will,)
will always minister some occasion of satisfying thy duty to thy Lord God in
what manner he best pleases. And this is the truest service thou can
perform, and the most acceptable sacrifice thou can offer to his divine
Majesty.

But I think it very convenient to Another dangerous snare.
give thee here another caveat, of a most dangerous and subtle snare, into
which many, blinded with self-love, fall unawares: and this it is; They so
palliate and excuse their defects that themselves do scarcely perceive them.

4. And mark this diligently; that Text.
oftentimes when a man falls into impatience, he imputes it not to the pain
which he endures, but for that he is impeded from the practice of good wotks:
So that the cause of Diverse pretenses for our impatience.
his impatience relates not to the sickness or adversity it self; but partly
to himself as deserving it, partly to others, whom he must be forced to
trouble against his will; and partly to the omission of his spiritual
exercises.

5. Thus he who fails in his ambitious But all unwarrantable,
seeking of honors and offices, will tell you, he complains not for his own
sake, but for the necessity of his family and friends, whom he might thus have
helped. Now that such men deceive themselves, is made apparent by this; that
they are not much troubled, when the very same effects come to pass by some
other means or persons, which seemed to afflict them, and under which they
covered their own imperfection.

6. For example, Thou tellest me, As is explained by an example.
that thy sickness makes thee not impatient, because it is in it self
grievous to thee, but for that they who are about thee are thereby
overburdened: But should they, whom thou so much compassionatest, be as much
overburdened in serving other sick persons, it would not much trouble thee:
From whence it is evident, that not the sense of their trouble, but thine own
desire, and self-love, was the true root of thy Impatience. And in this
manner, thou may discover the hidden deceits in the rest of thy affairs.

EXPLICATION.
TO remedy this, I advise thee, The remedy is, to separate the pain, from the
pretended circumstances.
(my beloved,) that as soon as thou doubtest of such a deceit, thou presently
separate (by the help of thy conception) the pain which presses thee, from
those circumstances which are pretended excuses for thy impatience; and then
reflecting upon that alone, force thy self to produce true and efficacious
acts of patience, and resignation to suffer it willingly. Thus thou will either
become a true practiser of virtue, or at least thine eyes will be opened to
discover thy own defects, whereof thou were formally ignorant.

7. Wherefore I exhort thee, that Text. Therefore desire not to be freed from
thy Cross,
if thou art able to carry thy Cross with patience; thou never desire to be
freed from it: for this desire brings with it two great evils: The one is,
that if it destroys not thy patience, yet it disposes thee by little and
little to impatience: The other is, That it deprives thee of merit before God,
who esteems that only a work of perfect Patience, (though short in reference
to time,) which is done with the resignation of our wills to his divine pleasure.

8. In this therefore, and in all But conform thy will to God's.
thy other works and proceedings follow this Rule: Withdraw and purge thy heart
from all other desires and demands, than that only, purely, and simply, which
is conform to God's will. And this is the way to be no more disquieted with
adversity; since no such thing can befall thee, without his will and liking.

9. But when some lawful means Yet thou may use lawful means, so thou
take heed of self-love.
must necessarily be used for the expelling of some overburdening adversity;
take heed left self-love creep into thy heart with them; and see thou apply
them, (not to be thereby freed from thy pressure) but only because it is Gods
pleasure* that thou should make use of those instruments: and then thou can
not be discontented, in case they should not conduce to thy deliverance from
adversity.

EXPLICATION.
How to oppose the Devil, striving to deceive us with indiscretion.
When the Devil perceives 1. How to oppose the Devil, striving to deceive us
with indiscre^ion,
that thou walk on warily in the right track of virtue, so that his common
cunning is become useless to his design of making thee go astray: he then
transformes himself into an Angel of light, and solicites thee with delightful
thoughts, flatters thee with passages of sacred writ, and suggests examples of
the Saints; that so conceiting thy self climbed up to the top of perfection,
thou may fall more dangerously into the precipice which he has dig'd for
thee. To this end, he presses And pressing us to afflict our bodies;
thee to the punishment of the body, with disciplines, abstinence, hair-cloath,
and other extraordinary austerities; that either thou may be puffed up with
pride, as thinking thou do very much; or may destroy thy health, and so
become incapable to do good works; or lastly, that having endured much in this
kind, thou may grow weary of doing penance, and abhor thy spiritual
exercises; and so become a prey to thine enemies, and a slave to fleshly and
worldly pleasures; which has happened to very many, whose presumption having led
them on, and left them to the conduct and violence of an indiscreet zeal,
after they had gone beyond the limits of their own virtue by immoderate
rigours, perished at last in their own inventions, and so became laughing
stocks to their enemies; all which disasters will never befall him who
diligently observes this doctrine. Which though it is sometimes good, Yet it
must be tempered by discretion: For all cannot imitate the Saints in auste^ity
of life;


2. For although these voluntary pernances are sometimes praiseworthy, and may
be meritorious, when strength of body and humility of spirit do correspond and
accompany them; yet they must be tempered and moderated by discretion according
to each one's nature and quality: Thus, he that is unable of body to imitate
the Saints in severity of life, may right well be able to imitate their
virtues; by being fervent in devotion, frequent in prayer, continually aspiring
to his Lord and love, setting naught by the world and himself, and loving
silence and solitude; HE may be humble and affable to all, patient in
suffering affronts, glad of the occasions to do good to his greatest enemies,
and finally resolved to perform his Lords will, and promote his honor to the
utmost of his power; and never to offend his divine Majesty in the least matter
whatsoever.

3. All which inward acts and But each one may imitate their virtues.
mortifications are far more pleasing to God th^n the outward macerations of
the flesh; and therefore I counsel thee to be very punctual in those things
which concern thy duty and obligation, but as for extraordinary rigours, be
rather backward and fearful, than indiscreetly forward ^o embrace them.

4. Yet I speak not here to those Yet take heed of too much addicting thy self
to delicacies, etc.
delicate ones, who (though in other things they are sufficiently spiritual)
are overmuch inclined to indulgence toward themselves, and to an ex^ct doting
and diligence in the preservation of their health, under Under pretense of
health, or the better performance of thy duty.
pretense of being thereby better able to serve God and perform their duty; for
they strive to couple two capital enemies together, the Spirit and the flesh;
but unprofitably, and with manifest danger to both, since this solicitude
causes oftentimes the loss of health to the one, and of devotion to the
other. Discretion therefore Discretion therefore is the best directour in this
matter of mortification,
must be the chief directour in this matter, which must distinguish the
diversity of complexions and conditions, and since every one is not of like
temper, all cannot be regulated by the same precept. To this I add, that this
discretion and moderation is necessary not only in exterior things, but also
in the acquisition of interior virtues, as I shall now declare.

5. For though the true Soldier of Christ, aspiring to perfection, must put no
limits to his spiritual profit, yet there are some heart of spirit, which need
to be quenched with And also in the acquisition of virtues,
the dew of discretion, especially such as in beginners are kindled with
overmuch fervor. Thou art therefore to know that virtues are to be gotten by
little and little, and by degrees, Which must be done by degrees,
that so they may take the deeper root, and become more durable in our souls.
For example: If Thou art in the pursuit of patience; Thou art first to study
how to bear injuries and afflictions, before thou fall to practice those higher
degrees of delighting in them, and desiring them.

6. Moreover I advise thee not to And one by one, rather than all or many
together;
apply thy self to obtain all virtues or many together, but first and
principally to practice one, and then afterward another, for by this means a
virtuous habit is more easily planted, and mo^^ ^irmly fixed in thy soul; For
by this continual exercise of one only virtue, the memory is ready upon all
occasions, the understanding is studying new means and reasons to acquire it,
and the will is more affectionately inclined to embrace it, than if many were
the objects of their employments. And such is the conformity and affinity of
one virtue to another, that the implanting of any one, is the preparing of the
ground for all the others; and whosoever is a proficient For, the obtaining of
any one virtue is a preparation to all the rest.
in the practice of one virtue, has thereby learned the manner how to purchase
another; in so much that as one is augmented, all the rest do by the same
means increase in our souls, by reason of their inseparable nearenesse,
connection, and concatenation together; they being all beams proceeding from
the same Sun, which is the divine light.

Further advises for the getting of Virtues.
1. Besides those means formerly prescribed (in the 11. Chapter) for the
obtaining of virtues, I will here give thee some brief and material advices
concerning this important matter. First, it behooves thee to have a generous
First, thou must resolve to suffer.
heart, a great courage, and a strong and resolute will, as being certain thou
have to do with cunning enemies, and art to wrestle with many contrarieties,
and suffer many 2. Thou must bear a great love to virtue.
Crosses.

2. In the next place thou art to bring with thee a particular inclination and
affection to virtue, which thou can not want, if thou truly weighest how
pleasing it is to God, how excellent in it self, how profitable and how
absolutely necessary to the attaining of all perfection.

3. Every morning make strong and efficacious resolutions and protestations, 3.
Thou must practice it upon all occasions.
to exercise thy self according to the probable occasions which may that day
be offered unto thee; and sometimes in the day reflect upon thy self, and
examine thy performance of this promise, and fervently renew thy desires and
intentions.

4. Apply all thy actions, spiritual exercises, reading, prayer, and 4. Apply
all thy exercises to this end.
meditations, for the obtaining of that virtue which thou now practisest.

5. Endeavor so to accustom thy self to form acts of virtue, 5. Form acts
thereof.
both internal, and external; that they by use may become as easy and
natural unto thee, as were formerly their contraries, which were conformable
to thy vicious desires.

6. The sweet passages and sentences 6. Think upon such passag^s of Scripture,
as concern, and commend it.
of holy scripture, are of great force to this purpose; and therefore it will
be convenient to commit diverse of them to thy memory touching that virtue thou
now aymest at; and to pronounce them often by mouth, or express them in thy
heart, especially upon the occasion of feeling the passions and motions
contrary to that virtue: For example, If patience be the virtue thou praisest,
reflect upon that saying of Baruch: Baruch 4.
Child, suffer patiently the wrath which is fallen upon thee. And that of the
Psalmist: The patience of the poor shall Psalm. 9.
not perish in the end: Or that of Solomon: The man that is patient, is better
Prove. 16.
then he that is strong, and he that overcomes his own mind is better than he
that conquers towns: And; in your Luke 21.
patience you shall possess your souls: And; let us by patience run on to the
Heb. 12*
battle which is proposed unto us.

7. To the same purpose thou may 7. Make frequent use of Jaculatory prayers,
also make use of these Jaculatory prayers: When, o my God, shall my heart be
armed with the shield of patience? When shall I for thy love support
cheerfully all contrarieties? O sweet and dear sufferings! which make me like
my meek Savior, afflicted for my sake! O only life, and love of my soul;
shall I never compass to content my self for thy glory, amongst thousands of
crosses and calamities? Oh, how happy were I, if amidst the flames of
tribulations, I could burn with an inflamed desire to suffer yet far more!

8. These and the like ejaculations, and darts of affection, have great power
to excite us to virtue, and penetrate even to Gods heart in heaven, especially
being aided and Which being aided with two wings, wlil so are up to heaven.
accompanied with two wings: A true knowledge of the content our Lord takes in
our practice of virtue; and a lively and longing desire to obtain it, for no
other end than because it is pleasing to his divine Majesty.

9. Thou art yet farther to be instructed, Above all things thou art to make a
continual progress:
(my dearly beloved,) concerning this weighty and necessary matter of obtaining
virtue; that one maine point is, to make a continual progress in the practice
thereof: ^or if thou leavest off this pursuit, it will necessarily follow, that
through the violent inclination of thy sensual appetite, and the alluring
impulse of outward objects; unruly passions will press in upon thee, which
will either destroy, or at least much diminish the acquired habits of virtue,
and will moreover deprive thee of those manifold graces and gifts of God, which
by thy continuance and progress thou had infallibly obtained.

10. For surely the way of the spirit, walking to perfection, is far
different from that of earthly travailers; who lose nothing by their convenient
stay, because they redress their weariness, which is caused and increased by
the continuance of their corporal motion; whereas in this way of the spirit,
by how much more thou marchest onwards, by so much thy strength more
increases; for, For by going foreward, thy strength increases,
the inferior part, (which by it is resistance, renders the path harsh and
painful,) is by this virtuous progress still more and more weakened; and the
Superior part, (which is the habitation where virtue resides,) is thereby
fomented and fortified: So that by the continuance of welldoing, thou still
lessen'st the contradiction which thou feel in thy journey, and receivest a
certain secret content in thy happy conquest.

11. Thus continuing thy designed course, and marching ever onward in thy
journey, thou will arrive with less pain and more pleasure, ascending by the
several degrees and steps of virtue, to the top of the mountain; where thy
perfected soul Till thou art gotten up to the mountain of perfection.
will perform her pious exercises, not only without contradiction, but with
much gust and content, having now tamed and triumphed over her unruly passions,
and completed her conquest over her self, and all things created, and being
sweetly settled in the bosom of the divinity.

12. Neither is it sufficient, (my dearly beloved,) that thou strivest not
Thou art also to seek out all occasions of practicing virtue,
to avoid the offered occasions in this practice of virtues, (as was declared
in the ninth precedent Chapter,) But I would have thee seek them out, and
joyfully lay hold of them, though they appear never so little, and at a
Especially such as are contrary to thy sensuality.
distance; especially such as are contrary to thy sensuality.

13. To this hard combat, then may encourage thy self by these following
considerations: Whereof one is, that all such occasions, are the proportionate
and probable, (yea necessary) means, for the acquisition of virtue; in so much
that when thou demandest virtue of God, thou also ask these occasions, This
being the most proportionate means to attain to it,
else thy prayers would be presented in vain, and thy heart would contradict
thy lips, yea thou might seem to tempt thy Savior, who ordinarily gives
not patience without suffering, nor humility without contempt: and this is also
true in all other virtues, which are all acquired by contrary accidents,
whereby we best perceive our own wants, and therefore are most moved to
desire their redresses: And by how much these feelings are more sensible, by so
much the more strong and generous are the acts by which we endeavor to the
virtues, we stand in need of. Thou art therefore to make high esteem, and
improve thy self, by the least offered occasion; as by a crosse-looke or
contradicting word, which will inure thee to the patient sufferance of more
important diff^ulties.

14. The other consideration, is that which has been formerly touched; To
conceive of all things which befall thee, as coming from Gods And coming from
Gods Providence for thy particular profit,
Providence for thy particular profit: And though some of them, (as thine own,
or others faults,) cannot be imputed to God, (who abhors all sin,) yet they
may be referred to him, in as much as he permits them, and though he can, yet
does not hinder them: But all pains and punishments whatsoever, which happen to
us, by and through our own defects, or others malice, are from God, and his
Divine Providence, to which he concurres, and wills that we endure them; and
which he would not permit, (since they contain a certain deformity, a And
that thou may draw good from them
thing ever odious to his purity) but for the good we may draw from them, and
for other just reasons best known to his All-knowing Majesty.

15. Being therefore ascertained of Gods Will in all thy sufferings, and that
he will have thee to support voluntarily all afflictions which befall thee
either by others faults or thine own; it follows, that they are much mistaken,
who (to excuse The mistake of some rectified.
their impatience) pretend, that God will not this or that thing, because he
hates all evil: for what is this, but to seek a cloak to cover their own
imperfections, and to refuse the carriage of that Cross, which Christ has
laid upon their shoulders?

16. And I yet further assure thee, To suffer voluntarily by them who^ thou
have obliged,
that thy Lord God more values thy voluntary disgestion of such difficulties
which come from those persons whom thou have obliged, than them which come from
other accidents; because the pride of thy perverse nature is more suppressed by
these, than by them; and suffering these willingly, thou much contentest and
exaltest thy God, by cooperating with him in that, wherein his ineffable
bounty, and power do so Is to draw virtue from sin and malice.
greatly appear: and this in effect, is to draw from the pestilent poison of
sin and malice, a most precious balsome of virtue and goodness.

17. For believe it, (my beloved,) thy Lord God no sooner discovers in thy
heart a lively and ardent love of well-doing, and a disinteressed desire of
getting this glorious conquest, but he forthwith prepares and presents this
chalice of cruel temptations, and harsh occasions, which thou art to take and
digest, according as he best knows and pleases: and therefore confident
Receive therefore the bitter cup, mixed by the heavenly Physician; and swallow
it cherfully.
of his love, and careful of thine own profit, shut thine eyes, and receive
it from his holy Hands, swallowing it down cherfully, readily, and securely,
even to the last and least drop, as a medicine made by a Physician incapable of
error, and whereof the ingredients, are by so much more profitable to thy
soul, by how much they have less sweetness and savor to thy sensuality.

How to make use of all occasions in the exercise of one virtue.
1. Thou have been already informed, (my dearly beloved,) that the single
practice of one only virtue at once is more profitable, than the laying out for
them all together; and that all occasions and occurrences, though different in
themselves, are to be directed to that end; Now take this method for thy more
easy proceeding therein.

2. It may fall out, that oftentimes in the same day or hour, thou may
chance to be unjustly reprehended for something which in it self deserves
praise; that thou may cause anger by doing a good action, or be murmured
against for some small subject; that thy fitting demand In all occurring
accidents of suffering,
may be harshly refused and rejected; that thou art suspected, contradicted,
and calumniated without cause; that thy body is afflicted with pain, or thy
mind with melancholy; that thou art employed in some peevish affair; that thy
diet is ill dressed; and finally, that thou suffer either in these-like
inconsiderable occasions, or perchance in matters of more difficulty to be
supported, wherewith this miserable life is replenished.

3. In all which accidents, though it be good to produce diverse acts of Make
acts of that virtue thou then practisest.
virtue, conformable to the variety of the subjects; yet following the Rule
already prescribed, thou art to exercise thy self in such acts, as directly
aim at that virtue thou then practisest: As for example: If at the time when
these occasions are Examples; in the virtue of Patience.
offered, thou art upon the acquisition of Patience; thy way is to form acts,
of enduring those particular contrarieties, with all willingness, joyfulnesse,
and cheerfulness. If thy virtue be Humility; acknowledge Of Humility.
thy self most justly deserving these and far greater indignities: If it be
Obedience; yield readily, and submit to Gods powerful Hand, Of Obedience.
offering to obey (if so he pleases) not only all reasonable creatures, but
even to sink below the brute beasts, and debase thy self under all things
which any way disgust or displease thee: If it be Poverty; Of Poverty.
content thy self in the want of all worldly comforts and conveniences,
whatsoever: If it be Charity; Of Charity.
produce acts of love, both toward thy neighbor, as being isntrumental to
thy purchasing of virtue; and also toward God, as being the principal and
loving cause, whence these crosses proceed, (or at least are permitted) to come
upon thee, for thy spiritual practice and profit. And by this Doctrine here
delivered concerning the diverse accidents which may daily befall thee, thou
may easily learn how to behave thy self, and make acts of the virtue thou
practisest, in any one occasion of sickness, persecution, or other pressures
which are of longer durance.

4. As for the space of time, which Concerning the time thou art to stay in the
practice of each virtue, Thy directour must be judge;
is to be employed in the practice of each virtue; it is not for me to
determine; but it must be regulated by the condition, diligence, and necessity,
of each particular combatant; and according to their much or little progress in
the way of the spirit; whereof none can be a competent judge, but he who is
the Guider and Directour of their souls.

5. But whosoever shall heartily settle himself to work, with the devotion
and diligence aforesaid, Yet thou may have some signs of thy progress;
may without doubt make great profit in few weeks practice. And take this for
one sure sign of thy proficiency; if amidst all dryness, darkness and
distresses of thy Soul, and feeling thy self bereft of all spiritual Whereof
one is, if thou losest not courage in time of desolation.
gust and comfort, thou ceasest not to continue with courage in thy virtuous
enterprises.

Moreover, the contradiction of thy sensuality in the forming of acts of
virtue, will afford thee a manifest testimony; for the more that is weakened,
the more this is strengthened; Another, if the rebellion of thy sensuality be
weakened.
so that to feel no rebellion in the inferior part, especially in unforeseene
assaults, is a true token of thy having obtained the virtue. And as far forth
as thy actions are accompanied with a promptitude and alacrity of spirit, so
far thou have just reason to think thou have profited in this exercise.

6. Yet take heed of persuading thy self, that thou art in sure possession of
perfect virtue, or absolute Yet never think thy self a conqueror,
master of any one passion; though happily thou have not a long time, and after
many hot skirmishes, felt these rebellious motions; for the deceit of the
Devil, and the corruption Because vice may be clothed in virtues dress,
of thy nature, may herein be too hard for thee, since that thing may be
really a vice, which secret pride clothes in the habit of virtue. ^f
furthermore, thou steadfastly be^oldest And thou have yet much more to do.
the perfection to which God has called thee, thou will ea^ily grant, that
had thou made a far greater progress in the path of perfection, yet thou art
scarcely well entered into the first confines thereof.

7. And I must here put thee in Therefore look forwards upon what thou yet
want,
mind, (my dearly beloved,) that thou art still to look forwards, and advance
thy self toward those many virtues thou want, and not to reflect backwards
upon thine own small profit and progress: For this is to be left to thy Lord
God, the true searcher and only knower of hearts, who lays open this secret
to some, and conceales it from others, according to his Divine knowledge of the
pride or humility which will ensue thereupon, and so as a loving Father, takes
away from these all danger, and gives those an occasion to increase their
virtue.

8. Wherefore let the pious practitioner And pursue thy exercises with patience
and constancy.
pursue his exercises with patience and constancy, though his perceives not
it is own progress; assuring himself that he shall in due time see and feel
it, when the Divine Providence shall be so pleased for his greater profit.

CHAP. XIX.
How our enemy endeavors to make our virtues isntrumental to our Ruin.
1. OUr deceitful and dangerous enemy the Devil, tempts us also by those very
virtues which we have acquired, and casts them, as it were stumbling blocks,
in our way, to occasion our ruin. To this end Our enemies strive to make us
take pleasure in our virtues.
he strives to make us please and delight our selves in them; that so being
puffed up in our selfe-conceits, we may fall afterward into the dangerous
precipice of pride.

2. But to secure thy Soul from this fearful fall, stand always in the open
and plain field, and persevere securely in the true and profound But do thou
consider thine own nothing.
consideration of thy own nothing; confessing that of thy self, thou art
nothing, thou know nothing, thou can do nothing, and thou have nothing
else in thee of thy self, but eternal damnation.

3. And take a serious care, to drive far from thee all such of thine own
cogitations, which seem to whisper against this selfe-knowledge: For they
surely are suggested by thy sworn enemies, and therefore if thou excludest
them not from thy heart, they will either kill, or cruelly wound it.

4. Which truth that thou may apprehend, I prescribe this Rule unto thee:
When thou go about to contemplate thine own baseness, think not of the
Benefits, Blessings, And mark well what is within thee of thine own goods, and
what of Gods Gifts.
Gifts and Graces which thou find in thy self; for these are none of thy
goods, but Gods Gifts: turn thee therefore to take a view of what is thine
own, and so thou shall rightly judge how great, or rather how truly nothing
thou art: which thou may thus do: Imagine the time before thou had a being,
and What were thou from eternity?
thou will soon find that for an eternity thou were an absolute nothing, that
thou did nothing, nor could contribute in the least manner to thy own
life, or any thing which thou now possessest. If in What art thou in time?
the next place, thou do ponder the time wherein thou begann'st to be
something, thou will likewise understand, that thou receivedst it from the pure
bounty and benignity of thy God alone; for he created thee, and gave thee this
life, which he still continues and conserves unto thee, and he does all other
things thou now have, know, and possessest. In so much as thou can not
meet with the least occasion in thy self, whereon to ground a thought of thy
being any thing, or of deserving any esteem above others, for any thing.

5. Now as concerning thy state What good can thou do of thy self?
of grace, and abilities given thee to do good: tell me, Can thy nature do the
least good thing by it self, deprived of thy Creatours Divine Assistance? If
further thou turn thy thoughts upon thine own evil and sinful works, and
others yet What evil have thou, or might thou have done?
worse which thou had undoubtedly done and continued in, if God of his great
Mercy had not kept, stayed, and withdrawn thee with the right hand of his holy
Grace; thou will be easily brought to acknowledge, that thine own wickedness,
(both by reason of the length of time, in which thou lay'st drowned therein, and
also of the multitude of thy evil actions and perverse affections,) is so
great, that it can neither be expressed, nor numbered; in so much that thou art,
or surely might have been, like another infernal Lucifer: therefore unless
thou will be a sacrilegious felon, and steal away the goods of thy Lord God,
and attribute them to thy self, thou may justly esteem thy self every day
worse than other.

EXPLICATION.
YEa, thou have good grounds to So that thou may justly think thy self, the
worst of all men.
think thy self the most ungrateful and ungratious wretch in the World, and
to be nothing but dirt and dung of the Earth, or that which is more stinking
and abominable, because the loathsomeness and stench of thy sins is far
greater. Text Yet be just in thy self-accusation,


6. Yet here take this necessary caveat, That Justice be joined with this
confession of thine own baseness; lest it bring thee more prejudice, than
profit: For if in this knowledge and humble confession of thy self thou
excellest some other, (who by reason of his own blindness thinks himself
something, and for such desires to be esteemed by others;) and art desirous
that upon this score, others should think well of thee, and esteem thee that
which thou acknowledgest thy self not to be; thou art far worse than he is.

7. Wherefore that the acknowledgement of thy own baseness and vildnesse, may
be true and real, and render thee pleasing to God; thou art not only to
acknowledge thy self base and wicked; but b^have And not only acknowledge
thine own baseness, but so use thy self.
thy self as such a one, treat thy self as such a one, and desire to be so
held, and so handled by all others.

EXPLICATION.
Abhorring all honors, rejoicing in affronts, and condescending upon all
occasions to perform the basest employments, and to be slighted and contemned
by every one; yet still for the only end and intention to humble and exercise
thy self, and not out of a certain pride, and secret presumption of spirit.

8. And if it sometimes happen Text.
that for some good work, wherein thy Lord God vouchsafed to make thee
isntrumental, thou come to gain a good esteem, or beginnest to And stick
to this amidst all praise or applause of others.
be beloved, or praised by others: Take heed, and be not drawn a tittle from
the aforesaid truth of thine own baseness: but turn thy heart to thy Lord
God, and there say to him: O my Lord, let it never enter into my thought, to
steal from thee thine own Divine goodness.

EXPLICATION.
TO thee, O my God, all praise and honor is only due; to thee only be given
all the glory, and to me that which I truly deserve, which is only confusion.

And afterward thou may reflect Text.
upon him who praised thee, saying within thy self: Why does this man think I
am good? When indeed there is none good, but thou only my good God.

If thou thus proceedest and practisest, thou rendrest truly to God that which
is his, and put thy soul in a disposition to receive greater grace.

EXPLICATION.
9. BUt if the memory of thy good deeds, endanger thy soul to fall into vanity;
looking upon them And let not the memory of thy good deeds, puff thee up with
vani^y;
presently as none of thine own goods, but as Gods Gifts, reason thus with
them: How can you appear and pretend to have a being in my heart, since I
neither gave you a beginning, progress, nor perfection; but my good God, by
his only Grace and Goodness created you? I therefore acknowledge him for your
principal Father, and to him I return all hearty Thanks, Praise, Honor and
Glory.

10. Then penetrate the best of thy For thou will find the best of them very
imperfect.
good works, and thou will find, thou have not only failed in perfectly
corresponding to the grace which God gave thee to perform them; but also that
they are far from that perfection, purity of intention, and due fervor and
diligence, which should have accompanied them: in so much that the whole matter
being impartially pondered, thou may rather be confounded and ashamed, than
puffed up with pride and complacency. For nothing is more certain, than that
the pure and perfect graces and gifts of God, are destroyed and lessened by our
imperfections, when we put them in practice.

11. And if thou will elevate thy spirit to thy Lords supreme Greatness and
Goodness, and truly resent what service is due to so Divine a Majesty; thou will soon conclude And that thou have no color to glory in them,
that there is no cause or color for thee to glory in thine own merits,
though thy actions had been far more excellent and renowned than they are;
but accusing thy self of Bu^ to accuse thy want of duty.
want of duty, and trembling at thine own deficiency, wilt put on the person of
a poor penitent desiring pardon, and saying; O my God, be favorable unto me,
a wretched Sinner.

Thou may furthermore, enter into comparison of thy works, with them of the
Saints and Servants of God; and thou will by that parallel, plainly perceive
the baseness of thy best actions.

12. Learn therefore (O my Learn therefore humility,
beloved) this necessary lesson of humility, and acknowledge thy self with thy
whole bundle of good works put together, to be a mere nothing; for this is the
firm foundation, whereon thou art to raise the perfect structure of all other
virtues; and Which is the foundation of all virtues,
the deeper thou layest this groundwork, the higher will be thy spiritual
building; yet never think thou can dig it deep enough, but rather
imagine, that if an infinity could befall a creature, thy unworthiness would
be infinite. This point, (to wit, selfe-acknowledgement,) being well practiced,
gives thee the possession And without which thou art less than nothing.
of all that is good, and without it thou art less than nothing, though thy
actions are more perfect than those of the greatest Saints, and thy heart be in
continual recollection with thy Creator. O blessed knowledge! which makes us
happy on Earth, and glorious in Heaven! O true light, shining out of our
darkness! O great nothing, which rendrest us masters and monarchs of all
things! No, (my dearly beloved,) I will never give over the pressing of this
Point, which thou art ever to practice.

13. If therefore thou desire to praise God, accuse thy self; if thou will
exalt his Divine Majesty, dive into thine own misery; If thou will find him,
climb not up to Heaven, for he will fly from thee, but rather descend into the
abyss of thine own nothing, and he will thither come to And it is the only
way to praise, find, and please God.
thee, and there embrace thee. Yes, he will court and cherish thee by so much
the more dearly, deliciously and tenderly; by how much thou seem abject and
vild in thine own eyes, and art well pleased to have all others slight, and
scorn thy company, as a mere out cast, an object of derision, and a thing
abominable.

14. Know furthermore and consider Therefore thou art bound to him, for
permitting thee to be scorned;
thy self most unworthy of so high a favor from thy Lord God, as to be
neglected and scorned by all; and fail not to render him most hearty and
humble thanks.

Finally, thou art to be grateful, and sensible of thy great obligation to
them who have administered the occasion of this thy spiritual improvement, and
to acknowledge And to them who do it.
thy self most bound to them who have most mastered and mortified thee.

15. But if notwithstanding all these true and weighty considerations, the
subtilty of the Devil, thy own ignorance, or an evil inclination, should have
yet the power over thee, so as to disquiet and And be ever wary of the devil,
and thine own inclination.
trouble thy mind with fancies of selfe-praise, and make some impressions in
thy heart, of thine own merits and deserts: It Is then thou art chiefly and
courageously to beat down and humble thy self; since thou find by
experience, how poorly thou have profited in the way of the Spirit, and
knowledge of thy self, and what deep roots thy pride and vanity have taken in
thy entralls: And this is the way to suck honey out of poison, and to draw
health from wounds.

Of Rash Judgment.
1. From this vice of selfe-esteem, springs up another no less dangerous,
which is Rash-Judgement Rash-judgemen springs from Self esteem,
concerning our neighbouts, and this is commonly followed with contempt of
their persons, and detraction from their good name: This vice as it has its
beginning from a p^evish and proud inclination, so likewise And from Pride.
it is nourished and fomented by no other food; for Pride and Rash Judgment
increase together, comply with each other, and do both jointly covertly and
insensibly concur to deceive us. For we presume to exalt our selves, by
judging meanly of others, and we think our selves free from those
imperfections, which we are fully persuaded are in our Brothers.

2. Now, our wily enemy, the Devil, no sooner discovers this perverse
disposition in us, but he is busy in keeping our senses open, to ^he Devil
^trives to ^eepe open our senses, upon our Neighbors actions;
see, hear, examine, control, and heighten the faults of our Neighbors: he
is diligent to imprint this imperfection, or that indiscretion, of such or such
a person in our spirits: If therefore (my dearly beloved) thy foe is so forward
and watchful to entrap thee, be thou equally careful and vigilant to avoid
his plots, But we must be as vigilant, to shun, as he is to lay his plotts.
and rescue thy soul out of his dangerous snares; and in the first place when
another defects are presented before thee, presently withdraw thy thoughts;
but if thou art solicited to give sentence, let it be a flat First, by denying
to give any sentence;
denial, and short answer, that thou have no such power given thee: and if
thou had any such privilege, thou could hardly form a right and sound
judgment, being environed and prevented with such a number of passions,
inclining to think more amiss than there is just cause.

3. Then make use of this second and singular remedy: Let the consideration
Secondly by looking homewards, upon our own selves,
of thine own wants, and interior necessities, so take up thy whole time, and
thoughts, that seeing how convenient it is to look homeward, and how much thou
art concerned to take order in thy own bleeding affairs; thou may recall
thy mind from roming abroad, and have no leisure left to lend away to others
superfluously, who have scarcely time enough to look after thy self in things
of absolute necessity. And this serious search into thine own wants, will
clear the inward eye of thy soul, from those ill humors which engender this
pestiferous imperfection of Rash judgment. For know, that when thou conceivest
amiss of thy Neighbor, Where we shall find some root of the same fault we
blame in them.
there is some root of the same evil in thine own heart, which is apt to take
the impression of that object which is like it self. When therefore thou
feel this itching desire to censure another fault; fall into passion at thy
self, as if thou were equally culpable, and enter into these terms with thine
own Soul: Is it possible, that I, who am so miserable, not only because I
wallow in the same mire, but am also full of greater faults and inperfections,
shall notwithstanding be so proud and presumptuous as to take upon me to judge
another? Thus the weapons which first pointed at thy neighbor, but have thus
pricked thine own heart, will prove a perfect cure of thy wounds, and a true
comfort to thy soul.

4. But when the fault which is If the fau^t be manifest, put a charitable
construction upon it;
committed, is become manifest, then excuse it with a charitable construction;
and piously conclude that thy brother has many hidden virtues and perfections,
for the custody whereof he is thus permitted to fall: or that it is to humble
him for a time, to make him see his own nothing; and so from this contempt of
others, raise him afterward to higher perfection in the sight of the divine
Majesty, whereby his gain may prove greater than his loss. But if the sin
be not only manifest, but even monstrous, and proceeds If monstrous, have
recourse to Gods secret judgments,
from a perverse and obstinate heart; turn thy thoughts to Gods secret and
severe judgments; where thou will find some, whose works seemd to speak them
highly wicked, to have afterward showed evident signs of holiness, and died
with opinion of sanctity: and thou will also find others, who were thought to
have touched the top of perfection, tumbled down into the miserable precipice
of eternal damnation: It is And tremble at the proceedings of his Providence.
therefore thy part to tremble at these unperceiveable proceedings of divine
providence, and to remain always careful and fearful of thine own
condition, not intermedling with that of others, which is concealed from thy
knowledge.

5. Finally, believe it for a certainty, And know that all Charity proceeds
from God's good spirit,
that all the good and charitable constructions thou put upon thy
neighbors actions, are the assured effects of the holy Ghost, and that all
contempt, rash censures, and bitterness of mind against them, are derived from
thy own malice, and and all bitterness from the Devil,
thine enemies suggestion: wherefore raze out of thy soul with all speed and
diligence, such impressions as glance at thy brothers imperfections, and shut
not thine eyes to sleep, before thou have excluded all such thoughts out of thy
heart.

Of the means to shield us against the attempts of our Enemies at the time of
death.
1. Though the whole course of our life is a continual war, yet the The way
to be conquerours at our death,
most signal and important day of battle, is the day of our death; and
whosoever is conquered in that last and inevitable skirmish, remains hopeless
of the victory for all eternity: wherefore that thou may be then ready to
bear this fatal brunt with constancy, fight now and fall upon thine enemies
before hand Is to fall now upon our enemies beforehand.
courageously; for he that is a stout combatant duting his life, is most like
to be conqueror at the point of death, as having by long practice gotten the
true use of his weapon.

2. Thou art also to make death familiar to thy thoughts, by frequent and
attentive conference and consideration; for so thou will less fear it when it
comes; and be freeer to resist what will then so fiercely assault thee.
Worldlings hear not willingly this doctrine, because it interrups them in the
cariere of their pleasure, which they follow with overmuch passion and
affection, and consequently leave it not without great grief and affliction.
But do thou (my dearly beloved) make timely preparation for a matter of
Therefore make timely preparation,
so high importance; and to this end, imagine thy self to be sometimes all
alone, helpless, and comfortless, struggling hand to hand with death; and
there represent to thy soul, these things following; which as I conceive will
then most afflict thee: and consult with thy own heart how to remedy all things
before it be to late, that so thou may readily make use thereof in thy latest
and greatest And now study thy answers, to the four challenges, which thy
enemies will then send thee.
necessity: For that which can once only be acted, ought in all reason to be
very exactly studied beforehand, lest a fault be committed, which can never be
redressed.

Of four assaults which our enemies make against us at the time of Death; And
first, Of their assault against Faith, and of the means to defend our selves.
3. Our subtle enemies, make ordinary The First is against Faith.
their strongest opposition when we are in the weakest condition; and therefore
they raise four maine batteries against us, from whence they let fly their
empoysoned darts at us into our deathbeds: assaulting us, with temptations
against Faith, with Despair, with Vainglory, and with Illusions.

4. As for the First: When the Devil sets upon thee with false arguments, The
remedy is, to retreat from thy Understanding to thy Will,
to batter down thy Faith; make a speedy Retreat from thy Understanding to thy
Will, saying: Avoid Satan, thou Father of all falsehood, I will give thee no
audience; for it sufficcth and satisfies me to believe that which the
Catholic Church proposes unto me. Take heed therefore of admitting any
fancies concerning thy Faith, though they appear never so friendly; but take
them all, as indeed they are, for deceits of the Devil, to engage thee in a
dispute with him: But if thou art so suddenly intrapped, that thou want time
to retreat, stand strongly upon thy firm ground: and never yield either to the
reasons he allegeth, or to the authorities of Scripture he cites, assuring thy
self, that they are either ^ull of fallacies, or corruptly quoted, or ill
applied, or falsely interpreted, though they appear never so clear and evident.

5. And should the subtle Serpent fall upon interrogations to entrap And to
give no answer to thy enemies questions;
thee in thy answers: As, What does the Church believe? vouchsafe him no reply,
but frame an inward act of lively and firm Faith; or undauntedly tell him,
that the Church believes the Truth. If he again proposes, And, What is this
Truth? Say, it is even that thing which this Church believes.

6. But above all things, keep thy heart and mind fixed and attentive But to
fix thy thoughts, upon Christ crucified.
upon the contemplation of Christ crucified: where sweetly discoursing with thy
Lord and love, say: O my God, o my Savior, o my Creator, succor me speedily,
abandon me not in my necessity, let me not swerve one tittle from the truth of
thy Church; and grant me, I beseech thee, this grace, that as I now live in it,
so I may constantly die in it, to thy glory, and my own eternal comfort.

Of their Second assault of Despair, and the Remedy against it.
7. The Devils next Engine, wherewith he strives to ruin and destroy The
second assault, is of Despair,
us, Is the fright he puts into us, upon the thought of our ^normous offenses,
whence he would cast us down headlong into the gu^ph of despair. In which cruel
danger, stand Where, thou art to observe this certain Rule.
fast to this certain Rule: That all reflections upon thy sins, proceed from
Gods grace, and tend to thy good, if they be followed with effects of humility,
with true sorrow for having offended so good a God, and with a firm confidence
in his goodness: But when this reflection disquiets thy mind, makes thee
doubtful and distrustful, peevish and pusillanimous, then (although thy
sins appear indeed sufficient, to make thee think thy self justly and
eternally damned, and that there can be no reason for thee to hope after
Salvation,) assure thy self they are clearly the effects proceeding from
Satan's suggestions: And therefore And to have a perfect
humble thy self so much the more, and be more hopeful and hope, and humble
confidence in God,
confident in thy God; whereby thou will confound and conquer thy enemy with
his own weapons, which he prepared for thy destruction.

8. When therefore thy sins are And never to distrust his mercy,
suggested to thy memory, conceive a perfect hatred of them, as of things
detestable to the divine goodness; yet be sure to have an hopeful confidence
in thy Saviors passion: And I tell thee yet more; should thou seem to hear
God saying unto thee, Away, thou art none of the number of my sheep; yet thou
art not to lose thy confidence in his mercy, but humbly to reply, Thou have
just reason, o my Sovereign Lord God, to shake me off for my sins sake; But I
have greatest reason to be confident of thy goodness and mercy, and to believe
that thou will pardon me; therefore I humbly beg salvation for this thy
wretched creature; damned indeed by it is own malice, but redeemed by the And
the merits of his passion.
dear ransom of thy Sons most precious blood and passion. Thou will save me,
o my Redeemer, for thine own glories sake; and I resign my self freely into
thy hands, upon the assurance of thy infinite mercy. Do with me, and dispose
of me, as thou best please, for thou art my only Lord; and if thou killest
me, yet I will place my whole hope in thy heavenly goodness.

Of the assault of Vain glory.
9. The third assault, is that of The third assault is, of vainglory,
Vainglory and presumption: Here thou art to be ^quall, wary of the other
extreme, and never to admit of the least conceit or complacency in thy self or
thy actions, but to refer all goodness that seems to be in thee, purely to
Gods great mercy, and the merits of Christ's p^ssion; Imbase thy self in thy
heart, whilst there is the least remainder of breath in thy body, and
acknowledge thy Which is conquered by distrust of thy self, and trust in God.
God as the true fountain of all thy goodness. Look not at all upon thine own
merits, but rely totally upon his mercy. Distrust thy self, and trust in thy
Savior; and think what poor provisions thou have laid up in store for this
passage of death, and thy journey to eternity; and how vain and useless all
thine own endeavors will prove, unless God will be pleased to put his
helping hand, and gather thee under the sacred wings of his divine protection.

Of illusions, and false aprearances, which are usually presented at the hour
of death
10. If thy obstinate enmy, who is The fourth assault, is, by false illusions,
ever studying to supplant thee, should at this time set upon thee with false
appearances, and transfigurations of himself into an Angel of light, thy best
way is, to recurre to the certain knowledge of thine own nothing, and boldly to
answer him: Depart, o thou accursed devil, into Against which, have recourse
to the confession of thy own nothing; And admit them not though they seem to
come from heaven.
thy own darkness; I neither deserve nor desire any visions: I need no other
thing than the mercy of my Jesus, the prayers of the Virgin Mary, and the
assistauce of the Saints. Yea, though thou have reason to guess by some
evident signs, that these things are from heaven, yet still deny them all
access unto thee, and drive them far from thee; nor need thou fear lest any
such resistance (grounded upon thine own indignity) should displease God; for
if the visions come from him, he knows well how to make them manifest,
notwithstanding thy opposition: and art secure to be thereby no loser; since he
who gives his grace to the humble, cannot be angry with him who practices such
high acts of that virtue.

11. These are the common and After these general temptations, follow others
in particular.
ordinary engines, which our enemy makes use of in this last passage: After
which follow his other trained bands of temptations, according to each ones
particular inclination and disposition. Stand therefore timely to thy arms (my
beloved) before this great day of battle steal upon thee; and fight now
valiantly and generously against thy violent passions and imperfections, that
thou may be prepared at that time, which takes from thee all other time and
power to perform it.

CHAP. XX.
That we must never flatttr our selves, as having subdued our enemies; but must
often return, to our wonted exercises, as if we were yet Novices in this
Spiritual Conflict.
I have yet one thing (O beloved) Never persuade thy self, thou have gotten a
full victory,
to tell thee of; which is, that thou never persuade thy self to have gotten a
full victory over any one of thy passions, though perchance thou have for a
long time together felt no motions thereof: But that thou often renew thy
accustomed But often renew thy exercises.
spiritual exercises, as if thou were yet a young beginner, and a freshwater
soldier now entering the list.

2. For if we behold, and desire to follow the perfection whereunto God has
called us: we shall find it to be so high and so copious, that For perfection
is very high and hard to be obtained.
after our best spent endeavors, we shall scarcely presume to say, that we
have learnt the first principles thereof: And besides this; That which seems
to us a virtue, may indeed sometimes be a vice; our judgment being deceived by
some secret pride.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Holy Prayer.
WE have hitherto (o beloved) The fourth weapon is Holy prayer.
through the divine assistance heard and learned what concerns Diffidence in
our selves, Confidence in our God, and continual Exercise; which are the three
necessary means, to get the victory of our passions, and to conquer the
disordered motions of our Sensuality. Now follows the fourth, which is Holy
Prayer; and this is the best and most efficacious means to obtain all good
things from Gods gracious and bountiful hand.

EXPLICATION.
FOr Prayer, is the food, the comfort, A furthet description of prayer.
and the support of the soul during its pilgrimage upon earth: It is a secure
bridge for it to pass over the several seas of adversities and prosperities:
It is a wall of defense against vices and temptations; a key opening into the
cabinet of celestial treasures; the door of holy thoughts; and finally, an
invincible Citadel, and sure retreating place from the violent assaults of all
our enemies.

By prayer, (if thou know how to apply it to its true use,) thou put a
sword into thy Lords powerful hands, wherewith he will fight thy battails for
thee, and vanquish all enemies which oppose thee in thy way of perfection.

2. But to make thy prayer grateful, Text. Which must have these properties,
useful, and acceptable; it must be accompanied with these conditions, and
properties.

First, That an ardent desire to 1. A desire to serve God.
serve thy Lord God, in such a manner as may best pleasure his divine Majesty,
do continually inflame thy heart.

EXPLICATION.
TO obtain this inflamed desire; How to obtain this inflamed desire.
consider that thy Lord God, by reason of his admirable excellencies, of
goodness, majesty, wisdom, beauty, and other infinite perfections; is more
than worthy to be served, and honored, by thee and all creatures. That to
serve and succor thee, this greatness has condescended to compassionate thy
weakness; and to suffer for thee in his sacred humanity for thirty three
years space, during which time he cured and salv'd thy stinking sores, (which
were gangrened by the soul contagion of sin,) not with medicinal oil,
ordinary wine, and common plasters; but with the most precious balsom of his
own sacred blood, and with unguents confected of his purest flesh, torn from
his body by scourges, thorns and nails. Weigh also the importance of this his
service, since thou art thereby enabled to master thy self, to conquer thine
enemies, and to become the child of God.

Secondly, That thou be possessed Text. Secondly, perfect Faith,
with a true and constant Faith, whereby thou beleevest, that thy loving Lord
will give thee all things necessary for his service, and thy salvation.

EXPLICATION.
THis holy Confidence, is the vessel, which the divine goodness fills with
the treasures of his graces; and the greater it is, the richer, and more laden,
will thy prayer return into thine own bosom: For how can our unchangeable
Lord fail to make us partakers of his good gifts and graces, when as himself
has commanded us to ask them, and promised his holy Spirit to them who
petition him for it, with Faith and perseverance?

Thirdly, that thou have no other Text. Thirdly, Conformity to God's will
end in frequenting holy prayer, than the accomplishing of Gods will and not
thine own; and this as well in asking, as in obtaining. That is, Let nothing
move thee to pray, but only that God will have thee pr^y; neither do thou
desire to be heard, for any other reason, than that thou hopest it is his
pleasure: briefly; Let thy intention, and the whole purpose of thy prayer be
this, That thy will may be conformable to Gods will: and strive not at all to
bend his will or draw it unto thine.

EXPLICATION.
ANd this thou art to do so much Because thy own will is subject to error,
the rather, because thy will being infected with self-love, is subject to
error, and forgetfulness of it self, and so knows not what it asks: but the
divine will is ever accompanied with unspeakable goodness, and so can never
fail, but is the rule but the divine will is infallibly right.
and queen-regent of all other wills, deserving to be followed and obeyed by
them all. Thou art therefore always to petition for those things which are
conform to Gods ho^y will; and when thou suspectest whether some desire of
thine be truly such, to make thy demand conditional; and not to wish it, but
only so far forth as thy Lord God is well pleased thou shall obtain it. In
things also, which are known to be certainly agreeable to his divine Majesty,
such as are virtues, and graces; thou art to pray for them, rather that thou
may by their means better please, satisfy and serve him, than for any other
end or consideration whatsoever, though never so spiritual.

Fourthly, That thy prayer, and Text. Fourthly, A connection with the former
exercises.
the other before-described spiritual exercises, be so joined together, as
that thou undertake not the one, without the practice of the other: For pray
thou never so long, and never so much, to obtain any virtue, unless thou also
labor, and exercise thy self in the way to get it; thou only temptest God,
but obtainest not thy desire.

EXPLICATION.
Fifthly, remember that before thou Fifthly, Thanksgiving for received favors.
demandest new favors, thou art to render humble thanks for them thou have
formerly received, by these or the like expressions: O my good and gracious
Lord God, who have made me, redeemed me, and rescued me from mine enemies,
oftener than I my self know or can conceive; succor me now also, and deny not
to grant this my present petition, though I have been hitherto rebellious to
thy will, and ungrateful to thy goodness.

And if thy demand be for some particular virtue, whereof thou now stand in
great need, by reason of some temptation, trouble or contradiction, which
urges thee; forget not to thank him for that occasion of thy trial and
exercise; which through his gracious assistance, may redound so much to thy
spiritual good.

Sixthly, since Prayer has it is Sixthly, a reflection upon Gods goodness, and
promise; and Christ's passion.
whole force, power and hope of obtaining, from Gods goodness and mercy, from
Christ's merits and passion, and from the divine promise; therefore thou may
fitly usher in thy demands, by some of these following sayings: O my God*
grant unto thy servant, I beseech thee, this grace for thy supreme goodness
sake, that thy most dear Sons merits may impetrate for me the grant of my
petition. Remember o my Lord, thine own loving promise; and incline thine
ears to hear my prayer. At other times, thou may ask by the merits of the
most glorious Virgin, and suffrages of the Saints; which are powerful to
prevail, in thy pious demands.

Seventhly, Thou art to pray with Seventhly, Perseverance.
perseverance; For if the continued importunity of the Evangelicall widow,
inflected the hard-hearted Judge to give her what she asked; how shall
perseverant petitions be rejected, by him who is mercy and goodness it self?

Therefore after thy prayer, Text. Prayer must also be strengthened with Hope.
strengthen thy soul with a live by Hope in God, that (through his infinite
love) he will bestow on thee the now demanded grace or gift, or something that
is better for thee, or both together: And although he so long delays his
answer, that thou may doubt he denies what thou ask; yet remain
constantly in this hope, and never slacken therefore, either thy prayer, or thy
practice, or thy confidence. And though God seems to reject thy prayer, yet
persevere knocking.


3. Yea though it may seem to thee that God rejects thee and thy prayer: Yet
do thou still humble thy self more and more before him, increasing thy Faith,
and comforting thy self with hope in thy Savior. For the more fervently and
frequently thou interposest this constant hope in God, even in such violent
repulses, and (as it were) manifest reprobations of thy prayer, the more thou
becommest pleasing and grateful unto him.

4. And therefore thou art always And always thanking him, as well when he
grants, as when he denies.
to return him grateful thanks, whom thou acknowledgest no less good, wise
and loving in thy behalf, when he seems to cast out thy petition, than when
he grants it. Keep then an ever-constant, courageous, and joyful mind, in all
events whether good or bad: and humbly submit thy self to the infallible
wisdom, and all-ordering providence of thy Lord God.

CHAP. XXII.
What inward (or mental) prayer is, and what Contemplation: and the use thereof.
INward (or mental) prayer, Is an 1. Mental prayer includes aswayes,
elevation of the mind to God: and it always includes, either to an actual,
or virtuall petition of something*

2. Virtuall petition is, when the mind is lifted up to God to obtain Either
a virtuall Petition ^ some thing,
some grace from him; showing him our necessities simply and briefly without
any discourse or consideration of any other things: As, when I elevate my mind
to God, and confess before him my weakness both to do well, and to defend my
self from doing evil: This sort of prayer, is properly termed Virtuall;
because when I thus briefly lay my mind open to God, he well knows what is
there wanting, and how much I stand in need of his help.

EXPLICATION.
ANd this virtually implies, an humble supplication to his Divine Majesty that
he will vouchsafe to supply my necessities. And by how much the more this
confession of thine own want and weakness is real and manifest, and thy
desire efficacious, and thy confidence lively; by so much also thy demand shall
be of more force and value.

3. There is also another kind of inward virtuall Prayer, which consists in a
simple beholding or contemplation of God in our minds, And this Prayer is, When
we silently desire, and (as it were) put our Lord in remembrance of that grace,
we formerly demanded.

4. Learn, (O my beloved,) this way of Prayer, and make it familiar unto thee
by the frequent use of it: For experience will give thee to understand that it
is the best armor of proof against all enemies, adversities and dangers. Have
it therefore always in readiness, that where and whenever need requires thou
may make use thereof.

5. Actual petition, or actual inward Prayer is when grace is asked Or an
actual asking by words expressed in the mind.
by words expressed in the mind; In this or the like manner: Give me, O my Lord
God, this grace, this benefit, for the honor of thy most sacred name: Or thus,
I steadfastly believe, O my God, that it is thy holy will I should beg of thee
this grace which I stand in need of: Do thou therefore, O my God, accomplish
thine own pleasure in me.

6. Thus also thou may present before Gods Divine Majesty, thine enemy which
annoyes thee, or thy sins which afflict thee, joining therewith thine own
weakness to resist them: and say; O Lord, look upon thine own creature, made
by thy holy hands, and redeemed by thy precious blood: behold also thine enemy
and mine, outragiously reaching at me, and striving to take me from thee, and
tear me in pieces. O my God, to thee I only fly, In thee only I trust.
Consider my weakness, and mine enemies strength; who will infallibly subject
me to his tyranny, if I am left destitute of thy powerful protection.

CHAP. XXIII.
How we may join Contemplation to this inward Prayer.
1. IF sometimes thou art willing to settle thy self to mental Prayer for a
certain space of time, as an hour, or more; thou may join Take some points
of Christ's Death or Passion.
to this way of Prayer, certain Meditations upon the Life and Death of our
Savior Christ, applying always his Actions to that virtue thou then
demandest, and so meditating upon them both together.

2. For example: Patience is the virtue thou art now in quest of; choose
therefore for the subject of And apply his actions to the virtue thou demandest;
thy Meditation, some mystery of Christ's Crucifixion; As, how cruelly he was
despoiled of his garments, which were barbarously rent from his Body, carrying
away part of his sacred Flesh which cleaved fast unto them: With what ourcries,
and As for example to Patience.
curses, they crown and uncrowne him with Thorns, iterating again and again
that terrible torment: How this most innocent Lamb was fastened with Nails to
the wood of the Cross, and lifted up into the Air, with unspeakable grief of
his Wounds, and new anguish of his whole Body: And so of other the like points.

3. And in these considerations, first apply thy senses to feel, see, etc. the
pain which thy dear Savior endured in these passages in all the Members of
his sacred Humanity: Then elevating thy heart to his holy Soul, penetrate into
his P^tience and Meekness, and see how pleasantly he passes over these so
great and grievous afflictions: and how ready he is, for his Fathers
satisfaction and our salvation, to suffer much more and far greater torments:
After this, behold him hanging Mark how meekly he suffered, and learn thereby
to suffer patiently thy smaller adversities.
on his Cross, and completing his sufferings by his Death: stand thou close
to him and contemplate him, and think with what an ardent desire he did all
this for thee, that thou by his example might learn to endure with
patience, thy smaller adversities for his honor. And as he turned himself to
his Heavenly Father, and prayed for thee; so thou should implore his Grace to
bear and overcome this Cross thou now groanest under, and all other thy Of
Resolution.
grievances, with quiet of mind, and constancy of resolution.

4. And Lastly, compel thy will to consent to these sufferings; And And
compel thy will, to take up thy Cross quietly.
speak to it, to take up this Cross quietly, and carry it on constantly: Then
turn thee to God thy Heavenly Father, and humbly beg of him the virtue of
Patience; and that he will be pleased to hear the perfect Prayer of his own
dear Son, powered out on the Cross for thee.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of another certain manner of Prayer, by way of Meditation.
1. THere is yet another manner of Praying and Meditating together; As thus:
Having attentively and seriously considered upon thy To pray and meditate
together,
Saviors bitter Passion, sustained for thy sake, and to save thy soul; apply
thine own senses (as aforesaid) and endeavor to feel (as it were) the like
dolours in thy self: and let thy thoughts pierce into the promptitude of mind
wherewith Christ thy Savior suffered all this.

2. And having weighed his exceeding pains and his exact patience; proceed to
these two following considerations: By considering Christ Merits, and the
content his Heavenly Father took in his obedience.
First, of the treasure of Christ's Merits: and Secondly, of the high content
and good liking, which his heavenly Father took in his dear Sons perfect
obedience. Then,

3. Having filled thy mind with these pious points of Meditation; produce
them, and present them to And presenting them both to God.
thy Lord God; and beg by virtue of these that grace which thou stand in
greatest need of. And thus thou may put up thy Petitions, not only in
meditating upon any mystery of Christ's passion; but also upon any internal or
external action of his.

CHAP. XXV.
Of a way of praying by the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin.
1. THere is yet, (besides these foregoing methods of Prayer and Meditation,)
another way, by the means of the most glorious and everblessed Virgin, and
Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which thou may thus easily practice: First,
fix thy mind and meditation upon God the Eternal Father; then upon Jesus
Christ his dear Son and our sweet Savior; and lastly upon Mary, the First;
fix thy mind and meditation upth 'eternall Father.
ever-blessed Virgin Mother.

2. In thy meditation of the Eternal Father, take these two points for thy
subject, and offer them up to his Divine Majesty: First, the great liking and
content he had in himself from all eternity, concerning this perfect creature
the Virgin, before she had a being: Secondly, the wonders he wrought in her,
and the content he took in her, when she was borne into the World.

3. And as for the first of these considerations; Soar aloft, and Considering
the content he had in himself (concerning her) from all eternity;
exalt thy thoughts beyond all time, and above each thing created, penetrating
the very eternity of the Deity; and then consider what celebrity of joy and
delight the Divine Majesty had within himself, concerning this sacred Virgin
and her high perfections: And there finding thy Lord amidst these joys and
delights* lay hold of the opportunity, and address thy Petition unto him with
full hope and confidence, that for this his great joys sake, he will impart
bountifully some Grace, Strength and Courage unto thee, whereby thou may be
enabled to encounter and conquer thine enemies, especially this vice which now
chiefly tempts and troubles thee.

4. Hence proceed to the consideration of those admirable virtues, great
gifts, and singular graces, conferred upon this most glorious Virgin; And the
wonders he wrought in her, when she had a being.
and sometimes present the whole bulk of them to the view of the eternal
Father; other-times choose out some particular perfection to lay open before
him: imploring and entreating for his own boundless goodness sake, and in
respect of these virtues and merits of this his dearly beloved Spouse, that he
will graciously hear, and mercifully grant what thou so greatly need.

5. Then turn thy thoughts toward the Son of God, our Lord Secondly, upon
God the Son.
Jesus; and represent before him the sacred womb of his Virgin Mother, which
enclosed and carried him for nine months space: as also the singular reverence
wherewith she received him from her womb into her bosom, when he first
appeared in the World; assisting him and acknowledging him true man, and
adoring him as eternal God; as her own poor child, and as her powerful
Creator: Put him further in mind, of her eyes of compassion toward his
poverty; of her sacred Arms which so often embraced him; her Kisses, wherewith
she cherished him; her Milk wherewith she nourished him; her labors suffered
for him all his life time, and her dolours at his Death: by which and the like
relations from the dear Mother, thou shall use (as it were) a certain
violence to her beloved Son, to grant thy Petition.

6. Lastly, come to the sacred Virgin Lastly come to the sacred Virgin.
her self; lay open before her, her own privileges, prerogatives and
perfections; how she only, amongst all Virgins and Women, was especially
elected by the eternal, Power, Prudence, and Goodness of God, to be a Mother
of Grace and of pity; to be an assistant and advocate of all mankind; and
that (next to her dearly beloved Sons humanity) we can apply our selves to
none but her, for better supplies of our necessities, or truer solace in our
sorrows, or greater hopes of happiness. Tell her also of that true and tried
saying; that no one did ever faithfully call upon her, who received not a
merciful answer, and present assistance by her holy Prayer and Patronage.
Lastly, put before her eyes all her Sons sorrows and sufferings upon Earth;
and beg of her for his sweet sake, for his only honor, and for his glory,
that thou may impetrate by her pious intercession the effect of this thy
Petition, which that thou might obtain, he patiently underwent his so bitter
Death and Passion.

CHAP. XXVI.
How to pray and meditate by means of the holy Angels, and Heavenly Citizens.
1. ANother powerful means to obtain thy Petition, is by the Angels and
blessed Saints in Heaven: which is also practiced two manner of ways. First*
apply thy thoughts First, address thy self to the eternal Father.
to the Eternal Father; and present before him the Love, Honor and Praise,
wherewith his Heavenly Court worsh^ps and exalts him: and withal lay open all
the miseries, labors and molestations, which his Saints suffered, and by his
grace surmounted, here upon Earth.

2. The other way is, by applying thy self to these glorious spirits, as Next
unto the glorious Angels and Saints themselves,
to them who not only remember us amidst their joys, but earnestly desire our
perfection: beg therefore their faithful assistance in thy fight against
vices; and sometimes implore their aid and assistance at the hour of thy
Death, against thy dreadful enemies.

3. Other times, reflect upon those excellent gifts and graces, wherewith their
Lord God endued them; exciting in thy soul a lively feeling of love and joy,
that they possess these high perfections, as much, yea more, than if they were
thine own, since such was the good will and pleasure of the Divine Majesty.

4. And that thou may more Dividing them into Quires, according to the days
of the week.
easily and orderly perform and practice this pious exercise; divide the
Quires of this blessed company, according to the weekdays, in some such
manner, as follows.

Upon Sunday, meditate upon the nine Quires of Angels. Upon Monday, of the holy
Apostles. Upon Tuesday, of the glorious Martyrs. Upon Wednesday, of the blessed
Bishops. Upon Thursday, of the holy Doctors. Upon Friday, of the holy
Confessors. Upon Saturday, of the sacred Virgins.
5. But let no day pass, without But every day praying to the B. Virgin, To
thy particular Patron,
some special devotion to the most glorious Virgin Mary; to thy Proper-Angel;
and to that particular Saint and Patron, to whom thou owe singular duty and
Veneration.

EXPLICATION.
AMongst which I persuade thee to place S. Joseph, the dear Spouse of the
sacred Virgin; who (as experience, and contemplative persons testify,) will
assist thee by And to S. Joseph.
his holy Prayers, in all thy temporal and spiritual necessities; and
particularly advance and direct thy Soul in its spiritual Exercises of Prayer
and Contemplation: And surely if our loving Lord, so highly esteems his other
Saints, because they yielded him his due honor and obedience upon earth; how
much more does he value this most humble and happy Saint; and how prevalent
are his prayers like to be, with that Divine Son, who honored, served, and
obeyed him upon Earth, as his Father?

CHAP. XXVII.
How to meditate upon the holy Cross, and Christ our Savior hanging thereon,
to excite and move our affections.
1. I Have before showed thee, (O my dearly beloved) the manner of meditating
and praying upon our Saviors Passion: now I will instruct thee how thou may
thereby stir up good motions and enkindle holy affections in thy soul. When
therefore thou have taken some Article of Meditation, upon Christ's Cross and
Passion; (as for example, Of his How to enkindle holy affections in meditating
on the Passion.
Crown of Thorns,) think thus with thy self: How thy most innocent and
amiable Lord Jesus, was (with greatest derision and scorn) clothed in a
purple coat, crowned with sharp Thorns, cudgelled with a hard Cane, besmeared
with filthy spittle. How this King of eternal glory, whom millions of Angels
adore in Heaven, was by the worst and wickedest sort of men, mocked upon Earth,
as a counterfeit King with scoffing Adoration and Reverence.

2. Now when by these, and such other points of Meditation, thou desire to
raise in thy soul the true feelings and affections of Love; By reflection upon
Christ's Love and goodness.
elevate thy heart oftentimes whilst thou art meditating, to acknowledge the
boundless goodness of thy Lord God, and his love toward thee: which thou
may easily gather, from the multitude and the bitterness of his sufferings
for thee. By this acknowledgement of his Goodness, thy love will be more and
more inflamed; and a true contrition for thy sins will be more easily
obtained: especially if thou considerest, that thou have again and again
offended, this thy most bountiful and loving Lord God, who was thus cruelly
sl^ine formerly for the Ransom of thine iniquity.

3. To raise also a constant hope in How to get a constant hope,
thy soul; look upon thy Lord Jesus, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
reduced into the extremity of misery, to free thee from the slavery of Sin
and snares of Satan, to reconcile thee to his Heavenly Father, and to give thee
confidence to come to him cheerfully in all thy necessities.

4. And if furthermore, thou would by these Meditations on thy Saviors
passion, move thy self to spiritual joy; warn thy thoughts from And a
spiritual joy,
remaining any longer upon his pains, and pass to the profits, fruits, and
effects of his sufferings: There thou will find thy self and the whole World
absolved from thy sins by them, the Divine wrath appeased, the Devil
defeated, Death conquered, the lost sheep reduced, the Angels seats supplied.
Join to all this, the Joy of the sacred Trinity, and of the whole Church both
triumphant and militant, who all rejoice in the profit issuing from Christ's
cruel Death and As also affections of sorrow and compassion,
Passion.

5. But to raise affections of sorrow and compassion toward thy suffering
Savior; thou may weigh, not only the many wounds of his sacred body; but
the multitude of anguishes, griefs, and sadnesses of his most holy foul. For he
well knowing the eminent and infinite dignity of his heavenly Father, (whom he
so highly loved,) must needs be grieved above measure, to see this benign and
bountiful Creator of all things, after so many and so great benefits, to be so
rashly, so maliciously, and so frequently offended, and deluded, by his own
creatures.

6. And this sadness of thy Saviors soul, was much augmented by the
foresight he had of that vast multitude of men, who by their own sin and
sloth, were to be damned eternally.

The same grief was further aggravated, by seeing the immense dolours of his
dear and worthily beloved mother; and the same sword spared not his, which
pierced her heart with sorrow. Moreover, Christ's sacred foul, which was
all-knowing (by reason of the divine union) suffered in all the Martyrs and
tender Virgins torments, sustained for his faith and affection.

7. In these and the like meditations And acts of contrition for thy sins.
upon thy Lord and Saviors passion, thou must often reflect, that thou by thy
grievous sins and defects, were the cause and occasion of these his
afflictions: and from hence, conceive acts of true sorrow for thy shameful
ingratitude, and humble thy self at the feet of his Majesty. And know that to
be the best pleasing and most acceptable compassion, when thou persecutest
thine own disordered affections, and strivest to ruin those enemies, and root
them out of thy heart, which were the cause of thy Lords so cruel pains and
passion.

8. And to move thee to a perfect With a perfect hatred of them.
hatred of thy sin; think seriously in running over all these points of thy
dear Saviors passion, as if all these his sufferings were for no other cause,
than to stir thee up to detest all sin, and destroy thy unruly passions and
affections: them especially, which most endommage, defile, and distract thy
self, and most displease thy Savior.

9. Lastly, That by these meditations upon Christ's death and passion, thou
may be moved to the admiration And to admire Gods goodness: by considering
6, circumstances. 1. Who suffers? 2. For whom?
of his goodness: Consider attentively, First, Who he is that suffers these
things? Surely, the only Son of the Almighty God; who to save thee, came
from heaven and became man. Secondly, For whom he suffered? Surely, for us poor
worms, the works of his own hands, and who always are prone to offend him.
Thirdly, By whom he suffered? Surely, By the vild and 3. By whom?
vulgar crew, and the very refuse of all nations. Fourthly, What he suffered?
4. What?
Surely, disgraces, contumelies, contempts, wounds and torments, more than can
be named or imagi^ed. Fifthly, How he suffered all 5. How?
this? Surely, with a most patient, meek, and willing mind; neither showing any
sign of distaste, nor speaking any word of reproach, against his most
ungrateful and malicious persecutors; but like an innocent lamb led on to the
slaughter, he complained not of their violence, and his own sufferings; but
laid down his life, his heart remaining full of sweetness. Sixthly, 6. When
and where?
When and where he suffered? Surely, at the time of their Paschall solemnity,
and in their prime and sacred City, and in the presence of his dearest mother,
and finally in the view, as it were, of the whole world.

EXPLICATION.
A further Declaration of the profit which may be drawn from the meditation
upon Christ's Passion, and particularly of the imitation of his virtues.
AMongst the infinity of profits The first profit, is a confusion at the sight
of our imperfections.
which may be drawn from this holy exercise, One is; that thou must needs
conceive, not only a sorrow for thy sins past, but feel also a shame and
confusion in thy soul, to see that those unruly passions, which put Christ
Jesus to death upon the Cross, do yet lurk and live within thy heart.

The other main profit which flows The second, a desire and demand of pardon,
from the former, is; that being truly sensible of thy sins, and ashamed of
thine Ingratitude, thou will heartily desire, and humbly demand pardon for what
is past, and grace to amend for the future: And for an acknowledgment of thy
extraordinary obligation, for thy Saviors sufferings undergone for thy sake,
with a resolution of amendment.
thou will resolve to serve him, love him, and suffer for him hereafter.

The third profit, is; that thou will fall out with thy perverse inclinations
The third, a persecution of our passions. The fourth, an imitation of Christ's
virtues.
and passions, and persecute them to death, be they never so little.

The fourth, is; that thou will force thy self to the utmost of thy power, to
imitate the virtues of thy dear Savior; who endured all this, not only to
save thee, and satisfy for thy Sins; but also to give thee an example to
follow his sacred steps.

Another way to meditate on the Passion.
And now (my beloved,) I will here declare unto thee another method of
meditating upon Christ's passion, which thou may make use of, as thy devotion
and occasion shall suggest unto thee. If thou desire (for example) to obtain
patience, in imitation of thy Redeemer; consider these points following:

First, What the afflicted soul of thy Savior does toward his heavenly
Father. By considering,


Secondly, What the Father does toward this soul of his Son.

Thirdly, What this soul does toward it self, and its sacred body.

Fourthly, What does thy Savior toward thee.

Fifthly, What should thou do toward thy Savior.

First therefore, Consider how the soul of Jesus Christ being totally First,
how Christ's soul carries it self toward his heavenly Father.
intentive upon God; Is amazed to behold this infinite and incomprehensible
Majesty, in respect whereof all things created are as a pure nothing;
submitted, (though immutable in his glory,) to the sufferance of such unworthy
usages upon earth, for man; from whom he never received any thing but
disloyalty and injuries: And how it afterward adores, thanks, and offers up it
self entirely to the disposition of the divinity. Secondly, how the Father
toward him.


Secondly, Consider how God wills and exciteth the soul of thy Savior, to
suffer for thy sake all those blows, buffets, scourges, spittles, blasphemies,
thorns, and death upon the Cross; giving him to know, how well it pleases
him, to see him thus replenished with all sorts of affronts and afflictions.

Thirdly, passing on to the soul of thy Savior Christ, Consider, how with his
understanding (which is all Thirdly, how the soul toward it self, and its
sacred body.
light) knowing how highly his passion pleased God; and with his will (which is
al fire) loving the divine Majesty beyond measure, which thus invited him to
suffer for thee; he disposes himself, readily, joyfully, and contentedly to
obey his sacred will and pleasure: And who can dive into the depths of those
desires which this pure and loving soul of thy Savior had to suffer for thy
sake? It found it self, as it were, in a Labyrinth of troubles; casting about
to encounter new ways of sufferings: and therefore freely gave up it self,
and it is innocent body, as a prey to the pleasure, and cruelty, of the most
lewd and worst sort of villains.

Fourthly, Consider in the next Fourthly, how thy Savior carries himself
toward thee.
place thy sweet Savior, amidst his bitter torments, fixing his eyes full of
tears and tenderness upon thee; and conceive thou hear him thus
expostulating with thee: Behold, my Child, whither thy immoderate desires, and
unmortified affections have brought me; because thou would not use a little
violence to thy self: See, and consider, how much, and how willingly I suffer
for thy love, and to give thee a pattern of perfect patience: I beg of thee, (o
my dear child;) and I conjure thee by all these my sufferings and sorrows,
that thou will willingly embrace, and cheerfully carry this Cross, and any
other which I shall think fit to lay upon thy shoulders; and that thou abandon
thy self entirely into such hands as I shall permit to persecute thee in body
or fame, how vile, contemptible, and cruel soever they be. O, did thou but
conceive the greatness of the comfort I should receive in this thy patience
and courage! But thou may read it in these my wounds, wherein my love to thee
is written in bloody characters, and which I willingly receive, as so many
precious pearls to enrich thy poor soul with all sorts of virtues and
perfections, because I love it above all things created: And if I thy Lord and
Creator am reduced to this extremity for thy love; why, (o my dear Spouse)
will thou not consent to endure a little to satisfy my hearts desire; to
supple my wounds, and to mitigate these my pains, caused by thy impatience,
which more afflicts my soul, than these grievous torments do my body?

Fifthly, Consider well who he is Fifthly, how thou should carry thy self
toward thy Savior.
that speaks thus unto thee, and thou will find that he is the King of glory,
Jesus Christ, true God and true Man: Mark also the greatness of his grief, the
variety of his torments, and the manner and indignity of his disgraces, too bad
for the worst of men, or most infamous malefactor in the world: Yet thou see
thy Savior amidst all these affronts and afflictions, not only unmovable,
mild, and patient; but even joyful and content, as if he now kept his
marriage-banquet: And as a little water, rather strengthens than extinguishes a
full kindled fire; so by the increase of his torments, (which were small in
respect of his excessive love,) his content and desire of suffering far
greater, was more and more enkindled and augmented: Consider further, that he
endured all this by no external violence, nor for any self-interest; but (as
he told thee) for thy love, and that thou might imitate him, and exercise thy
self in the virtue of patience: And then penetrating into that which he
desires thou should do, and into the content thou should afford him by
this thy practice of patience; produce acts of a passionate will, to bear not
only this Cross patiently and joyfully, but any greater; that so thou may
imitate him more perfectly, and content him more abundantly.

And imprinting in thy mind a lively image of these his sufferings, and of his
constancy therein; be ashamed to think thy patience so much as a shadow of
his, or that thy affections are really any at all, being compared with his; and
tremble that the least thought of not enduring for the love of thy Lord, should
remain in thy heart.

Thy Crucified Jesus, (my beloved,) is the best book thou can read in; Christ
crucified is the best book to read in,
and the liveliest image thou can look upon, to draw the perfect pourtrait of
all virtue: For it being the book of life, it not only informs thy
understanding by words, but also inflames thy will by example: The world is
full of books, yet all of them together cannot so speedily and perfectly teach
the true means of obtaining all virtues, as does the right contemplation of
Christ upon his Cross: But they And to learn all virtues,
who employ much time in deploring their Saviors passion, and admiring his
patience, and apply it not at all to their particular practice when occasions
If thou make fit applications to thy particular practice.
are offered; do like unto those Soldiers, who before the skirmish, talk of
great matters, and speak high words in their tents; but at the first sight of
the appearing enemy, they take a fright, quit their colors, cast down their
arms, and utterly forsake the field. And indeed, what thing can be more silly,
cowardly, and unworthy, than to contemplate, as in a most clear glass, the
virtues of our Lord and Savior, loving them, and admiring them; and presently
to forget them, and disesteeme them, as soon as any occasion is presented
wherein to exercise our selves in their imitation.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of sensible devotion; as also of spiritual dryness, and dereliction.
SEnsible devotion, proceeds sometimes a natural inclination; sometimes from
the Devil; and sometimes from Gods grace: And by Devotion is best known by the
effects it produces.
the fruits of it, thou may best judge from which of these springs it
issues: For if thence thou art no whit moved to amendment of life; thou may
justly fear it comes either from thy enemy, or from thy own nature; and the
more sweetness thou feel, the more should thou be suspicious whence it
flows.

2. When therefore thy soul is replenished How to make profit of all
spiritual sweetness in devotion.
with spiritual sweetness, question not whence it comes, nor adhere much
unto it; but still stick steadfastly to the acknowledgement of thine own
baseness, abstracting thy heart from all other delights or desires, than only
that which it takes in God, and his good pleasure. Thus, will these short
sweetnesses, whether they spring from thy own nature, or thine enemies
suggestion, be truly turned to thy comfort and profit.

3. Dryness in like manner, or desolation Three causes of spiritual dryness.
of the soul, may proceed either out of our own natural defect, or from the
Devil, or from God.

From the Devil; who thereby The Devil.
strives to render the soul tepid, and tedious in her spiritual exercises;
and so to draw her by degrees to leave them, and look after earthly solaces.

From our selves; Either because Our selves.
we stand in fear of our selves by reason of our sins, or because we are
negligent in the practice of our devotions.

From God; who therefore permits God.
this dryness, to excite us to more diligence, and abstract us from all other
cares and curiosities, but them only which concern our Creator, or have some
relation unto his honor, or our own perfection: Or finally, to teach us, not
to trust or rest in spiritual joys, but to depend wholly on his holy will and
pleasure: As that resigned soul did, which said: Our Lord gave, our Lord has
Job 1. 21.
taken away, as it has pleased him so it is done.

4. When therefore thou feel this dryness of devotion, enter into thy self
and search out the cause thereof; Search out the true cause thereof,
and having found it, fight against it; not to recover that sensible sweetness
of grace, but to expel far from thee whatsoever is displeasing to the divine
Majesty.

5. And let it be thy continual And keep on thy accustomed practices of piety.
care, to keep on thy accustomed practices of piety, notwithstanding this
dryness in thy soul; yea, though thou seem to labor in vain, yet
prosecute them with greater diligence, and drink of that bitter potion of
desolation with a prompt and peaceable resolution; and if it be so mingled with
the thick dreggs of a troubled mind, that thou know not how to swallow it,
nor which way to turn thee; yet persevere with alacrity, and sit And seek no
outward comforts.
solitarily thus deferted, under the shadow of the holy Cross, seeking no
outward solace, though the whole world should offer it, or any creature afford
it thee.

6. For thou arr to conceal this Nor pray to have it mitigated.
Cross of thine from all persons, except thy ghostly Father, to whom thou art
faithfully to discover it; not to have comfort from him, but counsel, how to
carry thy self during this dryness, conformable to the divine pleasure and
good liking.

7. Nor art thou to make use of the holy Communion, Prayer, or any other
spiritual exercise with intention to have the least mitigation of thy
adversities; but only that thy good God will give thee strength of spirit, to
support thy Cross with patience. And if through trouble and distraction, thou
can hardly make use of thine understanding in thy meditations; keep only a
willing mind to do it, and supply it with jaculatory prayers, and frequent
elevations of thy mind to thy Lord God.

EXPLICATION.
IN this case, thou may make use of these or the like sacred sentences: My
heart is troubled within me, my strength has forsaken me, and Ps. 37. 11.
the light of my eyes is not with me.

Lord I suffer violence, answer for Esaias. 38. 24.
me.

Return, return, o my beloved, let me Cant. 6.
hear thy voice.

How long shall I consider in my self, Psalm. 13. 3.
and have grief in my heart all the day?

Why, o Lord, art thou gone far Psalm. 10. 1.
off, and despisest in opportunities, in tribulation?

Pardon me, that I may have some Psalm. 38. 14
refreshing, before I go hence, and shall be no more.

O my God, my God, why have thou Psalm. 22. 9.
left me?

Or thou may say: O my Lord, o my love! where, where do thou leave thy
poor servant thus all alone, who has no comfort in himself, and desires none
from any creature? O what shall he do, if he finds it not in thee? Whither
will thou go, poor strayed sheep, if thou hear not the voice of thy divine
shepherd? O living fountain! o source of all sweetness! shall I never more
become worthy to taste one only dropp of thy delights? To whom shall I have
recourse, if thou, my God, and only refuge, keep aloof from me? O unlimited
bounty! when shall I have a lively feeling of thy effects? How is it possible
for my dry soul to subsist in this desert earth, being deprived, o my God, of
thy heavenly dewes?

When thou find thy self thus In thy desolation, rememb^r how thy Savior
was left comfortless on the Cross.
abandoned; remember how thy dear Savior was also left comfortless by the
same heavenly Father, in the Garden, upon the Cross and in his greatest
afflictions; Therefore pronounce with him oftentimes those hard words; Fiat
voluutas tua, Thy holy will be done: which proceeding from the depth of thy
heart, will sweetly wound the heart of thy Lord God, and move him to
compassionate thy misery, either by sending thee comfort, or giving thee
courage, constancy, and resignation, to endure it.

8. For know assuredly, that to do Text.
or suffer for Gods honor, is to him For, to suffer for God, is the best
prayer, and makes thee truly devout.
the most acceptable prayer; And therefore to endure this dryness with perfect
patience, and humble resignation; makes thee truly devout; because true
devotion consists in no other thing, than to have a ready will to follow Christ
thy Lord, with thy cross on thy shoulder, whither, and which way he pleases;
having and desiring God, only for God; and sometimes leaving God for God.

9. If therefore spiritual persons, especially Religious men and women, would
seeriously examine and measure their progress in the way of perfection and
piety, by this Rule; and not by the feeling of sensible devotion, (which many
do chiefly And not sensible devotion.
regard;) they surely would make better use of sensible comforts in their
exercises of devotion; which their loving Lord affords, to make them more
zealous in submitting to his sacred will; which disposes all things, in order
to our salvation and benefit. Wherein many are deceived.


10. And in this also many are much deceived, that when they are troubled with
impure and perverse thoughts, they presently become fearful and faint-hearted,
and as if God had utterly forsaken them, think it impossible that his holy
Spirit should inhabit a heart so troubled and tormented. And they so intricate
themselves in these fancies, till by degrees they fall into a grievous dislike
of themselves, and lastly into a certain dangerous despair. Which they no
sooner apprehend in themselves, but they presently run to their wonted ways,
to recover their quiet. But hereby they show themselves little grateful to
God; who therefore permits them to be thus troubled and tempted, to bring them
to the clear knowledge of their own nothing; that so, as wretched, frail, and
desolate creatures, they may more seriously seek him, and more diligently draw
near him.

11. Wherefore, (o my beloved,) What thou art to do in this distress.
that which thou must do in such a distress, is this: Enter straight into a
profound reflection upon thine own baseness, and there humble thy self, and
confess thy peevish affections and passions, and acknowledge thy pronesse to
fall, (if left to thy self,) into all manner of wickedness; and that without
thy loving Lords care and custody, help and defense, thou would be cast
down headlong incontinently.

12. This done, raise thy heart with a good hope, and confidence in thy
Creator; seeing it is he only who permitted thee to fall into this adversity,
that thou might take hold of the occasion to draw nearer unto him by humble
prayer; and therefore thou art obliged to render grateful thanks to his divine
Majesty, for these-like troubles and temptations. And take this as a certainty:
That all such perverse thoughts are sooner expelled with meek sufferance and
patience, than with much solicitude and study.

CHAP. XXIX.
That the worthy frequenting of the most Blessed Sacrament, is an efficacious
means to conquer our passions.
THe sacred Communion, or most

2. The day before thou intendest Meditate the day before thy Communion, of thy
Saviors desire, etc. to come to thee;
to communicate; meditate, if thy leisure give thee leave, of the great desire
thy dear Savior has to unite himself to thee by the means of this
Sacrament, and thereby to root out thy vicious affections. For this his desire
is so immense, that no created understanding can comprehend it.

3. But that thou may have a small glimps thereof, consider these two things:

First, What pleasure our Lord takes to dwell in us; since the holy Scripture
calls this his delights; and in My delights are to be with the children of men.
Child, give me thy heart. And how much he hates sin.
requital of this love, he only requires our hearts. Second^y, how much he
hates our sins, which ^^^der his nearer union with us, and are directly
opposite to his incompa^^ble perfections. For he being the ^^ely and chief
good, the purest light* ^^d most perfect beauty, cannot but detest that which
is mere darkness, frailty, and the corruption and Canker of our wretched
souls.

4. And that this loving desire of thy dear Lord, may take yet deeper
impression in thy mind; meditate often of his mervailous works related in the
Old and New Testament; especially of his most bitter Passion and cruel death;
which he did expressly suffer to deliver thy soul from sin; and to cleanse it
from such affections, as are contrary to his divine Majesty. Concerning which
point, all the illuminated Doctors of Gods Church, do unanimously conclude
and teach; That Christ our Savior would again, if it were needful expos^
himself to a thousand deaths, to free us from the least evil passion or
affection.

5. By such considerations, thou And move thy soul to a reciprocal desire and
affection toward him.
wilt easily gather the great desire thy dear Savior has to dwell with thee:
and from thence conclude, how fitting it is that thou should reciprocally
stir up in thy self an ardent affection to receive and entertain him: Which
thou may do by these and the like jaculatory prayers: Come, o my Lord, and my
love; help thy caitif creature to conquer her enemies. When, o when (my dear
spouse,) will that happy hour come, that I may receive thee, the bread of life;
and being comforted and encouraged by thee, may fully conquer my self, and
totally subdue my own evil passions, and disordered affections?

6. And when thou art hightned And then provoke thy passions to battle.
with the hope of thy sweet Saviors coming into thy soul, then provoke thy
passions to battle; call up thy affections, and curb them again and again
with perfect hatred and disdain; and this done, produce acts and desires of
the virtues which are opposite to these vices: And let this be thy evenings
entertainment, and mornings ^mploym^^t.

7. But when the hour of sacred Being near the time of Communion thou art to
fear,
communion draws near; think seriously of thine own faults, failings, and
unfaithfulness to thy Lord God, since the time of thy last approach to the
sacred table; for which ingratitude and unworthiness, thou tremblest with fear
and confusion before his dread Majesty: But then again, encourage and comfort
thy But also to have courage and confidence.
self with the consideration of his goodness, his readiness to pardon, and
his inclination to mercy; and with a pious confidence, that he will have thee
receive him, notwithstanding thine own indignity; go on with alacrity of spirit
to the holy banquet, and joyfully embrace thy Lord God in thy soul.

8. The Sacred Communion thus After Communion discover thy wants.
performed, presently shut up thy self within the closet of thine own heart,
and discover to thy Savior thy wants, and thy weakness; saying in thy mind:
Thou see, o my sweet Savior, how I am possessed with this passion, and
pestred with this perverse affection. Thou also well know, o my Lord, my
weakness to resist it, and that ^^ is not possible for me by my own diligence
to be delivered: Therefore this battle is thine; I resign this my quarrel
against these enemies into thy powerful hands; and from thee alone I look for
the victory.

9. After thou have thus silently And constantly hope for the divine help.
prayed; turn thy self to the eternal Father, and piously present his dear
Son Jesus unto him, for the same effect for which thou now receivedst him
into thy soul: And expect with constant hope his divine help, which although
thou presently perceivest not, yet thou shall infallibly and plentifully
receive, when it shall be most expedient for thee.

CHAP. XXX.
How to excite in us the affections of love, by the sacred Communion.
IF thou desire to stir up in thy holy Sacrament, that fervent love of thy
Lord God which destroys and consumes all self-will, and selfe*love within
thee: Settle thy self, in the evening which precedes thy communion, to
meditate upon thy Lords immense love and liberality, toward Consider Gods love
and liberality.
thee unworthy wretch, the work of his own hands; how not content to have
formed thee of nothing to his image and likeness; and to have sent his only
Son from heaven to inhabit our earth, and to serve thee for the space of
three and thirty years in continual labors and travails, and lastly to
undergo his most bitter passion, and ignominious death for thy redemption: He
would further bequeathe this his Son unto thee in the most holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, for the perpetual food and refreshing of thy soul.

2. And that by the due consideration Especially showed in the sacred Communion.
of this special benefit (of sacred Communion) thou may become all fire and
love; thou shall thus order thy devout exercise:

Consider, in the first place, Who it Weighing first, who it is that comes thus
unto thee.
is that conferres on thee this so large and liberal gift: Surely, it is thy
Lord God himself; the divine and increated wisdom and goodness; whose worth
and perfection infinitely exceeds the reach of all created capacity.

3. Then, look upon the gift it self 2. What he gives thee.
which is the true and only Son of God, of equal height, nature and
substance with the heavenly Father and holy Ghost. Now if a small gift
proceeding from a King, has its high value in respect of the giver; how highly
is this gift to be valued by us, which is God, and given by God himself, as a
token of his true love, and a perpetual memorial of his tender affection
toward us?

4. Again, reflect upon the eternity 3. The eternity of his love.
of this love, by which it was decreed by his most divine, most hidden, and
most holy wisdom, that he would thus give thee himself for thy food and
refection: and hence begin with joy and jubily of heart to sing and say within
thy self: O infinite goodness of my God! and is it even so, that thou lovedst
me in thy endless eternity! did thou, o my Lord and my God, so much value
me, thy poor and unworthy creature, that thou remembredst me in thy blessed
eternity, and had an ardent affection and desire to give me thy self for the
food of my soul?

5. And finally, look into the purity 4. The purity of his love.
of this love, which so great a Lord shows unto so mean a worm: How different
is it from all earthly affection? how free from the least mixture of profit,
and selfe-interest? How far is it above thy merits, and how purely is it a
work of his only mercy and bounty?

6. Having thus seriously and sweetly, with affection and admiration, meditated
of the divine goodness; Thy heart may break forth Hence break forth into
admiration.
into these raptures: Whence is it, O my Lord, that thou so love me an abject
creature? Why, O King of glory, will thou so nearly join me to thy self, who
am but a little dust and ashes? I well conceive thy design, O my dear Lord,
this thy excessive love toward me: It is to win me reciprocally to thy love; O
the purity of divine love! Thou love me, o my God, and give thy whole self
unto me, for no other end but that I may in gratitude give thee my love, life,
and all, entirely: and this for no need thou have of me, but merely for thy
mercies sake, and for my advancement and profit; that by this sweet tie and
happy union of love, my earthly heart may be raised up to become one with thy
divine heart, o my Lord and my God.

EXPLICATION.
HEre all ravished with joy to see And ravishment to see thy self so highly
prized.
thy self so highly prized, and beloved of thy Lord God; withdraw into the
secretest part of thine own heart, and there acknowledging that all this
powerful love, is to entice thy poor and inconsiderate self unto his divine
Majesty: make so And make an entire oblation of thy self to him.
absolute an oblation of thy self unto him; that thy memory may scarcely
think of any thing but thy God; thy affection may abhor all content which
comes any way without him; and thy Understanding may admit of no other object
for its continual entertainment, than him, who is the only satiety and
satisfaction of all thy inward faculties and outward senses.

And since there is no action, amongst And this being the chief act of Religion,
all them which concern our Religion and loyalty to God, which can compare with
this, (of receiving him worthily in the most holy Sacrament,) either in
appeasing Strive to perform it most perfectly.
his anger, or uniting us to his love: Force thy self to the utmost of thy
power to prepare, purify, and open thy heart unto him, and to shut it against
all things created.

7. Then offer and dedicate thy self humbly and wholly, with heart and Text.
affection, to the divine pleasure; Dedicating thy self wholly ^o him.
and retain an ever ready and inflamed desire to please God, and follow his
blessed will. And when this holy desire and affection shall be thoroughly
enkindled in thy soul; thou will see me to move thy Lord God also to be so much
enamoured with thee, that he desires thou should freely open thy heart to
him, that he may the next morning enter And freely open thy heart to him.
in unto thee, feast with thee, and take his full delight in thee: Then do
thou also declare thy mutual desire to receive him, with these kind of
Jaculatory prayers. O heavenly and divine manna, when will that wished hour
come, that I shall to thine own content, receive thee into my soul? Ah; when
shall I be surely united unto thee, by sincere affection? When shall I, (O
only life of my soul!) relinquish all self-will, and vanquish all my passions
and imperfections?

8. In these and the like devotions thou may spend the evening and morning,
to excite, cherish, and increase thy desire to receive thy dear Savior, that
so thou may perfectly please him, and be most happily united unto him. And in
thy pious practices of these things, take this Caveat: Be sure to keep each
power and faculty of thy soul, pure and But take heed of vanity and curiosity.
free from all curiosity of worldly things, and from all idle and vain
thoughts: Take also the like care of thy outward senses, lest thy heart steal
out by them, and so thou lose all thy devotion.

EXPLICATION.
THe time of the sacred Communion At the time near the Communion.
drawing nigh; think thou art to receive the Lord who created this great
Universe, and thee to his own likeness; the Son of God, who died for thee
n^ked on the 1. Think what thou art going to do.
Cross; that increased goodness, which has so often freed thee from danger,
death, and damnation; which thy sins deserved.

Thank him with most profound Thank,
humility; and adore him, (uniting Adore, Implore.
all thy spirits and forces of body and soul together,) as true God, and true
man. Beg also his pardon for thy faults, and that the same love which moves him
to grant thee this great gift, may also induce him to purge thy soul from the
stains of all sin and uncleanness, thereby disposing it to a more pure and
perfect union with his divine Majesty.

When the Priest pronounces those sacred words: Domine non When Domine non sum
dignus, is said.
sum dignus; O Lord, I am not worthy; accompany him with these following, and
speak to thy Lord and love from the bottom of thy heart. I am not worthy to
receive thee, o my great Lord, before whose Majesty the Angels of heaven,
tremblingly confess their own nothing. I am not worthy o my Lord, that thou
should enter into my heart, who am one of the meanest, weakest, and
ungratefullest creatures upon earth. I am not worthy, o my Lord, that thou
should lodge with me, because I love thee not, and I remember thee not,
though these are prime reasons of thy instituting and remaining in this most
blessed Sacrament.

Thus humble, confound, and abisme Humble and Confound thy self.
thy self, at the serious consideration of thy sins, malice, and misery: but
then raising up thy heart with hope by the following words; [Sed But still
raising up thy heart with hope.
tantum dic verbo, and sanabitur anima mea.] Do thou only speak the word, o
my Lord, and my soul will be saved: Enter, o my love, into this unworthy
harbor, and make use of thine infinite power and goodness in pardoning my
sins, supplying my defects, and protecting me from my enemies.

9. And after thou have received Text. Having communicated entertain thy guest
with amorous expressions.
this divine Sacrament, betake thee presently to the innermost closet of thy
heart, and there enter into communication with thy holy guest, using these or
the like loving and respectfull expressions: What has moved thee, O great King
of Kings, to enter in to me, who am nothing but a miserable, despicable, vild,
blind, and naked creature? And he will answer thee: Love; for thou art my dove,
my friend, my sister, my spouse and my dearly beloved. Then thou may reply;
O increated love, o sweetest dilection, o friendly and faithful charity, what
would thou have me do? what demandest thou? what desire thou? I ask
nothing (says he) but love: I would have nothing burn in the harth of thy
heart, but the fire of my love, that it may devour all foreign love within
thee, and destroy all self-wil and seeking. This, this is my desire; because I
would be truly thine, and would have thee likewise be totally mine: Which can
never be compassed, until thou freely deliverest up thy self to my will and
pleasure: For without this entire resignation, thy fancy will be always
fastened to the loving and liking of thy self, and thine own actions, be they
never so mean: I desire therefore that thou should hate thy self, that
thou may have the love of me: I demand thy heart for my habitation, that I
may join and unite it unto mine, for to this end was my heart opened to thee
upon the altar of my Cross. My will is, I say, (o my dearly beloved spouse)
that thou desire nothing, think nothing, understand nothing, see nothing, feel
nothing, but my self only: that so I only may be in th^e, and thou totally
turned into me, and that thou may possess in me perfect quiet, and I in thee
pleasant context.

10. Lastly, thou shall offer the holy And Lastly, offer up the divine Son to
his heavenly Father.
Son to his heavenly Father, for thy self, for the whole world, and for the
souls departed; in memory and union of that divine oblation which he offered
upon the holy Cross: presenting in like manner all the unbloody sacrifices to
the divine Majesty, which are that day offered up in his universal Church.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Spiritual Communion.
ALthough (my beloved) thou can receive thy sweeet Savior 1. Thou may thus
often Communicate.
sacramentally only once a day; yet thou may receive him spiritually, every
hour and moment: For nothing can hinder thee from this, but only thine own
fault and negligence. And this spiritual Communion may sometimes prove more
profitable to thy soul, and pleasing to thy Savior, than the sacramental,
especially if there be a defect in thy due and diligent preparation.

2. For as often as thou desire By frequent desires.
to receive thy loving Lord God thus spiritually into thy soul, thou shall
find him ever ready to feast thee with his own sacred hands; and thou may
thus easily dispose thy self unto it: Turning thy self to thy Savior to this
end, reflect upon thine own frailty and frequent failings, and conceive an
inward sorrow and detestation of thy defects; then make thy supplication with a
loving affection, that he will not disdain to enter thy poor cottage, and
feast thee with his own true body and blood.

3. So also, when thou art moved And it is an excellent exercise against
passions.
with a pious zeal against any perverse Passion, and desire efficaciously to
mortify it, or to plant some virtue in thy soul; make use of this spiritual
communion, by converting thy thoughts toward thy Lord God, and invoking his
aid with ardent prayers, beseech him to enter and possess the secret part of
thy soul: Or, calling to mind thy last sacramental communion, speak to him
with an inflamed desire: When (o my good God) shall I again welcome thee into
the closet of my heart? Come now, (O my Savior) and comfort me spiritually,
with the like strength and virtue.

EXPLICATION.
IF thou will practice this pious How to make great use of this exercise for
thy spiritual profit.
exercise of spiritual Communion, with more reverence and profit; frame thy
intention overnight to apply all the mortifications of thy vicious passions,
all the acts of virtue, and whatsoever good thou shall any way perform, for
the obtaining of this happy effect, and that thou may worthily open the gate
of thy heart, to give due entertainment to so divine a guest. And in the
morning settle thy thoughts upon the serious consideration of the great
happiness of that sweet soul which worthily receives this most holy
Sacrament, whereby sins breaches are repaired, lost virtues are restored,
languishing forces are recruted, and each good returns to its first beauty, by
the communication of the fruits of Christ's merits and passion. Then force and
excite thy heart to an ardent desire of these comforts by thy Lords coming;
and turning toward him, say: O my Lord, and my love, I am not worthy to
receive thee sacramentally; but do thou, o increated goodness and unlimited
power, pardon all my imperfections, and make me worthy to receive thee
spiritually, to the honor of thy holy name, and the true comfort of my poor
soul.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Thanksgiving.
ALL our good actions are of All goodness is from God.
God, and from God; and therefore a thankful gratitude is due to him for all
our well performed exercises, for each victory obtained against our enemies,
and for all and singular his blessings and benefits.

2. And that thou may not be defective To whom therefore all gratitude must
be showed.
in this point of duty: Remember, that the chief motive why our omnipotent
creator conferres his mercies upon his creatures, is that they should
correspond to him in pious, perpetual and worthy thanksgiving. And because our
Lord God in bestowing his benefits, intends principally his own honor; and
secondly our profit: do thou likewise First, therefore acknowledge his
goodness.
in receiving them acknowledge in the first place, his power, wisdom, and
goodness, which most gloriously shine in each one of them.

3. And in the next place, reflect upon And then thine own unworthiness.
thine own unworthiness of so great favors, who art nothing else but
ingratitude, misery, and baseness. And Lastly, submit thy self to obey his
divine will and pleasure, and study to perform what thy Lord, in lieu of these
benefits, expects from thee; which is, to love him chiefly, to serve him
carefully, and to offer and dedicate thy self to him freely and totally; as I
shall now teach thee.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the perfect oblation of thy self, to thy Lord God.
AFter thanksgiving for received favors, the soul presently breaks forth
into that delicious affection of the Royal Prophet: What shall I render to my
Lord, for all the good things he has given me? That therefore thou may do
something, seeming like satisfaction; by offering up to his Majesty, all that
thou art, have, and can; and that entirely, absolutely, voluntarily, and by
an efficacious act of thy inward man.

2. Consider first with a serious attention First, consider Gods greatness and
glory.
the greatness and glory of thy Lord God; (for upon this depends the perfect
oblation of thy self,) and thou will find that there is a reverence and fear
due to this his greatness and glory: that there is a love due to his
goodness; that there is a hope and confidence due to his mercy; and so of his
other attributes and perfections: And thou shall congratulate and rejoice with
thy Lord God, that he is what he is; to wit, the best, greatest, most wise,
most holy most happy, most powerful, most infinite, and that he has all the
perfections which he possesses: Thus multiplying many such amorous acts of
complacence in thy heart.

3. Then, bow down the knees of soul and body with most profound 2. Adore and
acknowledge him, etc.
reverence, before thy Lord and maker, adoting his divine Majesty, and
acknowledging him to be the supreme governor of all his creatures: And
particularly, that whatsoever good thou have by nature and by grace, is his
proper gift: since he alone conferred it upon thee, and he alone conserves it in
thee: for thus thou must needs confess thy self to be his debtor, though thy
offering be never so great; because thou can present him with nothing, which
is not already his own, and first proceeding from his liberality and bounty;
neither does he lose his dominion thereof by conferring it upon thee.

4. In the next place, pass on to the 3. Offer up all thy interest in any
thing.
oblation it self; and deliver up all thine own interest in whatsoever thou
have or can, into the holy hands of thy heavenly creator, with all possible
cheerfulness and integrity: that is, offer up unto him all that he has given
thee, and so restore thy whole self to thy God in perpetual bondage, to
dispose of thee both in time and in eternity, as he best pleases: Neither
shall it suffice thee to make this oblation generally, by presenting unto him
the root and beginning of all thy thoughts, words, and works; but thou shall
do it peculiarly, by presenting even those also, which by reason of thy state
thou art obliged to exercise, to the honor and glory of his sacred name.

5. Lastly, thou shall unite this entire oblation of thy self and all that And
unite all to the merits of Christ.
belongs to thee, unto the merits of Jesus Christ, the sweet spouse of thy
soul; that from thence it may have that value and esteem, which from it self
thou can not hope or expect: And thus thou shall end thy exercise, by
presenting the eternal Father, with thy whole self and the Pre^^^^ing both
together to the eternal Father.
holy merits of his only Son joined together, with all his actions and
sufferings, from the crib unto the Cross; for all these are thy treasures,
which he at his death, bequeathed by his last will and testament unto thee,
whom he left entitled to all his merits: But remember that thou make not this
oblation for thy self alone, but also for the universal Church, and her
members: for thus it will be far more acceptable to God being sweetened with the
incense of perfect charity.

6. In like manner, when thou will offer up thy fastings, prayers, or other So
Likewise in offering thy works of piety.
pious works to thy Lord God: consider, that his holy Son thy sweet Savior
has already presented them together with his own, to his eternal Father; and
so has conjoined and united them both together, do thou therefore offer up
the same in the same manner; by which thou shall know that thy oblations
proceed from a sincere heart. And if thou practisest this in time of adversity,
thou will easily master all misery, anguish, pain, and perils whatsoever, and
duly fulfill Gods holy pleasure.

7. If furthermore thou desire to make an oblation of Christ's actions for
thine own offenses, he have thy How to offer up Christ's actions for our
offenses.
self in this sort: First cast an eye upon thy sins, and perceiving that
thou can not hope to pacify Gods wrath, nor satisfy his divine Justice by
thine own endeavors: address thy self to thy Saviors life, passion and
death, and fix upon some one or other action or suffering of his; as upon his
fasting, or his praying, or the effusion of his precious blood: then reflect,
that he offered that his action or passion to his eternal Father for thy sins,
and to reconcile him to thee; as if he said: I do now, O my heavenly Father
fully satisfy thy divine justice for the sins of this thy servant N. Oh; let
it please thee to spare him, and to receive him into the number of thy elect.

8. Do thou also make the same oblation of thy dear Savior to the eternal
Father; and humbly beg for thy self and others, that in virtue of this
offering and for his own glories sake, he will in his mercy pardon both thine
and their offenses.

And thou may piously and profitably make use of this manner of spiritual
exercise, in any action or passage of our Lord and Saviors life or passion.

EXPLICATION.
Another manner, of perfect oblation.
TO the end thy oblation of thy Christ here on earth, offered not only himself,
self may be acceptable to the divine Majesty; Consider, that whilst our
Savior so journed here upon earth, he perpetually offered up to his eternal
father, not only himself and all his merits, but also all us mortals together
with himself: But also al us, to his Father.
Make therefore thy Oblation in virtue and union of his, yea make the self-same
oblation of Jesus Christ, in which he also comprehended thee: Make thou the
same oblation.
and let this thy oblation be without the least touch of propriety or
selfe-wil, neither regarding earthly goods, nor heavenly graces, but purely and
precisely looking upon the divine pleasure and providence, to which thou art
entirely to submit and sacrifice thy self, as a perpetual holocaust; and
forgetting all things created, say unto thy Lord God: Behold, o my good God, o
my great Creator, a small lump of mire and earth mixed together, in the hands
of thy eternal providence; do with me what best pleases thee, in my life, at
my death, and after my death; in time, and in eternity. And thou may give a
How to know the sincerity of thy oblation.
probable guess concerning thy own oblation, that it proceeds from a sincere
and disinteressed heart, if thou can perfectly practice it in time of
adversity; bearing it with true patience, and being then ready to execute Gods
holy will in all thy desolations and distresses. This is the right way, (o my
dearly beloved.) to make a beneficial truck and traffic of thy self for thy
Savior, who will give thee himself in exchange, if thou bequeathest and
sacrificest thy self thus totally to his divine Majesty.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How to petition for divine grace.
HAving made this perfect oblation Text. First encourage thy self with
confidence in his goodness.
of this most precious treasure, (which is no less than Christ himself, with
all his glorious merits,) to the Eternal Father: thou may appear with
Confidence before the throne of his mercy, to petition for the supply of thy
necessities; And that thou may do it with the more decency:

First, encourage thy self with confidence, remembering his benefits, bounty,
and liberality toward thee: for nothing can more strengthen thy hope of
obtaining new supplies, than than the reflection upon Gods former favors in
time of necessity: And know that this confidence gives the whole efficacy to
thy petition; so that without it, never expect to obtain from God any thing
which thou demandest.

2. Secondly, Take special care that Secondly, join humility with it.
this Confidence be coupled with humility; distrusting totally thine own
merits, and relying boldly upon Christ's mercies: Not that I advise thee to
become fearful and pusilanimous, upon pretense of humillity; so as not to beg
large benefits from Gods bounty: For though it behooves to know thine own
baseness, and to consider how little thou deservest; yet thou must beware of
distrusting the divine bounty, or undervaluing his liberality: No, be not
dejected; for as thou deservest nothing, so thou have greater occasion to
demand much; since Gods gifts are not grounded upon thy deserts, but upon
Christ's merits, which are Thirdly, press thy petition with fervent desires.
of infinite worth and dignity.

3. Thirdly, Endeavor to press thy petition with frequent and fervent
desires: that is, that thou a^dently wish to obtain what thou ask: for since
thou petitionest a most pious father for a supply of thy necessities, who not
only bids thee ask great things, but is also angry if thou ask not; and
has past his promise to perform thy petition; why should thou not have
inflamed desires ^o obtain what thou demandest?

4. And indeed we most commonly The want whereof, hinders the effect of our
demands.
fail in the effects of our demands, because we want this fervor in our
desires, and make our petitions tepidly, rather because faith and reason
dictate unto us that such things are needful for us, than that we zelously
covet to receive them: The true cause of which tepidity is, for that our
affections being fastened to earthly things, we prize them in our wills, though
we slight them in our understandings; and consequently though we know in our
judgment, that our minds are to be raised up to higher objects, yet we do not
seriously seek to be separated from them: whereas if we verily and vigorously,
humbly and heartily desired it, our prayers would soon return us a happy effect.

5. Lastly, provide that thy petition Fourthly, Let not thy petition want
Charity,
want not; First, Affection of charity to thy neighbors; for it should not
suffice thee to pray fervently for thy self, but to extend thy piety in
petitioning the divine grace for all others.

Secondly, Perseverance; For our Perseverance,
loving Lord, uses sometimes to prolong and to put off the fulfilling of our
petition, for our greater profit, and the better increase and enkindling of our
holy desires, as may be exemplified in the Cananean woman, and Evangelicall
widow.

Thirdly, Resignation of thy will; Refignation.
For thou art to represent thy desires to thy dear Lord, as if thou rather
expectedst the fulfilling of his divine pleasure, than of thy petition: So
Christ prayed in the garden, not to have his own will, but his heavenly
Fathers accomplished.

CHAP. XXXV.
Some short observations concerning meditation.
First, Before thou betakest thy self 1. 1. Read overnight the matter of thy
meditation.
to thy nights rest; read attentively and considerately that mystery of thy
Saviors life, or that argument which thou meanest to meditate upon the morning
following; and contracting it into two or three points or heads, commit it to
thy memory.

2. When thou awakest from sleep, 2. Reflect of the same in the morning.
shut out all other thoughts from thy heart, and let thy employment be to
reflect upon, and repeat the points, prepared overnight for this mornings
exercise: and think that thou art presently to talk with thy Lord God.

3. Wherefore making (as it were) 3. Weigh his majesty with whom thou confer.
a stand, for a short space, before thou art in the place of prayer; imagine
that thy great Creator, whom the Angels adore, is present in the Oratory,
expecting thee to enter discourse with him, and beholding thy behavior in thy
prayer. Let this truth make a deep impression in thy mind; and thereupon yield
him most profound reverence with body and heart, as craving permission to
confer with his majesty.

4. Then with bended knees, begin 4. Begin with oblation, and petition.
thy prayer; first, offering up to thy Lord God all the cogitations, words, and
actions of thy whole life; particularly presenting unto him this present
exercise now intended, to his honor and glory; and humbly implore his gracious
assistance, that thou may perform this thy practice with such attention,
devotion, and reverence, as befits one that speaks with his Lord and Savior.

5. Incontinently after this, imagine Then apply thy senses to the mystery.
thy self present to the mystery thou intendest to meditate on, and in the
very place where it befell; for this will fix thy fancy from wandering: As, If
thy theme be of Christ's Incarnation; think thou see the glorious Archangel
entering the secret chamber of the sacred Virgin, and there listen to their;
mutual discourses. So, If thy subject be of thy Saviors flagellation; suppose
a pillar before thee with thy dear Lord fastened thereunto, and eye those
inhumane executioners, how cruelly they whip and beat him: And thus thou art to
vary thy fancy, and conform it to the manner of the mystery.

6. And when the mystery is thus present to thy mind, make thy petition, And
beg what thou intendest to obtain.
and beg that which thou proposedst to obtain by this exercise: As, If thy
meditation be concerning Christ's Incarnation, let thy prayer be for spiritual
light, that thou may clearly penetrate and perceive that ineffable love which
moved him to be made man for thy sake: If it be of his Passion, ask the grace
of compassion and condoling with thy dear Savior's sufferings; and so let thy
petition be for such pious affections, as are ushered in by the argument of thy
prayer.

7. this done, begin with thy first After this beg in with the first point.
point; and if that alone furnish thee with fuel sufficient to inflame thy
affection, persevere therein for the whole space assigned to thy prayer; but if
otherwise, then pass on to the second. And briefly, take this for a maxim in
all meditations; that whenever thou feel thy affection enkindled; stay
there, and digest well that consideration, till thou have therein fully
satisfied thy devotion.

8. And suffer not thy understanding And beware of fancying high mysteries,
to roam after high and delicate mysteries; but make use of it is discourse so
far only, as many help to heat thy will with pious affections, and solid
resolutions. Wherefore from each consideration extract some affection, and from
every affection draw some determinate and particular resolution, to do this
very day, this or that thing for thy Lords honor; to reform this or that fault
or imperfection, and to mortify thy sensuality in this or that occasion. And
this is the true fruit and profit of prayer.

9. Be resolute also in staying out Or leaving off before the time allotted
for prayer, be expired:
the full time allotted for thy prayer; and stir not from it through any
dryness in devotion, or any trouble of distractions; for such a prayer is for
the most part more profitable to a soul using diligent resistance, and patient
expectance of Gods grace, than when it sensibly partakes of the sweets and
abundance of devotion.

10. Thy exercise being ended, In the end reflect how thou have behaved thy
self,
insist a while in the examination of thy self; and reflect how thou have
behaved thy self in thy prayer: If thou find all well; give thy good God all
the thanks; if thou have been negligent, resolve upon amendment; and take
notice of the cause of this ill success, that thou fail not for the future.

11. Let the matter or mysteries And order well the matter of thy medition.
thou meanest to meditate upon, be well ordered; as, if thou proposest to thy
self, thy Saviors life and passion, make thy entrance at his Incarnation, and
duly proceed in the rest of the ensuing mysteries; and leap not inconstantly
from one to another.

CHAP. XXXVI.
An Exercise before the Sacred Communion.
1. THe conformation of the place, for 1. The place.
the settling of thy mind; may be to imagine thy Savior Christ, encompassed with
his Angels and Saints, who all adore his divine Majesty with all possible
reverenc^.

2. Make thou also thy humble 2. Beg of thy Savior to fit up thy poor house.
address unto him, and since he vouchsafes to divert into the harbor of thy
poor heart, entreat him to send before him such ornaments, as are necessary for
his worthy entertainment; because thy poverty is incapable to provide, what is
suitable to so great a majesty.

3. Then reflect who it is that intends 3. Think what guest is to lodge in it.
to lodge with thee; It is surely he, whom the Angel named Jesus, the Savior
of man*kind; He, who only can cure thy wounds: He, who so dearly loves thee,
and takes such care of thy salvation, that he came purposely and personally to
procure it; interposing his authority, hazarding his honor, and losing his
life for thee upon an ignominious Cross: And be sure to insist upon this pious
consideration, as being very proper to prepare thy soul for the receiving of
this most holy Sacrament; according to our Saviors precept, As often as you
shall do these things you shall do them in remembrance of me.

4. Consider to what end thy dear 4. Why he comes to thee,
Lord comes unto thee; Surely, to conclude a union between himself and thy
soul, whence results a certain divine life, which thou henceforth enjoyest by
this sweet union with thy Savior. For the food we take, begets humors of the
same quality which it self is of: and consequently no mervaile if this
heavenly food, and divine nourishment do in some sort deify the soul. He that
eats me, shall live for me, says our Lord.

5. Let thy next consideration be, to whom he comes; To a little worm 5. To whom
he comes.
of the earth, to a vessel full of filth and rottenness: and perhaps, (which
is far worse) even to his enemy, to the contemner of his commands, to the
wilful transgressour of his laws, to a base runaway, who has forsaken the
colors of his Lord God, and taken part with the Devil.

6. Make therefore thy humble 6. Make thy petition.
supplication to thy sweet Savior, that since he vouchsafes freely to come
unto thee for his own mercies sake, and for no merits of thine; he will also
be pleased to prevent thee with his grace, and adorn thee with the gifts of
his holy Spirit, that thou may become a worthy receptacle for his sacred
body: as he formerly by the like prevention, prepared for himself a happy and
holy habitation in the virginal entralls of his most blessed Mother.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How we may devoutly offer up the sacrifice of the Mass.
WHen thou feel thy heart 1. 1. Free thy fancy from all outward objects.
inflamed by this foregoing or the like exercise; free thy fancy of all
sensible objects, and shutting the windows of thy senses, so are up to thy Lord
God, and fix there the eye of thy soul upon him only, purely, freely, and
quietly, excluding all tumults of outward thoughts; and implore the assistance
of the holy Ghost, by reciting the hymn of the holy Church, Veni creator
spiritus, etc.

2. Then coming to put on the 2. In vesting thy self, mark the mysteries.
sacred vestments, mark with attention those mysteries which they mean and
signify: and from that very instant of time, take upon thee Christ's person,
whom thou representest in this holy action; that so thou may be moved, to
conform each outward and inward deed, to him whom thou now personatest. 3. Let
thy outward depo^tmen^ be decent.


3. And as for the outward composure of the body; see that thy going forth of
the vestry, be with all decency and gravity; let thy countenance be cherfull,
thine eyes humbly cast down, and not curious to pry after any passages done
in the Church: Let thy voice be low and sober, reading those sacred words
neither precipitantly, nor over-pausingly, but beseemingly between both those
extremes: Let the holy ceremonies be piously and punctually observed: and let
all be attentively performed; taking more care in the Canon, and most of all
when thou come to the words of consecration.

4. Let thy inward composition also correspond with thy outward carriage; 4.
And thy inward composition correspondent.
and therefore coming to the foot of the Atar, look upon Christ thy Lord and
thy love, sitting in his throne of glorious majesty, attended by his Angels and
blessed Saints: and think he is presently coming down from his throne to the
altar, to enrich thy poor soul with the treasures of his divinity: And
considering so high a Majesty, confess thine own misery, meannesse, and
nothing: and so truly humbling thy self both inwardly and outwardly, begin the
action of the sacrifice: And keep this presence of thy Savior sitting in his
throne and beholding thy devotion, until thou come to the consecration;
which done, thou have him then before thee upon the altar, thou touchest him
with thy hands, and embracest him in thy heart there present in the Sacrament.

5. In thy first memento: Contemplate 5. In thy first memento.
thy Lord Jesus crucified, reposing in thy heart, and depose all thy
necessities and wants in his sacred and sugared wounds. And first offer up thy
whole Mass to his holy head, To Christ's holy head.
intending it to the eternal honor of the most blessed Trinity, and for the
increase of the accidental glory of his dear Mother, thy Angel guardian, and
thy particular protectours and patrons in heaven; all which thou shall join
together in the wounds of thy Lords venerable head; and beseech them, that as
thou in this vale of misery, strivest to augment their glory; so they in their
happy and heavenly mansions, will be pleased to remember thee, and join with
thee in the oblation of this divine sacrifice to thine and their Creator.

6. Coming then to the wound To his right hand.
of his right hand, pray for the state ecclesiastical; that is, for the Pope,
Cardinals, Bishops, and pastors of the Church; for all Religious persons and
their Prelates: and for them all, offer up this present sacrifice.

7. At the wound of his left hand, To his left hand.
pray for the Laity; for Kings, Princes, Magistrates, and the rest of their
people; and in particular for thy parents, friends, familiars, and all who
desired to be made partakers in thy devotions.

8. At his most sweet heart, offer To his sacred heart.
up thy whole self only, humbly representing unto him thy life past, and
begging his pardon: thy present being, and desiring his direction: thy
spiritual necessities and corporal needs; thy health, thy temptations, thy
desires, thy designs; Consecrate all the future thoughts, words and works of
thy whole life to his eternal honor: Finally, resign thy whole self
reverently and confidently to his divine providence; and so rest secure in his
care, since thou have delivered all thy affairs into his custody, who will
better improve all things for thy profit, than thou can either ask or expect.

9. At the wound of his right foot, To his right foot.
offer up the sacrifice for all them who are in Gods grace, and continue in his
charity, that he will be pleased to preserve them still in his favor and
friendship.

10. At the wound of his left foot, To his left foot.
offer it up for all sinners, that God will vouchsafe to convert and enlighten
them: for all poor, weak, and any-way afflicted wights, that he will please to
comfort and deliver them; and lastly for all thou either ought, or art bound
to pray. And so conclude thy whole oblation with Saint Augustines words: I
recommend Commendo eos, quos tu vis and scis, and velle me nosti.
unto thy Majesty, whomsoever thou (o my Lord) wilt, and know; and would
have me remember: And finally, offer up thy Savior Jesus, thus loaded (as I
may say) with all thy petitions and necessities, to his eternal Father in this
present sacrifice; saving those words of the Psalmist: Behold, o God our
protector, Ps. 83. 10.
and look upon the face of thy Christ; And so proceed on in the sacred Action.

11. In thy second memento; Thou 6. In thy second memento.
have Christ present in the holy Sacrament, now glorious and risen from death;
unite therefore thy affection unto him, and strive to creep into his open side,
and there hide thy self safely and securely from all assaults of thine enemies:
There also determine resolutely to do his holy will for the future in all
occurrences whatsoever; and put on that pious affection of the Royal Prophet:
What is to me in heaven? and besides Psalm. 72. 25.
thee, o my Lord and love, what would I upon the earth? Lastly, offer up the
Sacrifice for the souls of the faithful departed; and complete what remains
of the sacred Mass.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
An Exercise aefter the holy Communion.
REpresent to thy self (as formerly) 1. Representation of the place.
thy Blessed Savior, encompassed with the glorious troops of Angels and
heavenly spirits, adoring and praising his divine Majesty.

2. Then implore his grace; that since 2. Imploration of his grace.
he beyond all desert of thine, has vouchsafed to enter thy poor cottage, he
will be likewise pleased to furnish it with all such ornaments of holy virtues
as may best like himself; and to illustrate thy soul with the beams of his
celestial light, as he did that of holy Simeon; that with him, receiving thy
Lord into thy loving embraces, thou may sweetly intone thy Nunc dimittis, etc.

3. In the next place, consider that 3. Consider whom thou have within thee.
he whom thou have now within thee, is thy some Lord God, of whom before
Communion thou conceivedst such high things: And render him humble thanks, for
this immense benefit, of communicating and uniting himself unto thee;
entreating him that it may not be a slight (and as it were) a passing visit,
but a permanent abode with thee.

4. After this, look upon thine 4. Mark thine own unworthiness.
own unworthiness to receive such a guest; how homely is thy habitation? how
beggarly, yea how beastly is thy heart? how full of the noise of passions and
perplexities? and draw from hence acts of sorrow for thy sins, of shame for thy
negligence, and of confusion for the uncleanesse of thy soul.

5. And lastly, ask with a most fervent desire, that he who is the King 5. Make
thy Petition.
of glory and goodness, and the source of all sanctity and purity, will
garnish thy soul with his virtues, and wash away all thy filthyness with the
water of his celestial grace; and so inseparably unite and join thee to
himself, that nothing created may evermore make a breach between thee and him;
but that he will strongly lock up the closet-doore of thy heart, and mark it
for his own habitation with the signet of his sacred love; that so he alone may
there peaceably and perpetually take up his rest, without the least disturbance
of any foreign guest.

CHAP. XXXIX.
A daily Examination.
1. FOr the keeping clean of thy Conscience, it will be necessary for thee to
go down daily into it, and sweep each darkest corner thereof with the besom of
diligent examination, that all uncleanesse may be speedily cast forth of doors.

2. Wherefore, thou art to do three Every Morning thou art to do three things.
things every Morning: First, Give God thanks for all his benefits bestowed
upon thee in the night past, and particularly for thy delivery from sudden
death, and from the deceits of the Devil. 2. Then, make a cordial oblation of
all things thou shall think, speak, or do in the day following: and entreat
the Blessed Virgin, that she will be pleased to present with her purest Hands
this Oblation of thy self and thy actions, together with thee, to her only
Son. 3. And lastly conceiving a confidence of the Divine assistance; make a
firm purpose by his grace not to offend him that Day in the least venial sin.

3. And at night, a little before thou At night thou art to examine thy self.
betakest thy self to thy rest, examine thy self how stoutly thou have stood
to this good purpose. But before thou descendest to particulars, think of thy
Lords Presence, to whom thou art now ready to give in a reckoning of that days
transactions: and endeavor to feel a certain shame and confusion in thy
self, like an ill servant before his most indulgent master; or like a
perfidious Soldier before his pious Sovereign, who raised him from the
dunghill to the highest degree of honor: for how much more reason have thou to
be ash^med in the sight of thy God, whom thou have served so negligently, and
offended so impudently?

4. Begin therefore with a general Begin with a general acknowledgement of
Gods favors.
acknowledgement of thy Lords love and favors, conferred upon thee from the
first instant of thy being, to that present hour: rendering him particular
thanks for the benefits that day received from his Bounty: And invite all the
Angels and Saints, and chiefly the sacred Virgin, to help thee make a worthy
thanksgiving, for thy Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Vocation, Remission
of thy enormous crimes, and expectation of thee so long to penance, etc.

5. Secondly, demand light and grace Then beg light and grace.
to see thy defects and negligences, which thou have that day committed, and to
feel a true sorrow and contrition for the same: For they are so secret, that
without this light thou can not discern them, and so enormous, that without
this aid thou can not truly judge of them.

6. Thirdly, run over each hour of Next, descend to particula^s,
the day, and discuss with diligence what were thy Thoughts, Words, Actions or
Omissions, in every of them, that thou may punctually perceive wherein thou
have particularly transgressed.

7. Fourthly, endeavor to excite a true sorrow for thy sins, (which is And
endeavor to excite a true sorrow for thy sins.
the main drift of this examen,) and let this grief touch thy heart, because
thou have offended so good a God, rather than for any other inconvenience,
which thereby thou incurrest: Let it proceed (I say) not from any fear of
punishment which thou have deserved; but from a true reverence, and high
esteem, which is due from thee to the Divine Majesty of thy Lord God, whom
thou desire to love and respect, above all things, and resolvest to practice
it for the time to come.

8. Fifthly therefore, and lastly, beg And lastly implore his pardon for the
past, and protection for ^he future.
his pardon for thy past negligence* and his assistance for thy future
amendment: promising particularly, and resolving effectually, to shun, for his
love, this or that occasion of sin; and to lay hold of this or that
opportunity, for the correction and bettering of thy self.

9. And if thou happily find by this serious discussion of thy self, that
thy transgr^ssions are not so grievous as to excite thee to this sorrow and
shame; refer all this to the Divine mercy, and not to thy own diligence or
virtue: And refl^ct upon thy former faults, and the grievous failings of other
worldlings; and conclude that thou had surely fallen more foulely, had not
his Heavenly Grace upheld and prevented thee.

EXPLICATION.
Another method of Examination.
QUestion thy self concerning, three things. First, Wherein thou have that day
fallen and offended. Secondly, What occasioned it. Thirdly How diligent thou
have been in the practice of virtue.

Concerning thy fallings, read and follow the 15 foregoing Chapter.

Concerning the occasions, resolve to cut them off for the future.

And for thy practice of virtue; strengthen thy will with these three Cordials;
distrust in thy self, trust in God, and Prayer. Suspect thy past victories,
and rely not upon thy former good works; but rather forget them, lest thou fall
into selfe-complacency; look always forwards upon what thou yet want, and
how much rests to be done: And acknowledging Gods Grace to be the source of
all goodness, thank him for all his benefits and blessings; for the
inspirations he has sent thee; and the good desires of virtue he has given
thee; for his deliverance from dangers, and defense against thine enemies.

CHAP. XL.
Being a Conclusion of the whole Work.
1. MUch more might be said of This short book we^l practiced is sufficient.
these important matters; but let this which is here delivered, according to my
poor Talent, suffice for the present: which surely if thou endeavourest to
keep in thy memory, and accomplish in thy actions, thou have sufficiently
learned and labored.

2. But in respect of thy weak capacity, and my proposed brevity; it will be
necessary that thou use a studious diligence in often revolving and meditating
upon these foregoing Precepts: For by frequent consideration, and continual
exercise, thou will certainly increase thy inward strength, whereby to conquer
all thine enemies.

EXPLICATION.
ABove all things beg incessantly of the Divine Goodness, the gift of
perseverance, in thy unwearied endeavors against thy passions and
imperfections; it being the chief weapon in this spiritual warfare, against
thy never-dying enemies; which like ill weeds are ever budding and breaking
forth, so long as the Earth has any life in it to nourish them.

3. Resolve therefore to betake thy Tex^. If thou resolvest to fight manfully.
self to these proposed Arms of defense; and to fight stoutly, manfully and
constantly; because no man can avoid this combat, without endangering the loss
of the conquest. Nor can there be any hope of Peace with such enemies; which
endommage them most, who most desire to enter league and friendsh^p with them.

4. Neither be thou terrified at And not to be terrified at thy enemies power.
their seeming power and cruelty; since all their force and fury, is in the
more powerful hands of that Supreme Captain, for whose honor thou art
engaged in the battle; wherein none can be vanquished, but they that will
themselves. And if thy Lord for whom thou wagest this war, does seem sometimes
to withdraw his Assistance, and delay thy conquest over thine enemies for a
time, yet be not thou faint-hearted, but fight on courageously; being most
certain and secure, that his Goodness, Power, and Providence, directs all
events, (and more especially all adversities) to the best profit of his
soldiers.

5. These thoughts will beget in Though the victory seems to come slowly on.
thee a generous spirit, and a constant heart to resist and fight with courage;
and therefore though the victory comes slowly on, believe firmly that this
deferring is either to free thy soul from secret pride, and conserve thee in
true humility: Or else to perfect thee in virtue, and to teach thee to become a
tried Soldier, by these long continued conflicts; Or surely, for some other
good of thine, which thy Lord then conceales from thee, for thy greater merit
and improvement.

6. Go on therefore, (O my dearly beloved) and enter these lists with a
cheerful and heroic mind, lest thou seem ungrateful to thy loving Lord God,
who so much tendered thy good that he suffered death for thy sake: And attend
carefully to every Counsel and Command of thy Captain Christ Jesus, that thou
may totally rout and ruin all thine enemies: For if thou permittest but one
only to live and lurk in thy Soul, it will be as a moat in thy eye, and as a
Lance in thy bowels, and prove a perpetual impediment in the progress of so
glorious a Victory.

APOC. 2. 7. To him that overcommeth, I will give the hidden Manna.

1. KINGS, 15. 18. Thou shall fighe against them, until their utter
destruction.


The general Table, containing the several Chapters of this Treatise, as they
stand divided into numbers: And being a brief compendium of the whole work.
The Spiritual Conflict. Or, The Arraignment of the Spirit of Self-love, and
Sensuality, at the bar of Truth and Reason.
Chap. I.
WHerein Christian perfection consists. The importance of this knowledge is
very great. Numb. 1. Some place perfection in austerity. 2. Others in reciting
many prayers. 3. Others in exact observance. 4. All which are good means, but
not directly tending to perfection. 5. And they that rest in these lower
exercises, are in great danger. 6. As may appear by the rest of their actions.
7. And especially by their want of resignation in time of affliction. 8. True
perfection therefore consists in the knowledge of God, and our selves, In the
love of God, and hatred of our selves, In resignation to God's will, and
denying our own. 9. All which Christ has taught us by word and example. 10.
And we must also do it, if we mean to purchase victory. 11. Nor is there any
thing more glorious to our selves, or more grateful to God. 12. But to obtain
it, we wust provide four necessary weapons. 13.

Chap. II.
First, Distrust of our selves, which is gotten, by a deep sense of our own
nothing. 1. By Prayer. 2. And by often reflecting upon our own weakness. 3.
And this self-knowledge is a lesson must be well learned. 4. And we must be
careful to rise speedily after our fall. 5. The great, necessity of this
distrust in our own strength, is enforced by the corruption of our nature, and
the frailty thereof; and by considering how much this acknowledgment pleases
God, and presumption displeases him. 6.

Chap. III.
Secondly, Confidence in God, which is obtained. 1. By prayer. 2. By
considering the divine power, wisdom, and goodness, by which he can, knows
how, and is willing to help us. 3. By meditating upon holy writ. 4. Another
means, is; by thinking on our own frailty, and Gods omnipotency, at the
beginning of each action; Whereby we shall not be foolishly dejected at our
frequent failings. 5. A necessary Caveat, for all spiritual people. 6. By Gods
assistance we can do all things, But many are deceived in presuming upon their
own strength. 7.

Chap. IV.
Thirdly, Continual Exercise, 1. Which consists, in the right use of the
Understanding. 2. Which is to be kept from Ignorance, by prayer, and by a
diligent discussion of our own actions; judging things according to their true
worth; And this will open our eyes to see the meannesse of all worldly
vanities. 3. A necessary caution, to keep the will from sixing its love, until
the Understanding have first pondered the object. 4. And the same caution is
necessary also in holy things. 5. The understanding is to be furthermore weaned
from curiosity. 6. How highly this conduces to perfection, and how cunningly
the Devil plots against it, by suggesting pride to our Understanding. 7. Which
is far more dangerous, and more difficultly cured than Pride of the Will. 8.

Chap. V.
Of the Will: and the end, to which we are to direct all our actions. A will to
do well suffices not, But our actions must also be performed only to please
God. 1. Which to attain to, Apply thy Understanding to know Gods will. 3. And
take heed of being deceived, because nature is subject to seek her self. 4.
This intention, of doing all for God, is to be always made in the entrance upon
any work, And to be renewed in the prosecution of it. 6. Lest self love creep
in, and so change and corrupt it. 7. He that does all things to please God,
remains in perfect indifferency, and has always what he desires, which shows
the high importance of this pure intention. 8. And it may be kept even in
things aiming at our own good; Finally it puts such a worth upon our actions,
that the best of them without it is lost, and may be sinful, and the smallest
with it is most acceptable to God. 9. If this exercise seem hard at first, yet
use will render it easy, and soon beget a habit in our souls. 10.
Especially, if we consider how dearly our Lord has loved us; as appears in our
Creation, Redemption, Preservation, and his other benefits, which are so great
that none but God himself can comprehend them. 11.

Chap. VI.
There are in man two wills: The Rational, seated between Gods grace and our
sense. 1. And the sensual. 2. The truly virtuous persons yield promptly to
Gods will, and vicious to their sensuality; But they who of sinners are become
converts, have the greatest conflict. 3. Who must therefore resolve to bear
patiently the loss of their pleasures. There are diverse sorts of unmortifi'd
souls; seeming good, but full of imperfection, ignorance and blindness. 4. A
danger in the choice of spiritual Exercises, discovered. 5.

Chap. VII.
Of the fight against Sensuality; and of the inward way of the Will to acquire
Virtues. When sensuality rebels. 1. Look strictly to thy reason, that it
consent not: and recall that motion again and again, and as often conquer it.
2. Also produce acts of those virtues, which are contrary to these vices. 3.
But beware of thy cunning enemy, who sometimes suppresseth these motions. 4.
For then it is thy part to excite them, and fight afresh with them. 5. Till
thou have gotten a perfect hatred of them. 6. And the way to plant virtues, is
to practice acts contrary to those defects; The reason whereof is, because as
long as the root of vice remains alive in us, it will still bud forth, and
choke up our plants of virtue. And therefore we must make many Acts (contrary
to the vicious habit,) to implant the habit of virtue. 7. And though this be
full of pain, yet it is also full of profit. 8. The like diligence must be
also used against the least evil motion. 9. Yea and against lawful
affections, when they are not absolutely necessary. 10. And this is the way to
become truly spiritual. 11. Because all vice springs from the yielding to
sense, and all virtue by subduing and submitting our will to Gods. 12.

Chap. VIII.
What he must do, who feels his Reason conquered by Sense. So long as thou
consentest not to Sensuality, fear not. 1. For victory consists not, in feeling
no motions, but in not yielding. 2. But if thy enemy surpriseth thy Reason;
then give back, to gain time and strength. 3. And if thou have time, help thy
self with consideration. 4. Whether thou have deserved this affliction: If so,
rest contented; If not, think upon thy former sins, not yet fully punished.
5. Yea, though they were, yet self-denial and sufferance is the way to heaven.
6. And if there were another way, yet thy duty to God, binds thee to cbuse
this, 7. As being most grateful and pleasing to his Majesty. 8.

Chap. IX.
That we must not shun the occasions of these Combats. The way to get true
virtue, is not to avoid, but to seek the occasions of combat; As for example,
To get Patience, shun not the company. 1. Or the employment which is tedious to
thee. 2. And the same rule is to be applied to troublesome thoughts. 3. Yet a
young Scholar must be wary in waging this war, but never desert the Field; for
then he will still be unprovided. This is good in all cases, except that of
carnality. 4.

Chap. X.
Of the fight against sudden Temptations and Passions. First, ponder them in
thy understanding: 1. And forsee, what is like to befall thee. 2. But if some
other cross happens, not foreseen; fly to the thoughts of Gods Love and
Providence. 3. Who sends or permits it, 4. and be constant, though almost
conquered. 5. But the best remedy against sudden motions, is to cut off their
causes. 6.

XI.
Of the fight against fleshly Concupiscence. In this war, thou art to change
thy weapons. 1. And therefore before the temptation assails thee, call it not,
but avoid all occasions procuring it. This enemy assails us sometimes by
stealth, and upon pretext of lawfulness, etc. but Sensuality may mix it self
with thy affection, and ruin thy Soul. 2. The occasions are commonly five:
Conversation, Aspects, Idleness, Disobedience, Vain complacency. 2. In the
time of the temptation, mark the cause of it, whether external, and fly from
it. 3. Or internal, and prevent it by fit chastisements of the body, and by
hearty Prayer. 4. Yet not as some Books prescribe, for fear of giving new
occasions to impurity. 4. But by meditating on Christ's Death and Passion. 5.
Dispute not with carnal temptations, but discover them to thy Ghostly Father.
6. And make no actual and particular reflections upon these temptations. 7.
After the temptation is past, stand still upon thy guard. 8.

Chap. XII.
How to fight against slacknesse and Negligence. Follow holy inspirations
speedily. For this is of great consequence to conquer Sloth, and having
courageously set upon thy work, carefully prosecute the same. 1. The fruit
whereof must be discovered, 2. And the pains disguised, 3. Unless there be a
real disability. 4. But the best way to get a custom of enduring, is to
expect Crosses continually, and not to seek how to avoid them. 5. How
prejudicial Negligence is to perfection, and the most alluring hait of our
enemy: therefore take timely care to prevent it, and account that day lost, in
which thou have done no good action. 6.

Chap. XIII.
How to govern our Sensuality. Keep thy heart disingaged from earthly
creatures. 1. And contemplate thy Creators greatness, reducing all created
perfection to him, the fountain. 3. And all worldly beauty to heavenly glory.
4. Marking well the craft of the Devil. 5. But in things displeasing to sense,
think upon Gods eternal decree. 6. So likewise in any sudden or dismal
chance, and in all self complacency. 7.

A larger Declaration of this Doctrine.
The appetite is violently bent to seek its pleasure, and makes use of the
Senses to obtain it. 1. The antidot against this poison; and how to curb the
senses roaming abroad, by separating the spirit of each object, from the
material thing it self. 2. Whether it be a creature which has only a being,
3. Or has a vegetation and increase. 4. Or has sense and feeling. 5. Or is
endued with rare beauty. 6. Or excellent perfection. 7. Also when thou
undertakest any action. 8. Or refectest thy body with Meat and Drink. 9. Or
smellest delicious odors. 10. Or art delighted with musical harmony. 11. Or any
other sensible object.

How to raise thy Soul by sensible objects to contemplate the word Incarnate:
Examples; By the sight of poor Cottages, Stones, the Earth, Sun, Water, etc.
In tasting Wine, in smelling, In clothing, and uncloathing thy self, in
hearing noyses, or the Clocks striking, In time of sadness. 12.

Other ways to meditate upon sensible objects. 13. By considering how mean
the best of them are in themselves. 14. As the Suns brightness. 15. The
Heavens greatness. 16. The Birds melody. 17. Walking abroad. 18. Marking the
flight of the Fowls. 19. In time of Winds, Thunder, Storms. 20. Also upon all
other occasions, as of grief. 21. Looking upon Christ crucified. 22. Or the
image of the blessed Virgin. 23. And the pictures of Saints. 24. Or entrest
into Churches. 25. Finally, make all objects and accidents, instruments to thy
perfection. 26.

How to regulate the Tongue. Much talk proceeds from Presumption. 2. Therefore
avoid long discourses. 3. And passionate expressions. 4. And all talking of thy
own affairs. 5. Or of thy neighbors. 6. But speak willingly of God. 7. And
ponder in thy hear^, what thy Tongue is to utter. 8. The praise and profit of
Silence. 9.

Chap. XIV.
Of the order to be observ^d in fighting against our enemies. Mark which are
thy greatest. 1. And single out the fiercest to fight with. 2. But when they
apper not, seek them. 3.

Chap. XV.
What course he must take, who is conquered, and grievously wounded by his
enemies. When thou art fallen, rise with speed, And pray with fervor. 1. Be
not over solicitous or fearful. 2. But be diligent, and use violence to thine
own inclination; recovering the quiet of thy Soul, and Reconciliation to thy
Sovereign. 3. By forgetting thy fault. 4.

Chap. XVI.
That we should keep our hearts ever quiet and joyful in our Lord. No accident
can justly deprive us of quiet; for though we must needs abhor things contrary
to nature, yet we may love them as coming from Gods Permission, and so
conform our selves to his holy Will. To obtain this quiet, thou art to appoint
a sentinel. 1. And when thou art surprised with perplexity, return with all
diligence to quiet thy heart. 2. And therefore admit of no new affections,
before thou have offered them up to God, 3. and mortified thy will and desire,
4. which is the surest way to remain in peace. 5.

Chap. XVII.
That pious purposes, are sometimes deceits of the Devil, to hinder our
progress in virtues. For he suggests unto us desires to fight against former
faults, that we may neglect the present. 1. And fall into selfe-complacency. 2.
Therefore thou art to fight actually with thy nearest foes, and not to irritate
them which are quiet, 3. unless thou art well versed in the acts of that
virtue. 4. Be not careless of small defects. 5. Three things make our designs
fruitless. First, the relying upon our own strength. 6. Secondly, the want of
force to go through with them. 7. Thirdly, the not levelling at the right end.
8.

Chap. XVIII.
How the Devil strives to withdraw us from the way of virtue. This deceit of
the enemy is exemplified in a sick person, falling into impatience, upon pious
pretenses, 1. and over-earnestly desirous of health. 2. The remedy whereof is,
to admit of no purposes; which thou can not presently put in execution, And
to persuade thy self, that either they would not have their effect; or, that
God would not receive them from thy unworthy hands. 3. There are diverse
pretenses for impatience, but all unwarrantable. 5. (As is explained by an
example.) The remedy of all which is to separate the pain from the pretended
circumstances. 6. And not to desire a freedom from thy Cross. 7. But to
conform thy will to Gods. 8. Yet thou may make use of lawful means, so thou
take heed of self-love.

How to oppose the Devil, striving to deceive us with indiscretion, and
pressing us to afflict our bodies. 1. Which though it is sometimes good, yet it
must be prudently tempered. 2. For all cannot imitate the Saints in austerity
of life, but each one may imitate their virtues. 3. Yet beware of the other
extreme, which is, to addict thy self overmuch to delicacies, etc. under
pretext of health or the better performance of thy duty; Discretion therefore
is the best directour in this matter of mortification. 4. And also in the
acquisition of virtues; which must be done by degrees. 5. And one by one,
rather than all, or many together, because the obtaining of any one virtue, is
a preparation to all the rest. 6.

Further advices, for the obtaining of virtues. First, thou must resolve to
suffer. 2. Thou must bear a great love to virtue 3. Thou art to practice it
upon all occasions. 4. Apply all thy exercises to this end. 5. Form frequent
acts thereof. 6. Think upon such passages of Scripture, as concern, and commend
it. 7. Make use of Jaculatory prayers, 8. Which being aided with two wings,
will soar up to heaven. 9. Above all things, thou art to make a continual
progress, 10. (For by going forward, thy strength increases.) 11. Till thou
art gotten up the mountain of perfection. 12. Thou art also to seek out all
occasions of practicing virtue, especially such as are contrary to thy
Sensuality. 13. This being the most proportionate means to attain to it. 14.
And coming from Gods providence, for thy particular profit. 15. The mistake of
some rectifyed. 16. To suffer voluntarily by them whom thou have obliged, is to
draw virtue from sin and malice. 17. Receive therefore the bitter cup mixed by
thy heavenly Physician.

How to make use of sundry occasions in the exercise of one virtue. 1. In all
occurring accidents of suffering, 2. Make acts of that virtue thou then
practisest: Examples, in the virtue of Patience, Humility, Obedience, Poverty,
Charity. 3. As concerning the time, thou art to stay in the practice of each
virtue, thy Director must be judge. 4. Yet thou may know thy progress by
these signs: First, if thou losest not courage in time of desolation;
Secondly, If the rebellion of thy Sensuality be weakn'd. 5. But take heed to
think thy self a Conqueror, because Vice may be clothed in Virtues dress,
and thou have still much to do. 6. And therefore art to look forward upon what
thou yet want. 7. And to pursue thy exercises with patience and constancy.

Chap. XIX.
How our enemy endeavors to make our virtues isntrumental to our ruin.
By making us take pleasure in them. 1. But do thou consider thine own
nothing, 2. And mark well what is in thee of thine own goods, and what of Gods
gifts: What thou were from eternity, what in time. 4. What good thou can do
of thy self, and what evil thou either have or might have done; Whereby,
thou may justly think thy self the worst of all men. 5. Yet be just in thy
self-accusation. 6. And not only acknowledge thine own baseness, but use thy
self accordingly. 7. And stick to this, amidst all praise or applause of
others. 8. And let not the memory of thy good deeds, puff thee up with vanity.
9. For thou will find the best of them very imperfect, 10. And that thou have
no color to glory in them, but to accuse thy want of duty. 11. Learn therefore
Humility, which is the foundation of all virtues; and without which thou art
less than nothing. 12. It being the only way to find praise, and please God.
13. To whom thou art bound, for permitting thee to be scorned; as also to them
that do it. 14. Be ever wary of the Devil and of thine own inclination. 15.

Of Rash-Judgement; which springs from Self-esteem, and Pride. 1. The Devil
strives to keep open our senses, upon our neighbors actions; but we must be as
diligent to shun, as he is to lay his plots; First, by denying to give any
sentence. 2. Secondly, by looking homewards upon our selves; where we shall
find some root of the same fault we blame in them. 3. If the fault be manifest,
put a charitable construction upon it; If monstrous, have recourse to Gods
secret judgments; and tremble at the proceedings of his Providence. 4. And
know, that all Charity proceeds from Gods good spirit, and all Bitterness from
the Devil. 5.

Of the means to shield our selves against the attempts of our enemies at the
time of Death. The way to be then conquerours, is to fall upon our enemies
before hand. 1. And to make timely preparation, by studying now the answers of
the four challenges our enemies will then sendus. 2.

The first is against Faith; and the remedy is, to retreat from thine
Understanding to thy Will. 4. And to give no answer to thy enemies questions,
5. But to fix thy thoughts upon Christ crucified. 6.

The second assault, is of Despair; where thou art to observe this certain
rule, etc. And to have a perfect hope and humble confidence in God. 7. And
never to distrust his mercy, and the merits of his Passion. 8.

The Third is, of Vainglory, which is conquered by distrust of thy self, and
trust in God. 9.

The Fourth is, by F^l^^ Illusions, against which have recourse to the
confession of thine own nothing: and admit of no apparences, though they seem
to come from heaven. 10. After these general temptations, follow others in
particular. 11.

Chap. XX.
That we must never flatter our selves as having subdued our enemies.
But often renew our exercises, for perfection is very high and hard to be
obtained. 1. 2.

Chap. XXI.
Of Holy Prayer.
The Fourth maine Weapon, in this spiritual warfare. 1. Which must have these
properties: First, a Desire to serve God: Secondly, Perfect Faith: Thirdly,
Conformity to Gods will; because thine own will is subject to error, but the
divine will is infallibly right. Fourthly, A connection with practice. Fifthly,
Thanksgiving for received favors. Sixthly, A reflection upon Gods goodness and
promise; and upon Christ's Passion. Seventhly, Perseverance. Prayer must also be
strengthened with hope. And though God seems to reject thy prayer, yet persevere
knocking; and always gratefully thanking him, as well when he deny's as grants
thy request.

Chap. XXII.
What Mental Prayer is, and what Contemplation.
Mental Prayer includes always either a virtuall petition of something, 1. 2.
3. 4. Or an actual asking of it, by words expressed in the mind. 5. 6.

Chap. XXIII.
How to join Contemplation to this inward Prayer. By taking some points of
Christ's death or passion, 1. And applying his actions to the virtue thou
demandest. As for example to Patience. 2. Marking how meekly he suffered; and
learning thereby to suffer patiently thy smaller adversities. 3. And compelling
thy will, to take up thy Cross quietly. 4.

Chap. XXIV.
Of another certain manner of Prayer, by way of praying and meditating
together. 1. Considering Christ's merits, and the content his heavenly Father
took in his obedience, 2. And presenting them both to God. 3.

Chap. XXV.
Of a way of praying by the Intercession of the B. Virgin. 1. First, fix thy
mind upon the eternal Father. 2. Considering the content he had in him self
(concerning her) from all eternity. 3. And the wonders he wrought in her, when
she had a being. 4. Secondly, upon God the Son. 5. Lastly, upon the sacred
Virgin. 6.

Chap. XXVI.
How to pray and meditate by means of the Holy Angels and heavenly Citizens.
First, address thy self to the eternal Father. 1. Next unto the glorious
Angels and Saints themselves. 2. Dividing them into quires, according to the
days of the week. 4. But every day praying to the Blessed Virgin, to thy
particular Partron, and to S. Joseph.

Chap. XXVII.
How to meditate upon Christ's Passion, and to enkindle holy affections. 1. By
reflection upon his love and goodness. 2. How to get constant hope, 3. And a
spiritual joy. 4. As also affections of sorrow and compassion, 5. And
contrition for thy Sins. 7. With a perfect hatred of them. 8. And to admire
Gods bounty, by considering; First, Who sufers? Secondly, For whom? Thirdly, By
whom? Fourthly, What? Fifthly, How? Sixthly, When and where? 9.

A further Declaration of the profit which may be drawn from the Meditation
upon Christ's Passion, and particularly of the imitation of His Virtues. The
first profit is, a Confusion at the sight of our imperfections. The second, a
desire and demand of pardon, with a resolution of amendment. The third, a
persecution of our passions. The fourth, an imitation of Christ's Virtues.

Another way to Meditate on the Passion;
By considering, First, how Christ's Soul carries it self toward the Heavenly
Father. Secondly, how the Father totowards Christ's Soul. Thirdly, how the
Soul toward it self and it is sacred body. Fourthly, how thy Savior carries
Himself toward thee. Fifthly, how thou should carry thy self toward thy
Savior. Christ Crucified is the best Book to read in, and wherein to learn
all virtues; if thou make fit application to thy particular practice.

Chap. XXVIII.
Of sensible Devotion, and Spiritual Dryness.
Devotion is best known by the effects it produces. 1. How to make profit of
all spiritual sweetness in Devotion. 2. Three causes of Spiritual Dryness,
The Devil, Our selves, and God. 3. Search out the true cause thereof. 4. And
keep on thy accustomed practices of piety, without seeking outward comforts.
5. Nor pray to have comfort in thy Cross. 7. Because to suffer for God, is the
best Prayer, and makes thee truly devout, 8. And not the feeling of sensible
Devotion, 9. Wherein many are deceived. 10. What thou art to do in time of
distress and dereliction. 11.

Chap. XXIX.
That the worthy frequenting of the most Blessed Sacrament, is an efficacious
means to conquer our Passions. 1. Meditate the Day before thy Communion, of
thy Saviors desire, etc. to come to thee, 2. Who affirms that his delights
are to be with us. 3. And moove thy Soul to a reciprocal desire and affection
toward him. 5. Then provoke thy passions to battle. 6. Being near the time
of Communion, thou art to fear thy self, but to have confidence in thy
Savior. 7. After Communion lay open thy wants, 8. And constantly hope for the
Divine help. 9.

Chap. XXX.
How to excite in us affections of love, by the Sacred Communion. Consider Gods
Liberality, 1. especially showed in the holy Communion. 2. Weighing First, who
it is that comes thus to thee; Secondly, what he gives thee; Thirdly, the
eternity of his Love, Fourthly, the Purity of his Love. Hence break forth into
admiration, and ravishment to see thy self so highly prized, and make an
entire oblation of thy self to him. And this being the chief act of Religion
strive to perform it most perfectly. 6. Then dedicate thy self to his
Service, and freely open to him thy heart. 7. But beware of vanity and
curiosity. At the time of Communion, Think what thou art going to do. Thank,
Adore, Implore. When Domine non sum dignus, is said, etc. humble and confound
thy self, yet still raising up thy heart with hope. 8. Having communicated,
entertain thy guest with amorous expressions. 9. And lastly, offer up the holy
Son, to his heavenly Father. 10.

Chap. XXXI.
Of spiritual Communion. Thou may thus often communicate. 1. By frequent
desires. 2. And it is an excellent exercise against passions. 3. If thou make
this right use thereof, here prescribed.

Chap. XXXII.
Of Thanksgiving.
All goodness is from God. 1. To whom therefore all gratitude is due. 2.
First, therefore, acknowledge his goodness, and then thine own unworthiness.
3.

Chap. XXXIII.
Of the perfect oblation of thy self to God.
First, consider Gods greatness and glory. Secondly, adore and acknowledge
him, etc. Thirdly, Offer up all thy interest in any thing. Fourthly, unite all
to the Merits of Christ, presenting both together to the eternal Father. 5. So
likewise in offering thy works of piety. 6. How to offer up Christ's Actions for
our offenses. 7.

Another manner of perfect Oblation.
Christ here on Earth, offered not only himself, but also all us, to his
Father; make thou the same Oblation. How to know the sincerity of thy Oblation.

Chap. XXXIV.
How to Petition for Divine Grace.
First, Encourage thy self with confidence in Gods Goodness. Secondly, Join
humility with this confidence. Thirdly, Press thy Petition with fervent
desires: the want whereof hinders the effects of our demands. Fourthly, Let not
thy Petition want Charity, Perseverance, or Resignation.

Chap. XXXV.
Some short observations concerning Meditation.
First, Read overnight the matter of thy Meditation. Secondly, reflect upon it
in the morning. Thirdly, Weigh his Majesty with whom thou art to confer.
Fourthly, Begin with Oblation, and Petition. Fifthly, Apply thy senses to the
mystery. Sixthly, Beg what thou intendest to obtain. Seventhly, after this
begin with thy first point, 8. and beware of fancying high mysteries, 9. Or
leaving off before the time allotted for Prayer be expired. 10. In the end
reflect how thou have behaved thy self. 11. And be sure to order well the
matter of thy Meditation.

Chap. XXXVI.
An exercise before the sacred Communion. 1. The conformation of the place. 2.
Beg of thy Savinor to fit up thy poor house. 3. Think what guest is to lodge in
it. 4. Why he comes, 5. and to whom: And lastly, present thy Petition.

Chap. XXXVII.
How we may devoutly offer up the Sacrifice of the Mass. 1. Free thy fancy
from all outward Objects. 2. In vesting thy self, mark each mystery. 3. Let
thy outward deportment be decent. 4. and thy inward composition,
correspondent. 5. In thy first Memento: To Christ's holy Head; To his right
hand; To his Left Hand; To his sacred Heart; To his right-Foot; To his
left-Foot. 6. In thy second Memento, Unite thy affection unto Jesus Christ now
present in the Sacrament.

Chap. XXXVIII.
An exercise after holy Communion. 1. Representation of the place. 2.
Imploration of Gods Grace. 3. Consideration, of him whom thou have within thee,
and of thine own unworthiness. 4. Petition.

Chap. XXXIX.
A Daily Examen. 1. Every Morning thou art to make three acts; of Thanksgiving,
2. Of Oblation, 3. Of Resolution. Secondly, at night thou art to examine thy
self: beginning with a general acknowledgment of Gods Favo^^^, Then begging
his Light and Grace, next, descending to particulars. 6. And endeavor to get a
true sorrow for thy sins. 7. And lastly implore pardon for the past, and
protection for the future. 8.

Another Method of Examitation.
By questioning thy self, First, wherein thou have offended. Secondly, what
occasioned it. Thirdly, how thou have practiced virtue.

XL.
Being a Conclusion of the whole Book.
This little Book, well practiced with perseverance, is sufficient, Supposing
thou fightest manfully, without being terrified at thy enemies power, though
the victory seems to come on never so slowly.

FINIS.
depiction of death and time Hold thy hand, O Death, whilst Times Conflict
begets an Eternal Conquest.

Will* Marshall. sculpsit.


A Lively pourtraict of the Spiritual Conquest.
Love Seraphicall Divine of stepps Sacred

They have disposed Ascension in their hearts The Lawgiver will give a
blessing, and they shall ascend from virtue to virtue, (by steps and degrees,
even to Heaven). Psalm: 83. v: 6. 7. 8.

THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST, IN Five TREATISES, Enabling all Christian Warriers,
to conquer themselves, and come to a vicinity with GOD.

Habacuc. 3. 19. God our Lord is my strength: he will make my feet as of the
Hearts: And upon my high places, he the conqueror, will lead me singing in
psalms.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

The five Treatises Of the Spiritual Conquest.
The First. Of the discovery of our enemies Ambuscado's.

The Second. Of the use and practice of our Spiritual weapons.

The Third. Of the steps, and degrees of Perfection.

The Fourth. Of the steps and degrees of divine Seraphical Love.

The Fifth, and last. Of the choycest Maxim's of Mystical Divinity.

TO THE truly virtuous and our most honored PATRONS
Two in one



Right Worthy, and most Honored Patrons,
AMongst the numberless vanities of this life, our thoughts have more than once
glaunced (not without a certain indignation), upon that exceeding folly of
almost all Dedicatory Epistles; the writers whereof, (as if hired tomake
Encomiums, and present the world with Panegericks) run over each common place
of Rhetoric in the recital of their Patrons rare parts and qualities, leave no
tittle of honor untouched, no action of their lives unadmir'd, no prerogative
of pedigree unextoll'd, no gift of nature or grace unsumm'd up; and having
drained their whole stock of invention in this scrupulous inquest after all
sorts of praises; conclude finally, that al these (and more lines of
perfection, than either their modesty dares relate, or their capacity can
reach), do directly concentrate in the unparalleled breasts of them, whom they
thus resolve to celebrate, canonize and Deify. A proceeding so far from
pleasing all generous, heroic, and discerning spirits, that it rather puts
them to the blush, to see themselves more abused than adorned, with such plain
and palpable flatteries.

We therefore (most worthy Patrons), who build upon other principles; and
follow a Rule and profession obliging us to sincerity: though we most willingly
acknowledge your temporal and spiritual greatnesses, heartily congratulate your
high perfections, and joyfully consider you mounting up amain the divine ladder
of heavenly love and contemplation: Yet we cannot but look upon your souls as
immured still in walls of clay; we can only judge you to be faithful pilgrims,
not full possessors; to be valiant champions, not yet crowned conquerors; and
therefore we conceive that we may much better complie with our duty to God, and
our obligation to you, by endeavoring to further you in your spiritual
progress, than to follow you with Euge's and acclamations, as if you were
already arrived at the desired end of your journey.

For this reason, we declare, that the primarie motive inducing us to present
you with this small spiritual donative, is the ardent zeal and desire we have
of your own happy advancement in solid devotion and divine charity. And in
pursuance of this design, we

First, discover briefly unto you the most common and dangerous snares of your
sworn enemies, and show you the safe way to shun them.

Secondly, we deliver spiritual arms into your hands, wherewith to defend your
selves, and defeat your foes, by reducing the precepts into practice, and
furnishing you with such affective acts and elevations, as may readily serve
you for restauratives against fainting in these your indefatigable combats.

Thirdly, we raise you up a ladder of perfection; from the top whereof, (which
is perfect indifferency, resignation, and obedience to Gods Divine will and
pleasure), you may comfortablie cast down an eye, and counteach step you have
taken in your wearisom journey toward your heavenly Jerusalem.

Fourthly, from this mountain top of perfection, we show you the diverse degrees
of sacred and seraphical love, which will lead your elevated souls to perfect
union with their beloved Bridegroom, and settle them in the sweet embraces and
bosom of the divinity.

And lastly, we have made a collection of the chiefest and choicest Maxim's of
mystical Theology, to which you may have continual recourse, by which you may
solve all your doubts, and in which you may secure your consciences, upon all
emergent occasions and difficulties, arising in this your blessed enterprise
and tendance to eternal felicity. These are the choice flowers which we have
gathered in the several gardens of sacred writers, and bound up in this posie
for your present use, comfort, and encouragement.

The other end we aim at in this our dedication, is to give you, and
posterity, a public and perpetual testimony of our grateful hearts for your
many signal favors and temporal benefits; wherewith you have more obliged us,
and our nearest friends, than we can either tell how to repay in any other
coin, or express in any particular terms: And therefore we desire you to
receive this our thankful acknowledgement and real protestatition, proceeding
from both our united minds and mouths, as an absolute assurance of our truly
devoted service to your selves, and all the worthy branches of your most
honored family.


THE FIRST TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, A plain discovery of the
Ambuscado's, and wily Stratagems of our Enemies, in this our daily War-fare.

Enabling the Christian Warrier to foresee, and avoid them.

Psalm. 56. 7. They prepared a snare for my feet, (but)

Psalm. 123. 7. The snare is broken, and we are delivered.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

To the devout Champions, tending to perfection.
YOu have beheld, In this precedent Treatise of our learned and devout author,
Fa. John Castaniza.
(O Dear Champions of heaven) a famous Duel, fought between the Sense and the
Soul, the Elesh and the Spirit, the Animal and the Spiritual man; you have been
Spectators of this Grand-plea, and present at this renowned trial; where,
before the supreme Tribunal of Truth and Reason, the Animal man was convened
and arraigned at the Bar; had Pe^rus Damianus. Sermon. 30.
his own thoughts, words, and works, for his casting, convincing, and
condemning Jury; heaven and earth, irrefragable witnesses against him; his own
guilty Conscience, a constant accuser of him; the said Truth and Reason, the
impartial Judges, pronouncing sentence upon him; and his own soul, the happy
executioner of their just verdict: Which lifting up the sword of holy zeal and
indignation, gave such home-blows (of Contrition for the past, and Resolution
of amendment for the future) to his heart; that blood of tears and joy, seemed
to stream from the wounds; and the whole man, first made a true Martyr of
Penance, is now become a faithful witness of Gods infinite mercies.

You have seen (I say) a notable siege, laid to this rebellious City, man's
sensuality, which for it is ditches of defense, had depths of impiety; for walls
and rampires, obstinacy and insolency; for towers and bulwarks, mountains of
pride and presumption; for arms and weapons, reluctance to goodness, and
resistance of Gods inspirations; for artillery, tumults; for dwellinghouses,
dens of hypocrisy: for palaces, labyrinths of dissimulation; for temple,
proper-will; for Idol, self-love; for Captain, blindness; for Soldiers,
exorbitant passions; for counsel, folly; and for constancy, perverse opinions.

Yet Babylon is fallen, this treacherous town is taken, sensuality is subdued:
So great is the force of Grace, and so happy the success of Truth and Reason!
And which is most worthy of joyful admiration, perfect liberty is gained by
this captivity, high advancement by this downfall, holy greatness by this
annihilation, and by this death, a happy life. O blessed Conquest!

But lest this now stifled fire of rebellion should again burst forth into new
flames of sedition, and so your recidivations prove more dangerous than your
first diseases; (For Alas! such is man's inconstancy, that he now seems in a
Who so stands let him look that he falls not. 1. Cor. 10. 12.
firm station, who soon falls and fades away into nothing: such is the nature
of his quarrel, that it has no other point of quiet in this life, than the
last full period of his death: such are his watchful enemies, that they Man's
life is a warfare upon earth. Job 7. 1.
are ever waiting for advantages; and such is his known weakness, that it
perpetually wooes, and eggs him on to wickedness); how highly does it import
you (O pious Soldiers) to stand constantly and continually to your spiritual
arms, and to keep an uninterrupted guard upon all the gates of your inward and
outward senses and appetites.

To this end, we have here presented you, (out of our Author), Castanizae.
with a brief draught of your enemies chiefest postures; showed you from what
grounds they take their usual advantages against you, and discovered where
they lay their Foreseen darts, do least hurt. Greg. hom. 35. in Evang.
perilous ambushes to entrap you; that being thus duly forewarned of your
eminent danger, you may be fitly and fully armed for your necessary defense,
preparedly attend their approaches, undantedly receive their charges,
courageously repel their violence; and finally, return laden with glorious
Trophies of victory, into your own peaceful consciences; and keep there a
delicious Called by Isay; Sabbatum delicatum? Esa. 58. 13
Sabbath of repose in the happy enjoyments of unspeakable delights.

The Seven chief Ambushes of our Enemies.
1. SElf-love. Which is the root of all sin, and cause of all inproficiency in
the way of perfection. 2. Few are found free from it. 3. To avoid this snare we
must seek Gods honor in all our actions. 4. To self-love belongs unmortified
sensuality, which must be tamed by cutting off superfluities: 5. To the same
pertain Pride, Self-conceit. etc. Which must be remedied by the Practice of
humility. 6. Also the passions of our inferior nature, Love, Hatred, etc. To
which we must oppose Peace of heart. 7. Lastly, the adhering to our own wills
and judgments* which must be cured by Obedience. 8. Note a triple Obedience.

2. Immoderate affection to creatures. 1. This distracts us from our Creator;
against which we must provide Poverty of spirit. 2. Affections to persons
corrupt our judgments. 3. We must remedy it, by loving all impartially, in and
for God. 4. Spiritual comforts may be sometimes snares of the Devil, therefore
we must not stay in them, but transcend them.

3. Extroversion, or an inordinate application of our selves to external
things, 1. Which choakes up Devotion: therefore we must not thrust our selves
upon employments, 2. But curb our fancies; 3. Perform works of obedience,
necessity, and charity, without engaging our affections; 4. And strive to get
into our interior, 5. By fixing our heart on Christ crucified.

4. Bitterness of heart, sadness, frowardness, etc. 2. All which proceed
either from nature, indiscretion, thoughtfulness, presumption, or
immortification; 3. And must be sweetened with Charity. 4. To this belong a
certain grudging at Gods providence; which must be avoided by a cordial
Resignation.

5. Scrupulosity, inward affliction, fearfulness, etc. 1. Which aim at the
destruction of our Faith and Confidence in God. 2. To avoid this, we must rely
upon God and our guide, 3. And assure our selves that we cannot err in
Confidence, if we fall not into Negligence.

6. Excessive and unnecessary study, 1. Which busies the Understanding, but
leaves the Will barren. 2. Puffs us up with Vanity, but leaves us empty of true
Piety. 3. The remedy is to rectify our intentions in our studies.

7. Tepidity and coldness in Devotion, 1. Which is the bane of all
spirituality. We must always go forward toward perfection, with perseverance,
and excite our sluggishness with frequent aspirations. 2. An excellent document
of Saint Anthony.

Latet hostis, et otia ducis?



The first Ambush.
Self-love.
1. THis (in S. Austin's opinion) is the root of Self-love is the root of all
sin, and cause of all inproficiency in the way of perfection.
all sin, and we may fitly add, and avouch it to be the cause of all
inproficiency in the way of perfection. For our subtle nature so constantly
seeks her self in all her actions and omissions; that even the spiritual man,
who treads in the pleasant paths of piety, is subject to be drawn into this
dangerous ambush: He will find (upon due examination) some sinister, and
self-intention, Read the second chapter of the Spir. Con.
creeping in, and corrupting his sincerest endeavors; and perceive, (unless
highly illuminated), that there is more of private commodity than pure and
perfect charity, in his most transcendent and heroique exercises.

2. Who is not generally more diligent in the performance of his Few are found
free from it.
duty, for the fear of hell, and hope of heaven, than for the sole and
substantial love of his Creator? who has not rather some small clause and
secret condition of self-interest in his actions, than the only fulfilling of
Gods holy will, and the following of his Divine inspirations?

Whom shall we find, though never so great pretenders to perfection, so totally
untangled from this net of Self-love, that they neither hover after humane
respects and praises; nor look upon rewards or punishments; nor overvalue their
own ways and exercises; nor solace themselves with the sweets of sensible
devotion; nor please themselves with their high-towring contemplations, and
raptures into Gods immediate perfections; nor finally, dress up devotion by
the pattern of their own passions, and so fall in love with their own
conceptions, and make to themselves in Bethel golden calves, in stead of 3.
Reg. 13. 8.
the Cherubins in Jerusalem? Whose will is so truly divested from all
propriety, as to remain untouched, unmoved, undisquieted, resolute and
resigned, in all temporal chances and changes, and in all spiritual dryness,
desolation, dereliction, and affliction whatsoever?

3. To avoid this pernicious snare, To avoid this snare, we must seek Gods
honor in our actions.
we must strive to level all our actions at Gods pure honor and pleasure, as
the only end we aim at, the only object of our love, life, and labor; in whom
only, and not in the best of his creatures, is found true quiet and content.

4. Unmortifi'd Sensuality, is the To self-love, belongs unmortified sensuality,
dear darling of Self-love; This proposes nothing but pleasure and pastime to
our seduced appetites, roamings abroad to our affections, makes us sedulous to
satisfy our fancies, covetous to content our curiosities, to hearken after
vanities, to Read the 7. chapter of the Arraignment
glut our gusts with dainties, and to evapor^te our precious time and talents
in extravagant adhesions to creatures. What hope, Alas! of internal repose and
recollection, where such tumults and troubles prepossess the spirit? What place
remains for the holy entertainments of heavenly love, when such affections have
filled up each corner of the heart?

Wherefore a soul that seeks God, Which must be tamed by cutting off
superfluities.
must scorn to rest in these seeming goods she m^st banish all superfluities,
and be content with the mere supplies of her necessities; she must admit of no
excess in meat, drink, sleep, attire, talk, or other solaces whatsoever* if
she really intends to make the body pliable to the spirit, and the spirit
proper to tend to perfection.

5. Pride, presumption, vanity, self-esteem, self-complacency, self-content, To
the same belong pride self-c^nceit, etc.
self-praise, self-seeking, self-delight, with all the rest of like nature, are
but sever^ll noozes of the same net, and sprouts, out of the same main root*
self-love. And whosoever hopes for honor, praise, preferment, or profit from
others, for any goods of nature, g^fts of grace, or prerogatives of virtue, is
fallen into this snare of the Devil, robs God of his proper due, is rotten at the
heart, and has already received his full reward.

The remedy of all this (O dear Which must be remedied by the practice of
humility.
souls), is unfeigned humility. Cast one glance of your souls eye upwards upon
your Creators might and mercy; all your perfections come out of his treasury,
and are lent you to be improved for his service, not to be proud of for your
own satisfaction: And look down with your other eye upon your bottomless
nothing; see there your own base indignity and brutish ingratitude, your great
impurity and gross impiety, and be ashamed to desire any temporal esteem, who
so truly deserve eternal damnation.

6. Other knots of the same To selflove, appertain also all the passions of our
inferior nature love, hatred, etc.
snare, are all those passions, which have their residence in our inferior
nature; love, hatred, joy, grief, hope, and fear, with their several
attendants: these raise up broiles to disturb our inward tranquillity, to
discompose our Reason, and interpose their earthy exhalations between our
superior will and the grace of God.

Peace of heart is the secure refuge To which we must oppose Peace of heart.
against all these peevish Passions: do but cast your whole care upon your
Creator, and call away your inordinate affection from creatures, and what then
can punish or perplex you? Remit, and refer all accidents, whether adverse or
prosperous, sweet or sour, good or bad, to Gods high power and holy
providence; comfort your selves in his mercy, content your selves in his
all sufficiency, and quiet your selves in his love. Ah! how poor, how vain, how
vile, how unregardable Read the 4. chapter number. 3. of the conflict.
are the best of worldly blessings? how is it possible that things in
themselves so contemptible can have the least entrance or admittance into a
soul settled in Gods pure love and presence? O let the children of this world,
who place their final felicity, in such fading fooleries, who have their souls
buried in this earth, and swallowed up in sensuality; be solicitous to seek
them, glut and burst themselves in the enjoying of them* and be dejected to be
deprived of them: but we, (O souls aspiring to perfection), whose master is
God, whose aim is virtue, whose reward is heaven; what have we to do with these
inferior passions? Away with these Mammons. My heart is signed with the signet
of Gods love, my hatred is only bent against sin and my self, my joy is in God
my Savior, my grief is that I am not all his, my fear is to offend him, and my
hope is to enjoy him.

7. Lastly, all adhering to our proper will and judgment, appertains to this
ambush of our enemy. The adhering to our own wills, and preferring of our own
judgments, are also points of self-love, Read the 5. chapter of the Conflict.
This draws us off by degrees from doing our duty; diverts us from following
divine motions, and superiors commands; daunts us from relying entirely on
Gods providence, and fulfilling perfectly his holy pleasure: we dare not
disobey this master, nor will we venture to destroy this Idol of our hearts;
it is death to be crossed in our conceits, or contradicted in our exercises,
which we have chosen according to our private fancy, accustomed with
self-complacency, and keep with unpardonable propriety.

Perfect obedience breaks through Which must be cured by obedience, submission,
and resignation.
this snare and a total resignation to Gods good will and pleasure, is the
secure refuge against this deceit. How can a soul be disquieted to receive or
refuse, act or omit, that which she truly conceives to proceed both in
substance and circumstance from the divine providence and permission? How can
that person go astray who is perfectly obedient to God and his superior; gives
up himself wholly to the guidance of Gods holy Spirit, and the government of a
discreet directour; observes each beck of the divine call, (first examined* and
approved by them who are incharged with their souls); and waits upon the divine
will, as the shadow on the body?

8. Where you are to take notice Note a triple obedienc^. 1. Of vow.
of a triple obedience: One is of vow another of conformity and a third of
union. The first concerns all religious people, and imports an external, exact,
and necessary performance of that which is commanded.

The Second concerns all spiritual 2. of Conformity.
souls, and consists in their inward promptitude and readiness to execute Gods
will, (manifested by faith and their ghostly guide) purely for himself, and
precisely for his own sake, without the least touch of proper interest, or
self-seeking.

The Third concerns all perfect 3. Of Union.
persons, and consists in so entire a connection of their wills, to the will of
their Lord God, that they seem both one: hence it is that they embrace all that
happens to themselves or others, good or bad, life or death, for time or
eternity, as immediately proceeding from his divine goodness, and as the very
best that could happen. Here the soul elevated (above it self, and all things)
into God, and steadfastly fixed in divine contemplation, patiently expects, and
obediently attends to what he speaks, wills, and acts within her remaining ever
ready, and really resigned to suffer outward pains, or inward pressures; to
receive comforts, or endure crosses, as the supreme providence best knows,
permits and pleases: being fully content with all and faithfully constant in
all.

The Second Ambush.
Immoderate affection to creatures.
1. THis infects, distracts, disquiets, and diverts our minds, from their pure
and perfect tendance to our Creator. Ah! what have we (whose inheritance is
heaven) to do This affection to creatures, distracts us from our Creator,
with the poor and perishable commodities of this world? yet our subtle enemy
strives to make us serious in searching after them, solicitous to keep them,
and impatient to part with them.

Against this, we must provide true poverty of spirit, which consists Again
which must pr^vide Poverty or spirit.
in a perfect denudation of our souls from all propriety of love to any
corruptible creature whatsoever: we must use them only and not rest in them; we
may enjoy them, but take no joy in them: if Superiors command them from us, we
must cheerfully part with them; if any accident bereave us of them, we must
willingly let go our hold, saying, Our Lord gave them, our Lord Read the 13.
chapter of the Conflict.
has retaken them, his name be ever praised, his will always performed:
Farewell uncertain and unsatisfying profits: welcome sweet and secure poverty!
We must throw away courageously all such cloggs as retard our soul's flight to
perfection: Away with superfluities: Oh! that we could live with the only love
of our naked and crucified Jesus! That we could support our feeble Nature,
without the supplies of any creatures! that so our souls disingaged from the
depressing necessities of flesh and blood, might soar aloft, and sweetly repose
in the bosom of divine love!

2. Nor is the overmuch tenderness of affection to any person Affection to
persons corrupts our judgments.
whomsoever, under what pertext soever, any other thing than a mere ambush of
our enemy; for it corrupts our purest actions, and vitiates our most pious
intentions; it is the bane of Gods love, the poison of our hearts, and the
venom of our souls: For when humane favor and respect strive to oversway the
love of God, and strike in for a part of that which is due to God only; we do,
or leave undone say or unsay, what we neither should nor would, but for their
sakes: Ou^ kindred corrupt o^r judgments, and courtesies blind our reasons; so
that we neither discern their follies, nor correct their faults* but rather
comply with their imperfections, and sometimes wink at their open wickednesses,
for the continuance of our own content.

3. O how far is this from that The remedy is to love all impartially in and
for God.
pure love, which obliges us to affect all, (without exception of persons),
only in and for God, as bearing his image, as being truly virtuous, and as far
forth as they are furtherers to our souls salvation and perfection! Fie upon all
friend, ships and affections, which are attended with such dangers, accompanied
with such distractions, and followed with such disquiets which busy our
fancies, and bend our imaginations, to things so unprofitable and impertinent,
and so much impeding us, in our intended p^ogresse to the perfection of Gods
love.

4. So also all disordered delight, Spiritual sweetnesses may be sometimes
snares of our enemy;
pleasure and propriety in spiritual sweetnesses, and inward solaces of
devotion, are mere traps of the enemy, laid to catch and ensnare our unwary
souls, and to make them rest with complacency in things, which are not God
himself (the end of our desires,) but only his creatures, gifts, and graces.

You must not stay here, (O devout We must no^ stay in them, but transcend them.
souls) but pass on your way, and transcend all for his sake whom you only
seek, and not his solaces. These are helps and encouragements in your course,
not the goal you must touch; These are neither security Read the 28. chapter of the
Confflict.
nor sanctity, but only baits of the divine piety, to strengthen you in
climbing the steep mountain to his perfect charity.

The Third Ambush.
Extroversion, or an inordinate application of the soul to external things.
1. THis choaks up the Spirit of Extroversion choaks up devotion,
Devotion, quenches the souls ardor in her holy exercises, hinders her hastening
to perfection, and buries the whole heart and mind, the whole time and talents
in mean and inferior employments, which should be totally taken up in divine
contemplation.

Take heed of being drawn into this dangerous ambush (O dear Therefore we must
not intrude our selves into employments;
souls,) intrude not your selves into any business: and when Necessity,
Obedience, or Charity, (the only pretexts, which can make extroversion lawful
and laudable), urge you abroad keep your heart still at home* converse there
with your Lord and love, and commune with him, concerning the more important
affairs of eternity; abstract your selves from all outward multiplicity, and
there treat sweetly and secretly with him, of your souls union to that one
thing, which is only and absolutely necessary.

2. Abridge therefore your fancy But curb our fancies.
from fruitless roaming abroad upon all occurring objects, which proceeds from
instability of heart, and argues a neglect of your interior: Curb and
suppress all extravagations Read chapter 4 n. 6 of the Conflict.
of your mind, not only from sinful, but from superfluous, and unprofitable
conceptions* which nothing advance your soul in it is tendance to perfection,
but contaminate it with the dust of vanity, and contristate the holy Spirit of
God, within you.

3. Perform such works as concern your calling* without solicitude of mind, or
engagement of affection: Perform work^ of obedience, nec^ssity, and charity,
without eng^g^ng your affections;
lest your senses become darkened* your soul distracted, your fervor diminished,
your prayers neglected, and you sliding insensibly into negligence, and a total
discomposition in your inward man, be hardly ever again reclaimed and
recollected For how can a soul which is totally environed with worldly
impertinencies* have any vacant time left for the entertainments of piety? how
can a mind, dulled and astonished with the continual noyses of mundanity,
hearken attentively to Gods holy inspirations?

4. Wherefore strive timely and And strive to get into your interior.
diligently to get into your interior: prevent your soul (which is ever
active, never idle,) with pious thoughts, lest evil habits press in first* and
pre-possesse it: apply your selves speedily and seriously to introversion,
spiritual silence, and inward attendance to God alone; adhere to him only, and
remain unremoveable from this maxim, To desire nothing, demand nothing, think
of nothing, love nothing, labor for nothing, but him alone, that One and All,
which is needful for you: Do this as if nothing else concerned you, and as if
there were nothing but He and your self, and You and himself, considerable in
the whole world.

5. The surest way to compass this happy and heavenly design, is to keep your
eyes and heart fixed By fixing our hearts upon Christ crucified.
constantly and continually upon Christ crucified. This is the solid ground
whence the highest contemplatives take their first rise; hither (into this
sacred Ark of our Saviors humanity), they must again return after their lofty
soarings into the divinity; and here they must settle, when elsewhere they can
find no footing: And surely a soul that seriously considers his sufferings,
contemplates his mercys, and reflects upon his virtues; will find her whole
time too short to visit each room of his several perfections, and none at all
left, to be lost upon extravagant and worldly fancies.

The Fourth Ambush.
Bitterness of Heart.
1. WHich comprehends all kind Bitterness of heart comprehends all sadness,
frowardness, etc.
of Sadness, Melancholy, frowardness, restlesness, indignation, despitefulness,
proness to impatience, discontent, tediousness of mind, aversion, distaste of
all things, dislike of others, suspicions, sinister interpretations,
unpleasantness, murmurations, detractions, rancor, malice, rash-judgments, and
the like.

2. The source of these bitter All which proceed, either from nature,
indiscretion ^n austerities, thoughtfulness, persumption, or immortification;
streams, is either perverse nature; or indiscreet austerities; or an
over-serious application of the mind to study and thoughtfulness or a secret
presumption of self-perfection and sufficiency or an immortification of
passions; or a reflection upon past injuries; or an envying at others virtue,
praise, preferment and prosperity.

And all these anguishes of mind, and harshnesses in conversation, are great
impediments in our progress to spirituality, and must necessarily And must be
sweetened with charity.
be sweetened and seasoned with the Sugar of perfect Charity: For if we truly
love our Lord God, how can we scorn his image, stamped in the souls of our
Brethren? Do they cease to be Gods amiable creatures, because they displease,
despise or Read c. 16* of the Conflict.
neglect me? may they not be Gods friends, though they are my foes? are they
not more likely to love God, because they dislike me, who am so truly unworthy
to be loved by any one? Are not my seeming enemies, (upon due consideration),
my surest friends, since by mortifying me, they increase my stock of merit,
occasion my more serious application to the practice of ver^u^, and egg me
onwards in the way of all perfection?

3. You must therefore buckle up your selves (O dear Souls) against all these
bad and bitter dispositions; by loving all, in, and for God; by being amiable,
to a^, And by being amiable and affable to all.
affable to all, meek to all, merciful to all: Strive to be gentle in words,
cheerful in countenance, pleasing in your proceedings, patient in enduring,
compassionate to others in their failings, charitable in assisting them, ready
to pardon them pious to interpret their actions for their best advantage, far
from troubling or thwarting them, free from contristating or confounding them.

4. There is also another private To this ambush belongs a certain grudging at
Gods pr^ceedings, Which must be warily avoid^d,
and perilous corner in this ambush of bitterness of heart, which is, a certain
grudg^ng at the proceedings of Gods providence, and a repining at his
permission of adversities to fall upon us.

Take heed (dear souls)* of slipping into this sad and dismal gulf of
discontent and murmuration against God, in the least thought, word, or gesture:
be not dejected or disquieted at any thing, but say cordially, cheerfully,
faithfully and resignedly: It is the By a cordial Resignation.
Lord, let him do what seems good in his own eyes. Alas! Can Self-love so blind
my understanding, as to make me think I deserve not to suffer this and much
more? I offer up my self to thy sweet pleasure, O my God; my heart is ready and
prepared to perform what thou please, and to endure what thou permittest; and
I am wholly resigned to thy holy will, in all things which shall befall me, for
time and eternity.

The Fifth Ambush.
Scrupulosity.
WHich includes all inward affliction, fearfulnes, perplexity, vexation and
trouble of the soul, and is an evident effect of some secret pride and
self-love,

1. This dangerous Ambush is designed by our enemy to cut off Scrupulcsity
ayms at the destruction of our Faith and Confidence. To avoid this, we must
rely upon God and our guide.
all succors of Faith and Confidence in Gods mercy and goodness from us, that
so by degrees he may lead us on, and cast us headlong into the precipice of
despair.

2. To avoid this deceit, which ayms at your utter ruin and destruction, your
only secure and short way (O dear souls), is to cast your selves really,
resignedly, cheerfully and confidently into the bosom of the divine bounty and
to the guidance of your ghostly Father: there is no other hope of shelter or
safety from these storms of troubles and temptations: There you may make a
happy exchange of your servile and slavish fear into sweet and filial love:
there you will drown and destroy these dismal, dreadful and desperate
Imaginations and fancies in the abysses of Gods infinite mercy: there you will
admire, adore, and implore, his power, wisdom and goodness, whereby you will
confess, yield, and confide, that he can, knows how, and is willing to help and
heal your sick and sorrowful souls in his own good time and liking: there you
will truly see that you are nothing of your selves, but are all things, have
all things, and can do all things in him, your allsufficient creator and
comforter. We cannot err in Confidence, so long as we fall not into Negligence.


3. And you may securely stand to this infallible verity; That you can never
err in overmuch trust, hope, and confidence in God, and in his mercy and
bounty; so long as you slack not in the punctual performance of your duty;
cease not in the serious mortification of your passions and sensuality;
continue your practices of patience in adversity, of gratitude in prosperity,
and of indifferency and resignation to the divine will in all occurrences.

The Sixth Ambush.
Excessive and unnecessary Study.
1. THis busies the understanding Which busies the Understanding, but leaves
the Will barren, S. Bernard. Jerm. 36. super Cantica.
about curious notions and useless speculations, and leaves the will barren of
all true devotion and affections: For there are some who study to know much,
that they may become learned, and it is a foolish curiosity: Some study that
they may fell their skill, and it is a foolish avarice: Some strive to know
that they themselves may be known, and it is a foolish vanity: Some study
knowledge, that with it they may edify others, and that is charity: And
finally some desire knowledge, that they themselves may be edified and their
own souls bettered* and this is wisdom.

2. Wherefore all such study as ayms at the bare knowledge of things, without
any ^u^^her relation Puffs us up with vanity, but leaves us empty of true piety.
to piety, and proficiency in the way of the Spirit, is a mere trap of our
enemy, thereby to puff us up with pride and vanity, to take up our time, and
fill up our souls with selfconceits, and presumption: It makes a great noise,
and furnishes our tongues with fair expressions concerning the spiritual life,
divine feelings, and the secret ways of Gods proceedings with his faithful
friends and servants; but has no true taste at all of that which it talks so
much; it is an empty discourse, void of all inward experience, a mere
Hypocondriacall wind.

3. The remedy against this, The remedy is to rectify our intentions.
is, to rectify our intentions; Read not dear souls, nor study, to be accounted
learned, but to become perfect; desire rather to love Gods goodness* than to
know Read the 1. 2. 3. cha. of the first Book of the Imita. of Christ, And the
43. chapter of the third Book.
much of his greatness; to lead a holy life, than to speak high words
concerning it. Confess your own ignorance in all things, and content your
selves with the sole-knowledge of your Savior: This is the sum of all Science,
and this alone will suffice for your Salvation.

The Seventh Ambush.
Tepidity, and coldness in devotion.
THis is the bane of all spirituality This is the bane of all spirituality.
Read the 12. chapter of the Spir. Conflict.
nor has the devil any more alluring bait, than this (seldom perceived and yet
highly prejudicial) luke-warmness in devotion, want of vigor in our spiritual
exercises, and defect of fervor in our tendance to perfection.

1. Think not therefore (dear souls), that it suffices you to perform your
accustomed practices of piety, but that you are continually We must always* go
forward toward perfection.
to aim at a further and daily increase of charity: Consider, that not to
advance in the way of the Spirit, is to recoyle; and that it is not the
multitude of your good works which makes them considerable, but the fervor
wherewith they are performed: Be sure to keep your heart and soul always (as
much as humane weakness and the rule of discretion will permit) elevated to
your Lord and love: cry continually for his grace, knock And sigh after it
perseverantly,
incessantly at the gate of his mercy, sigh after him perseverantly seek to
perform his will diligently, and follow his pleasure purely and perfectly; give
that day for lost wherein you have not made some progress in the way of
perfection; and finally, rouse up your selves, and prick forward your sluggish
dullness in devotion, with some brief and burning aspirations, which you are to
have always ready in your heart and mouth: As Exc^ting our sluggishness by
frequent aspirations.


O my Lord, o my God, the life of my soul, and the only love of my heart! when
shall I love thee, as I desire and thou demandest?

O my Jesu! when shall I die perfectly to the world, my self, and all things,
that I may live purely and entirely in thy only charity.

O when shall I be nothing to any creature, and every creature nothing to me,
but only in thee, and for thee alone?

O that I could go out of my self, and get into thee! That I could thrust my
caitif heart out of this breast, to establish thine, (o my sweet Savior) in
it is place!

O let thy true love transform me totally into thee! Let me not live any longer
but in thee! Let me not love any creature, but by, in, and for thee, my
Creator!

O incomprehensible bounty! Either take my soul out of this world; or take the
love of this world out of my soul! Either bereave me of my life, or bestow on
me thy love, etc.

In all which raptures and affections, the holy Spirit is the best directour,
whose inward impulse and dictamen, you are diligently to follow, (still
according to discretion and obedience), with a perpetual longing and loving,
sighing and seeking to advance your soul to divine Union.

2. Finally, I conclude with this hearty and heavenly counsel of S. Anthony to
his disciples, against this dangerous coldness in devotion: An excellen^
document of S. Anthony.
My brethren, Let this be my general and particular precept unto you, the
first and last lesson I teach you: Never to lose your first fervor and good
purposes, nor to grow slack in your observances, but to go always forward, and
renew daily your devout exercises, as if you daily were new beginners in the
way of perfection: This he often repeated and inculcated and being on his
deathbed, that his last words might remain more lively imprinted in their
minds, he bequeathed unto them as his final and never to be forgotten
testament, this piercing and pithy document, able to win, wound and melt a
flint into fervor and compunction: O my loving children, I go the way of my
forefathers, our Lord calls and invites me, and my soul thirsts after him and
heaven: But you, (o my bowels)! what will you do? I have often admonished you,
and do at this last gasp* leave it you for my will and testament: Take heed you
grow not tepide, and go backward, and so on a sudden lose the pains and profit
of so many years past: Think still you are to begin anew, as though what you
had already suffered for Christ, were nothing: Let your good will and desires
get every day new strength and vigor; forget what is past, and run to what is
before you; live and labor with such fervor and purity, as if it were your
first work that ever pleased God, or the last service you should ever render
him in this mortal life.

O devout souls! Our days pass away swiftly, death is always at our heels,
eternity approches, wherein our God, whom we have served and loved, will wipe
the tears off our eyes, the sweat off our brows, and the blood off our wounds,
and crown us with glory, peace, security and immortality: Let us not lose heart
in his service, nor hope in his goodness! He expects and invites us: Angels and
Saints offer their helping hands: The question is of eternal life, eternal
light, eternal liberty, and eternal love.



THE SECOND TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: or, The use and Practice of
those necessary weapons, which are prescribed in the Treatise of the Spiritual
Conflict.

Here Methodically managed, and drawn into seven Exercises, Affective Acts, or
Aspirations, according to the days of the Week.

Psalm. 118. v. 34. Give me understanding, and I will search thy Law, and I will
keep it with my whole heart.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

To the Devout Champions aspiring to Perfection.
THat you may make the right use (O devout souls) of these ensuing Exercises,
you are first to be premonished,

That Aspirations or jaculatorie prayers are short and fervent acts,
elevations, desires, and requests of the Soul to God; And they are of diverse
sorts, and may be performed either in the heart only, or by the heart and mouth
jointly.

First, they may be practiced by way of petition, begging love, virtue,
perfection, devotion, etc. As, O Lord, give me light to know thy Will, grace to
embrace it, and force to follow it. Help me to overcome my self, and my sworn
enemies: Assist me to digest difficulties, and disgraces for thy love. Pity a
poor sinner; Pardon a proud beggar; Receive a prodigal Child; Redeem a
perishing soul; confirm my frailty, confound my Pride, comfort my Dull, Dark,
and desolate Spirit. And the like short, amorous, and pithy petitions.

Secondly they may be expressed by way of wishing, and sighing after God,
goodness, piety, perfection, etc.

As, O Lord, when shall I know thee and my self? When shall I truly love
thee, and perfectly hate my self? When shall I live in thee, and be dead to my
self?

Or thus, Oh, that I were truly virtuous, truly religious, truly mortified!
Oh, that I were all thine! O my poor soul, take courage, how shall we abound
with delights, when we shall see our Master and Maker in his heavenly
Kingdom!

Thirdly, they may be performed by way of expostulating, and complaining;
sometimes to God, other-times to our own souls; and then to all creatures:

As, How long Lord? vvilt thou forget me for ever? Why hidest thou thy face?
Why art thou sad my soul? O heavens, are you shut against me? etc*

Fourthly, by shorter expressions: as by Expressing the whole affection in few
words, thus: Good God! Svveet Jesu! How long! O fire! burn! O one! O all! etc.

These must differently be made use of according to the various disposition of
the souls dryness or devotion. In all which you are not to bind your selves to
any set form or sorts of words, but only use such as holy and fervent love
shall suggest unto you.

And this manner of prayer (by fervent Aspirations, frequent acts of love, and
enflamed elevations of the soul) is (according to the divine doctrine of S.
Denis) the easiest, shortest, sweetest, and perfectest means of uniting the
soul to her last end, which is God, and consequently of corresponding to our
creation and calling.

This (says he) is that admirable, holy and hidden Unitive wisdom, which
without any foregoing meditation, or precedent search into divine mysteries,
draws up forthwith the lovers affection to his beloved Lord, which is more and
more stretched, intended, and enlarged by these ardent ejaculations of the
soul, thus familiarly conferring, communing, treating and talking with her
Creator, and raising up her self to him by acts of love, and desires of
conjunction.

And we may fitly say that the solid foundation of inward perfection is
contained in such acts, motions and tendances of our Souls toward God, their
neighbors and themselves; as the outvvard consists in the practical
performance of our duties, in relation to the same three objects.

Make use therefore (O dear souls), of these affective Devotions, daily,
diligently and perseverantly; and you shall soon perceive a happy and heavenly
change in your souls; you shall feel your faith strengthened, your devotion
actuated; your good desires prepared and put in real performances; your pious
intentions ripened for executions; and your well-made purposes and resolutions
forwarded to leap into the punctual and particular observation of each part of
your duty toward God, the world, and your selves.



The Seven Exercises.
The 1. Exercise, For Monday. Of the Knowledge of God, and Confidence in him.

The 2. Exercise, For Tuesday. Of the Knowledge, and Diffidence in our selves.

The 3. Exercise, For Wednesday. Of obtaining Remission of our sins.

The 4. Exercise, For Thursday. Of subduing Sensuality to Reason.

The 5. Exercise, For Friday. Of Mortification, and perfect Abnegation.

The 6. Exercise. For Saturday. Of Conformity to Christ Crucified.

The 7. Exercise, For Sunday. Of perfect Union with God.

FOR MONDAY. Of the Knowledge of God, and Confidence in him.
The First Exercise.
1. TO know thee, O divine fountain of goodness, is to be truly happy; and yet
none can know thee, (O boundless and bottomless Sea of all perfections), but
through thine own manifestation and mercy: Vouchsafe therefore, I beseech thee,
(o most loving and liberal Lord), to enter this poor and empty heart of thy
meanest servant; to inform my ignorant soul, with a glimpse of this necessary
science, and to inflame my cold affection, with a small spark of thy holy love.

O omnipotent Creator of heaven and earth, both which thou fillest with thy
greatness and glory: O God of infinite power, excellent wisdom, unmeasurable
goodness, and incomprehensible love! my soul thirsts after thee, the essential
source of all felicity; my heart seeks thee, the proper place of it is repose;
it sighs to thee, the natural center of all it is hope and happiness. IN thy
blessed mind, o my God, it first rested in it is eternal possibility and
similitude, thither it must again return, and there it must either rest
eternally or perish for evermore: O let it now find thee, that it may ever love
thee.

2. O Lord, most good, glorious, and gracious: most blessed and bountiful, most
high and holy; most excellent and ineffable; What words or thoughts can express
thy purity and perfection? Let me know thee, O thou life of my soul! Let me see
thee, O true light of my eyes! Let me seek thee, O thou only solace of my
spirit! Let me find thee, O thou desired of my heart! Let me embrace thee, O my
heavenly Spouse! Let me possess thee, O thou sovereign sweetness, and full
satiety of all my inward and outward senses. O that my heart could always
think on thee, my will ever love thee, my mind still remember thee, my
understanding continually conceive thee, my reason perpetually adhere to thee,
and my whole man incessantly praise thee! O hide not thy face from me, my joy,
my light, and my life! If I may not see thee and live; O let me die that I may
see thee: I desire to die here, and be dissolved, that I may see thee, know
thee, come to thee, live with thee, and love thee eternally.

O ever blessed and glorious divinity! O Father, who of thine own substance,
bring forth an ineffable goodness, coequal, consubstantial and coeternal
with thy self, which is thy Some: O Father and Son, who loving each other with
infinite charity and content, are united together in one Holy Ghost, equally
and unspeakably proceeding from you both! I admire thee, adore thee, and
worship thee with all the powers of my body and soul.

3. O sacred Deity! O Tri-Unity, and Vni-Trinity! O Father, S^n, and Holy
Ghost! Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, who were, art, and shall be for ever
almighty; I thy poor creature, prostrate before the Throne of thy Divine
Majesty, from the abyss of my own nothing, invoke, adore and acknowledge thee,
the abyss of all perfection: I present thee with all thine own gifts, goods, and
graces, which thou have plentifully powered out upon all thy creatures: I offer
up to thy praise the affections of Angels and men, the properties of the
elements, the beauty and motion of the whole universe, and the essence of all
being: O that my soul were capable to comprise unitedly all their several
affections and perfections! how joyfully would it employ them in thy praise?
how sweetly would it melt away in thy presence? Behold, O my God, I make an
entire oblation of them all, I acknowledge and adore thee with them all, and
desire to do it as frequently as I breathe, and as often as there are minutes
in time, stars in the firmament, sands in the Ocean, and numbers in all nature.

O my Lord, whose love is the life of my soul, increase my knowledge of thee,
that I may enlarge my love to thee. Alas! I love thee not, o amiable Lord God,
because I know thee not; I know thee not, because darkness and sin has covered
and encompassed my understanding: Wherefore, o bright light, who illuminatest
all things, expel this darkness from my soul, drive off these clouds from my
understanding, and draw the curtain from off the face of the abyss of my mind,
that I may see and know thee, and then I shall not choose but love thee.

O my dear Jesu, show me thy divine Father; dart a beam of thy heavenly
splendor into my dull heart, that I may have some degree of that holy science
which may help me in thy love, make me obedient to thy will, and resolute in
thy service.

To know all things of this world, o Jesu, and not to know thee, is but
ignorance and folly: let me therefore know thy eternal Father; and thee whom he
sent for my salvation, and it suffices me. O give me this knowledge, that I
may give thee my love, and I ask no more. Let me be unknowing, ignorant and a
fool in all other things, so I may wisely know thee only, o my God, and my all.

4. O King of glory, I acknowledge thy perfections to be above all knowledge,
but that of thy own divine understanding: I confess that thy height is
unreachable, thy goodness unchangable, thy greatness incomprehensible, thy
light inaccessible; And all other thy divine attributes and perfections are so
mighty and so many, so good and so glorious, so excellent and so admirable, so
worthy and so wonderful; that were all the power and prerogatives, all the
virtue, wisdom, and qualities of all creatures united in one individual nature,
it were not so much in respect of thy glory and greatness, as the least drop of
water is, in comparison of the vast Ocean. Wherefore, I beg of thee, (O immense
and inaccessible Godhead), only so much to know, conceive, believe and
understand of thy hidden majesty, as may efficaciously move my will to thee;
and I content my self with so much light of thy divinity, as may force me to
love thee ardently, effectually, perseverantly.

O my Lord and my love! Fill my heart with the sweet influence of thy heavenly
grace, that I may in some measure discover how good and gracious thou art to
me, and to all thy creatures! O let me still remember thy mercy, ever dread thy
justice, and continually admire and adore thy power and providence.

Ah! my noble Soul, stamped with thy Creators lovely image, endowed with the
excellencies of understanding to know him, of will to love him, of Memory to
rest in him; why adherest thou not fast to him only in pure and perfect
delight, forgetting and forgoing all sensible and worldly objects?

5. O that I were so ravished with thy love and liking (my only amiable Lord
God) that through joy, jubily, and admiration, I might feel no self at all, no
sense, no change, no inequality! That no prosperity might puff me up, no
adversity deject me, no accident separate me from thee, o my God of infinite
love and liberality!

O that I could be ever joyful in thee, ever grateful to thee, and ever
mindful of thy inhabiting presence within me! Thou are always nearer to my
soul (o my good God) than my soul is to my body, always conserving,
counselling, disposing, directing* inciting and inspiring it to thy love; and
will thou not, (o my senseless and sinful soul!) be always cautious and
circumspect how thou behavest thy self in thy Lords presence, who is so
tenderly careful of thy safety? O let his love be no longer neglected, his
sweet invitations no longer slighted: O that thou would henceforth walk
before him as befits his chaste and holy Spouse, with all respect and reverence,
fear and fidelity, courage and constancy! preparing thy self diligently for his
divine embraces.

6. Grant I beseech thee, o mighty and merciful Creator, that my whole time
and thoughts may be totally taken up in the contemplation of thy unmeasurable
benefits and bounty toward me. For I know, Lord, that I am truly nothing, and
yet thou carest for me (o my loving maker), as if thou had no other creature
in heaven or earth; thou deliverest me from innumerable dangers; adornest me
with many gifts and graces; give me leave at all times to have free access to
thy throne of mercy, so that with one holy thought, one humble sigh, one devout
desire, I may draw near to thee, and enjoy thee, and in thee all comfort and
content: O divine privilege!

To discover to thee my wants, lay open my wounds, and boldly declare my
wishes, as to my nearest, dearest, and trustiest friend and familiar, and to be
sure of supplies, salves, and succor in all my necessities! O what goodness,
what grace, what mercy is this?

O my soul! How loving and liberal a Lord have we? how loving in mercy* how
liberal in bounty? Ah! our unthankfulness to requite, our unworthiness to
deserve his favors!

Up my heart, be no longer ungrateful and unfaithful, to so great, good, and
gracious a benefactour. Yes, o blessed and bountiful giver, I now say
cordially, and will ever stand to i^ co^ragiously; I will henceforth love thee*
o my Lord, my love, my life, my strength, my support my home my harbor* and my
happiness. I will remember thy sweet words to all sinners; Why will you perish.
O children, As I live I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he would
turn to me an^ live. I will behold thy sacred wounds suffered for me, able to
move a rock to love and compassion: And though I am ashamed to think what I
have been, and how little I have done, how much thou have endured for me, how
long thou have expected me how lovingly thou have besought me, and how poorly I
have corresponded to thee; Yet I know, o my Lord, thou ceasest not to be God
and good, though I am weak and wicked. Therefore I will take yet courage in thy
service, and confidently hope, that thou who sought'st after me a lost sheep,
wilt mercifully receive me now I seek after thee my loving shepherd with a
right intention, real resolution, and inflamed affection.

7. Yes, (o my Lord and my love), heaven and earth shall sooner perish^ than my
confidence in thy sweet mercies, and my Saviors merits: If thou repel me, I
will run after thee; If thou shut thy door against me, I will never leave
knocking; and if thou kill'st me, yet I will trust in thee. I wholly cast my
self upon thy holy will, providence and protection. I protest with heart and
mouth that I now am, and henceforth will be entirely thine; that I have
nothing, seek nothing, fear nothing, desire nothing, demand nothing, want
nothing, will nothing, but thee only, My Lord, my Love, and my All.

And I firmly purpose to serve and love thee (o sacred and supreme Majesty),
simply, sincerely, purely and perseverantly, not for any fear of pains or
punishment; not for any selfinterest of what this world can offer, or the next
afford; not for the least hope of heaven or happiness: but I will thee, seek
thee, and love thee for thy self only, (o my all-sufficient Lord God), who art
the sole object, sweet compleatment, and solid contentment of my soul. Pardon
me, protect me, and provide for me; For thou art my only hope and happiness.



FOR TVESDAY. Of the Knowledge, and diffidence in our selves.
The Second Exercise.
1. WHat is man, (o Omnipotent Creator) what is this man, that thou should be
mindful of him? He is nothing o Lord, and I am the least and worst of those
nothings* because I have least corresponded to thy grace, and made worst use of
thy gifts. O give me lig^t; reach forth thy hand to this blind creature crying
after thee, O thou true light of the world, and life of my soul! that now at
length I may duly, diligently, cordially and abyssally dive into my own
baseness, weakness, misery, nothing: that knowing what I truly am, I may really
loathe, hate, distrust, despise, and deny my self, and all my own proceedings;
sincerely love thee, only trust and hope in thee, and rely wholly upon thy
divine providence and protection.

I am not only content (o my Lord God) but even willing and desirous, that all
thy creatures should take me and treat me, according to my true condition and
unworthiness; And I am resolved by thy grace to humble my self, not only under
thy mighty hand, but also under all their feet, as their servant and slave, to
be trodden on, abhorred, avoided, and detested by them all, as a sink of sin and
filthiness.

I will be desirous to be esteemed and used as dross among metalls, chaff among
grain, a Wolf among Sheep, and as Satan amongst the children of God.

I acknowledge my self unworthy of all grace and comfort from God or man, and
worthy of all pain, punishment, crosses, contradiction, confusion, desolation
death, damnation. I will be henceforth ashamed to complain of any aggrievances,
and be content to suffer whatsoever the world, the devil, and hell it self, can
inflict upon me.

2. And to strengthen this my resolution, I will rationally consider before
thee, o my Lord, what I really am? what I was? and what will become of me? both
touching my body, my soul, and my whole being?

Ay me! I have a body all clay, a soul all sin, a life all frailty, and a
substance all nothing. And this is all I have to vaunt of in thy presence, o my
Lord and my maker!

My material part, is but slime of the earth, the very worst part of the
unworthyest element. Ah poor man! and can thou look so big who came from so
base an extraction? be ashamed to lift up thy head, vile mud and dirt, since
thy pedigree is so well known, and the ingredients of thy being are so mean and
contemptible.

And when I consider what this my body was in the womb, how it was conceived in
concupiscence, nourished with filthiness, and brought up in darkness; I am
ashamed to own my own beginning, which is so horrid and lothesome: and who then
can justly boast of state, strength, beauty, or nobility, since the groundwork
of all is but a little dung and corruption?

Ah poor worm! what a dismal prison were thou detained in, for nine months
space of thy time? what nasty and poisonous food was thy diet? how wretched was
thy birth? how weak and woeful thy infancy? and what art thou in thy best and
most flourishing condition in the world, but a clog and cage to thy inthrall'd
soul; a painted sack, or pargetted sepulcher, full of filth, froth, and ordure?
O my Lord, give me grace to frame an impartial judgment of what I am, and then
how soon shall I check all risings of pride and presumption?

3. I came into this world (o my Lord), with groans and tears, I live in it
with griefs and cares, I shall go out of it with pangs and fears, and lastly I
must become a horror to the eyes of my dearest friends, a prey of ve^min, and a
companion of rottenness. Ah! how can thou be proud of thy perfections, poor
clay and ash^s? why should thou look to be so highly prized, and so daintily
pampered, thou stinking puddle? Dust thou art, and to dust thou must return.
Have thou not always before thy eyes these ashes for thy glass, and death for
thy mistress, why then do thou suffer so many sparkles of vanity to arise
from this thy caitiff condition?

And thou* my poor soul, the spiritual part of my composition; O what shall I
say of thee to thy great Lord and maker? What thou ^^st hitherto been, I well
know; wretched, wicked, sinful. What thou now art I know not; being uncertain
of Gods grace and love. What thou shall be hereafter, I am altogether ignorant;
because doubtful of thy correspondency with grace, and fearful of thy
perseverance in goodness.

Ah sad condition! I came (o my Lord), into this world in original sin, I am
bred up in actual sin, and if death and deadly sin meet together, I shall feel
the smart of them both eternally: O how much need have I then of thy grace (o
merciful Lord God) to avoid sin, since I cannot eschew death! O let me rather
admit a deadly wound, than commit a deadly sin!

4. What art thou then, o my whole man, consisting of body and soul? What were
thou, (o N.) from all eternity, before thy conception in the womb, and birth
into the world? Nothing. Ah poor nothing! what is less than nothing? where
dwells this nothing? who can describe a nothing? which more differs from the
least atome in the Sun, than Gods infinite greatness from the least of his
creatures. O proud nothing! What have thou, that thou have not received?
Nothing. Why then art thou puffed up with it, as if thou had not received it?
I acknowledge my whole being, to be from thy only bounty, (O my great, good,
and glorious maker): and since I possess nothing, but what I have from thee,
since I shall also necessarily fade away into my first nothing, if thou
withdraw from me thy conserving hand but a moment; I will no longer glory in
that which is none of mine, but I will here lay the foundation of my spiritual
edifice, upon this sure and solid ground of thy All, and my own Nothing. I will
endeavor to frame a true conceit of my own misery, frailty, insufficiency and
nothing, that so I may fully, speedily, and solidly come to this desired
self-knowledge and humility.

I will run over my lesson, repeat my questions, learn my answers, and strive
to grow skilful in this necessary and sacred science.

What have I received that I have not abused? Nothing: Body soul, will,
judgment, memory, understanding, affection, senses, meat, drink, company,
habit, books, prayer, Sacraments, all creatures.

Can I then be proud of Sin, Filthiness, rottenness, labor, grief, infirmity,
blindness, obstinacy corruption, death and damnation, which are worse than
nothing?

Shall I boast of thy gifts (O my God), which are not mine; or of my own abuses
and ingratitudes? The one is to rob thee of thy honor, the other is to be
honored for thy dishonor.

5. What creature ever sinned so grievously as I have done, and yet sorrowed so
little, and suffered less?

Who ever forsook so great and good a God, for so little and vain a toy as I
have done?

What sinful soul is there now in hell, that would not have been a glorious
Saint in heaven, if it had the helps, favors, feelings, and visits, which I
have both had and abused?

Who ever received so many mercies, so sweet comforts, and so great graces from
thee, O bountiful Lord God, and made so little and bad use of them as I have
done?

If I deny all this, my conscience witnesses against me: If I confess it, oh!
why am I not more humble?

Finally, If such great troubles, temptations and tribulations had hapened to
me, as have done to others, I should by consenting have ere now burned in hell
fire; but thou, (O meek and merciful Creator) have spared me, because thou
know my weakness, and sent me small crosses, because I cannot bear greater,
etc.

Wherefore, Not unto me, (O Lord), but to thee, be all honor for time and
eternity!

O that I could know thee, and know my self! O that I could truly see my own
nothing, and total dependancy on thee! my misery and malice* and thy
perfection and total goodness.

Ay me! weak and wretched N! What are my forces that I should rely on them? I
have nothing. O my Lord, but what is thine, my merits are thy mercies, my goods
thy graces; yet I neither have been thankful for receiving them, nor faithful
in using them.

O! when did I trust in my own strength and was not foiled, and confounded?
Grant therefore, (O my Lord, o my only hope, and help; O my sole safety and
security) that I may totally trust to thee, and distrust my self; truly
acknowledge thee, and deny my self; entirely love thee, and hate my self.

6. I confess (o my Lord) that I am the poorest, ungratefullest,
unprofitablest, and unworthyest worm of the earth; a thing altogether useless
to the world, and only active to offend thee, and to do wickedly in thy sight:
and is it possible that I can harbor any thought of self-love, or self-I king?

O God of infinite glory, greatness, and majesty, before whom the powers of
heaven do tremble! what are all creatures in thy sight? and what am I the
meanest of them all? O what proportion is there (great God) between me and
thee? between thy All and my Nothing? And yet have I infringed thy laws,
disobeyed thy commands, contemned thy Counsels, resisted thy callings, and
contradicted thy will to prefer my own! O monstrous impiety and ingratitude!
And shall I not willingly submit to all pain, punishment, contradiction, and
contempt, which thou (o my highly offended creator*) shall suffer thy
creatures to inflict upon me? Behold, O my Lord, I debase, humble and
annihilate my self under all things that have a being: I will henceforth
utterly hate, distrust, and detest my self and wholly love thee, and rely upon
thy mercy.

O holy self-knowledge. O sacred humility! thou art the key of all perfection*
the door of all solid virtue, piety and devotion.

7. I now clearly see, by the light of thy divine goodness (O gracious Lord
God), what has hitherto been the cause of my ^onproficiency in the way of the
Spirit; and why the path of virtue seemed and so unpleasant, thornie, tedious
and troublesome to my deceived soul: It was because I had not learned to leave,
loath, deny, and distrust myself; and to rely wholly on thee, O my only comfort
and support!

I will therefore henceforth faithfully practice what I perceive so necessary:
I will profoundly humble my soul; both inwardly in thy presence (O my Lord),
and outwardly to the whole world.

I will joyfully and voluntarily embrace all injury* indignity, contempt,
correction and confusion which can befall me, with as much pleasure as I have
formerly any cherishings and kindness.

I will utterly destroy, ruin, and root out all self-love, self-liking,
self-seeking, self-praise, and self-complacencie.

I will cast my self under the feet of the vilest creatures* take pleasure in
the meanest employments, and obey them most willingly, whom my nature most
distasts and dislikes.

I will walk before thee, (O my Creator,) as thy needy, naked, desolate and
destitute vassal; acknowledging my self void of all virtue, and attributing to
my self nothing but sin, ingratitude, defects, failings, imperfections.

I will fully persuade my self that no one can contemn, confound, persecute and
punish me as I deserve.

I will not regard whether I am honored or hated, but imagine my self, as a
thing dead and forgotten: or as that which never had a being, and is now truly
nothing.

I will be contented to be accounted an hypocrite in my sincerest actions; and
to be thought full of inward impatience secret grudgings, and desires of
revenge against them who shall any way mortify or misuse me* though my heart be
never so free from it.

Finally, I will have these and the like thoughts and words always in my heart
and mouth: I am nothing, I have nothing, I do no good, I am an unprofitable
servant, I utterly hate and distrust my self, and totally rely upon thee, O my
Lord, my love, and my All.



FOR WEDNESDAY. To obtain Remission of our Sins.
The Third Exercise.
1. WHo will give water to my head, and fountains of tears to my eyes? And I
will weep day and night for my sins, which cover me all over like an incurable
ulcer, from the soal of the foot to the crown of the head.

Where art thou, O my wretched and wicked soul? In what labyrinths do thou
walk? In what sinks of sin, and puddles of uncleaness do thou wallow?

Awake, arise, lament, repent: how long will thou sleep? why will thou die? when
will thou shake off thy fetters? Ah, return silly sheep to thy good Pastor,
return poor prodigal to thy pious Father, whose goodness so lovingly invites
thee, whose mercy has so long expected thee.

O great and glorious God, the mighty Monarch of heaven and earth, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, behold a poor and penitent Publican (who is ashamed
to lift up his eyes to heaven, and unworthy to take thy sacred name into his
sinful mouth) humbly knocking at thy gate of mercy clipping thy holy feet, and
craving thy accustomed pity and compassion.

O merciful Lord, hide not thy self from me shut not the door against me. Oh!
one crum of comfort, one dram of devotion to my sad and sick soul, to my dry
and desolate spirit.

2. I am conscious of my ingratitude against thee, (O supreme majesty) and my
sin is always before me, and confounding me: But whither should I retire my
self from thee? To whom should I have recourse but unto thee?

Art not thou my Father, my Father of mercies, which have neither limits nor
measure? Art not thou my Maker, my preserver, my governor, my deliverer, my
King, my Pastor, my Physician, my Priest, and my Sacrifice?

If thou art not all this and more to me; and if I am nothing to thee; refuse
me, reject me, and relinquish me a prey to be swallowed up by thy enemies.

But it is time, (O my Lord) that heaven and earth take notice of what thou art
to me, and what I am to thee. It is time thou enter into thy right: And I must
now either give my self to thee, or thou must take me unto thee.

Not that I aspire to those excellent prerogatives of thy dearest servants: No,
my Lord, it suffices me to be in the out-rank of thy meanest slaves; to be
only stamped with thy mark, and linked fast in thy chains, that I may never
more have the power to fly from thee. O grant me this favor (most merciful
Father) which thy dear Son has purchased for me, by the price of his death and
passion.

I am fallen without thee by my own frailty, but can never hope to rise, but by
thy mercy, O my Lord and only support! I am sick without thee, but cannot be
cured without thee, my heavenly Physician: I am dead without thee, but can
never be revived but by thee, o life of my soul! So true it is that to make me
come to thee, thou (o most gracious Lord God), must first come to me.

O the admirable goodness of my loving Lord! Even this little I am doing, is
rather thine own work than mine: Thou O my Lord, put repentance into my
soul, desires into my heart, sighs into my breast, confession into my mouth,
prayers into my lips, remorse into my memory, resolutions of amendment into my
will: It Is Thou (O gracious God), who chiefly actest all this good in me, by me,
and for me.

O my All! do then all in me that thou desire: And particularly overwhelm (I
beseech thee) my whole interior with perfect contrition; not coming from a
slavish and servile fear, but from a faithful and filial love: Grant me a true
and entire grief for having offended thee, not because of thy promises or
threats; but because thou art in thy self, good, amiable, adorable.

3. Or if mercenary interest do yet more move thee, (O my sensual and sinful
soul! For how hainously do thou take a small injury, how deeply do thou
resent a little disgrace, the loss of a dear friend, of health, of honor, or
the like temporal and perishable commodities)? O whence is it then, that thou
so little apprehendest thy loss of grace, and thy eminent and imminent danger
of eternal damnation?

Is it a small matter to be Gods enemy? To lose the good will of all heaven? To
destroy Gods image? To cut up life, root and branch? To side with the accursed
devils, (thy Creators sworn enemies)? to hatch Treason, and enter Conspiracy
with the damned? Yea and to kill (as much as in thee lies) him, who by his own
death gave thee life? O brutall and unnatural ingratitude!

Surely the annihilating of heaven, The reason is: Because the least degree of
a higher order, surpasses the highest degree of the lower order.
earth, Angels, men, and all Nature, cannot be compared with this malicious
evil and wilful destruction of thy grace O Lord, in my soul. O eternal God!
what a monster have I then been in grace, what a prodigy in nature, who have
so little cared to commit such enormous sins?

But (O my Lord) I will even now change my life; I here detest all sin, I make
firm purpose of amendment, I have a full confidence in thee my Creator, a good
will to do satisfaction, and a total resignation to thy divine pleasure.

4. I am the woeful criminal, (O just judge of my soul), and I will be also the
accuser and witness, the advocate and executioner in this tribunal.

I summon you therefore, O detestable pride, O abominable envy, O execrable
avarice, O beastly lubricity, and all you accursed crew of sins: how long will
you reign on earth? how long will you dispeople Gods inheritance? who brought
you in amongst Gods children?

It Is the perverted Will of man (O dread Sovereign) which has done all these
mischiefs. Rectify (o my Lord, I beseech thee) this my crooked Will, and murder
these horrible monsters in me, and grant that I may henceforth rather expose my
body to a thousand deaths, than my soul to one deadly sin.

Thy Saints will rejoice (o God) at my amendment* and thy Angels will make a
Feast, but thy own resentment of joy will be infinite, because thy love is
infinite* which goes hand in hand with thy essence and comprehends all love in
supreme eminency.

I will therefore expect from thee, O heavenly Father, the exact remembrance;
from thee, my Redeemer the perfect knowledge; from thee, o holy Spirit, a true
repentance and from thee, o Sacred Trinity, an entire absolution and plenary
indulgence from all my iniquities.

The grief I feel for my past offenses; the hatred I have against each sin at
this present; and the resolution I make to avoid all iniquity for the future,
are not equivalent in me to their enormity and hainousness: I therefore humbly
crave (o holy Lord God!) that thou will accept thine own hatred against sin,
for that which I should and would have; and in stead of the sorrow I want, I
offer that of thy Son, my sweet Redeemer, with the Sacrifice of his immaculate
life and innocent death.

And since I cannot be impeccable by nature (O my Lord), nor dare presume to
ask to be so by grace; give me leave to prostrate my self before thy infinite
bounty and clemency, and beg (by the merits of Jesus Christ, thy dear Son, and
by the desires of thy essential love, the blessed holy Ghost), that though I
may not be impeccable, yet I may never sin more; and if I must sometimes sin
through my frailty, yet that I may never sin mortally.

This thou desire, O Lord, this thou demandest, this thou command; O give
me what thou command, and command me what thou please.

5. O my good Lord Jesu, who art Lord of my life, and should be the love of
my soul (had I not like an ungracious and ungrateful wretch given my heart,
and sold my affection, to fond, frail, filthy and fading creatures and
comforts, which are so far from bringing me either quiet of mind, peace of
conscience, purity of soul, or perfection of spirit; that they leave me nothing
but trouble, confusion and remorse, with a world of disquiet and desperate
thoughts, violent passions, and vicious inclinations), I find no other refuge,
or remedy but to return to thee my Center; to convert my self to thee, O my
good Lord and Master; to cast my self in all humility at thy sacred feet; and
heartily to beg thy mercy, pardon and reconciliation.

O merciful Father, I truly acknowledge my prodigality, and humbly confess my
treachery; and am sorry from my heart, that ever I offended thee, who deservest
so much love and service from me:

Beseeching thee as a guilty prisoner, to be pitiful to thy poor creature, and
mercifully to forgive me the manifold rebellions and grievous iniquities that I
have committed against thy Divine Majesty and goodness; and for the love of
thee, I freely forgive all them who have any way offended or contristated me,
sincerely acknowledging that I deserve no comfort from any creature, but all
contempt and confusion, and not only to be troubled by all on earth temporally,
but even to be tormented by the Devils in hell eternally.

6. O how ungrateful a child have I been to offend so often and so grievously,
so loving and liberal a Father so meek and merciful a Redeemer and so ^weet
and sovereign a Majesty, who has always showed himself so benign and
bountiful to me, tolerating me in my sins, and expecting me to his mercy!
wooing me to his love* and calling me to his service by a thousand means, all
which I have either rejected or neglected; and still nevertheless given me time
and opportunity to do penance?

O my poor soul! how blind and bewitched have thou been, to leave the bread of
Angels, and to feed on the husks of swine; for vanities, villainies; shadows,
and nothings, to abandon God and all goodness on whom depends all thy hope and
happiness, quiet and comfort for time and eternity?

O blindness! O folly! O frenzy!

Would God I had never sinned! Oh* that I might never sin more! O my God, what
have I done? Would I had suffered on the Cross, pains of body, and pangs of
soul, when I thus N. sinned!

Oh what can I say or do more? I abhor and detest whatsoever I have done, said,
thought or desired contrary to thy holy will (O my Lord and my love!) I
renounce all company* and occasions which may induce me to offend thee.

7. I cast my self at thy sacred feet, to be thy slave for ever, with a firm
resolution to bear thy Cross till death, and to do penance and satisfaction for
my past pride and pleasure, desiring nothing but to live at thy feet, like the
penitent Magdalen, in solitude, silence, submission.

O good Jesu! Out of thy infinite mercy, merits, and meekness; suffer not me,
thy poor creature, to be damned and separated from thee eternally! O amiable
eternity! O eternal amity of God! Shall I leave and lose thee, for filthy
pleasures, frail creatures, fond friendships, fading honors?

No, dear Lord, No: L^^ it please thee rather to take my soul out of my body,
than thy love out of my soul: let me rather die miserably, then sin mortally.

Let me pass on the rest of my pilgrimage in thy grace and fear, that I may end
my days in thy friendship and favor; which I beseech thee to grant me (O most
powerful and merciful Savior), by the love of thy sweet heart, by the merits
of thy bitter death and passion, by the intercession of thy Blessed Mother, and
by the suffrages of all holy* happy, and devout souls.

Upon all which relying, as upon so many sure anchors of my hope, I commit and
resign my self to thy disposition and providence, for time and eternity, (O my
Lord, my love, and my All,) fully trusting that thou will mercifully pardon my
sins, carefully assist me in my wants and weaknesses and in the end happily
bring me to eternal bliss, by such means as thy divine wisdom knows most
convenient for me.



FOR THVRSDAY. Of Subduing Sensuality to Reason.
The Fourth Exercise.
1. MY Spirit is willing (O most glorious and gracious Lord God), to serve
thee, love thee, honor thee, and follow thee; but my flesh is weak, frail and
refractory.

I do not what I desire (O my God), and what thou demandest; but I act that
which I hate, and what thou forbiddest.

I feel, O my Lord, a law of sensuality, contradicting the law of my mind,
captivating my reason, clouding my judgment, and continually striving to cast
me down headlong into sin and perdition.

Unhappy man that I am! Who will free me from this body of death? Ah* my
brutish body! ah! my burdensome flesh! Thou art my dangerous and deadly enemy.
It Is thy weight that depresseth my soul; thy earth that clog^ and corrupts my
air; thy contagion and perversity, which infects and debaseth my better part
and heavenly portion; thy sensuality* which draws on, endangers, and almost
destroys my reason.

2. Ah Sensuality! the source of all my misery! how justly do I now hate thee?
and how willingly would I leave thee?

At my first acquaintance with thee, thou defiledst me with original sin: In my
infancy thou made a beast of me; And now in my riper years, thou still
pursuest me, proclaimest open war with me, blindest my Understanding with
darkness ignorance and errors, make my Will refractory to good, and ready to
all evil, distractest my Memory with vain and vile fancies, and perpetually
tossest me to and fro between love and hatred, joy and grief hope and fear, and
the rest of thy numerous and enormous irascible and concupiscible powers and
passions.

Ay me! how sad is my state? how deplorable my condition? Oh! how long (Lord)
must I dwell with these devils? how long must I endure the violence of these
passions?

O my Lord, my strength, and my salvation* break these fetters for me! Command
a calm? (O thou only Ruler of Sea and winds) and appease the surges of these my
unmortified appetites: Oh! restore me to my self again, reduce reason to her
lost dominion in my soul, and bring back me thy poor creature, to thee, my
powerful Creator. O let not this passenger perish amidst these boisterous
billows, nor suffer utter shipwarck in these fearful tempests.

I suffer violence (O my Lord) answer for me: the companion which thou have
given me has deceived me: Sense has corrupted and conquered my Judgment. Oh!
how I am dragged up and down by my al-mastering appetites! commanded by my
servants, and fettered by my slaves: O tyranny! O indignity!

Ah my soul! O noble spirit, fair as the angels formed to thy Creators lovely
resemblance, stamped with his divine character, and heir apparent to his
glorious kingdom! To be thus subject to the base and brutall desires of flesh
and blood? O intolerable bondage! O unworthy servitude.

3. O Father of mercies, and only Physician of my soul! Thou art almighty, and
al-mercy; and I am all weakness, and all misery: There is no part left sincere
in my whole body and soul* from the contagious poison of passion, from the
infectious leprosy of sin and sensuality.

All is out of order, (O my Lord) I acknowledge it to my own shame and
confusion; each sense is gone astray, each member of my body is corrupted, each
power of my soul is perverted.

My Understanding is obscured with self-love, my Memory dist^acted with sensual
^b^ects* my Will possessed with peevish inclin^tions: My affections are vain my
passions violent* my dispositions vicious: My body is burdensome, my
imagination troublesome, my life irksome.

These are my wounds (O my heavenly Surgeon). O put to thy helping hand I
beseech thee; see, fear, and search them before the gangren enter, and the
grief grow incurable! My soul is sick even to death; if thou will, O my Lord,
thou can both cleanse and cure me.

To this end thou descendedst from Jerusalem to Jerico, (O pious Samaritan),
from heaven to earth (O compassionate Savior), where thou find me in this
pitiful plight sore, beaten, wounded, half dead, and utterly despoiled of all
natural and spiritual riches, by thieves and robbers, which are the senses of
my body, and the faculties of my soul: O pass not by me (sweet Jesu) but
mercifully bind up my bleeding wounds with the swathing bands of thy death and
passion; power upon them the wine of thy precious blood; and supple them with
the oil of thy heavenly grace.

4. I intend, o my Lord, (strengthen me in this hour), I intend, O sweet
Savior, a total reformation of life and manners; an entire mortification of my
corporeal senses, and spiritual faculties; an absolute change in my whole man.

O grant me (I beseech thee my loving Lord) the powerful assistance of thy
special grace, for the performance of this great and good purpose.

Teach me now (o my blessed Master), to live inwardly, piously, spiritually; as
I loved formerly to live outwardly, vainly, sensually.

O let me henceforth yield to thy divine motion, obey thy call, imitate thy
example, and follow thy will.

O let me never more act or omit any thing, (be it never so little), for my own
liking, but purely and perfectly for thy love.

5. Grant (o good Jesu) that at each word of my mouth, at each glance of my
eye, at each morsel I eat, at each member I move, and at each inward and
outward action I undertake, I may first ask thy leave and permission, and so do
it or leave it accordingly, as thy holy inspiration answers and allows me.

O that I could perform each natural and necessary work with an actual
reflection upon thy praise and pleasure, and with a pure intention to be united
to thee, my Lord and my love.

Thy outward senses, (o my sweet Savior) were exactly subject to thy reason,
and perfectly obedient to thy sacred soul: O let mine be swallowed up, I
beseech thee, (gracious Jesu) and sanctified by the merits of thine. Let me
live, love, move, and make use of my senses, purely and only, in thee, for
thee, and by thee.

Thy sacred hands (o holy Jesu) were harshly nailed to the tree of the Cross;
preserve mine I beseech thee from all sinful touching.

Thy blessed feet were likewise pierced and fastened to the same rood: O fix my
steps, that I run not to evil actions, direct them in thy paths, and make me
speedy in all works concerning thy honor, and the assistance of my neighbor.

Thy holy mouth was free from guile, full of wisdom: put thy words* (sweet
Jesu) into mine, let it always speak of thy love, and only sing thy praises.

Thy divine ears were filled with blasphemies and derisions: Let not mine be
open to hear vanities and detractions.

Thy sweet eyes, poured out floods of tears for me: O give unto mine, tears of
compassion for thy sufferings, and of compunction for my own sins.

Thy taste was tormented with the novsome potion of gall and vinegar: O take
from me, I beseech thee, all desire of delicacies; let me not eat or drink but
for mere sustenance and necessity.

Thy whole humanity (o gracious Jesu,) was martyred and murdered: O grant that
I may be truly and totally mortified; Let me not see, feel, hear, taste, smell,
eat, drink, do any thing, or make use of any thing, as following my own gust,
sensuality, and self-seeking; but in pure conformity to thy divine will and
pleasure.

6. O merciful Redeemer! how great and grievous were the inward sufferings of
thy holy soul? O for those thy sorrows, and thy tender mercies sake, cleanse,
cure, inlighten, inform, reform, and transform all my inward man.

O permit not my Understanding, where the knowledge of thy greatness and
goodness should be only seated to be overspread with ignorance and error.

Let not my Memory, which should be totally taken up with thee, be stuffed with
vain fancies or impertinent curiosities.

Let not my Will, which thou gav'st me to desire and love thee, (O my only Lord
and love), above all thy creatures, be enslaved to any inferior affection.

Repair, (o gracious Redeemer) this lively image of the lovely Trinity* which
is almost defaced by my brutish sensuality. Grant, (O dear Savior), that my
Understanding, Will and Memory, may be incessantly busied in knowing, loving,
and remembering thee, and that they may forget and forgo all other objects, but
only in thee and for thee.

7. O that my heart were perfectly disingaged from the love of all creatures!
Drain it (sweet Jesu) and deliver it from all foreign and domestic affection;
and fill it up again with thine only, that it may never love, desire, nor will
any thing but thee alone, O my Lord, my love, and my All.

O that my Will were conformable to thine, without any reservation or
retraction! Take it unto thee (Dear Lord) freely and fully, for time and
eternity: I will have no will but thine; dispose of me as thou please, here
and hereafter.

O that my Memory were disincombred from all imaginations, and purged from all
impressions, but of thee only! Empty it (o thou only amiable object of my
soul*) and then replenish it with such holy and heavenly notions as may best
please thy divine Majesty.

O that my Understanding were imbued with some measure of the knowledge of thy
divinity! O my Lord, infinite in goodness, dreadful in Majesty, and
unspeakable in all perfection! O my great, gracious and glorious God, Quicken
it, sharpen it, elevate it, and illuminate it, that knowing thee, I may not
choose but love thee; and that knowing and loving thee, I may be eternally
happy.

Behold (Lord), I make an absolute divorce with all self-love, sensuality, and
affection to creatures; and give thee my self by an irrevocable donation.

Behold, (Lord) the keys, the lodging, the treasure, and the Master prostrate
at thy sacred feet, Enter freely, possess all fully, dispose universally, and
command absolutely. Put me where thou will, give me what thou will, treat me as
thou will, Thine I am, (o my Lord, my love, and my All), for time and



FOR FRIDAY. Of Mortification, and perfect Abnegation.
The Fifth Exercise.
1. O Eternal, and ever Blessed Lord God! Thou have framed me of soul and body,
and fitted me with faculties proportionable to attain the end of my creation,
which is to love thee entirely, and to live with thee eternally. But alas! how
far am I from observing thy blessed and beautiful order?

Thou (o Lord) gav'st me a soul to bear all the sway in my body; Reason to have
the chief regency in my soul; thy Law to be the guide of my reason; and thy
self to be the sole mover and governor of my whole man.

But Oh! how have I wilfully crossed thy sacred design? contradicted thy
intention, and swerved from this perfection? My body, is all brutish, my soul
all animal, and my reason all sensual. I am all blindness, self-love, and
immortification.

Yet I know well, and thou (O eternal verity) have expressly told me; that
unless I renounce all, deny my self, take up my Cross, and follow thee, I can
never become thy true Disciple.

Ah, harsh words to my carnal ears! If thou will be my disciple, deny thy
self: If thou will be perfect, sell all; give away all, reform all, renounce
all, relinquish all: If thou will possess life eternal, contemn this life
temporal: If thou will be exalted in heaven, humble thy self in the world: If
thou will wear a crown with me, bear thy Cross with me. But (O my soul), how
will thou brook that more dismal sentence, Depart from me, thou accursed, into
eternal fire?

Wherefore (O my Lord) my love, and my all: Since Thou have taught me these
things by thy sacred word, and showed them by thy holy example: and thou art
the way, the truth, and the life; Grant, (O infallible truth) that I may
courageously walk in this thy perfect way, that so I may happily come to thee,
the only true and eternal life and love of my soul.

2. What dreadest thou (O my fearful and faithless heart?) Behold, Christ thy
King and captain is marched on before thee; Take up thy Cross, and travel
after him: he leads thee to a Kingdom; heaven is worth thy pains: O take
courage to mortify thy self, deny thy self, and die to thy self; that thou
mai'st live to Jesus, and with Jesus eternally.

Learn (O my soul) this short and securing lesson: Leave all things, and thou
shall find one thing which is all in all. Take courage, and fight valiantly
against thy own bad nature; pray, suffer, stoop, bear repugnances, swallow down
contradictions, digest injuries: the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence: The
end thou aymest at is perfection, the reward of thy conqucst, is eternal love,
eternal life, eternal happiness.

Behold, (o my Lord, my strength, and my salvation), I am fully resolved to lay
the ax to the root of this wicked tree. Help me, I beseech thee with thy grace
from above, that I may hew my self out of my self, that* I may kill, crucify,
and mortify my inveagling sensuality, cut off my evil inclinations, rectify
my disordered passions, and root out each thought or desire, which tends not
directly to thy honor, will and love, O my Lord and my God!

3. I know (Lord) that it is bootless to study perfection without the practice
of mortification; I confess I can never love thee truly, but in as much as I
hate my self really; such is the antipathy between self-love and thy holy
affection: Ah! how can a spirit distracted with contrary inclinations be freely
and fully vacant to thy divine contemplation? Put therefore I beseech thee, a
sluice to my unmortified passions, put a bound to my distraught heart, and
powerfully keep back those innumerous concupiscences, and corrupt imaginations
violently succeeding each other, that my united affections may intend thee
only, the only object of all happiness.

Gather (o my Lord) the dispersed forces of my soul from all multiplicity of
worldly affections, to the union of thy only love.

Keep, I beseech thee, my understanding, will, memory, imagination, and all my
inward and outward senses from roaming abroad: that carefully attending and
entertaining thy divine presence in my soul, I may attain true introversion,
simplification, and union of my Spirit with thine.

Reform (o my Lord), all the natural corruptions of my outward man, and
redress all the spiritual infirmities of my inward man; destroy and disperse
all internal and external enemies and opposers of thy holy love; possess me
perfectly, and dispose of me entirely according to thy divine will and pleasure.

4. To this end, (O bless my weak endeavors, al-mighty and al-merciful Lord
God), I will subtract all superfluities from my body, and accustom it to all
sorts of sufferings; that so I may fit it up for thee, O holy Spirit, who
dwell not with them that are sensual and subject to sin.

Alas! I have not yet resisted to the effusion of my blood; and should I spill
each drop of blood in my body, in this holy quarrel; how little ought I to
regard it in respect of the great good I expect?

I will therefore crucify thee, (O my flesh) with all thy concupiscences. I
will mortify my outward senses, the windows by which death steals into my
soul, the hinderers of my hearts tranquillity the destroyers of true devotion
the dispersers of inward recollection, and the utter ruiners of all the good
desires which I conceive and kindle in my prayers; Ah how soon is this divine
fire cooled, and quenched, not only by sin, but also by the distracting images
of outward objects?

I will keep a special and strict watch over my tongue, on which depends my
spiritual life or death; and cheerish thee (o beloved silence) which art the
key of piety, the keeper of innocence, and the preserver of purity.

I will trample down my inferior This is the chief exercise of Gods children,
not to be carried away with affections of flesh and blood, but to conduct
themselves according to Gods Spirit;
nature with all it is evil affections and motions, of love, hatred, joy,
sadness, desire, fear, hope, Anger* etc. I will order, dispose, and direct it,
according to the laws of reason, and thy divine inspirations, (o my Lord and my
God). Grant me courage, I beseech thee, to quell and curb this most dangerous
and my greatest enemy, which is the source of all my miseries; the citadell
from whence sin assails me, and Satan fetches his forces to fight against me;
Grant, good Lord, that I may Therefore, every one must strive to know his own
natural inclinations, and then employ all his forces, and apply all his prayers
and spiritual exercises to quel them.
never yield to this wicked Eve, persuading Adam (my Superior will) to eat the
forbidden fruit; (to consent to unlawful pleasures.)

O that I could tame these cruel beasts, my natural passions! how soon should
I be master of all moral virtues?

O that I could so till this vineyard, so delve this garden, so purge it from
all ill weeds of affections, and prune all superfluous surgeons and shoots of
passions, that the seed of thy grace, (o heavenly husbandman) might only there
take root; increase and fructify?

5. I will also mortify my Superior and rational part with all the curious
and fruitless speculations of my Understanding, all conceits of self-wisdom,
natural prudence, proper judgment, and good liking of my own proceedings: All
vain and foolish reflections of my Memory; And all petty desires and affections
of my Will, which relate not to thee, the only object and Lord of my love.

I am resolved, (o my Lord) to nip off each budding passion as soon as it peeps
up in my soul to trouble it in its true repose, and to hinder its liberty and
tendance to thy love.

I will (by thy gracious assistance) proceed faithfully and sincerely in the
hatred, denial, and mortification of my self, and in the prosecution of thy
divine love. And in order to this only end and aim, I make in thy presence, and
from the very bottom of my heart and soul these particular acts following.

I renounce, (o my Lord,) for the pure love of thee, all affection to worldly
things. Give them unto me (o gracious God,) or take them from me, as best
likes thy divine Majesty. I resign up all my interest in any thing, though
never so near and dear unto me. Behold, (o my Lord and lover) I uncloath my
soul from all affections whatsoever to creatures, and desire nothing but thy
self-alone O happy nakedness, O rich poverty of Spirit, O pure obedience to the
divine will in all things! Be you my hearts delight, my whole pleasure and
patrinony.

6. I renounce all self-seeking. Ah! my corrupt nature I abhor thee! Adieu all
private-interest, profit, praise and preferment! I will henceforth perform all
my actions and exercises (O my Lord God) for thy only pure and perfect love: I
will seek to please and praise thee with an inward, ardent and amorous
affection, for thy self only, and not for thy gifts or graces.

I renounce all sensuality; whether it be in meat, drink, sleep, apparel,
curiosity of my five senses, or any thing else whatsoever. (O my Lord) I will
make no other use of any thy creatures than I am absolutely compelled to by
necessity of nature. I look for no solace but from thee alone, My only comfort
and content.

I renounce all disordered love to any wo^ldly person. No favor or friendship,
(o my only amiable Lord God), no greatness or goodness of any one, shall make
me fwerve from my exact duty to theewards. No carnal affection to kindred, No
tenderness of amity, No private or public respect; No connivency or
correspondency shall make me partial in the reproof of vice, or praise of
virtue. O take up my whole heart with thy holy love, that thy perfect image and
perpetual memory may blot out all species of foreign objects.

I renounce all vain, vicious, idle and unprofitable thoughts, fancies and
imaginations. O let my mind not only yield no consent, but no entrance unto
them! O let me never more contristate thy holy Spirit with these vanities; nor
hinder my souls advancement and union with thee by these divertisments. I will
henceforth compel my heart to some good employment: I will no longer permit it
to wander and wast it self in any idle and superfluous curiosities. No, my Lord
and Savior, thy bitter and blessed passion, thy blessings and benefits, shall
be the continual occupation of my interior. O what have I to do with
transitory things, who am made for eternity!

I renounce all care and solicitude, which necessity, obedience and charity* do
not oblige me to. No natural passions of joy, sorrow, hope, fear, love,
hatred, anger or shamefastness shall make any impression in this heart of mine,
which is preingag'd in thy affection, sealed up and settled in thy
contemplation. No pretext of lawfulness, nor show of fittingness, nor conceit
of compassion, nor excuse of necessity, shall procure the admittance of such
passions into my soul, as may any way distract, darken or dull the point of my
affection and devotion toward thee, my only Lord and love.

I renounce all bitterness of heart against any one. Is he good? be thou
eternally praised in him and by him, (O bountiful bestower of all blessings).
Is he wicked? Correct him, (o merciful Creator,) comfort, encourage and raise
him to amendment. Has he offended, affronted, injured, or slighted me? I
deserve, (o great God) to be trodden on by all creatures, and therefore I freely
forgive him for the past, and give him free leave to add stripes to his
injuries for the future. Am I denied the grant of my most lawful and just
demands? Thou best know (O eternal wisdom) what is best for my state and
condition; O deny not thy love to my soul, and let me be refused in all other
my requests whatsoever.

I renounce all vainglory, all self-liking and pride which may arise from
worldly praises, al delight springing from any gift of nature or grace which is
in me. Not unto me (Lord) but to thy holy name be given all honor and glory.
Alas! what am I? what have I? what can I? All is thine, (O my bountiful Lord
God) Nothing is mine but sin; and therefore I deserve only shame and confusion.

7. I renounce all desire of delight in my devotions, all sensible gusts of
grace, and all sweetnesses and solaces in the inferior faculties of my soul.
Ah, my heart! what is all this to thee? follow thou thy Savior. Thou seek
thy crucified Jesus: This is not he, but his gifts. O my Lord, it is thy self I
seek and sigh after: If thou send'st me comforts for the encouragement of my
weakness, be thou ever praised, for thou do like a most benign and bountiful
God: If thou withdrawest them, still blessed be thy providence, which has
secret and several ways of conducting souls to thy self; and if thou will
make trial of my fidelity, by permitting me to be dull, dry, and desolate in
my devotions, be thou equally and eternally blessed.

I renounce all scrupulosity of Conscience, which reflects any way upon the
least diffidence or distrust in thy mercy. I am a sinner (O Jesu) but thou art
a Savior. I have great reason to dread thy justice; but greater to hope in thy
goodness. Heaven and earth shall sooner fail, than my confidence in thee my
merciful maker. If thou kill me, I will trust in thee; And if I had formerly
hated thee, and betrayed thee as Judas did, I would now with penitent Magdalen
run to thy blessed feet, weep and bemoan my misery, and hope to obtain thy
mercy.

And finally, (O my Lord), I absolutely entirely, and irrevocably renounce my
whole Will in all things, and totally resign whatsoever any way concerns me,
to thy holy will and pleasure. I offer up unto thee the full sacrifice, both
principal and accessorie, of all that (by thy gift and grace) I am, have, and
can; my self, goods* graces, body, soul, senses, heart, will, all. I leave no
right or title to any selfness in any thing whatsoever: I am no more my self,
but thy slave. O Lord, not my will but thine be done for time and eternity. O
let me will what thou will, or not will at all. Let all my desires be
involuntary if they swerve never so little from thy divine pleasure. Die
self-will: Live Jesus, my Lord, my Love, my All.



FOR SATVRDAY. Of Conformity to Christ Crucified.
The Sixth Exercise.
1. CRucified Jesus! thou only Lord of my life, life of my love, and love of my
soul! O that I could reform my life, Deiform my love, and conform my soul to
thee* the absolute pattern of all perfection!

O that I could imprint thy lively and lovely image in my heart! fasten all my
affections and imperfections to thy sacred Cross, drown all my desires and
defects in thy dear wounds, put off my self totally, and put thee on entirely,
O sacred humanity! o my suffering Savior!

O that I could perfectly imitate thee, the pure exemplar of all virtues! that
I could give up my whole self to thee* by an act of irrevocable donation, as
thou demandest and command!

But alas! I am yet, (O my Jesu,) all self-love, sin and sensuality. I
acknowledge* (O my Lord) what I have, and what I want; I know what I desire and
what I deserve. I confess I am wounded, I am wicked. I am wretched, and I
tremblingly come to thee, my heavenly Physician, to be cured, converted,
comforted.

O sweet Savior! for thy mercies sake, and for thy passions sake, Forget and
forgive what I have been, pity what I am, satisfy for what I deserve, and
supply what I desire.

2. Behold (most merciful Jesus) I first cast my self at thy sacred Feet,
pierced and fast'ned to the cruel Cross for my transgressions: Pierce my flesh
(O my Lord) with thy fear, and fasten my soul to thy love. O let not pride and
presumption nestle any longer in that heart, which thou (O meek Savior) love
so tenderly, and redeemest at so dear a rate. O my vain glory and arrogancy
what have I to do with you, how much do I now detest you? Wash off these
stains, (O Jesus) from my poor soul, in these sweet streams flowing from thy
wounded Feet. O drown these my imperfections in these sacred Seas of piety.

Give me (O Gracious Lord) such true humility of spirit, that I may perfectly
perceive the abyss of my own nothing and naughtiness, and rightly conceive the
immensity of thy greatness and goodness; whereby I may depress my self
unfeignedly, and exalt thee only in my soul. Let me be content to be contemned
by all creatures, desire to be despised, be willing to be trodden on as dirt and
dust and the very outcast of the whole world: O let me really hate all honor,
and humbly pronounce with mouth and mind, I am nothing, have nothing, deserve
nothing, desire nothing, but only to please thee perfectly, (my Jesu) praise
thee perpetually, love thee purely, and live with thee eternally.

3. Grant me also, good Jesus, by the merits of these thy wounds, the virtue of
perfect obedience. O let me never tire in trampling down self-will, in
forsaking my own sense, in subduing self-judgement, in submitting my spirit
inwardly to thy inspirations, and outwardly not only to my Superiors
injunctions, but even to the commands of all thy creatures. O let me have no
propriety, affection, or affectation in my own proceedings, but wholly mind thy
holy pleasure in all things.

Let me lay down all my desires at thy sacred Feet (O my Jesus), saying, Lord,
what will thou have me do? so transforming my will into thine, by an absolute
forsaking, denying, and annihilating my whole self.

Let me receive, (O my Savior) as from thy secret providence and permission,
not only patiently but thankfully, all pain, all poverty, all shame, all
sickness, and all sufferings whatsoever; acknowledging that I truly deserve
worse, and desiring willingly to endure more, that so I may have a more perfect
resemblance of thee, my crucified Lord.

Let me learn, (O my Lord), by thy blessed example, the holy lesson of discreet
silence, not only from ill and idle talk, but even from all needless, and
unprofitable discourses: Let me rather edify by the purity of my life and
conversation, than by multiplicity of words and conceptions.

O give me (sweet Jesus) a free and frequent access to thy sacred Feet during
the whole course of my life, and a sure comfort in them at the hour of my death.

4. From thy blessed Feet, (O my dear Lord) I raise my humble devotion to thy
al-holy Hands: and beg leave to cast into the sweet fountain issuing from thy
powerful right Paulm, my manifold sins of malice and injustice; with all my
faults of hypocrisy and ingratitude, falsehood and infidelity, rancor, and
revenge.

Renew, (O Lord God) a right spirit within my bowels: Let exact justice be the
square of all my actions; truth the touchstone of my words; and sincerity the
subject of my thoughts.

Let me be punctual in performing my duty to thee, zealous in punishing my
self, and charitable in compassionating my neighbor. Let me ever yield, first
unto thy sacred Majesty, all honor and glory, reverence and respect, laud and
love, grati^ude and obedience, with my whole heart, soul, and strength; next,
to my Superiors, equals, and inferiors, and lastly to my own body, soul and
senses, that which is my duty, and each one of their respective dues. O let me
fully perform what I am bound to, carefully eschew what is forbidden me, and
uprightly walk according to my calling.

O let me never presume to slight, scorn, suspect, judge, or condemn any
person; but sincerely serve, succor, and seek the temporal and spiritual good
of all men whatsoever, even of my professed and most peevish enemies.

Lord Jesus, give me grace to imitate thy virtues, to be grateful for thy
gifts, and to make use of thy goodness in order to my souls advancement in the
way of thy dear love* and desired union with thy divine Majesty.

5. And in the Sacred wound of thy left hand, I humbly intomb all my offenses
of Negl^gence, tepidity, sluggishness* cowardice, and pusillanimity; all my
covetous desires, all impurity, and all intemperance. Purge me, (O my powerful
Lord), purify me (O my merciful Savior). Give strength, comfort and courage to
my feeble and frail nature, that I may pass undauntedly through all
difficulties and dangers, to come to thee, my Jesus, to lay hold on thee, and to
repose in thee, the only Center of my desires.

Grant me (O my Lord) chastity of body, and cleaness of heart; temperance in my
appetites, and sobriety in my senses* gravity in my deportment, and moderation
in all my proceedings; that nothing may dislike thee in my soul, nor dissolve
the sacred knot wherewith thou have fastened me unto thee.

Give me also (O Jesus my Lord) perfect poverty of spirit. O permit not my soul,
intended to enjoy thee, the only solid and satiating riches, to be entangled
with the least affection to the poor and perishable trifles of this world.
Behold, I cast my self, uncloathed from all creatures, into thy naked embraces,
(O crucified Savior) I desire to clip nothing in my folded arms, but a breast
burning with desires to please thee (my Creator), and a heart melting away in
thy love. I make choice of thy bare Cross, (O Christ) for my best inheritance;
I stretch out my opened folds, to meet thy holy and heavenly huggings. O let me
never more be unclasped from thy blessed bosom: Be thou (O my
great-little-naked-Iesu) my rest during the short time of my life, and my
refuge at the dreadful hour of my death.

6. And now, O merciful Savior, I humbly convert my eyes and contemplation,
to thy sacred Head crowned with thorns, and thy divine Face, all besmeared with
gore and spittle* for my sake: Here, I implore strength, (O Jesu) for the
weaknesses of my head, and pardon for the wickednesses of my five wits and
senses. (O my Lord) I desire to bury in these thy innumerous wounds, the
enormous number of my iniquities; and I beseech thee for these thy sufferings
sake, to adorn my weak capacity with so much solid wisdom as may fitly suit
with my condition. O let me never think, speak, or act any thing, which is not
seasoned with the salt of discretion! Let me seriously weigh each circumstance,
and patiently wait thy leave and leisure, before I leap into any work.

Inlighten me, to see clearly thy will and pleasure, and empower me exactly to
fulfill and follow it: Open the eyes of my Understanding to behold my own
baseness and wickedness, and give me thy gracious assistance to reform it: Help
me to form a right judgment of the real vileness and vanity of all transitory
things, and indue my heart with courage to contemn them.

Inebriate my affection, (o amiable Jesus) with the sweetness of thy love, and
let all worldly solaces savor of bitterness to my soul. Let me be deaf, blind,
and dumb, to all things which are not thy self, o my crucified Savior.

Let me prudently discern, and piously perform, each parcel of my duty, in it is
due circumstance of time, place, order, measure and manner. Let that holy and
innocent simplicity (which is the virtue of thy Saints) shine in all my
actions. Let me not be curious to know much, but careful to practice much, and
cordial to love thee much, (O my only Lord and love).

Cleanse my Will from all self-seeking; Keep my Memory from all superfluities;
Close up my Senses from all vanities, that my happy soul, separated from all
sensible images, may quietly tend to thee only, sweetly repose in thee, and
continually enjoy thy blessed presence.

O let thy pure and perfect love, (dear Lord Jesus) be the faithful scout-watch
over all my proceedings; that no foreign affection, no sinister intention, no
self-liking or self-seeking may steal into my heart, and defraud or disturb
it is happy enjoyment of thee, and holy unity with thy divine Spirit.

Grant, (O my Lord), that I may prudently turn all good events, and all bad
accidents, to my spiritual profit; by reflecting wherefore they befall me, of
what they warn me, and how far they concern me. Let me learn thereby, gratitude
to thy goodness, fervor in prayer, contempt of my self, humility of spirit,
care of my actions, resignation to thy will amendment of my life, or what else
thy holy Spirit shall please to intimate by these fatherly visitations.

O sacred Head of my crucified Savior, be thou my certain succor, during my
lives conflict, and my sure place of retreat, in my last agony with death.

7. And lastly I reverently approach to thy dear Heart, (o amiable Lord Jesus),
opened with a cruel lance in the sight of thy blessed Mother, and thy beloved
Disciple, for the love of my soul. O my Jesus, I here implore thy pardon for all
my perverse affections, and irregular appetites.

Give me thy leave (o my loving Lord) to creep into this sweet hole of the
rock, this sacred cleft of the wall, this unlocked closet of heavenly
treasures, this saving Ark of the new Testament, and shut thou (O Jesus) the
door from without, that free from the deluges of all wickedness, and dangers of
the world, flesh, and devil, I may sit solitarily, silently, and sweetly
harkening to thy divine whispers in my elevated soul.

Purge all my impurities, (o my dear Savior) in the precious blood streaming
from thy patent side, and replenish my heart with thy perfect love! Oh! drown
me, wound me, burn me, and consume me in thy divine flames of affection; that I
may love thee strongly, purely, perfectly, perseverantly.

O grant me to leave all things with alacrity for thee (my beloved Jesus),
though never so great; to loathe all things joyfully for thy love, though never
so good; to do all things contentedly for thy honor, though never so hard; to
suffer all things patiently for thy sake, though never to painful; and to
persever constantly in my pious practices, for the sole satisfaction of thy
holy will, and accomplishment of thy blessed pleasure.

O let me be incessantly calling and knocking at this sacred gate of mercy* Let
me be still sighing and seeking after thee, (my Jesus, my Savior, my Lord, and
my love): Let me be always thinking, ever talking and perpetually tending to
unite my heart to thine, to conform it unto thine, to transform it into thine,
that I may be all thine, and thou all mine for time and eternity.

Grant also, (dear Jesus) that I may truly love all others in thee and for thee.
O inflame my charity, quicken my faith, rectify my intentions, strengthen my
confidence in thee, destroy all complacence in my self, establish me in all
these my good purposes, and let me be as often minded of my now-promised duty,
and encouraged to proceed forwards in the path of perfection, as I shall eye
the sacred image of thy crucified humanity.

Elevate my desirous soul unto thy self, (o Jesus my Lord) above all chances,
changes, and creatures. Oh! let it be so totally attentive to thy presence, so
entirely taken up in thy contemplation, and so wholly absorpt in thy love; that
no outward objects may touch or trouble it, no inferior cares or cogitations
may entangle it, nothing may impede the free intercourse of thy heavenly
friendship, nothing may stop the sweet influence of thy divine graces, or any
way interrupt it is happy quiet and holy tranquillity.

O dear and opened Heart of my dying Lord Jesus, be thou my sweet comfort
during this lives pilgrimage, and my sure Sanctuary in it is last period.



FOR SUNDAY. Of perfect Union with God.
The Seventh Exercise.
1. O Infinite, immense and unmeasurable abyss of all bounty! O ever-flowing
fountain of mercy! O undraynable Sea of love! O my Lord, my Sovereign my
Savior, and my Sanctifier! Behold I return into thee, the sweet source of my
beginning; I run into thee the gracious preserver of my being; and I desire to
rest in thee, the only hope of my souls happiness.

Be thou henceforth, (O my Creator) the sole subject of my thoughts, and the
only object of my love: Be thou, (o God of my heart, heart of my life, life of
my soul, and soul of my love) my part and my inheritance for ever: I choose
thee only, I offer up my self wholly, I consecrate my self heartily, and
dedicate my self eternally to thy love, honor, and service,

Ah, good God! where dwell thou? which is the pleasant plaee of thy abode, o
King of glory, and comforter of my soul? I seek nothing but thy lovely
presence, I desire nothing but the presence of thy love. My soul sighs to see
thee, my heart covets to have thee, my love longs to enjoy thee, and I can
expect no perfect content, until I am totally united unto thee.

If I now beg a glimpse of thy divine face, (O my glorious Lord) then a drop of
thy heavenly grace, and afterward a dram of thy dear affection; Yet in all
this, it is thy self, (O sweet God) which I demand: thy whole self is the only
satiating object of my boundless desires and unlimited affections.

2. I desire to love thee (o only amiable Lord God), by all means, and beyond
all measure, until I am totally transformed into thee by love: O do thou freely
and fully possess my spirit, guide it, govern it, inlighten it, inflame it,
elevate it, inform it, and transport it, how and when thou please.

Oh! Let all adulterate love be quite banished, all multiplicity vanish away,
and all impurity and self-seeking swallowed up: Let thy love be my light, my
liberty, my life!

Lord, I desire but two things in this world: To love, see, taste, and enjoy
thee my best beloved; and to be humbled, despised, rejected, and esteemed a
reprobate for thy love.

O sweet life! O loving Jesu! what a heaven, what a happiness is it to love
thee? O how lovely, how loving, and yet how little loved is my God?

O source of all goodness, and center of all good souls! What is the greatest
love of mother, friend, life, or any thing else? Art not thou (my God) all this
to me, and all in all? Ah, my soul! what did thou ever best love? And did
thou love thy Lord God as much? I blush, (O my dear Lord), I sigh, and am
ashamed to answer: I will henceforth do any thing, suffer any thing, and leave
all things for thy love. I will not live but languish, not breathe but burn, by
reason of ecstasy and excess of love.

3. O fire! O flames! Burn, consume, annihilate. Alas! Beauty of Angels, how
late and how little do I love thee? O come into my soul; behold a poor lodging,
yet such as it is, it is all thine: I conceal nothing, I reserve nothing;
heart, soul, spirit, all is thine own, compose all, dispose of all, depose all
unruly passions, impose what penance thou please, I accept it, (o my Lord)
only repose peaceably in my soul, and let no foul or false affection interpose
it self, or disturb this blessed union.

O that I could please and praise thee purely, perfectly, perpetually! Oh, that
I could love thee faithfully, freely, and fully, in all and above all things, o
my all and only love!

I acknowledge my self bound, (o Lord) in thy chains of charity, I am burned in
thy fire, I am wounded, and won to thy love; But what shall I say, What can I
give? All I have is not worthy of thee, and yet is thine already: Ask (my sweet
Lord) and have, choose and take, make me such as thou desire, and then take
me to thy desire.

Give thy self, (o great God) to my soul, and then take my soul with thy self
in it: My life, liberty, love and all is thine own. My last will is already
made, in which I bequeath all to thee, Thine own death and passion, all thy
mercies and merits, all the praises and perfections of thy dear Mother and the
blessed Saints and Angels, and all the goods, glories and splendors of all thy
creatures.

All that I am, have, and can, both spirituals and temporals; kindred, friends,
riches, health, honors, estates, offices, devotion all is at thy disposition. I
am resolute, (o my Lord) I am resigned and indifferent, to have them increased
or diminished, to use them to thy glory, or to lose them altogether.

4. I give thee back, (o merciful Maker) my whole being, either to be what thou will, or to be nothing at all; to love thee, or not to live at all.

I offer to thee, (o pious Redeemer,) my sins to pardon, my works to perfect,
my will to purify. I offer thee my wounds to cure, my soul to cleanse, and my
spirit to comfort.

I offer to thee (O holy Spirit) my intentions to rectify, my inclinations to
sanctify, my affections to deifie.

Finally, I offer all for one, I give all to one, and all I desire is to be all
one with thee, my all and only Lord and love.

Thou have given me, (O my bountiful Creator), the whole world in freehold,
for one penny of Rent, saying; Child, give me thy heart: O Lord! Let this penny
never want the superscription of thy grace, and let me never want thy grace to
pay this rent.

O my Lord, all that I have is but two small mites* I cast them into thy hands,
and had I more, I would give more: Dispose of them both (dear Lord), of my body
and soul, as best pleases thee, that thy will may be perfectly performed, and
thy name purely sanctified in both.

O sweet God of my heart! Let me embrace thee in the two arms of profound
humility, and perfect charity.

O let my heart faint and melt away in the fire of thy divine love, let me lose
my self to find thee, be out of my self to live in thee, and be empty of my
self to be full of thee.

O fun of Justice, dissolve with a beam of thy brightness the frost of my
heart, and resolve it into tears of affection.

5. O beautiful and best-beloved of my soul! I am weary of this wretched world:
and I breathe, thirst and sigh after thee the sweet fountain of life-giving and
soul-saving waters: O thou true rest and refresher of my faint and feeble
heart, out of whom there is neither comfort nor content, Let me shroud my self
under the shadow of thy wings, until iniquity and infirmity have an end.

Come, (Lord Jesu) Speak thy sweet words of love to my languishing soul, for
thy servant hears thee. Give me courage, alacrity, fervor and fidelity in thy
service, the few remaining moments of my wretched and wearisome pilgrimage.

O rest, long expected, and much sighed after! where shall I seek thee? and when
shall I find thee? where sleep thou (O dear Spouse) at midday, in the heat
of love? Where is thy secret cabinet of Contemplation, which thou hidest from
the wisdom of worldling, and revealest to little ones and humble of heart? O
show me the bed of divine Union, wherein thou reposest with the simple,
solitary, and mortified soul! O let my poor heart have the honor and happiness
to rest in thee, to remain with thee, and to be united to thee!

O God of love! wound my soul with thy sweet wounds of love, which nothing can
cure but death, wean it from the worlds vanity, and wed it to thy increated
verity; that treading all creatures under me, I may be rapt into thee (my
Creator) above my-self, and there like the happy Dove in the secure Ark, repose
my weary and faint lims in the bosom of thee, my Sovereign Lord and lover.

6. O divine wisdom! Lead me into the solitude, speak unto my heart, teach me
thy holy will in all occurrences. My deep sighs, and secret desires are not hid
from thee; Thou know nothing can fully cure, comfort and content me but thy
self, the one and only necessary thing: O take my self and all, and give me
that one thing in whom are all things.

O sweet waters of divine Love! which flow from the blessed bosom of the
divinity, and from the open side of my Saviors humanity! Run into my bowels,
and like pure oil, penetrate and possess every parcel of my spirit; Irrigate
and inebriate it, overflow and absorp it, that it may be transformed and
conformed to the divine Spirit* so that all my actions, cogitations, and
affections may be spiritual, divine, and Deiform.

O let my ravished soul, full of life and fire, break forth into these flames
of joy and jubilation, I have found him, whom my soul loves: I have him, and I
will hold him. This is he, which by reading I sought* by meditation I found, by
prayer I desired, and by contemplation I enjoy.

O how the earth stinks? how loathsome are all creatures to me? O taste, O
sweetness, O true and solid pleasure! O how great is the difference between
this spiritual, and all fleshly delights? O the multitude of thy sweetnesses,
which thou have laid up, O Lord, for them that fear and love thee! O lights! O
delights! O ecstasies of spirit!

Wound me, (O sweet God) burn me, consume me, crucify me; Let me cry out with
that Lover, Retain, O Lord, the floods of thy grace, or enlarge my heart, for I
can hold no longer. I thirst, Lord, give me this water. O when? how long? how
much?

7. O my soul! how good is it for us to be here? O sweet and secure home and
harbor! Let us remain and rejoice here for ever. I will keep thee, O my dearly
beloved, and I will kiss thee; I will conjure thee to remain with me, I will
rather lose my self, than leave thy presence.

My beloved is mine; his honor is mine, his heart is mine, his heaven is mine:
And I am his; behold the key, the keeper, the soul, the body, the lord, the
whole (o my God) is thine; Behold, my liberty, my life, my love, all is thine,
(o my Jesu) and thine alone; Repose therefore, as a sweet posie, between my
breasts; sleep, like a bridegroom, in my heart; and reign, like a King, in the
most intim closet of my soul.

Come, Lord Jesu, come quickly; take full possession of thy own: Come, and
please thy self, love thy self, and serve thy self in me, as thou desire and
deservest to be pleased, loved, served.

Let thy love* (O King of love) be the life of my soul, and the lease of my
life, that when I cease to love, I may cease to live.

In thy love, (O Jesu) I end this act of love, though my desire actually to
love thee be endless: Oh! let me live and die in thy love, and for thy love,
that by love I may for ever reign and remain with thee, in thy Kingdom of love.
Amen.

THE THIRD TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, The Ascent of the pious
soul by Steps and Degrees of Virtues, to the happy Mountain of Perfection.

Psalm. 83. v. 8. They shall go from virtue into virtue.

The God of Gods, shall be seen in Syon.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

To the Devout Champions tending to Perfection.
THis Spiritual ladder (O dear Souls) will show you how much you have profited
in pure and solid devotion; how far you have proceeded in the way of the
Spirit; how forward you are in seeking God, and forsaking your selves; and what
progress you have made in your journey toward heaven: Contemplate therefore
your selves often, in this impartial mirror; bewail your backwardness, shake
off your sloathfulness, increase your fervor, and encourage your diligence to
climb this sacred Mountain of Perfection, and to pass on cheerfully from virtue
to virtue, Psalm. 83. 8.
till you happily come to the beatifying sight of your Lord God in Sion.

The Seven Degrees of Perfection.
1.Upon the first Step, stand they who are Faithful Catholics, Fearful of
Gods judgments, and Careful to avoid mortal sin. These are Beginners, who
have little inward light, stand upon slippery ground, and though they may be
saved, yet so as by fire.

2. On the second Step, stand Proficients, who strive to avoid venial sins, and
conquer their sensuality; but are slow in tending to Perfection, and subject to
be self-conceited.

3. On the third Step, stand they who casting off sloth, tame themselves with
austerities; but their intentions are not pure, nor they well grounded in
self-denial.

4. On the fourth Degree, stand they who have gotten into their interior; but
yet seek for solaces, and are discouraged with adversities.

5. On the fifth Step, stand they who are fully resigned, and perfectly
obedient; but fail for want of experience and courage.

6. On the sixth Step, stand they who have gotten a perfect habit of
resignation and constancy; but desire comforts to enable their perseverance;
Here also stand they who are indifferent to comforts or desolations, but yet
they rest in Gods favors with some propriety: Here furthermore stand they who
are satisfied with God only; but are not absolutely as willing to leave divine
favors, as to have them.

7. On the seventh and highest Degree of Perfection, stand the elevated and
contemplative souls, Gods faithful friends and favorites, who are perfectly
indifferent, resigned and obedient in all things, to his divine will and
pleasure.



The first and lowest Degree of Perfection.
THe first Step and groundwork of all virtue and perfection, is, To be well
settled in the Upon the first step of this ladder, stand Beginners, who are
Faithful Catholics, Fearful of Gods judgments Careful to avoid mortal sin;
Catholic faith, Fearful of Gods severe judgments, and Careful to avoid all
mortal sin. This is the Church porch, and entrance into Gods holy Temple; but
they who stand here, remain cold in charity, careless and undiligent in their
lesser duties, remiss in spiritual exercises, negligent in thinking of their
obligation, by which they stand engaged to tend toward perfection; and finally
they greedily gape after all conveniences of their corrupted nature, and give
up themselves to glut and solace their depraved sensuality.

These Beginners have very little But they have little inward light,
or no inward light, they know not what is the meaning of mortification, what
it is to get into their interior, or what Introversion signifies; but they
seemingly satisfy and secure themselves, in that they have a will to avoid the
known and capital sins, whereby they hope to escape hell, and avoid Gods heavy
judgments.

Surely such souls stand upon very unsafe and slippery ground, and Stand upon
slippery ground,
their salvation is in a doubtful and dangerous condition: for they are so
blinded and bewitched with self-love and sensuality, that they cannot well
distinguish, perfectly discern, nor rightly judge, what sins are of mortal
danger, and what not; so that conversing daily amidst such multitudes of
perils, and shaking hands with the world, the flesh and the devil, with so much
freedom and so little care and precaution; what do they else, but dance (as it
were) upon the very brink of hell, from whence, if they once tread awry, they
infallibly tumble headlong into that bottomless dungeon of eternal perdition?

Yet in case they should indeed And though they may be saved,
foot it so warily all their life time, that death takes them not tripping, nor
fallen into mortal offense, (a thing most rare, and not to be presumed on by
any one, who carries himself so carelessly), they shall surely be saved; but so,
as by fire: They must expect a most sharp and severe Yet so, as by fire. 1 Cor.
3. 13. 15.
punishment, a long and piercing purgatory, by reason of their unmortifi'd
affections to venial sins, their giving scope to their unbridled senses, their
neglect of Gods love, their coldness in charity, and their tepidity in tendance
to perfection. And as for their good works, they are not likely to be there
much available; since their groundwork was servil fear, their end self-love,
and their whole drift and intention altogether sinister, and deficient from
that purity and perfection, wherewith they should have been performed.

The Second Degree of Perfection.
THey stand on this second Step, who harkening to Gods holy inspirations,
following his internal On the 2. step, stand Proficients, Who are careful to
shun venial sins, and conquer sensuality;
attractions, and obeying the sweet invitations of his Spirit, keep themselves
disingaged from all vain affections to the world, yield not to the enticements
of flesh and blood, resist the suggested temptations of the devil, and
carefully avoid all occasions of offending their Lord and maker, so much as
venially.

To help on this pious design, they put themselves into good company, seek to
converse with virtuous people, are diligent in their devotions, zealous
frequenters of the Sacraments, and painful practisers of the corporal and
spiritual works of charity.

But by reason they are yet slow in the pursuit of solid virtue, and slack in
their tendance to Perfection, But are slow in tending to perfection,
they are still subject to fall into their enemies snares and ambushes: For
they are terrified at the difficulty of getting an entire conquest over their
passions and imperfections, and therefore seem to satisfy and solace their
minds with what they have already done, and left, for the love of God,
presuming overmuch upon his goodness, flattering themselves with a certain
self-security, fancying that they are in a sufficiently good condition; whence
they fall into a false opinion of their and ^^bject to be self-conceited.
own worth, and an erroneous conceit that little or nothing is wanting to them:
All which maxims manifest their secret pride and presumption, and render them
by degrees, careless of their further increase and progress in the path of
spirituality.

The Third Degree of Perfection.
Unto which those proficients are ascended, who have more perfectly vanquished
all affections to the On the 3. step, stand they, who casting ^ff sloth, tame
themselves with austerities;
world, subdued their sensuality to the rule of Reason, and changed their
sloathfull and sluggish indisposition, into a noble and generous resolution of
mortifying each unruly passion, and wrestling with their evil inclinations: And
to this end, they fall seriously and severely to work, applying corporal
austerities, fastings, watchings, wearing of hair-cloaths, long vocal prayers,
and faithfully practice such painful means, as may probably help them forward
in their desired conquest over themselves in the acquisition of virtues, and in
their tendance to perfection.

But because their intentions, in But their intentions are not pu,
the performance of these pious practices, are not pure, sincere, divested of
all selfishness, and simply for Gods supreme honor alone; but have some small
mixture of servil fear, which looks upon hell and punishment; or of self-love,
which eyes heaven and reward, rather than Gods only pleasure and liking;
therefore they are yet seduced by the devils subtilty, and drawn into a certain
secret delighting in their own supposed good deeds, relying overmuch upon
these outward exercises, and neglecting Nor are they welgrounded in self-denial.
their inward man, by not laying there the true groundwork of solid virtue,
which is perfect mortification and self-denial; but following the track of
nature, in it is love to these seeming, sensible, and satisfying practices, not
duly weighing how highly they hinder the operation of Gods holy Spirit in their
souls.

The Fourth Degree of Perfection.
Unto which they are cl^mb'd, who rightly considering the nobility of the
inward exercise, get Upon the 4. step, stand they, who have gotten into their
interior;
into themselves, and there study diligently how they may unite their souls to
their Creator, with fervent desires and filial affections.

Yet these are oftentimes self-seekers, But yet look for solaces,
lovers of their own will, and desirers of solaces and sweetnesses in their
devotions, rather than the pure pleasure of God: they glory in their own way of
the Spirit, and prefer it before that of their brethren; which shows them to
have a touch of spiritual pride, and argues them of immortification.

And though in time of comfort they seem well resigned to endure all
dereliction; yet they are troubled when any cross comes upon them, and
discouraged when and are discouraged with adversities.
the least adversity befalls them: If they are commanded to leave what they
love, or act what they like not, they soon show what they are, and what spirit
leads them; they declare their disobedience, fall into grudgings and
murmurations, and make apparent the hypocrisy of their pretended resignation.
Such persons therefore must strive seriously to restrain this wilful
propriety, and give up themselves truly and totally to Gods good pleasure, and
the guidance of their spiritual conductor, without any manner of restraint or
reservation: which is the only secure and short way for them to attain to the
next higher Degree of Perfection.

The fifth Degree of Perfection.
IN which are placed those pious souls, which truly renounce their own wills in
all their actions, exercises, On the 5. step, stand they, who are fully
resigned,
and devotions, and are fully resigned to the divine pleasure and disposition:
These promptly obey, not only Gods inward calls, and their Superiors commands,
and perfectly obedient;
but even the becks of all men living, in all things which appear consonant to
Gods honor, and conducing to their self-denial and mortification: Their
chiefest care is to conserve cleanness of heart, their daily prayer is to
purchase purity of conscience, and their unwearied endeavors drive only at
the perfect union of their souls to their sweet Savior.

But because they are not yet masters in this sacred art, but young and raw
Scholars in this track of true and total resignation; But fail for want of
experience, and courage.
they sometimes fail for want of courage, constancy, Stediness and solidity in
it; all their affections are not absolutely rooted out and mortified by
sufficient use and experience in spirituality, which makes them yet waver in
their station, stagger in their resolution, slip down now and then into some
lower pit of self-love, and admit of some little point of propriety: yet they
soon arise, return, and regain their standing, by the help of selfdenial and
resignation.

The Sixth Degree of Perfection.
Upon which stand those holy On the 6. step, stand they, who have a habit of
resignation;
Contemplatives, who by much experience and long continued diligence, have
gotten a perfect habit of resignation, and a resolute perseverance and
constancy in their good purposes, free from all mixture of self-will,
propriety, or the least taint of contradiction from their Lords will and
pleasure; faithfully acknowledging that all things whatsoever, even the
greatest adversities, and most grievous temptations, turn to the spiritual
advancement of such souls, as truly seek God, which is their only aim and
employment.

Yet even into these high entertainments with God, there may creep in a certain
secret inclination to themselves, and an over-eager But desire comforts to
enable them.
appetite toward gusts and ghostly comforts, upon pretext to be thereby
enabled to endure all desolations and adversities: which intention being not
precisely pure from all propriety, and absolutely perfect in divine charity, is
a great impediment to the operation of the holy Ghost in their souls: For what
gifts soever (of nature or grace, outward or Note well this excellent maxim.
inward, temporal or spiritual) are not directly used in order to our own
humiliation, and our Creators honor, are abused by us to our great prejudice
in spirituality, and prove hindrances and stumbling blocks in our way to
perfection.

And upon this same Stair, stands Here also they stand, who are entirely,
indifferent
also another rank of holy persons, who have brought their inward man to an
entire indifferency in all things, whom neither prosperity puffs up, nor
adversity dejects, who have their Lords will for the sole law of their actions,
and his only love for their All in all: They desire to be truly conformable to
their crucified Savior, and to keep an internal quiet, content, and constancy
in all desolation and dereliction: They are well grounded and settled in a
simple and sincere affection to their Lord God; which enables them not only to
act great and heroique things, but also to suffer all grievous and hard matters.

These illuminated souls receive But yet rest in Gods favors with some
propriety.
many sweet and secret graces from the hands of the heavenly bounty, as rewards
of their sincere fidelity; their Understandings are replenished with clarity,
their Memories are possessed with objects of piety, their Wills are burnt and
consumed with perfect charity; But yet these aboundances of divine favors may
sometimes turn to their prejudice, when they rest in them with the least
spiritual gust and propriety.

Here furthermore are seated those Here furthermore they stand, who are
satisfied with God only;
almost perfect souls, which have really resigned up themselves and all, purely
to Gods pleasure, are fully contented with him alone, and remain wholly
satisfied with all that he either sends or suffers, looking upon himself only,
and not upon any of his gifts or goods.

These are yet more frequently visited from above, with divine illustrations,
and solaced with high and heavenly comforts: but because But are not as willing
to leave divine favors as to have them.
they are not as really resigned to leave them, and to be bereft of them, as
they are ready and willing to have and enjoy them, they seem to have yet a
little point left of secret propriety within them; and must therefore take yet
a higher flight, before they can perch upon the upmost round of this
spiritual ladder: which is,

The Seventh and highest Degree of Perfection.
WHereunto those elevated, and perfect souls are soared up, which are thoroughly
inflamed, absorpt, and extasied in divine contemplation* On the 7. step, stand
the perfect, contemplatives,
wholly dead to the world, abstracted from flesh and blood, and living (as it
were) only by vivacity of Gods love, and quickening of his holy Spirit within
them.

These are the dear darlings, blessed minions, holy favorites, and Gods
faithful friends and dear favorites,
happy spouses of the most high, though they sometimes live here below in
perpetual oblivion and obscurity: They are brim full of heavenly gifts and
graces, lifted up above themselves to taste the unexplicable sweetnesses, and
behold the unspeakeable glimpses of the divinity: Yet they rest not in these
sublime prerogatives with the least pleasure or propriety, but utterly renounce
all self-seeking and interrest; being securely grounded in solid faith,
clothed only with naked charity, and accompanied with abyssal humility,
counting themselves worthy of all abjection, conceiving themselves the very
worst of all creatures, and contenting themselves to be by all so taken and
treated. Their whole comfort is in the Cross of Christ: they neither look for
such plentiful showers of heavenly feelings, visitations illuminations, and
influences of the Spirit, nor ungratefully neglect them; but remain in perfect
indifferency, and Who are perfectly ind^fferent, and absolutely resigned and
obedient.
offer up themselves as obedient instruments to all that the holy Ghost shall
vouchsafe to operate by or in them: They receive all things from their Creators
hands into their open and disinteressed souls, as if they felt them not; ever
praising the divine piety, admiring his liberality, returning all to his
honor, resigning all to his will, and being satisfied with his providence and
disposition in all temporal and spiritual events whatsoever.

Finally their outward man desires no earthly consolation; their inward man
breathes nothing but the pure love of God; and the whole compositum begs
nothing but a perfect conformity to his crucified Lord and master, in all
things, but especially in self-denial and abnegation, the only safe and secure
guide of each Step in this his long pilgrimage toward perfection.



THE FOURTH TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Or, The Triumph of the
elevated Soul, in the amorous embraces of her divine Spouse.

Canticles. 5. v. 8. Tell my beloved, that I languish with love.

Cant. 2. v. 16. My beloved to me, and I to him.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

To the Loving Spouses, aiming at divine Union with their heavenly Bridegroom.
HAving thus happily 1. 1. The Sp^rituall Conflict.
Fought and foiled your ghostly enemies, (O Victorious souls;) 2. Prudently 2.
The Seven Ambushes.
discovered and avoided their dangerous ambushes; 3. Gotten the right use of
your 3. The Seven Exercises.
Spiritual weapons, by the frequent and faithful practice of your pious
exercises; 4. And 4. The Seven degrees of perfection.
courageously climbed up from one degree of solid virtue to another, from the
lowest Step of Devotion to the highest degree of Perfection: It only remains,
that you now take your 5. last 5. This ladder of divine love, consisting of
seven rounds.
and sublimest flight, from this mountain-top to the throne of divine love and
Union: to facilitate which heavenly enterprise, you may fitly make use of this
holy ladder, raised up for your souls assistance in those her high-soarings;
that so she may conveniently repose herself, upon each mystical Step thereof,
prune her wearied wings, fetch breath a while, and get new strength, and more
light, to ascend higher and higher, till she arrives at the full height and
head of it, which leans upon the very bosom of the Divinity it self, and leads
into the bedchamber of her beloved Bridegroom; where finding a sure footing,
and a secure resting place, forgetting the whole world, her self, and all the
multiplicity of things which she left below, and from which she has happily
unfettered, disingaged, and loosned her-self, she sits silently, solitarily,
quietly, and contentedly, attending to that One alone whom she only loves, in
whom only she lives, and from whose sweet embraces she desires never more to be
separated.

The Seven Degrees of divine Love.
1. In the first degree, the soul is wounded with love, sick of love, and
languishing with love.

2. In the second, she seeks her Physician.

3. In the third, she fears her own unworthiness, and the loss of her beloved.

4. In the fourth, she willingly suffers for love.

5. In the fifth, she is impatient in her desires of love; and must either
obtain, or die for it. lightly, swiftly and nimbly after love; grows bold and
confident in love; and becomes united to her beloved.

7. In the seventh, she enjoys her beloved perfectly, and perpetually.



The first round of this ladder of divine Love.
UPon this first Step, stands the pious soul, which In the first degree, the
soul is wounded with love, fick of love, and languishing for love,
(after a long experience in the way of the Spirit, and a serious application
of her self to the practice of solid virtue, having truly gotten into her own
interior, and happily ascended the steep mountain of Perfection), is become
deeply wounded with love, sweetly sick of love, and heartily languishing after
love: So that she cries out with that fainting Spouse in the Canticles; O tell
my beloved, that I languish with love.

This infirmity is not to death, but for Gods glory; for the Soul in this state
defyes all sin, deserts whatsoever is not God, and desires him only: she grows
weary and sick of all creatures, and aspires after the embraces of her Creator:
And as an infirm person, loses appetite, and loathes all the wonted contents
of nature; so here, the soul feels no gust, takes no pleasure, finds no
comfort; in any earthly objects. She lies sick, and seized on by this mystical
fever, caused by the violent heat of heavenly love: and here she is in the
degree of contemplative purgation, when she finds no support, no stay, no
taste, no quiet, no content, in any thing whatsoever; And therefore she ^oon
soars up from this Step to the next.

The Second Degree of Love.
WHerein she rouseth and raises In the 2: she seeks her Physician.
up her self, and casts about which way she may seek and find her loving
Physician, who can only cure and comfort her; she gets up early, and eagerly
enquires after him without intermission or cessation, whom she failed to find
in her bed at night, (in the first degree): She faithfully follows the prints
of his steps, turns over natures book, dives into all creatures, questions all
she meets: Oh! have you seen him; whom my soul loves? Yet she stays no where,
stoops not to the lure of any created object; she demands, and passes on, she
leaves all for him whom she only loves and longs after: She holds no discourse
with Angels themselves, but listens only to his heavenly voice, and desires
nothing, but to see a glimpse of his beatifying countenance: O show me thy
face, let thy sweet words sound in my ears!

Here, love bears all the sway, and has made so deep an impression in the
pious soul that she is perpetually solicitous for love, ever sighing after
love, and still carping, caring, and seeking for her well beloved in all
things: All her throughts tend to him, all her discourses drive at him, all her
affairs end in him: If she sleeps, she dreams of him; if she wakes, she talks
of him: Finally she is always, in all things, in all places, transported into
this object of her love, and swayed toward this Center of her life: And
recovering new strength, ascends upward to a further Degree.

The Third Degree of Love.
WHerein she works with more heat and vigor, and of which the King-Prophet
speaks; In the 3. she fears her own unworthiness and the loss of her beloved.
Psa. 111.
Blessed is that person who fears the Lord; for he will exceedingly desire to
fulfill his holy laws. Whence may be inferred; that if Fear, which is Loves
daughter, cause such effectual desires; how efficacious will those desires be,
which proceed immediately from Love it self?

The Soul in this Degree believes that her best works, done in the behalf of
her beloved, are very base and inconsiderable: she runs over her Registers of
accounts, sums up her numerous exploits, measures her long suff^ances, and
surveys her high services; and they seem at best but poor and mean performances
of a greater duty: she finds them nothing worth, by reason of the excess of
affection which inflames and consumes her. If Jacobs love to Rachel had so
powerful an influence upon his spirit, that his twice seven years apprentiship
seemed to him but a Gene. 29. 20.
few days, by reason of the ardour of his desire: What admirable effects will
the Creators love produce in that Soul, which it has absolutely seized upon,
entirely possessed, and thoroughly penetrated in this third Degree? She will be
piously troubled, and angry with her self, that she does so little for so great
a Majesty: and if she might lawfully, she would most willingly give up her self
to be minced into a thousand morcels for his love, honor and service, and
receive therein full comfort, content, joy and satisfaction.

It truly seems to her that she troubles the earth she treads on, and the air
she breathes in; and that she unprofitably takes up a place in the world, as a
barren tree, which brings forth neither flowers nor fruit: Hence springs a
further admirable effect, that she verily thinks her self the worst of all
things created, considering what she owes, and calculating what she pays; for
Love teaches her how much God deserves and Humility tells her how little she
does: and because she finds that all her best endeavors are full of defects
and imperfections; and that her highest way of corresponding to the love of her
heavenly Lord, is so low and unbeseeming his Majesty, she is inwardly pained
and confounded in her self. A soul in this state is far from any puff of pride,
presumption, vain glory, or censuring of others; and is therefore duly disposed
to mount up to the next Degree.

The Fourth Degree of Love.
WHich is of suffering for her In the 4. she willingly suffers for love.
beloved, freely and cheerfully, without the least repining, or reluctance;
because true love makes the heaviest burdens seem light, and the greatest
labors easy. In this estate was that Spouse when she spoke to her beloved:
Place me as Cant. 8. 6.
a signet upon your heart, put me as a seal upon your arm, because love is
strong as death, etc.

The Spirit has here such a vigor, that it absolutely subjects and subdues
the flesh, and as much slights all motions of sensuality, as a well rooted tree
does the wagging of one of his little leaves. Here the soul seeks not at all
her own gust or comfort, either in God, or any of his gifts; nor demands any
grace in order to her own solace or support, but all her care is, to cast about
her which way she may render some acceptable service to the Divine Majesty, and
how she may content and please him in any thing which she can do or suffer,
(for that he deserves it for his love and goodness Many seek their own content
in God; But Few seek to give God content.
toward her,) though such her services cost her never so dear.

Ah! Good God, how many of your followers seek in you their own content and
comfort, sigh after your favors, expect your cherishings, and run after your
gifts and graces; But alas! how few are they, who strive to give you content,
and to present you with any worthy donative at their own cost and charges,
without some touch of self*love or proper interest? You are ever open-handed,
(o bountiful Creator), and ready to shower your heavenly benefits upon our
heads; but we are always loath to employ that in your love which we receive
from your liberality: though this is the only way to have them continued and
increased.

This degree of love is very high and heroic: For as the soul here seeks her
Lord so seriously, and adheres to him so sincerely; that she is ready willing
and desirous, to suffer any thing for him: So his divine Majesty often and
ordinarily rewards thi^ her fidelity with putting her in possession of joy, and
giving her many secret, sugared, and delicious visits: For the immense love of
the Word incarnate Christ Jesus, permits him not to see his loving Spouse
suffer purely for his sake, without hastening to her comfort and succor. Hence
she speedily gets up to,

The Fifth Degree of Love.
WHich moves the inflamed soul to a certain holy impatience In the 5. she is
impatient in her desires of love,
in her desires of being joined to her beloved: She is seized with such a
vehement ardour to overtake him, and to be united to him, that all stay and
tarriance, seems to her, tedious and insupportable: She thinks often to have
found him, caught him in her arms clasped him in her bosom but perceiving her
self still frustrated of her desired object, faints through her eagerness of
spirit; as he did who cried out, My soul covets and decays after the Courts of
Psa. 83. 1.
my Lord.

She cannot subsist long in this And must either obtain it or die for it,
condition: She must either obtain her love, or cease to live; she is as eager
in her desires, as Rachel was to see her self a mother, when she said to Jacob,
Give me children or Genesis 30. 1
else I die. Here the soul feeds altogether on love, as she only hungers and
thirsts after love So that she quickly raises her self up to,

The Sixth Degree.
WHere she runs lightly, swftly, and nimbly, after her beloved, In the 6. she
runs lightly, swiftly and sweetly after love, Isai. 40. 32
being fortified with Faith, lifted up with Hope, and quickened with Charity: Of
which degree the Prophet speaks; They who hope in our Lord, shall exchange
their strength, shall take Eagles wings, and fly without fainting: The reason
of this lightness, is the overspreading, and dilatation of these three
Theological virtues in the soul, whereby it becomes so elevated, that it wants
but little of a total purification. Whereupon that enlarged soul said; I have
Ps. 118. 32
run over the way of your commandments, when you dilated my heart.

Hence she grows hardy in love, grows bold and confident in love,
and putting on a confident boldness, is piously, amorously, and strongly
transported beyond the ordinary limits of reason: So that she stays not
according to judgment, retreates not according to counsel, nor governs and
represses her impetuosity, violence, and forwardness, by the rules of modesty
and shame-fastness; because the peculiar favor, which her best beloved shows
her, communicates to her a holy and heavenly audacity. In this state was that
hardy spouse, which begged a Cant. 1. 1.
kiss of her beloveds mouth: And Moses, when he peremptorily said Exo. 32. 32
to God, Either pardon this people, or blot my name out of the book of life,
wherein thou have registered it.

And then burning sweetly in and becomes united to her beloved.
pure and perfect union with her beloved, she cries out; I have found the long
desired object of my affections, I will not let go my hold, nor permit him to
escape out of my embraces, etc. Here her holy thirst and hunger is satisfied,
and she enjoys such unexplicable treasures of delicious love, that were whole
volumes filled up with the description thereof, the greater part would still be
left uncomprised. And from the estate the amorous Soul passes ^ to the last
Degree, which belong not to this mortal life.

The Seventh and last Degree.
WHich likens her totally to her well-beloved Creator, by In the 7. she enjoys
her beloved perfectly, etc.
the clear vision of divine essence: This she enjoys, as soon as (being here in
this world arrived at the Sixth degree of this divine ladder of love) she
departs hence to her happy eternity.

These blessed Souls, (which are very few in number) are sufficiently purged
and purified by Love* which has done that in them here; which Purgatory does
in others elsewhere: so that to them belongs that Beatitude, Blessed are the
cleanhearted, Matt. 5. 8.
for they shall see God.

Now we say, this divine vision causes a total resemblance of the soul with
God, following that sentence of S. John, We know, that, when he shall appear,
we shall be like 1 John 3. 2.
him, because we shall see him as he ^^: So that all that which the soul ^s and
has, shall be like God by ^articipation. Here nothing at al can ^e concealed
from her, according ^o our Saviors words; In that day Joh. 16. 23
you shall ask me nothing. Because ^he eyes the clear glass of the Godhead,
wherein her self and all things are most plainly and perfectly contained: But
until that day comes, though the soul be perched never so high, yet God is
always hid from her in some manner, as far forth as there wants in her
something of this total resemblance with the Divin^^y.

Thus, (o amourous souls), by climbing this mystical ladder of divine love,
upon which God himself leans, you get out of your selves, and all things, and
fly up into the divine being for love (like fire) tends always upwards, with a
perpetual desire to be plunged and ingulphed in the Center of its proper
Sphere. Apply your selves therefore seriously to this holy and inward exercise,
that you may attain to these heavenly effects: Embrace with open heart and
arms, your good, great, and gracious Lord and love; and resolve with that holy
Spouse, I have laid hold on him, and I will never leave him. Draw near Cant. 3.
4. Psalm. 33. 6.
this divine Sun and be illuminated; he will clear your darkness, errors, and
ignorances; dissipate all your dullness in devotion, dry up the dirt of your
concupiscences; encourage you in the carrying of your Cross, give you a general
alacrity in the performance of all your actions and undertakings, and replenish
your souls with unspeakable sweetnesses, comforts, and contents.

Come, I say, and only bring with you these three companions, Faith, Love, and
Resignation, and leave all other things to the divine disposition. Represent to
your thoughts, a woeful and bedridden creature, lying grievously tormented with
a burning fever; his Physician prescribing abstinence from drink, as the only
and assured way for his cure and recovery; his compassionate friends visiting
him, seeking to divert his pains with their pleasant discourses, and to charm
his disease with the delight of music, etc. Ah! what unwellcome comforts are
all these things to him, who can fix his mind on nothing but drink; who thinks
on nothing, talks of nothing, demands nothing, desires nothing, delights in
nothing, but only to refresh his ardours, quench his thirst, and assuage his
tormenting heat? This is your case, (O dear souls) This should be the
beginning, middle, and end, of your whole life and business in this world:
Nothing but God, God, God: Neither science nor ignorance, neither music nor
misery, neither delights nor desolations, should touch, trouble, or amuse, your
faithful, loving, and resigned hearts: God is your only aim and end, 1. To
languish after God, 2. To seek God, 3. To fear the losing of God, 4. To suffer
for God, 5. To be weary of delay, in your love to God, 6. To run lightly,
confidently, and sweetly into God, 7. And Finally to enjoy God, and live in
God, and with God eternally.



THE FIFTH TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL CONQUEST: Containing The choicest Maxims
of Mystical Divinity.

With Brief Instructions and Directions, necessary for those Devout Souls which
desire, To walk in the way of Gods holy Spirit without error, To follow the
Divine call without illusion; and Arrive at holy Union without danger or
difficulty.

Dilated With points of Practice, Affections, and Elevations.

Galathians. 6:16. Whosoever shall follow this Rule, peace be upon them.

AT PARIS, M.DC.LI.

To the Devout Contemplatives, walking in the way of heavenly Love, and
aspiring to perfect Union with God.
WE have hitherto conducted you, (O Dear and devout Souls), out of the Egypt
Exodus 13.
of sin and sensuality, through the Red Sea of your dangerous conflicts and
skirmishes, into the quiet Desert of Divine Contemplation: We have led you to
the top of the Deu. 32. 49
mountain Nebo, (by the several laborious Steps of Perfection), from whence we
showed you a small glimpse of the glorious land of promise, flowing with the
sweet milk and honey of heavenly Love and holy Union.

Now lastly, to settle you in your happy station, to assist you in your high
undertakings, to maintain your heroic fervor, to keep alive this sacred fire
burning on the Altars of your inflamed hearts, and to strengthen y^^r thus
elevated spirits with Perseverance (which only crowns the work, and infallibly
entitles you to childrens portions, in this divine inheritance), we have
provided these ensuing Maxims of Mystical Divinity, for your continual support
and comfort.

We name them Maxims, because they contain the general grounds and granted
veriti^s of solid Devotion and subl^^^ Contemplation; summed ^^, and set in
some order, out ^^ the larger elucubrations of the most illuminated Mystical
writers: And we deliver them in a compendious and concise style, leaving many
points rather insinuated than expressed; because our aim is only truth,
substance, and solidity, which need no word-ornaments to make them amiable or
intelligible; and we conceive they will be more easily admitted into your
souls, better retained in your memories, and more efficaciously applied to your
practices, being thus nakedly, simply and briefly proposed, than if they were
clothed and disguised with any begged luster from abroad.

We look not that sensualists should either read or savor Delicata est divina
consolatio, and non datur admittentibus alien^m. Bernardus.
them; for their doctrine is too divine, their positions too pure, their
practice too perfect, their contents too contrary to the tonents of flesh and
blood: Vanity and verity have little commerce together; light and darkness are
opposites; sense is at perpetual odds with the spirit, and the greater part of
worldlings (in this our corrupted age), are readier to mock at the holy
practisers of piety, than to reflect on their own express duty and obligation
of tending to perfection.

Nor can we promise them a heartier well-come amongst some pretenders to
spirituality: for self love has obtained Nemo ad veram contemplationem
scandere valet nisi per scalam humilitatis. Read F. Cisne^ius. chap. 31. 32.
33. etc.
so great an Empire over most men's minds, that they generally judge of devotion
according to their own gusts and fancies; they embrace Hypocondriacall shows
and shadows for truths and substances; and believe that only to be good, which
is agreeable to their humor and affection.

Some great Scholars also, whose understandings are wholly busied in drawing
consequences from natural reason, will strive to discredit that point of our
doctrine here delivered, (which denies and forbids the use of such acts of our
reason in this heavenly School of highest Recollection), Not duly considering
the 1. p. q. 85. a. ^. 1. p. q. 17. a. 4.
universally received principle of the Saints, That these two lights, natural
and supernatural, Greg. upon Ez^chiel l. 1. ho. 17.
can no more actuate the same understanding at one and the same time, than a
body can have two different forms together: And that God who has given us the
light of reason for the increase of our natural goods, knowledge, and
perfection; has ordained the light of Faith, (which is above all reason, and
implies a negation and cessation of all the acts thereof) for the attaining of
supernatural gifts and graces: And it is the often inculcated Maxim of S.
Denis, Denis. c. 7. de divin. nomin. F. Garcias Cisnerius. chap. 28.
That to receive supernatural benefits, we must relinquish all acts of reason,
and quit all such resemblances and images of creatures, as it ordinarily makes
use of, for the increase of it is natural knowledge.

So that it is most certain, that the soul which ayms at the purest,
perfectest, and sublimest Contemplation, must not only abandon all operations
of her outward and inward senses, but transcend all actings and workings of her
understanding, and (as it were), blindly elevate her-self to an un-explicable
union with that object, which is above all natural knowledge and conception:
This is to be moved with Love alone, (supported by Faith), without glassing her
self in any creature, or staying upon any thing, which is not the very Deity:
This is to be ingulphed in divine darkness, and to be so lost and absorpt in
God, that she neither sees, feels, nor finds her self any where, but in the
divine being: O happy loss! O heavenly darkness! O glorious annihilation!

Wherefore, drown your selves, (O divine Contemplatives) in this Ocean; lose
your selves in this abyss of the divinity; leave all that is material,
sensible, intelligible, and look immediately upon the supernatural object of
your Faith; stay not in the lower exercises, and feeble discourses of your
imaginations, but permit your spirit to take it is free flight, as a Royal
eagle, and perch upon the increated verity: Take courage in these your sublime
exercises, follow them faithfully, humbly, obediently, and perseverantly,
according to the rules and directions here prescribed; and let the world slight
you, which understands them not; let greatest Schoolmen condemn you, which
experience them not; let flesh and blood repine, which relish them not; let the
Devil rage, who by this means finds you not, but where you are forth of his
reach, and free from his ambushes; that is, in God, in whom only you live by
continual recollection, abnegation, abstraction, introversion, annihilation.
This is to begin your heaven upon earth, and to fortast that endless felicity
in which your faith shall be turned into clear vision, your hope changed into
full possession, and your charity knit to her beloved center and perfection;
where you shall praise God incessantly, love him entirely, and enjoy him
eternally.

The Table of the Maxims.
1. That our end is Perfection, and divine Union, and that Prayer is the way to
it. 2. That Beginners may profitably make use of the following Exercise of
mental Prayer and Introversion, until they obtain greater light, and more
experience in the way of the Spirit. 3. That of all internal Prayer, the
affective is most noble, necessary and profitable. 4. That Meditation is a
seeking, Contemplation a seeing of God. 5. That continual Recollection, is the
Exercise of Exercises, and the immediate way to bring us to perfection and
divine Union. The practice of this Exercise is declared in ten canons. 1. That
all places are proper for Recollection, but the more quiet the more proper. 2.
That to pray on our knees, is a posture most pleasing to God. 3. That we must
(especially at first), prefix to our selves certain and set times of
Recollection. 4. That we must frame an act of pure Intention, at our entrance
i^to Recollection. 5. That we must briefly examine our Consciences, and produce
acts of Contrition, self-confusion, humility, and resolutions of amendment. 6.
That we must also make an Act of perfect Resignation, before we fall upon this
Exercise. 7. That we must bring with us, some theme, subject or groundwork of
our Prayer and Recollection. 8. That we must look on God by Faith, and leave
off all discourses. 9. That we must carry God with us from our Prayer. 10. That
we must put on Christ, and imitate his example in all our actions.

6. That for this pure, perfect, and Transcendent prayer, no certain Rules can
be prescribed. 7. That the Contemplative must be very observant of the divine
visits, lights, and calls. 8. That the only way to get true peace of mind, is
to be totally resigned to God. 9. That a Contemplative soul, must lay a solid
groundwork to serve her in time of desolation. 10. That in this high Exercise
of Recollection, the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity, must
perfect and possess the three powers of our souls, Understanding, Memory, and
Will. 11. That our Understandings must be settled in pure Faith. 12. That our
Memories must be settled in pure Hope. 13. That our Wills must be settled in pure
Charity. 14. That this Exercise of Recollection and Annihilation, is the short
and secure way to divine Union. 15. That all sorts of people may safely addict
themselves to this holy exercise of Recollection. 16. That outward Observances
are helps, in the practice of this Exercise. 17. That Prayer for others is best
practiced by a general intention. 18. That all virtues are best practiced by
addicting our selves to Contemplation, or this internal Exercise of
Recollection. Some examples, for the practice of this divine way of Prayer.
Some further Advices, for the same practice of this pure prayer.
19. That corporal austerities, must be always subject to obedience. 20. That
Contemplatives must always have the seven verities, (which concern the divine
nature, whereupon all Cont^mplation is grounded), either habitually, or
formally in their memories. 21. That J^cul^tory Prayers, are the nearest
dispositions to Contemplation. 22. That the Presence of God, is the great
ex^rcis^ of Contemplatives, and the shortest way to divine Union. A more
sublime way to practice the pres^nce of God.
23. That Humiliation is a relic of Gods love. 24. That Humility is the solid
groundwork of all spirituality. 25. That Silence and Solitude, are our heaven
upon earth. 26. That the perfect love of God, and hatred of our selves, must be
our constant and continual employment. 27. That Confidence in Gods goodness is
the main support of our Spiritual Edifice. 28. That the measure of our progress
in Perfection, is the Conformity of our will to the divine will. 29. That
Unquietness of mind is the bane of Devotion, and curse of Contemplation. 30.
That Crosses are to be suffered, not sought; to be taken, not made; to be
concealed, not complained of. 31. That Temptations cannot hurt us, if we cast
our whole care upon God. 32. That Desolations, derelictions, afflictions,
distractions, are to be transcended by generous Resolutions. 33. That
Perfection consists in putting off all propriety, and putting on pure and naked
charity. 34. That Zeal and eagerness must be tempered with Moderation and
discretion. 35. That we must never rely upon our own natural judgment,
experience, and knowledge. 36. That we must seek no comfort in any creature.
37. That we must walk, and persever, in these our Spiritual Exercises, with the
two feet of Faith and Obedience. Under this Maxim are solved many material
doubts arising in our daily progress to Perfection. The first doubt. If we fear
that God will forsake us, by reason of our Ingratitude and disloyalty? 2. If
our sins trouble us, in respect of Confession and satisfaction? 3. If we can
neither pray with fervor, nor suffer with patience; neither feel God present,
nor be content in his absence? 4. If we are doubtful that God is angry with
us, that we want grace, that we only seek our selves, that we yield to all
temptations? etc. 5. If our consciences are unquiet, and our souls fearful by
reason of our proness to sin? etc. 6. If we are full of fears and apprehensions
of our estate, by reason we feel in our souls, such slender effects of Gods
grace and love, and have little devotion, no inward peace? etc. 7. If some
extreme cross, calamity, or affliction has seized our hearts? etc. 8. If we
desire to conquer the Devil, and overcome all temptations whatsoever? 9. If we
want comfort in long and dangerous temptations, and troubles? 10. If we wonder
that God will have us suffer temptation, sithence our frailty is subject to
yield, and so offend his divine Majesty? 11. If we are solicited by our enemy
to unchastness? 12. If we are in extraordinary desolation and darkness? 13. If
we are tempted to despair of Gods mercy, by reason of our frequent falls and
relapses into sin? 14. If we are perplexed with great sadness? etc. Other
remedies against Sadness. Another antidote, against melancholy and
pusillanimity.
15. If we suspect, that our Sadness and temptations proceed from our own fault
or negligence, or some secret sin, or our want of correspondency with Gods
grace? etc. 16. If we doubt that God is displeased with our Prayers, that our
afflictions befall us through our own occasion; and cannot satisfy our selves
to think we have done what God requires? 17. If nature has showed her self a
St^p-mother unto us, in giving us a hard and harsh disposition, whence proceeds
a reluctance to works of virtue, and mortification of vice: So that we distrust
of ever overcoming our selves? 18. If on the contrary, Our nature is so facil
and flexible, that we scarcely find difficulty in any thing: We wonder to hear
mention of rebellions, contradictions, desolations, etc. From all which we are
secure and quiet; And therefore we fear our actions proceed rather from a
natural promptitude than solid virtue? 19. If we so addict our selves to
Recollection, that we look upon works of Obedience, and the external practices
of our duty, as impediments to Perfection? 20. If we find such a calm in our
passions, imperfections, and temptations, that we hope the worst is past? 21.
If scrupulosity overwhelms us? 1. We must obey our Spiritual Directour. 2. We
must do our best endeavor. But here arise two difficulties. 1. If our
Directours knowledge be small, his experience less? etc. 2. If we cannot
satisfy our selves, that we have done our best? etc.

22. If we fear we detest not sin sufficiently, because we feel not so great
sorrow for the offense of God, as we do sometimes for a temporal loss? 23. If
we cannot ground our selves in a firm hope of mercy, for that we are so frail
and inconstant; we sin daily, and amend not our lives; we repay unto God evil
for good; we promise fidelity, and practice nothing less? 24. If we go not on
with alacrity, because we know not that our sins are forgiven, that our
Confessions are good, and that we are in the state of grace? 25. Though we
cannot (in this life) assure our selves infallibly to be in good state; yet if
we could comfort our selves with most probable tokens of grace, whereby we
might feel the pulses of our hearts, and somewhat ease our anguish? 26. If we
are troubled because we know not well when we give consent to sinful thoughts?
27. If we cannot well distinguish between Venial and Mortal sin? 28. If these
sayings of Divines terrify us: They sin, who do against their doubt: And, In
doubtful things the securer part is to be followed? 29. If finally, we are
apprehensive and fearful lest we should grow weary in the way of virtue, and
not persevere constantly in our Spiritual Exercises.



Maxims of Mystical Divinity.
The first Maxim.
That our end is perfection and Divine Union; and That Prayer is the way to it.
IT is not sufficient for us, (who are resolved upon a spiritual course), to
lead an ordinary good life, which consists in the avoiding of sin and scandal,
and in the punctual performance of our external duty to God and our neighbor:
But our end and aim must be to attain the perfection of Gods holy love, and a
happy Union of our souls with their first beginning, by living in abstraction,
recollection, and perpetual Contemplation, as far forth as Gods holy Spirit
shall enable us, and our frailty can correspond.

The chief means to attain this our end, is Prayer, without which, all Religion
is but a shadow without a body, or a body without a soul; and all outward
observances will prove but a superficial, not a real devotion. For it is the
constant doctrine of Divines; that what God S. Augustine. S. Basil. S.
Chrysostom. S. Thomas. 2, 2. q. 83. a. 2.
in his eternal disposition has determined to bestow upon us, he gives us in
time, by the intervention of Prayer: tying (as it were) to this instrument, the
conversion of sinners, the advancement of souls, the perfection of Saints, etc.
So that as his divine decree is, that we must till the earth, if we will reap
the fruits thereof, and provide mate^^als, if we will raise up buildings, and
the like; so, his absolute order is, that we must pray if we will have
spiritual benefits to be powered into our souls, and supernatural gifts and
graces to be granted unto us.

Let us therefore in the first place, resolve to prosecute Prayer,
courageously, constantly, and perseverantly, at set times, if we intend to make
speedy progress in sincere virtue, and lay a sure groundwork of solid
spirituality; and let nothing upon any pretext whatsoever, hinder or divert us
from it as far as obedience and discretion will give us leave.

Lord, heal my wounds, supply my wants, satisfy my wishes.



The second Maxim.
That Beginuers, may profitably make use of this following exercise of mental
Prayer and Introversion, until they obtain greater light, and more experience
in the way of the Spirit.
THis divine Exercise consists of three parts in general, and Nine points in
particular.

1. Preparation of 3. acts 1. An affective and lively apprehensio^ of Gods
presence. 2. A cordial and profound act of humility. 3. A pure intention to
please and praise God only.
2. Consideration of 1. My wounds, both internal and external. 2. My wants,
which are many in every degree. 3. My wishes, and humble desires.
3. Conclusion also of 3. acts. 1. Contrition for my sins. 2. Resignation in my
wants. 3. Complacence in God, and Confidence in his goodness.

A more ample and practical description of this Exercise.

The first part is Preparation, of three Acts.
1. A lively apprehension of Gods Presence, not only in all places, and all
creatures, by his power, and essence, but in our souls, by his mercy, love,
care and providence.

O my Soul! Where are we? 1. Part. 1 Presence of God.
who sees us? What is he that is with us, and within us? by whose light we
see, by whose fire we burn, and by whose love we live? Live, my most glorious
and gracious Lord! in whose presence I kneel, in whose arms I rest, and after
whose love I breathe: O that thou were as dear to my soul as thou art near it!
Alas, why does she not care as much for her God, as he does for her good? Why
do I not love thy presence, o my amiable Lord, since thou art present by love?

Thou art my Father, my Physician, and my food, hear me, heal me, help me: I am
wounded, I am wicked, I am wretched: Out of thee, there is no rest; without
thee, there is no hope; remain with me, reign within me; Let me be thine, all
thine, ever thine.

2. Profound and cordial humility: acknowledging unfeignedly before God and his
Angels, our wickedness, weakness, and wretchedness; what we are, and what we
deserve, and so resting quiet in our Center of nothing.

O my Soul! What have we 2 Profound humility.
been? What are we? What have we? what can we do? What do we deserve? What do
we desire? What has our loving Father and liberal Lord, that he has not given
us? What have we, proud and prodigal children, that we have not received merely
from his merciful hand and heart? What have we received, that we have not
abused by self-love or self-delight?

O sweet Jesu! Give tears to my eyes, words to my tongue, sighs to my heart,
and love to my spirit; for I need them all to deplore my misery, and implore
thy mercy; to admire thy beauty, and adore thy bounty; to sigh after thee, and
suffer for thee: What I have been, it grieves me to remember; What I am, after
so many signal benefits on thy part, and serious promises on mine, I am
ashamed to think; What I deserve I am afraid to call to mind; What I desire, I
am ignorant how to ask. Lord, for thy mercies sake, for thy Mothers sake; by
thy Bowels of mercy, and her Breasts of meekness; by all that thou have
suffered for me, and she for thee; by all that is dear to thee in heaven and
earth; forget and forgive what I have been, my past folly and wickedness; Pity
and protect what I am, my present frailty and weakness; Be satisfied for what I
deserve, supply what I desire, and be mindful of me in life and death.

How much, o my God, do I wish to leave all, and lose my self to find thee? to
humble my self, to please thee? and to hate my self, to love thee? But these
hard and high matters I dare scarcely promise, how then and when shall I
practice them? Yet without thee, (o sacred humility!) there is no solid center
to rest in, no true sweetness to take gust in: therefore, o my God, I come to
thy School to learn this necessary lesson, teach me, touch me, wound me, and
win me unto thee.

3. Pure intention, to please and praise God only: to be all his, ever his, in
what manner and measure he best likes, both in this prayer, and all things
whatsoever.

Behold therefore, o my Lord, how out of pure Obedience to thy Will, 3. Pure
Intention.
and confidence in thy mercy, I now approach to please and praise thee: Not to
receive great matters from thee, for I am unworthy; nor to conceive great
matters of thee, for I am incapable; but to leave all for thee, to be humble of
heart beyond all, and to love thee more than all: this is both conform to my
condition and obligation. I come to prayer. (O my only Lord and love) not to
have much, but to give up all, to be thine, all thine ever thine in life and
death, for time and eternity, as thou best please: I come. O my center and
sweetness, to seek thee and sigh after thee, yet I am content neither to find
thee nor feel thee, but only to see thee by faith, and to suffer for thee with
fidelity. I am satisfied and content that thou art so good, great, glorious,
rich and happy in thy self: and I am confident that thou in thy good time wilt
make me rich in thy mercy, and happy in thy love; for in this Pilgrimage I
desire no other happiness than true humility, nor greater riches than naked
charity.

The second part is Consideration: showing these three things, first to our
selves, and then to our God, as his poor beggars.
1. Our wounds, both internal and external: to wit, our sins, ingratitudes,
daily faylings, strong passions, etc.

Ah! my sick and sinful soul! how 2. Part. 1. Our wounds.
weak and wounded are we in every degree, in all parts, in each member of body,
and faculty of mind? 1. All is out of order, all is pride and self-love: how
impenitent are we in sorrowing? how impatient in suffering? how unconstant in
persevering? and yet how importune in sinning? 2. My Understanding is blind to
good, clear-sighted to evil; My Will is perverse peevish, cold, sensual; My
memory is weak, full of idle images, subject to distractions. 3. My affections
are vain, my passions violent, my inclinations vicious. 4. My Faith is little,
my Hope less, my Charity least of all. 5. So forward to extroversion and
dissolution, so backward to introversi^^ and compunction, so full of
imperfections, and immortifications 6. So little confidence in thy mercy, so
little patience in my misery and almost no performance of m^ good purposes. 7.
So curious t^ censure others, so careless to keep m^self and curb my own
senses. F^nally, all is self-love, self-will, self-conceit, self-seeking,
pride, propriety, partiality, which are my daily and dangerous diseases.

O Father of mercies, and only Physician of my soul! Thou art almighty, and
all-bounty; these are my wounds and impurities, and if thou will, thou can
both cure and cleanse me; and if thou will not, I will remain content as I am:
I am willing to continue weak, so I be not wicked; to be wearied and wounded,
so I be not utterly tired, over-turned, defeated, and lose the victory: Cut,
kill, crucify, o Lord, only spare me for eternity.

2. Our wants, for we are not only needy, but naked; not only poor, but
beggars; who neither know how to deserve an alms, nor how to desire it.

O my poor soul! What do we 2. Our wants.
want? nay what do we not want? 1. True light, true liberty, true love, true
life. 2. A settled attention, a simple intention, a serious introversion, a
sincere conversion. 3. Humility of heart, conformity of will, purity of soul,
indifferency of spirit. 4. Wisdom to know Gods will, strength to execute it
patience to persever in it. 5. Resolution to suffer for our Savior devotion to
sigh after him, diligence to find him, constancy to remain with him. 6. Courage
to endure all, faith to forgo all, hope to expect all, charity to give all, and
Confidence to gain all. Finally we want all we should have, Yet our loving Lord
is ready to bestow on us all that he has.

O my God and all! Thou art all that I want; give me thy self, and all my wants
and wishes will be at an end. Thou art all my safety and my only security, all
my refuge and my only center; Until I can return unto thee, or wholly turn into
thee, let thy Cross be my Purgatory and thy will be my Paradise, for other
heaven upon earth I can never hope to find: Until then* I must be content to
sweat and sigh under the burden of this mortal life, to sit like Job upon a
dunghill, forlorn and forsaken by all full of soars and sorrows to remain a
perpetual and pitiful patient scarcely feeling patience in my self, and
finding no compassion in others.

3. Our wishes and desires. What can a wounded wretch wish, but to be cared for
and cured? What can a naked beggar desire, but to be clothed and comforted with
some few rags and crumms? What can a blind and cold person ask, but light and
love?

This, O my sovereign and sweet 3. Our wishes.
Lord, is the sum and substance of all my wishes and requests. O that I could
go out of my self, and get into thee! That I were dissolved from my loathed
body, to the end I might dilate my heart in thy love, contemplate thy divine
face in perfect liberty, and please and praise thy Majesty eternally! For in
this prison of flesh, and vale of tears, I faint under the weight of my
temptations, I fall under the burden of my troubles, and I continually fail in
the prosecution of my pious purposes.

Oh! that thy will did so rule me, and reign over me, that it were a torment to
decline never so little from it! O that thy love did so freely and fully
possess my heart, that there were no room at all remaining for any bastard or
base love of things created!

Good Jesu! how truly happy and holy should I be, if I could clearly behold my
own nothing in thy all; if I could embrace crosses as crowns, and swallow down
all contemprs and confusions, as milk and honey! O when shall I be so elevated
in spirit above my self, by ecstasy of love, as to be able and willing to
humble my self under all creatures without repugnancy!

Alas! shall I never be content to forsake all, and be forsaken by all? Yea
having lost and left all for One, to be left by that One, who i^ my All? and so
remain quiet i^ my own nothing. How long shall I he wallowing in flesh and
blood? how long shall I delay and dally in false loves? How long shall I sigh
and not enjoy! seek and not find! live and not love?

Come, my Lord, and love* Lord Jesu* come quickly: Let the fire of thy sweet
love so consume in me a^l dross of self-love, and so transform my spirit into
thee, that I may take all from thee indifferently* give all to thee liberally,
and rest and repose in thee ^ternally.

Lord! let me be thine, or nothing! Love, or not live!

The third Part, is the Conclusion, which consists also of three Acts.
1. Contrition, which is a hearty and humble sorrow for our sins, ingratit^des,
disloyalties, tepiditie, etc.

O my God! how little did I love 3. Part. 1. Contrition.
thee when I so carelessly offended thy Majesty? Oh! that I had never sinned
mortally, though it had cost me my life immediately! O that I were sure never
more to swerve from thy sacred will and commandments! Let me henceforth
endure, dear Jesu, a thousand deaths of my body, rather than admit one deadly
sin again into my soul! O pity and pardon my past follies and frailties, and
prevent me with thy gracious blessings against future fallings.

How great, o Lord, is my obligation to serve and please thee, were it but for
thy favors conferred, thy benefits bestowed, and thy love powered out upon me?
and yet, ungrateful wretch that I am, how poorly have I corresponded!

Oh! that I had so deep a sense of my sins, that my heart might break with
sorrow? Hide not* o Lord, thy face from me* shut not up thy mercy gates against
me; for though I have most grievously gone astray, yet I am resolved upon an
entire amendment, correction, reformation of my whole man: this strong
resolution, (which is thy gracious gift), grounds my hope in thy goodness,
emboldens my confidence in the mercy, and gives me courage and comfort in thy
love.

2. Resignation in all our wan^^ wishes, desolations, and distresses, ^^ the
divine will and pleasure.

I am indifferent, O my dear Lord, 2. Resignation.
to sickness and health, to light and darkness, to delight and desolation: I am
thine, (sweet Jesu)! put me where thou will, do with me as thou will, send me
what thou will! I am content, not only to have nothing, but to be nothing, so
thou, ^ my Lord, be all things unto me! I acknowledge my self unworthy to beg,
and less worthy to obtain, and therefore I resign my self still to beg, and yet
still to want, even that which I most wish; which is all light, all liberty,
all love, all comfort, all content, yea even all virtue* peace, and perfection,
so long as it shall please thee! O father, I am thine, ever thine, all thine
body and soul for time and eternity. Live Jesus only!

3. Complacence and confidence: the first, that our God is what he is; the
next, that he will heal our wounds, supply our wants, satisfy our wishes, and
turn all to our good.

I am glad, o my glorious Lord 3. Complacence, and Confidence.
God that thou art so worthy of all love, though I of all others am not worthy
to love thee: I am as joyful for what thou art* o great God, as if all thou
have were all mine, and I will love thee in all I am and have, as being all
thine. Thy Cross is my comfort, thy Will my well*fare* and thy love my life; so
that if I can but suffer for thee, do thy will, and follow thy love, I shall do
all that is necessary.

I am indeed dry, dark, and desolate, but since it is thy will I am sure it is
my good, and therefore sufficient for me, and satisfactory to thee. I hope thou will one day complete thy own heavenly design in my soul, healing my wounds,
supplying my wants, fulfilling my desires, and filling my yet empty heart with
thy sweet presence and perfect love: In the mean space I will say and sing;
Live Jesus, Live my Lord, my love, my life, my all! whose name b^ blessed by
all, whose will be accomplish^d in all, whose honor be advanced above all.

An advertisement, touching the precedent Exercise.
1. We must perform it daily, diligently, discreetly, and with great confidence
and courage: 2. Yet without propriety that it may neither hinder the operation
of the Holy Ghost within, nor works of due obligation and obedience without. 3.
If in the practice of this introversion, we find dryness, and feel little
devotion we may sometimes, fitly resume (in lieu of the second part, or
consideration), our wonted exercises, whereto our minds are more addicted;
ending the same with the Conclusion here prescribed, being ever duly disposed
to follow the holy Spirits invitation to higher matters.

If we faithfully observe these things, we shall infallibly receive comfort,
and speedily perceive our own unspeakable profit and progress by the practice
of this pious exercise, as being indeed the end of all other external
devotions, and the short, sure, simple, and R^gia via, leading to a spiritual,
devout, and divine life.

The third Maxim.
That of all internal Prayer, the affective is most noble, necessary, and
profitable.
FOr the end and drift of all discoursive Prayer, is, to move, inflame, and
enkindle our affections in the love of God and virtue; and therefore all
discourses must be left by little and little, as our souls can more and more
live in Faith, and simplifie themselves from material objects, images, and
conceptions; and only tend to God by a sweet and secret motion of the will; and
an amourous correspondency to the Divine operations, and inward impulses of his
holy Spirit; treading down* and transcending all things under God, by
discreetly forgetting and unknowing them.

The fourth Maxim.
That Meditation is a seeking, Contemplation a seeing of God.
PRayer in general, (according to As is more amply declared in our
Introduction to the Spiritual Pilgrimage.
the known division) is either Vocal or Mental.

Mental Prayer, is, An Elevation of our spirits into God: For as our Creator
is elevated above all creatures, so our souls cannot see, talk, and treat with
him, purely, and perfectly, but by leaving them all and lifting up themselves
above them all.

This Elevation is by means of Meditation, Contemplation, Thanksgiving, and
Petition: Which 4. Essential parts of Prayer. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 83. a. 7.
are the wings by which our soul* fly to God, and the four essential parts of
prayer: all others, (as Preparation, lecture, examen, oblation, points,
conclusion, and the like), being only accidents, and properties thereof.

The difference between Meditation and Contemplation, is this,
We Meditate, when we seek after truths, and cast about for reasons The
d^fference between Med^tation, and
to affectionate our wills to the embracing of Gods love, Christian virtues, or
works of piety and perfection: For our Understandings are (as it were) the
Steels, and our Wills the Flints, which no sooner touch each other, but the
sparks of holy affections presently fly out, inflaming and actuating our
disposed souls with heavenly love.

We Contemplate when we steadily Contemplation.
and unmoveably behold God by Faith, believing that we have him truly with us,
and within us; and so leaving all other subjects, objects, reasons and
discourses, to look on him as present, love him in silence, and feed on his
only satiating sweetness.

And this Contemplation is either Ordinary, or Perfect, or Transcendent.

Ordinary Contemplation, is when Contemplat^on is threefold. 1. Ordinary. S.
Tho. in. 3. did. 32.
our souls make use of their imagination, and such Species, as they have drawn
from sensible objects, (first purified* subtiliz'd, and immaterializ'd by the
Understanding)* to conduct them to their Creator.

Perfect Contemplation, looks directly 2. Perfect.
upon the increated light, fixes her view upon the eternal verity, and perches
immediately upon the divine being and perfections, without any admixture of
fancy, or assistance of creatures. This is called dark Contemplation, because
our souls discharged from all inferior objects, and receiving no enlightnings
from below, are wholly daz'led, and (as it were) blinded with the bright
splendor of Gods incomprehensible Majesty, framing no sensible Idea of him,
but beholding him with the eyes of faith by way of Negation, and simple adhesion
to his divine Essence.

Transcendent Contemplation, 3. Transcendent.
mounts up yet higher above all intelligible species, and may fitly be termed
the Cousin german of beatificall vision, and that last heaven whereunto S. Paul
was raped, where not only all use of Sense is extinguished, and all acting of
Understanding abolish't; but the spirit is totally transported, absorpt and
inflamed with Seraphical love; and the whole inward man is drowned,
annihilated, extasi'd, and ineffably united to the Divinity: so that the thus
elevated soul can neither say or consider, God is with me or, I am with God;
for such advertency or reflection is sensible; whereas this most eminent
Contemplation, imports an absolute silence and forgetfulness of our selves, and
all things whatsoever, and an entire conjunction with our Creator, as shall be
hereafter further declared.

The Practice of the four essential The 4. parts of Prayer, exemplifi'd,
parts of prayer; is in this, or the like manner.
Taking some mystery of our Saviors life, (as for example, his praying in the
garden of Gethsemani) As is showed in the following Maxim.
for our subject or groundwork; we first examine our consciences, ask pardon
for our sins, and make resolutions of amendment. Secondly, we give up our will^
irrevocably to God, seeking purely his glory, and not our own gust, etc. Then
we enter upon the first essential part of Prayer, which is,

Meditation; considering our 1. Meditation.
dear Redeemer in his bloody sweat, sighing, weeping, praying, and his
disciples sleeping; Upon this sad spectacle we make some discourses, concerning
the person that suffers, the love wherewith he suffers, the subject for which
he suffers.

Then our affections being moved 2. Contemplat^on.
by these considerations, and inflamed in Gods love, we slide sweetly and
insensibly into active Contemplation, leaving all discourses* and looking (with
our eyes of Faith) upon our suffering Lord.

And having melted away in his 3. Tha^ksgiv^ng.
loving presence, for so long time as our Devotion, or the holy Spirits
invitation lasts; we heartily thank him for having thus suffered for our
salvation.

And lastly, we implore his grace, 4. Petition
that we may faithfully follow his steps; and above all, that he will grant us
his love; which we must filially, affectionatly, humbly, and confidently beg at
the conclusion of all our exercises.

The fifth Maxim.
That continual Recollection, is the Exercise of Exercises, and the immediate
way to bring us to Perfection and divine Union.
THat we may rightly conceive the verity of this Maxim; let us here in the
first place take a view of the whole manner, meaning, method, and practice of
this sublime exercise, in these ensuing Canons.

1. That all places are proper for Recollection, but the more quiet the more
proper.

Wheresoever we live, we may and should send up our Petitions, and breathe
forth our affections to our every where present Lord and lover, in public and
in private, in tempests and in calms, amidst all noises of employments, and in
quiet corners of retreat: Job prayed well on a dunghill, and Jonas in the
Whales belly* but Judas did not so in his Apostleship, and society of Jesus.
Yet when solitude, silence* and repose may be obtained, they are the fi^test 2,
2. q. 188. a. 8.
instruments of Contemplation, and therefore most highly to be prized, and most
diligently embraced: I Ose. 2. 14.
will lead him into the desert, (says our Lord), and there I will speak to his
heart.

2. That to pray on our knees, is a posture most pleasing to God.

Let us not hunt for excuses, pretend want of forces, nor cloak our laziness
and languour, with that misinterpreted Maxim; That Prayer must have the
quietest, easiest, and least constrained composition of body: but rather let us
imitate our Lord and Savior, (since all his actions are our instructions),
whose humanity lay often prostrate on the earth, Matt. 26. 39. Mark 14. 35.
Ephesians. 3. 14.
praying, and adoring his divinity and let us follow the example of his
Apostle, who frequently bended his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Let us, I say, submit willingly to this direction unless evident
weakness or infirmity hinder us, (for this adoration, and a far higher, is due
to the divine Majesty), and therefore let us conceive the contrary to be a
manifest temptation of our enemy.

3. That we must (especially at first), prefix to our selves certain and set
times of Recollection.

Let us not complain for want of convenience, time, or opportunity to follow
this exercise; for if our wills be ready, time cannot be wanting: If our
stomachs call on us for meat, or our bodies for warmth, we can find time to
feed and clothe them: are our souls less considerable? Let us rather steal time
from our sleep and recreation, than want it for Recollection: And since all our
time is given us by God, to be spent in his love and service; let us re-give
unto him at least the tithe thereof, and dedicate two hours, of four and
twenty, (one in the morning, and the other in the evening) to his particular
honor.

4. That we must frame an act of pure Intention, at our entrance into
Recollection: as thus,

I intend, o my God, to employ each moment of the short time I shall remain in
thy presence, in adoring thy Majesty, admiring thy goodness, begging thy pardon
for my offenses, thy mercy for the souls in Purgatory* thy succor for the
Churches necessities, thy assistance in such an extremity, thy strength against
such an inclination, thy grace for the getting such a virtue: I am here on my
knees, (o Lord) to perform these homages, and present these petitions.

This Intention will virtually endure the whole time of prayer, and make our
seeming idleness, and st^l^ess, active and meritorious.

5. That we must briefly examine our Consciences, and produce acts of
Contrition, self-confusion, humility, and resolutions of amendment;

Saying from the very bottom of our hearts, in this or the like manner: O my
Lord, my God, my (...) thou deservest all praise, honor and service, because
thou art good, gracious and glorious: I will henceforth rather lose all, than
leave thee (o my God), without whom all is nothing: and since thou art so good
in thy self, and so good to me, I will (by thy grace) never more offend thee: I
will confess my sins, amend my life, perform my penance, walk carefully,
humbly, obediently, resignedly in thy presence: to all which I am principally
moved by the infinite greatness, beauty, and bounty of thine own divine being,
and perfection.

In the particular examen of our consciences, (which must never be omitted in
the beginning of our Recollection), we must mark to what vice we are most
inclined, and wherein we are most frail, and then trample Read the Spir. Confl.
c. 7. n. 1. 4.
that down, violently and resolutely: for this Captain-imperfection being
conquered, the rest will soon yield and submit: And in the next examen, we must
impartially search and censure our selves, and see whether our falls in that
kind, are still as frequent as they were formerly: and so set upon our enemy
again with fresh fervor, vigor, courage: and constancy, till we have gotten
the complete victory.

6. That we must also make an Act of perfect Resignation, before we fall upon
this Exercise,

Leaving our selves entirely in Gods hands: He is our father, let him dispose
of his children, and all that concerns them as he best pleases, saying:

O my Lord, my father* my lover! do with my life, my health, my temporals, my
spirituals, my body, my soul, all, all, as thou will: I come not hither, to
receive my own content, but to learn how to conform me to thy will in all
things, and to remain in that very state, (neither more, nor less, nor
otherwise) which best pleases thy divine Majesty.

7. That we must bring with us, some theme, subject or groundwork of our Prayer
and Recollection,

As some mystery of our Saviors life, death, Passion; man's last ends; some
vice to be conquered; some virtue to be attained: some divine perfection to be
admired; or some jaculatory sentence to be so long stayed on, and chewed, till
our souls feel themselves inclined to quit all discoursing and acting, and to
remain quiet in an exercise of pure Faith and perfect Resignation, as follows,

8. That we must look on God by Faith, and leave off all discourse^,

When lively conceiving by Faith, that our Lord is in us, and in all things, we
humbly beg him to teach us the holy lesson of divine love: and so keeping our
selves in his presence, bidding good night to all creatures, objects, and
images whatsoever, (as at this time nothing concerning us), we only and
immediately eye the beloved object of our souls, and rest quietly, contentedly,
silently, and sweetly absorpt into the Divini^y.

9. That we must carry God with us from our Prayer.

Let us not leave our dear Lord in the Oratory, when we rise from Recollection;
but bear him along with us continually in our hearts; talking still with him,
and of him; eating and drinking in his company; sleeping with him in our arms;
negotiating walking recreating doing all things with him, in him, for him, and
ever praying and praising him whom we have with us, and within us in the closet
of our souls.

10. That we must put on Christ, and imitate his example in all our actions.

Our Savior Christ is our Master, let his life therefore be our model and his
practices the patterns which we always study to express and imitate: Let us
comport our selves in eating, drinking, sleeping speaking, praying, and doing
all things, as we conceive Christ did,* or would do upon the like occasions, if
he were now living upon earth in his humanity: Let us study to have this Rule
of three always at our fingers ends. 1. To think as Jesus did. 2. To speak as
Jesus did. 3. To do as Jesus did: So striving to become (as it were) a Jesus
Christ by imitation.

Thus briefly we have the whole manner and method of this transcendent Prayer,
and divine exercise of Recollection: (to wit, (1.) To get into our retreat,
(2.) and there placing our selves on our knees* (3.) Twice every day, (4.) to
frame an act of pure Intention, (5.) To examine our consciences, and produce
acts of Contrition, (6.) and Resignation, Then to (7.) think on the subject of
our prayer, (8.) Leave off all discourses, and look on God by faith, (9*) Carry
God with us from prayer, and (10*) lastly, put on Christ by imitation.) Which
is the short and secure way to divine union and Deiformity, being faithfully
performed, discreetly practiced, and carefully accompanied with profound
humility, perfect obedience, and an absolute submission to our spiritual
director, as shall be more fully deduced in the subsequent Maxims.

The sixth Maxim.
That for this pure, perfect, and Transcendent prayer, no certain Rules can be
prescribed.
THe ground of all Prayer, even purest, is (as has been said) some mystery,
some devout sentence, some virtue, or some jaculatory dart, etc. until our
affection be moved: Now if by continual Introv^rsion and peculiar grace, our
Wills are drawn incontinently by the simple view of our beloved Lord, it is
needless to use this ordinary means.

When our affections are thus enkindled, they break forth into flames of love
and aspirations. Then the heat increasing, our Prayer grows more inward, our
sighs deeper, our love greater, our hearts more ardent in their desires of
Union, which is active Contemplation: Wherewith our souls being overcome and
drowned in t^eir lovers presence, leave him to speak, move, act all things with
us and within us, and so we sleep in passive Contemplation, freed from all
objects of creatures, and sweetly united by pure love to our Creator.

The degrees therefore of Prayer in general are these. 1. Devout reading or
mixed Prayer. The degrees of Prayer, in general,
2. Vocal Prayer. 3. Meditation or consideration. 4. When the affection is
excited, Vocal aspirations. 5. The heat and light increasing, mixed (partly
Vocal, partly Mental) affections. 6. Then more still, abstract, and simple
Prayer; 7. After which, come's Active Contemplation. 8. And lastly Passive:


In which estate, we may and must leave all Rules, and help our selves by
experience, and the ^^ght ^f Earth; but especially by following and humbly
obeying the internal motion and attraction of the holy Spirit of God; upon
whom chiefly depends the perfection of this great work. For further explication
whereof,

The seventh Maxim.
That the Contemplative must be very observant of the divine visits, lights,
and calls.
WE must take heed of tying our selves to any set forms of words, points, or
methods of Mental prayer, after we have made We must ty our selves to no set
methods,
some progress in this practice of Recollection; for this were directly to
impede the free operation of Gods holy Spirit within us: When therefore we
shall perceive our souls drawn from discourses to this higher exercise, we must
humbly and readily relinquish our former hold, and give scope and leave to the
divine invitation; busying our selves no longer in our former fears and
customs, but making use of such inward or outward expressions as fervent love
will suggest and furnish us withal; conforming our selves perfectly to God's
will, and cooperating with his grace: yet so, as not to run before it* which is
the other extreme equally hindering the divine Spirit's intention. Wherefore a
quiet* indifferent, and industrious attention and correspondency (still
willingly giving way to Obedience, for fear of delusion,) is the very best
disposition to receive these heavenly visitations.

We must not then be troubled, But willingly quit our old customs.
if we break our old customs to embrace Gods will: he is the end of all our
exercises, and the end being obtained, the means must cease. O how many are
called by God, who refuse and resist him, by tying their Spirits to this or
that practice, and so bar him from elevating their souls to himself as he
pleases. They are loath to leave God in their usual Devotions for God in
Contemplation: If they begin not their prayers thus, and thus end them they
think they have done nothing and remain wholly unsatisfied. Thus they become
proprietarians in their Wills, and slaves to their exercises* and because they
cast not themselves absolutely into the two arms of Gods will and love, they
make small progress in the way of solid perfection.

The eighth Maxim.
That the only way to get true peace of mind, is to be totally Resigned to God.
REsignation, is a putting away of What Resignation i^.
our own Will, and a placing of Gods Will in its stead: it is (as it were) a
certain transfusion of our Wills into his; and an uncloathing our selves of all
desires, but only that God's holy Will be fully accomplished in heaven and
earth.

Without this Resignation, we There is no true quiet without it.
shall never find quiet in God nor our-selves; and the way to attain to it, is,
to receive all that happens, as from Gods holy hands, and to be content to bear
it as long, and in what manner, and measure he pleases: Let us not be troubled
(under a false pretense of zeal) at this place, that company, etc. For it is
not that, but our selves who stand in our own light.

First then, let us seek God purely in all. 2. See him present in all. 3. Take
from him all. 4. Return to him all. Let us be indifferent in all; praise God in
all; be quiet and content in all; in sickness and health; in light and
darkness; in peace and trouble; in life and death: To be expelled out of
Paradise with Adam; to lie full of sores and sorrows with Job on a dunghill; to
be forsaken by all with Christ on the cross; to be poor, needy, naked,
nothing; being ever ready to say cordially cheerfully, and with an humble and
habitual indifferency, Yes, O Father, yes, I will; It pleases thee, it shall
plea^e me; well, good, best of all: So be it, my good Lord, for time and
eternity, in this and in all things.

A soul thus resigned, can never be troubled with any cross or calamity, for
she eyes Gods Will and embraces his Providence in all occurrences; nothing
touches her, but only that his divine pleasure is not perfectly performed in
her self and in all creatures.

If in her prayers, she be seized with How to be resigned in desolations.
dryness, dullness, desolation, she gratefully confesses that state to be
best for the perfecting of her spirit: She neither complains of, nor considers
her inproficiency in her pious exercises; for she comes not to prayer for gusts
or graces, but to do Gods will, to receive what he pleases, to suffer what ^e
permits.

And because this Resignation is the Key of her true progress, she makes
frequent and fervent acts thereof in this or the like manner.

Take my Will totally to thee, O Acts of Resignation.
my God! govern it absolutely, and submit it perfectly to thine own: and
because I cannot deliver it up, O my dear Lord, as thou desire, take it from
me by violence, cut off all impediments, break all my fetters for me, bring me
forcibly, and bend me absolutely to a blessed conformity with thy Will and
pleasure.

Let my whole employment in this life, be the practice of this point! Let me
neither think of pain, nor look upon recompense; but resignedly behold thee,
because thou art in thy self so good* so great, so glorious, so amiable, so
admirable.

I give up my Will, O divine Artist, to be plunged, purified, polished,
hammered, filed and fired in the furnace of thy love; O do with it, and with
me, as thou best know and please: It Is for this I now come to prayer, and
for this only; that I may be taught this happy lesson of denying mine own, and
doing thy Will. Or thus briefly;

Lord! I put my Will (and al^ that concerns me, inwardly out wardly,
temporally, eternally,) into thy holy hands; dispose of all a^ thou please,
and direct me in a^ to do thy divine Will.

Having made this act and oblation, let us reflect seriously upon what we have
said and done; and that in giving away our Will, we have put the best pawn we
have into Gods hands, and out of our own power: let us then beware of so
infamous and ignoble an action, as to re-take the gift so solemnly delivered,
or to do again our own will in any thing whatsoever.

The ninth Maxim.
That a Contemplative soul, must lay a solid groundwork to serve her in time of
Desolation.
FOr no soul can in this life be always elevated to the Divinity, and
therefore will sometimes need a stay to rest upon, till she can take breath,
and repair her forces in order to her higher soarings in Contemplation. This
resting place, This gro^ndwork, may be Christ's humanity.
may most fitly be the Humanity of Christ, which is the very way and door to
the Divinity; upon which (when she returns to her self after she has been
absorpt into the divine light,) she may confidently rely and repose: And
without this prop, the higher she ascends, the lower will be her fall back
again.

The tenth Maxim.
That in this high Exercise of Recollection, the three Theological virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, must perfect and possess the three powers of our
souls, Understanding, Memory, and Will.
IT is, in the first place to be observed, (as an undoubted truth) that a foul
cannot (in this life) be united to God immediately by her understanding,
memory, will, imagination, or any other sense, power, or faculty whatsoever;
but only by the means of Faith in her Understanding, by Hope in her Memory and
by Love in her Will.

These three virtues must therefore Read F. Cisnerius. chapter 65.
be introduced, (by our cooperation with the divine grace) into the said three
powers of our souls, in the purest and perfectest manner that is possible, if
we will arrive at the height of divine Union. 1. Faith, must so possess our
Understanding, as to deprive it (for that present) of all other knowledge than
that of God only. 2. Hope, must blot out of our memory all images* and thoughts
of possessing any thing, but God only. 3. Charity, must uncloath our Wills of
all affections, joys, contents* satisfactions in any thing, that is not God
only: For Faith, tells us of things which cannot be understood by natural light
and reason; Hope, looks upon such things as we have not, hold not, possess
not; and Charity, retires our love from all creatures, to employ it all, on our
Creator.

The three powers therefore of our soul, must be perfected by these three
virtues; our Understandings, must be informed with this pure Faith; our
Memories unclothed of all possession by this pure Hope; and our Wills filled
with divine affections by this pure Charity; Thus refusing, denying, and
emptying our whole souls, of all that is not this perfect Faith, hope, and
charity.

In this divine practice is found an absolute assurance against all the subtle
snares of the devil and self-love; for a soul which is thus entirely denuded
and stripped of all active knowledge, possession, and love of things created,
must needs remain in God, in a certain tranquillity, passivenesse cessation,
sleep, annihilation, absorption: so that there can nothing be found out of God,
for Satan, sin, or sensuality to attempt against.

But to facilitate the intelligence and practice of this high matter, (upon
which foundation stands the whole edifice of this holy Recollection and divine
Union) let us particularly deduce and exemplify, how the Understanding is to
be placed in pure faith, the Memory, in pure hope, and the Will in pur^
charity.

The eleventh Maxim.
That our Understandings mu^ be settled in pure Faith.
THe practice of this point, is thu^ F. Cisnerius chapter 28.
Having conceived some myster^ of our Saviors Passion, or the like for the
subject of our prayer; we ruminate a while upon it, not ^ much to admire our
Lord Jesus, a^ imitate him; and we desire to know his virtues, that we may
practi^e them in our own particular, by hi^ perfect example.

Then we make an Act of Faith An act of Faith.
saying; I firmly believe that this my suffering Savior, is not only a man,
but also my Sovereign Lord God: I believe that he being Almighty, submitted
himself to Pilat, being the creator became a creature, being immortal became
mortal; and that in as much as he i^ God, he is with me, within me, without me,
about me, above me, beneath me, and so in all creatures which have a being.

Afterward, we speak further to our Savior; O my dearest Lord and lover,
Teach me now my lesson, that in requital of what thou have done for me, I may
keep thee company in thy sufferings.

And then we quit all discourses, thinking we have no understanding at all
left, and looking on our sweet Savior only by Faith, which has this property
(says S. Thomas) to S. Tho. of Aquin.
elevate the soul to God, and free it from all creatures: For so long as there
are discourses in our Understanding, images in our Memory, joys or tenderness
in our Will, these powers have not pure God but sensible things for their
object; because God being above all sensibility, must be found without all
creatures; and consequently if we can be totally abstracted from all things
created, we shall infallibly lay hold on our Creator.

It Is therefore impossible (says St. Denis.
the divine S. Denis) to be truly united to God* unless we leave all material
operations, both in sense and in spirit; that is* unless we lay aside all
senses, all discourses, all imaginations, and all ways of humane wisdom: Till
we can do this* let us not think to become perfect Contemplatives.

The twelfth Maxim.
That our Memories must be settled in pure Hope.
WHich is done by forgetting all things created* heaven, earth, our selves,
all; and being wholly taken up with God, and absorpt in the Divinity. So that
by a simple remembrance that we are with God, (without looking back to
reiterate the same reflection) we repose and slumber sweetly in him; staying
upon no image whatsoever even of our Savior himself; for as he, (in as much as
concerns his humanity), called Joh. 14. 6.
himself the way; so he thereby insinuated, that we were not to remain in the
way, but to march on to our ways end, which is his Divinity.

No mervail then, if we find in The doctrine of myst^call Divines explicated.
the prescripts of mystical Divines this doctrine; That to arrive at the
height of Contemplation, we must leave off all sort of Meditation, though it be
on the life and death of our Lord and Savior; because in all Meditation, there
is ever something that is sensible to which nature applying it self, hinders
our souls from soaring up to the fineness and quintessence of Contemplation,
which is (and can be) only a pure, spiritual, and insensible thing.

It Is true, that the consideration of the life and death of our loving Savior,
is a most powerful means to mount up to this contemplation of his Divinity;
but let us not make that the end, which is but the means and way to it.

The thirteenth Maxim.
That our Wills must be settled in pure Charity.
THis is done, by withdrawing it from all sort of Joy proceeding from any
natural, supernatural, or moral good.

Joy, is a certain content which our wills take in something we prize; How all
Joy is to be quitted
and this Joy is either Active, when we may leave it; or Passive, when it is
not in our power to quit it.

Now, to take Joy and content in natural goods, as, health, wealth, friends,
etc. Or, wit, sagacity, discretion, etc. Is a plain vanity.

To joy in moral goods, as in the exercise of virtue, etc. Is to imitate the
Pagan Philosophers, who loved virtue for vertu's sake; and made that their end,
which is only our way to it.

Supernatural goods, are either the gratuite gifts of God, as the working of
miracles, etc. And we must uncloath our wills from any Joy proceeding from
these prerogatives, since they may be conferred upon reprobates: Or they are
such goods as have relation to sanctifying grace, as Faith, etc. Which if they
are not accompanied with perfect Charity and final Perseverance, are nothing
worth; and nothing, can be no true subject of joy.

We may here take notice, how little reason some persons have to be troubled,
because they have not these extraordinary gifts; when as they may be rather
impediments, (if ill used, or overmuch adhered unto) than helps to divine
Union: For (says S. Denis), all these things are S. Denis.
not God, but only some effects of his favor, ordered by his providence to
indear us in his love.

Thus the three powers of our souls, Understanding, M^mory, and Will, are to
follow their three objects, Faith, Hope, and Charity: Now our Lord is our
loving Master, to whom we must have continual recourse, and who seeing our
longing desires and diligent endeavors, will infallibly instruct us in the
particular and unexplicable ways of this divine and perfect Contemplation.

The fourteenth Maxim.
That this Exercise of Recollection and Annihilation, is the short and secure
way to divine Union.
FOr a soul which is truly humbled and annihilated, hinders not at all Gods
holy operation within her, but leaves her self in his hands (not at all relying
upon any discourse or imagination which is coined in her F. Cisnerius chapter 29.
own mint), as a child in his mothers arms, who corrects it, cherishes it,
washes it, and orders it, as she pleases: And must not this needs be the
shortest, nearest, surest and most proportionate way to divine Union? For
before God created us, we were either nothing at all; or we were in Gods Ideal
being; and so were God himself, because all that is in God is God; now his
divine Majesty gave us our present being, and we losing our selves, because we
abused this our being, have no better way to regain our selves than by a
no-being; that so we may come to be that which we are not, by denying that
being which we are. O secure annihilation! What can hurt that which is nothing?

If we thus leave our selves will-less, self-less, being-less, we suddenly
become plunged into the increated being of God, and living in him only by
Faith, Hope, and Love, our enemy (as is already said) finds nothing to lay hold
on, because our annihilated souls are no where but in God, where they are
securely covered and protected under his wings; and who is obliged, (if we may
say it), to be our bulwark of defense, against all assaults of our enemies.

The fifteenteth Maxim.
That all sorts of people may safely addict themselves to this holy exercise of
Recollection.
It Is true, that this way of Prayer is delicate and slippery, for Beginners to
tread in. Yet if they will faithfully observe those few necessary precautions
here prescribed, they will find (to their unspeakable comfort), that most true
in themselves, which experience has proved F. Cisnerius chapter 22.
to be true in others: who though deeply engaged in worldly vanities and
affections, falling seriously, resolutely, courageously and humbly, upon Divine
Contemplation and Recollection, became, (after some time employed in purging
their souls from sin, and settling themselves in virtue, according to counsel
and obedience), quickly truly, and totally changed; and were conducted, (as it
were by a nearer cut), without pains and tediousness, to higher perfection,
than by the ordinary ways of discoursive meditation they could in long time
have attained.

For this is most certain, That If we use our ende^vors, Go^ always gives us
his grace.
God denies not his grace to them, who do what ly's ^n their own power. Now any
one of us (being assisted with Gods grace, and a good will), may do this which
follows: 1. We may purge our souls from sin, by Confession, contrition,
satisfaction; the means ordained by God and his Church. 2. Resign and give up
our selves, and all that we have, are, and can, to Gods Divine Majesty. 3.
Adore him in spirit and truth, and present our selves before him, as his poor,
needy, naked creatures. 4. Abstract our Understandings, Memories, and Wills,
from all objects and images of creatures, though never so good, high, and holy.
5. Enter into the obscurity of Faith, hope, and love, and leave our souls, as
it were, sleeping and swallowed up in the abysses of the Divinity. Finally, all
we have to do, is briefly this; We must leave our houses empty, that our Lord
and lover may take full possession: and then we may assure our selves, that at
the very instant, in which our dear Lord shall find our hearts vacant, he will
enter presently into them, inhabit them, instruct them, and show them how sweet
he is to those souls, which Lam. 5. 25.
truly seek him.

Let us but persever constantly, and courageously, in this pious practice, and
we shall soon perceive our unspeakable profit and progress: and though it seems
to our selves, that we perform it with much impurity and imperfection; yet our
continued endeavors, enabled with Gods concurring grace, will speedily raise
us up to divine Union.

The sixteenth Maxim.
That outward Observances are helps in the practice of this Exercise.
ALl external practices, duties, and mortifications, as fastings, Read F.
Cisner^us chapter 68.
disciplines, retirements, vocal devotions, etc. must be directed to further
our internal conversation with God, and to help us in the acquisition of solid
virtue and divine Union: for else they will but puff us up, and make us proud
of nothing; profiting little, with much labor.

Yet we must be wary of offending against the least ordinance of We must not
offend against the least ordinance, etc.
the Church, order of the House, or disposition of our Superiors; we must be
conscientious, careful, and punctual in each ceremony and constitution;
omitting nothing upon pretense that it is no great matter, not commanded under
sin, or not much conducing to our spiritual advancement: For this is a token of
an ignorant, unfaithful, or indiscreet spirit. Gods will, is as well in little
as in great things; and who so is careless in small matters, will soon fail in
higher.

The seventeenth Maxim.
That Prayer for others is best practiced by a general intention.
WE are not lightly to promise We must not lightly promise,
the performance of particular Prayers for others, either living or dead. This
sort of charity, hinders, diverts, and dissipats our souls; breeding
multiplicity, when as one thing is only necessary. We must therefore omit all
such obligations, as may renew old affections; and Nor oblige our selves to
pray for others.
labor to forget and forsake all, that we may more purely adhere to one, who
is our all in all: wherefore let this general, vertuall, and cordial
intention, suffice for all cases of this nature.

First, that we desire to be partakers of all prayers, sacrifices, and merits
of the whole Church militant and triumphant, as far as God shall please and we
need. Next that we intend to pray for all, (and especially for them who have
desired it, or to whom we stand any way engaged), as we do for our selves.

And this without any personal reflection, is more profitable to our friends,
and less prejudicial to our selves: All which is to be understood, when no
peculiar promise, occasion, or circumstance, induces a special obligation and
performance.

The eighteenth Maxim.
That all virtues are best practiced by addicting our selves to Contemplation,
or this internal Exercise of Recollection.
THe chief way to practice virtue, and prevent temptations, is not by a direct
and formal reflection upon them, which imprints images in the soul, and averts
her from attending purely to God in her interior: But by a virtuous and
vigorous The practice of all virtues in contemplation.
binding of her will to God: for being thus seriously and sweetly intent to him
only, she can by a happy disdain forget and pass over, or through, all
occurring d^fficulties; and so behave her self orderly and discreetly, as to
content both God and man.

Now that all virtues in particular are thus most excellently practiced; it
appears, first in Faith: Whereof Of Faith.
we are taught to make a lively Act in the entrance to this exercise. And what
way can this virtue be more heroically put in use, than to have our souls
lifted above all sensible objects, all discourse, all humane wisdom?

Hope is here practiced: for we Hope.
ly prostrate at Gods feet as poor beggars, hoping to obtain his grace in order
to the performance of his Will; and expecting all good from his mere mercy.

Here also our Love is exercised: Charity.
because our Will covets nothing but to content our Creator, and rests
separated from all that is not himself* for the sole love of him.

Here is the pract^ce of perfect Resignation.
Resignation: for we wish neither quiet nor disquiet, glory nor infamy,
pleasure nor pain, but only the fulfilling of Gods Will, and a desire to be
left in what state he best likes.

Patience, must be here necessa^ily Patience,
practiced, in respect of the crosses and contradictions suggested by So called
by Thaulerus.
sensuality in this afflicting exercise.

All sin is here destroyed; For that is an aversion from our Creator, and a
conversion to creatures: but Destruction of sin.
here (by means of perfect Faith) we remain (as it were) agglutinated to God,
and governed by his inward grace, which stills all outward motions, stifles all
concupiscences, and makes us unknowing and forgetful of our selves, and all
things created.

As for Mortification it is here Mortification. S. Greg. the great.
practiced in a high degree: For he that tastes the sweets of the Spirit, grows
soon disgusted with all carnal delights; here the flesh is totally supplanted,
and the senses quieted; for the eyes see no outward object, the ears attend to
no noise, the tongue remains silent, the understanding contemns all
curiosities, the memory draws a curtain over all images; the will is
disengaged from willing or nilling any thing; finally here is an entire
destruction of all sensuality.

Obedience is perfectly practiced, Obedience.
because the wings of discourse are clipped, and the understanding captivated by
Faith.

Humility can no where more Humility.
appear, than when a soul is so annihilated, as to trust neither little nor
much to her-self. O Rich nothing! What spiritual mines, what Masses of
treasures does a soul find, that has thus happily lost her self in her loving
Lord?

Adoration, sacrifice, devotion, and Adoration and al acts of Religion.
all acts of Religion, are here effectually practiced; and in a word, if we will
be perfect, (says Thaulerus), we must learn this abstraction, that is, this
suspension of discourse, and silencing all the workings of Fancy,
understanding, memory, will; leaving our souls to the absolute conduct of our
Loving Lord, according to the doctrine here delivered; which is the short and
secure way to make all our actions divine and celestial.

Some examples for the practice of this divine way of Prayer.
1. Receiving the Blessed Sacrament, Examples. How to communicate.
I say to my heavenly guest; My God, make me partaker of these sacred
mysteries, that my soul may enjoy the effects for which they were by you
instituted: Then being secured by my act of Faith, that I have received his
body, blood, soul, divinity, etc. I settle my self in this holy idleness and
abstraction before described, and remain silent and recollected, harkening what
my dear Lord will speak within me.

2. So when I have taken some point of my Saviors Passion for How to pray.
the subject of my prayer, I say; O my Lord, communicate to my soul what you
endured in this mystery, to the end she may enjoy those effects, for which you
suffered it, etc.

3. In like manner, when I go to How to take our rest.
take my rest, I say; Silence my soul! for our God is here present, with us*
and within us: and in this verity, Recollecting my self in him, I rest all
night in prayer* (or at least, my Lord allows it me as if I did), because my
soul covets to continue in the same happy abstraction recollection, and
annihilation* during the whole time of sleep.

4. Thus a virtuous, introverted, And do all things to God's glory. 1 Thessal.
5. 17.
and recollected soul, doing what lys in her to rest always in her Center
(which is God,) may follow and fulfill the Apostles counsel, which is, to pray
continually, and do all things, (even her natural and necessary actions, of
eating, drinking, sleeping etc.) to Gods glory; and these pure desires and
intentions, render them all meritorious.

Some further advices for the practice of this pure Prayer.
1. Before we thus recollect our selves in God, we may make what The first
adv^ce.
acts we please; but after we are entered into it we are to remain still,
quiet* silent insensible, unmovable as a stock to be fashioned, or a stone to
be carved, according to the heavenly workmans design: we must leave our selves
entirely to be moved and managed, as best likes our great Master, who both
knows what be our necessities, and how, and when, to supply them.

2. We must take special notice, The second adv^ce.
That as all Arts have their proper terms; So this sacred science of Mystical
Divinity, has its peculiar phrases and expressions: Divine matters may not be
handled according to the manner and method of School subtilties; but are to be
represented only with simplicity, piety, and a holy liberty of words, which
Contemplatives make use of, without metaphysicall questions and arguments.

When therefore we find in St. How to understand mystical writers.
Bonaventure, Eschius, Thaulerus, Rusbrochius, Blosius and others, That a soul
divinely and intimately united to God, does clearly see and experience what
she obscurely believed by faith; we are not to infer, Read Cisn^rius chapter 29.
that she therefore loses her faith in this life; for this Mystical
experience takes not away our faith, but fortifies, comforts, an^ clears it.

So when it is usually said b^ these spiritual writers, That suc^ a degree of
Contemplation, of virtue, or of pure love, is the very t^ of perfection; It is
not meant, tha^ a soul which is ascended thither can climb no higher in this
he^ exile: for that highest degree o^ perfection has a latitude of many
degrees of grace; whereby a soul may still increase in sanctity, and ascend
each moment to a nearer vicinity with her Creator,

When likewise we meet with this doctrine, A soul arrived at Union and
Transformation, carries her self passively, she acts not but suffers, God does
all within her, etc. We are to understand, that such a soul does very little or
nothing in comparison of what she did in her former discoursive exercises;
because she here in this state, finds all done in an instant; and therefore
leaves those painful employments, to repose sweetly in a kind of holy
idleness of Contemplation and Union with God; which pacifies all her senses,
silences all discourses, and lulls all her powers asleep with his charning love
and ravishing presence: All which notwithstanding, she remains still here
actually loving and looking on her Lord, and consequently is not totally idle,
but is in cooperation with his grace.

In this sense, St. Denis said; The S. Denis. Chapter 7. de div. nom.
Soul of Blessed Hierotheus was heightened to such a Union with God, that it
sufferd more than it acted, because in this passive contemplation, the soul
follows not her accustomed operations: as we see our Understanding works not
so much, when it receives its aliment from a higher knowledge, as when it gets
it by constrained and laborious discourse; nor our Will in like sort, which
commonly follows the motives proposed by the Understanding, to which it is
united. The 3. advice, of the practice of ^aith, Hope, and Charity.


3. That which is most important in this exercise of Recollection, is the
practice of Faith, Hop^ and Charity: For by the Act of Faith, all our knowledge
is annihilated; by the act of Hope* all ou^ worth is evacuated, in denying ou^
own forces and relying merely o^ Gods assistance; by the act of Charity, all
our wills and affections (which are not God, in God, for God,) are abandoned:
So that by these three Acts the whole man is drowned, suppressed, stifled; and
consequently our enemy the Devil finds nothing at all to lay hold on, nor any
way open for his entrance into our annihilated hearts; but is constrained to
return always foiled and ashamed of his ineffectuall efforts.

4. Beginners in this exercise, The fourth advice. For Beginners.
must vigorously apply themselves unto it for some time, till use and
experience fashion them into a habit of recollection; they must therefore in
the first place, carefully cleanse their interior from all objects whatsoever
and then lock up themselves wi^h God in this inward retreat: for as in vain we
shut our doors and windows* if the thief be already hid in our house; so the
closing of our senses from exterior objects, furthers little or nothing, if in
our interior there lurks any thing which is not God.

5. In all our vocal and mental The fifth advice, of our attention to God.
devotions, our chief aim must be Attention to God: There are three sorts of
attentions. 1. To the words, which is good. 2. To the sense, which is better.
3. To God, (who is the only end of all our prayer), which is best of all. Let
our S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 83. a. 13.
thoughts therefore abstract from all created objects though never so good, and
fix steadfastly upon the increated and essential goodness. This is the main
thing we must aspire to during the whole course of our life, not only in our
prayers, but in all our practices, To be more attentive to our Lord and love,
than to the action we have in hand: This is the Philosophy of perfect lovers,
to live more truly where they love, than where they breath.

6. It is not here intended (by The sixth advice.
the precedent doctrine), that a soul should not at all meditate upon the That
from Meditation we must rise to Contemplation.
subject or theme of her prayer nor chew it first by attentively considering
it: No, this is not dissuaded but counseled: Only we add, the as soon as
affections are sufficient^ kindled, and that our elevated sou^ can procure to
put themselves upon the aforesaid abstraction, recollection, and contemplation,
they presently embrace it, and leave off all discourses which are proper for
Schools and Sermons, not for Prayer and Contemplation: It suffices us
therefore to remember the mystery, apprehend it thoroughly, imprint it deeply in
our hearts, and then to observe the prescribed order: For when one has
sufficiently heard and understood what can be said for his good, he needs
neither hear nor speak more of it but presently fall to practice: In this case
to hearken after new things, seems more tending to satisfy curiosity* than to
the increase of inward virtue as he that eats before he has disgested his
former meals* nourishes bad humors, but nothing betters his own bodily
strength.

7. When therefore any distinct The 7. advice. That we must stay upon no
objects or images.
notions, forms, or images, intrude themselves into our memories, let us not
stay in them, but return amorously to our Lord present within us, think no more
of all those varieties, than is absolutely necessary for the knowledge and
performance of our duties. The best way therefore to increase our inward
strength of spirit. is to work courageously and suffer patiently in silence and
solitude, forgetting all creatures, unkowing all objects, transcending all
humane events and accidents. What though the whole world perished? though the
frame of heaven and earth were dissolved? What is that to t^ee? follow thou thy
Lord and love. For indeed he that has his mind diverted and The 8. advice. How
God is to be proposed to our understanding, in an eminent and Negat^ve way.
distracted with such fancies in prayer, is little attentive to Gods presence.

8. As concerning our Understanding and Will: We are to take notice, that when
the Understanding proposes God to the Will, as just, wise, powerful, or under
an^ particular attribute; the Will is elevated by that sight alone; and so that
act of love is limited lock'^ up, and less perfect, than if God were proposed
under a most eminent way and as the supreme being, surpassing infinitely all
that can fall within the verge of humane conceptions in this life. Though
therefore the Understanding may and can propose some positive and particular
conception of God to the Will; yet it is far better, and of higher perfection,
to do it in common, confusedly and negatively: for our truest knowledge of God,
S. Greg. the great. l. 5. moral. c. 26.
is to know that we can fully know nothing of him. This is to know by
ignorance; and it is signified by Elias, covering his eyes with his cloak when
God passed before him; because all our knowledge is disproportionate to God,
and therefore we must shut our eyes, totally* if we will contemplate him
perfectly.

O holy ignorance! What Pesant Read Cisnerius. c. 28
is so simple, what Soul, (endued with ordinary capacity) is so senseless, as
not to conceive, and comprehend the easy art of this excellent manner of
Prayer: for having been admitted to Faith, and adorned with the gifts of the
holy Ghost, in baptism, she has all that is required to make her capable of
this Contemplation. We deny not, but that she stands in need of Gods special
assistance to elevate her to this height; for this Maxim is always presupposed;
That God concurs to humane acts, as the first cause, and to supernatural acts,
as the author of grace. As for passive or infused Contemplation as it is
altogether supernatural, so it is totally Gods work: and this we possess when
we See S. Aug. l. 19. c. 2. de civit. Dei. The 9. advice. To take and make use
of what is most to ou^ spiritual purpose.
cannot at all meditate, and yet persever in this holy amorous, and negotiative
idleness.

9. If what is here set down for the practice of this Prayer, seems intricate
or tedious to any one; let such a soul make choice of that she conceives
expedient for her comfort, and leave the rest: for it is not intended that she
should be tied to this or that way but only that she should be convinced and
confirmed in this truth; That to behold God with a sim^le understanding (which
is the same thing with active Contemplation) is more pleasing to him, and
profitable to her self, than to seek after him by the sublimest di^courses.

Retire therefore (o contemplative souls!) from all sensible and intelligible
objects; and recollect, abstract, annihilate, and lose your selves in God: for
there (even in the most refined conceptions), your enemy may find ground to
pitch his nets but here you are in sanctuary and safety where he can never
reach or touch you: Here, and here only in this silence from all discourses; in
An exhortation to Contemplation.
this solitude from all creatures; in this idleness from all action; in this
retrait into the Divine Bosom; in this resignation and conformity to Gods will;
you may taste his sweetness in it is proper source: here and here only are full
and overflowing measures of delight. Created pleasures scarcely reach the soul
before they are consumed in the senses; and therefore can never quench our
inward thirst after God: It Is he alone is capable to content and quiet us, who
is our first beginning, and our final end: And who so dives into this truth,
will make higher account of one crum of this contemplation, than of all earthly
crowns and kingdoms.

The nineteenth Maxim.
That corporal austerities, must be always subject to obedience.
AUsterities, are sometimes necessary, sometimes obligatory, and sometimes
dangerous.

1. By necessary austerities, are Austeritie^ are either 1. Necessary,
meant the restraint of our senses, tongues, conversation, self-will: and in
this sort of mortification, there is no danger of excess.

2. Those austerities which are 2. Obligatory,
commanded, must be preferred before them which are voluntary.

3. Corporal austerities are most dangerous 3. or dangerous.
and least profitable, when performed by order of our own Will, without entire
submission to Superiors direction, for these are more worthy of reprehension,
than praise.

But the chief austerity of life, consists in the continual application of our
selves to interior recollection, The chief austerity is continual Recollection.
introversion, and contemplation: For here we perpetually chain up our
thoughts, yoke all our senses, reform our appetites, correct the disorders of
our passions* regulate our actions, shackle our Wills, and admit nothing into
our souls* which may retard or trouble their total tendance to their Lord and
lover: So that in the opinion of all spiritual men, this is the most rigorous
mortification, and most meritorious way of doing penance. For what is this
continual prayer, but an absolute bondage of the whole inward and outward man?
since we may not taste, touch, will, do, any thing we have a mind too. And
though this blessed slavery may bring us in time to a heavenly tranquillity of
life; yet the due and daily practice of this denial and death of the Will, does
so extenuate our truly mortified bodies, that they rather need sometimes to be
cherished, than to be any further punished.

The twentieth Maxim.
That Contemplatives must always have the seven verities, (which concern the
^ivine nature, whereupon all Contemplation is grounded), either habitually, or
formally in their memories.
1. THat God is an eternal being: 1 God is an Eternal,
he has ever been, and ever will be, and it is impossible for him to be
otherwise.

2. That God is an interminable 2. Interminable,
being: he so fills and penetrates all things, and all places, that his being
borns them, and not they him, who is an infinite fullness.

3. That God is a simple being: 3. Simple,
he is all in all creatures all without them, and all in each part of them;
because having in himself no parts by reason of h^s infinite simplicity, he must
necessarily be with all his perfection, wheresoever he is.

4. That God is an unchangeable 4. Unchangeable,
being: he can neither change in respect of place, because he i^ every where;
nor in respect of time, for he is eternal; nor in what concerns himself, by
reason he is an infinite perfection; and therefore there is in him nothing
superfluous to reject, nor defective to repair.

5. That God is an independe^^ 5. Independent,
being: All things depend on him, live in him, are conserved by him; and all
being is ordained to the glory of his bounty, whence they had their beginning.

6. That God is an all-suffici^nt 6. All-sufficient,
being: he remedies all that is amiss, supplies all that is wanting,
communicates all that is good, satisfies all desires, without the least
diminution of his own infinite perfections.

7. That God is an incomprehensible 7. Incomprehensible being.
being: no created understanding can comprehend what God is; All our knowledge
is too silly and short to reach his heights; yet our spirits are dilated by the
light of Faith; and though our Creator may not be comprehended by the creature,
yet he may be known by whom he pleases, when he pleases, and as much as he
pleases.

These verities, and other infinite perfections of God, give light to our dark
and weak understandings, in order to the knowledge of his Sovereign Essence.

The 21. Maxim.
That Jaculatory Prayers, are the nearest dispositions to Contemplation.
IF a soul finds great difficulty to This is the doctrine of S. Bonaven* circa
finem mist. Theol.
unwind her self from worldly imaginations, and to apply her self to God by
recollection; let her content her-self in breathing forth heartily these or the
like short words: [O my Lord, when shall I love you? When shall I embrace you?]
Let her repeat them affectionatly and perseverantly, and she shall sooner be
inflamed with divine love, than by the subtle consideration of the greatest
secrets of heaven: for it is the Will which unites us to God, not the
Understanding.

These acts of the Will, are the spiritual wings of the soul to lift her up and
unite her to her beloved object, they are short, sharp, and swift darts and
desires, shot by our burning hearts, and reaching heaven in an instant. Our
forefathers the Saints frequently Read the 10. collation of John Cassian. c 10.
used them, and most highly prised them: for being short, they trouble not the
memory; being fervent, they rowse our dullness and dryness to affection and
devotion; being frequent, they still renew our attendance to Gods presence, and
put us perpetually in mind of our duties.

The practice of this exercise, is Read the Spiritual Confl. chapter 13. n. 12.
to take occasion from all objects, actions, and accidents, to pray* and praise
God Do we eat? let us give God thanks. Do we walk abroad? Let us praise him who
produced all things which we behold, from the abyss of nothing. Do we look up
to heavens beauty? Let us admire the Creator in his creatures? etc. Have we
sinned, or are we tempted? Let us lift up our hearts to God, and say, O Lord,
permit me not to fall and offend thee. To die? alas, I am content when thou
disposest: but to sin? O pr^serve me from this disaster! Other times let us
burst forth into aspirations of love; as My beloved for me, and I for him. Of
Resignation; as, Not my will, o Lord, but thine be done. What do I desire in
heaven or earth, but thee, o my God. Of pure intention; as, It Is for you, o my
God, that I fast; it is for your sake that I obey my Superior; it is to please
you that I study, work, pray, etc. Your will, o Lord, is mine; your content is
mine: I have no other I or No, but as you will or will not; all my pleasure is
only to please you, etc.

This rule is to be observed, that An observation.
though all jaculatory prayers are good yet those are best, most profitable and
powerful, which our hearts, (moved by God), conceive of themselves, though
they be expressed in words never so plain and simple.

Nor is there any need of much variety of aspirations; for one onl^ word, being
often and amorousl^ repeated, may serve for many days when our souls find
therein gu^ and profit, and speak unto him whom they look upon as present with
their eyes of Faith.

This exercise is most easy, and most efficacious: and they who shall piously
persever in it, shall soon find their hearts inflamed with God's love, and
changed from all worldly affections.

The 22. Maxim.
That the Presence of God, is the great exercise of Contemplatives, and the
shortest way to divine Union.
THis exercise is called great, because Why called the great exe^c^se,
God himself taught it in the worlds infancy to his faithful servant Abraham:
I am thy God, (says he), and thy protector, walk in my presence, and thou
shall be perfect.

It is called the shortest way to And shortest way to union.
divine Union; because it is a summary of all the exercises of prayer, and
which alone will conduct our souls to the hidden treasure of perction, and
replenish them with those celestial riches, which our loving Lord is wont to
communicate to his dearest friends in this life.

God is present in several manners How God is present in diverse manners.
according to our understanding:

1. He is every where present by his essence; which being infinite, cannot be
contained within the limits of any place.

2. He is every where present by his power: He moves the heavenly orbs, fixes
the earth, governs all his creatures, etc.

3. He is particularly present in heaven, by the demonstrations of his glory.

4. He is specially present in holy places, by grace, benediction, and
readiness to hear their Petitions, bless their persons, and accept their
sacrifices of praise, who shall there unanimously meet to present them.

5. He is especially present in the hearts of his holy people, by the
inhabitation of his holy Spirit.

6. He is especially present in the consciences of all men, where he sits as
witness, and judge of all their actions, good and bad.

For the practice of this exercise Seven similitudes for the practice of Gods
presence.
of Gods presence, we may help our thoughts with these seven similitudes,
stirring up in our souls an ardent desire to feel the like effects of his
Al-present Majesty.

1. How the soul is in the body; all in the whole, and all in every part of it,
moving, animating, informing all; giving it life, beauty, etc.

2. How the meat we eat is disgested and changed into our substance, etc.

3. How a little worm lying in the warm Sunshine is environed about with the
beams made bright, hot and as it were, burned and inflamed etc.

4. How a black coal amidst a great fire, is ignified, all on fire, and well
nigh all fire.

5. How a little piece of paper, is pierced through with oil falling on it;
which by degrees dilates it self all over, that the whole seems rather oil than
paper.

6. How a small quantity of water in a vessel of wine, is swallowed up, lost
changed, annihilated, and turned into wine.

7. How a sponge in the midst of the Ocean, is all compassed within and
without, absorpt, imbued, possessed, and as it were, inebriated with water, etc.

O that we could always have S. Augustine. de verbis Domini c. 3.
this actual faith and thought, that God stands a present witness and judge
of all our doings; that if we go forth he spies us; if we go in he sees us;
if we light the candle he observes us; when we put it out, he also marks us;
should we not behave our selves as becoms so holy a presence? should we not be
very impious and impudent to give up the reigns to sin, and sensuality?

O that we would alwaits ruminate and remember this real verity, That God is
the great eye of the world, watching over our actions; an ever-open ear, to
hear all our words; and an unwearied arm to crush sinne^s into ruin how
speedily would sin cease amongst us? how soon should we obtain an habitual
fear and reverence of God? What greater engagement can we have to walk
unblameably, than to consider we act before that judge, who is infallible in
his sentence, Boethius l. 5. de consola.
all-knowing in his information severe in his wrath, and powerful to inflict
punishment?

This perpetual eying of God* is properly a building to him a Chapel in our
hearts, into which we may securely and sweetly retire in the midst of all
worldly varieties. This is to walk with God* (as Enoch did;) and to be in
continual conversation with the Divinity.

A more sublime way to practice Gods presence: is
To look always upon him without any discourse, by a simple act of lively
Faith: not to question how, or in what manner he is present; nor to A h^gher
way to pract^se Gods presence.
fix our eyes upon his inaccessible splendours; because it is yet nigh^ for us,
we are but travelers, and we must expect until the bright day of eternity
shine upon us and show him unto us as he is in himself; we must not think here
to behold him, but be content to believe him present with us and within us, and
that we live, move, and have our being in, and by him.

In this manner of practicing God's presence, it is not needful to form any
conception, or representation of God; as that he is here by us, or in any
designed place, or in such a form or figure: for we speak here of the presence
of God as he is God, which excludes all these imaginations: And therefore it
suffices to behold him only by Faith, simply believing that he is here and in
all places, that he fills the whole universe, and each corner and creature
therein contained S. Augus^.
and that he is more inward to us than we are to our selves.

The 23. Maxim.
That Humiliation is a relic of Gods love.
WHen any occasion is offered us, of humiliation, abjection, or mortification,
let us not examine, how, whence, or from whom it comes but joyfully accept it,
embrace it* and kiss it, as a rich relic, and royal token of God's great
love and favor toward us: Let us force our sensuality to swallow it down and
digest it; for though it be bitter, it will purge and perfect our spirits.

The 24. Maxim.
That Humility is the solid groundwork of all Spirituality.
WE are to grave this necessary lesson, not only upon our Oratory, and in all
our books* but upon the very doors of our hearts, and in the depth of our
souls: Learn of me, who am meek and humblehearted, Christ's lesson, is
humility. Mat. 11. 29.
and you shall find rest for your souls. O sweet Savior! O meek and merciful
lamb of God! teach me this lesson, which I stand in such need of. Oh, that I
could perfectly practice it? How purely and peaceably should I both live and
dye? Meek and humble spirits converse together like mourning turtles, like
innocent lambs, and like corporal Angels, turning the blessed family where
they live, into an earthly Paradise, etc.

In the external practice of this virtue, we are to observe chiefly these
three degrees.

First, to forbear, forgo, deny, Three points for the external pactise of
humility.
and submit our own judgments, heartily, humbly, and really, not only to our
Superiors, but also to all others, casting our selves at their feet, yea and
under their feet to be trodden on as dust and dirt: And this, as near as may
be, for Gods sake.

Secondly, not to care what others say or think of us; which point, which that
other, Of not meddling with what concerns ^^ not, will soon bring us unspeakabl^
peace and purity; thinking always with our selves; What is that to thee?
follow thou thy Savior.

Thirdly, to get a habit of patience, condescendence, yielding and being
silent, in all occurrences and contradictions.

In the internal practice of humility, we are also to observe these three
degrees.

First, to confess and acknowledge Three points for the internal practice.
our selves more wretched and wicked, impure and imperfect ungrateful and
unworthy of all grace and favor, than any soul created.

Secondly, to be glad that others treat us for such, as we really take our
selves to be; and repute us forlorn and forsaken creatures, unworthy of all
company and comfort.

Thirdly, to dye utterly to our selves, and be totally mortified in our
appetite^ and desires renouncing absolutely all propriety, and self-seeking:
These short words, contain infinite perfection.

And to move us powerfully to the prosecution of this virtue, we may thus
question our selves:

1. Do not all things humble Motives to humility.
themselves to serve me, both in heaven and earth? The Saints to pity me, the
Angels to protect me, the Mother of God to remember me, the Son of God to
redeem me, and God himself to remain with me, reign within me, comfort me in my
prayers, feed me in Communion, releeve me in tribulation?

2. O strange Humility of my Savior! Not only to descend unto, but into a
wicked worm; not only to eat with a sinner, but to be eaten by a sinner! O
strange pride in me, to see the Lord of heaven and earth, so humbled in his
Incarnation, Passion, Communion, and yet to see a beggar so proud, a sinner so
lofty minded* and dust and ashes have such difficulty to stoop!

3. Upon earth: Do not all things serve me for body or soul? some to nourish
me, some to cloth me, others to cure me, others to correct me, others to
comfort and instruct me? Even my betters, superiors; and confessors, must
humble themselves to me, because my pride will not bend to them. All creatures
must be subject to me, and I will not be subject to my Creator? Alas! what mean
I? when shall I begin? O secure and sweet Humility, when shall I practice thee?

4. Does not all the world, all that I am and have; my body, my soul, my
actions, my sufferings, my sins, furnish me with sufficient arguments of
Humility! What was I from eternity? What am I? what shall I be? What have I
that I have not received? what have I received that I have not abused? etc.

5. Upon whom does the Holy Esaias 66. 2.
Ghost promise to rest, but on humble and quiet souls? Stoop O dust and ashes!
O amiable Humility how necessary art thou for me? how pleasing to God and men?
With what comfort and quiet do thou enrich thy possessour? O heaven upon
earth! What do I not get by Humility? what do I lose by Pride and
presumption? etc.

The 25. Maxim.
That Silence and Solitude, are our heaven upon earth.
THese are the proper instruments S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 188. a. 8. Lam. 3. 28
of Contemplation; where our souls sit silently and solitarily lifted up above
themselves; by transcending all things created, and uniting themselves to their
Creator.

We must observe them diligently, Read Cisnerius. chapter 39.
discreetly, and devoutly; not out of a sullen or melancholy humor, or in a
disdainful and disgustfull manner, or out of pride and singularity, or to wave
matter of mortification, or to avoid the company of such as we brook not and
have a version from: but with an internal cheerfulness, to converse with God
in spiritual joy and fervor. And the ordinary practice of them may be reduced
to these four points.

First, To retire our selves, and 4. Points for practice.
keep exactly some certain times of silence every day, which (our calling
considered), we have enjoined our selves unto.

Secondly, to decline imperceptibly diverse unnecessary and impertinent
occasions, extroversions, affairs, companies, curiosities, etc.

Thirdly, to speak modestly and moderately in time of speaking.

Fourthly, to yield easily to others, and not contest in words: For all
consists in denying and humbling our selves.

Now in Contemplation, there are three sorts of Silence.

1. When all fancies, imaginations, In Contemplation there is a threefold
Silence.
and species cease in the soul; So that she is silent as to any created object;
desiring no worldly thing, but driving from her all that is not directly God,
to whom only she is silently, joyfully, and quietly attentive.

2. When in this great calm, she fits with Mary at her Lord's feet, in a
certain spiritual idleness; as it were saying; I will hear what my Lord speaks
within me: to whom he answers; Hearken my daughter, and behold, and forget thy
people and thy fathers house.

3. When she transforms her self all into God, her Will tasting his sweetness,
and she slumbring in his bosom, in absolute silence, desiring nothing more,
because fully satisfied.

So that here is a threefold silence. 1. When no creature talks to us; as
having no objects of them in our Understandings and Memories. 2. When we talk
not to our selves; as, totally forgetting our selves, and converting our inward
man to God alone, with a receptive subjection; climbing above our selves by the
act of Faith, whereby our Understanding is united immediately to God. 3. When
God talks not to us, but leaves us in the enjoyment of this divine sweetness,
and elevation of our selves above our selves. O heavenly silence! This has
been by some ^xperienced, but can be by none sufficiently explicated.

The 26. Maxim.
That the perf^ct love of God, and hatred of our selves, must be our constant
and continual employment.
WE cannot love God; except we hate our selves; and if How to know whether we
love God, and hate our selves.
we would truly know how far we are advanced in this love and hatred: First,
we must weigh, how willingly we can, and do submit our judgment, in things
contrary to our natural inclination; Secondly, how quietly we can, and do
suffer such things as are opposite to our sensuality, as hard usage, pains,
confusions, etc.

We must not conceive we have any degree of pure and perfect love, until our
affections are so totally transformed into God, that he freely and fully
possess^s our spirit, guides it, enlightens it, inflames it, elevates it, how
and when he pleases; His love being our only light and life, and we desiring
only two things in the world: First, to love, see, taste and enjoy God only;
Secondly, to be humbled, despised, reviled, rejected, reputed reprobates for
his love. O sweet life! O loving Lord Jesu! What heaven? what happiness is this?

We may stir up our souls to an ardent love of God, by these and the like
motives.

First; What is the object of our Mo^ives to love God.
love, and who is the author of all our good? Is it not God only? What have
we, (nay what has he), that

2. Who created, redeemed, converted,

3. What is the greatest love in etc. Is not God more than all this to us, yea
all in all? What did we ever best love? Did we love God as much? O let us
blush, sigh, and be ashamed at our gross ingratitude. Live henceforth O Jesu,
my only Lord and love.

4. Whose image do we bea^? etc.

5. Upon whom do we depend O powerful Lord God! O that I had whole worlds to
offer thee, infinite bodies to suffer for thee, and innumerable souls to love
thee!

6. Have we not an inclination love than upon God? Does any Creature better
deserve it, or more desire it, than our amiable Creator!

7. Can any thing else fully quiet Sweet Savior, thou art my only safety,
security, sanctity. Oh what did I ever love in the world, which did not in the
end bring me remorse and repentance? Is not all mixed with many occasions of
sin and misery; all vain, inconstant, fading, foolish, deceitful? Our souls, o
Lord, are created S. Augustine
to and for thee, and until they turn and return unto thee, they will never
find perfect peace, quiet, nor content. What quiet had the Prodigal child, till
he returned to his loving Father? Jerusalem, Jerusalem, return to thy Lord God;
Why will thou seek after puddle water, when as thou mai'st freely quench thy
thirst at the fountain head? I thirst, o my Lord, give me this water.

8. To whom must we have can comfort us in the pains and pangs of death? Who
must be our Judge after death? Who must be our eternal bliss and beatitude?
Thou only, O our Lord and love* art only all this and all things else to our
souls. And shall we please a creature to displease thee our Creator? No Lord,
we will die to all creatures, that we may live to thee eternally.

9. O my soul! Upon what can

10. To whom can thou give up

11. To whom can thou convert O King of glory, why menacest thou us with
hell, if we love not? Can there be a heaven without thy love, or a hell with
it? Or is there any heavier hell or death than not to love thee? Had we not
better cease to live, than leave to love? Oh! what shall I answer, if I love
not?

12. What can make a soul

The 27. Maxim.
That Confidence in Gods goodness is the main support of our Spiritual Edifice.
WE must be confident that our Loving Lord, will, First, pardon our sins;
Secondly, strengthen us in all necessities; Thirdly, bring us finally to
eternal happiness. And to strengthen this Confidence, we must deeply ingrave
these two Maxims 2. Maxims
in our souls, and then we shall easily be content to leave our selves in the
arms of his paternall providence, and lose our selves in the abyss of his
piety: First, That what ever befalls us, comes immediately Rusbrochius. Read
the Conflict. c. 10. n. 3. 4
either from his will, or his permission; Secondly, That he will turn all*
(even our frailties and failings) to our spiritual good. We may further weigh,
what wonderful cause Motives to put our Confidence in God. First, in heaven we
have, 1. Viscera misericordiae. 2. Vulnera misericordiae.
of confidence and comfort we have;

First, In heaven; where we have 1. Bowels of mercy, in God the Father: we cry
daily to him as his Son taught us; Our Father which art in heaven, Will not a
good father forgive the fault, and forget the folly of his returning and
^epenting child? 2. Wounds of mercy, in God the Son, the least of which was
sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds: whereby we being reconciled and made
his friends, will he deny us any thing that is necessary? Is not each drop of
his dear blood a motive of loving confidence, and able to melt us into a
filial dependency on him? 3. Promises 3. Promiss^ misericordiae.
of mercy, in God the Holy Ghost, who has assured us of his continued comforts
till the worlds consummation. 4. Words of mercy, 4. Verba misericordiae.
when he said; O why will you perish, you of the house of Israel? As I live I
desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn to me and live. What hard
heart would not be touched with tenderness, and say reciprocally; As I live, o
my Lord God, I detest all sin and convert my self totally to thee, that I may
live with thee, and love thee eternally. O holy Conversion! O happy contract!
5. Breasts of mercy, in the 5. Vbera misericordiae.
Mother of Jesus: O Jesu, be to us a Jesus! O Mother of Jesus, be to us a
Mother of mercies, Let the care of thy honor be ever in our hearts, and the
care of our welfare always in thine. 6. Castles of mercy, in the Angels, who
are before and behind 6. Castra misericordiae.
us, to watch over and protect us. 7. Oracles of mercy; the prayers and
suffrages of all the Saints pitying 7. Oracula misericordiae.
our misery, and purchasing pardon for us. If we put all this together, we
shall find all heaven for us. What matter then if hell be against us? O thou of
little faith, whereof can thou be doubtful or fearful, etc.

Secondly, On Earth in the Church Secondly, On Earth.
militant, what is not for us? Sacraments, Scriptures, Examples, Prayers. If we
go not to heaven where is the fault? What could God do that he has not done?
and what could we have more than we have, for our consolation and salvation?
Who can choose but take courage, comfort, and confidence?

Thirdly, Look upon Christ Jesus. Thirdly, In Christ.
1. Why came he into this world? 2. How did he carry himself in it toward
sinners, both in his life and death? 3. Why was he called Jesus, and termed a
friend of Publicans and sinners? 4. Why did he ^^y, That he came to call
sinners, and not the Just, and to do mercy and not justice? 5. What access and
comfort gave he to all sinners? 6. What was his last will and testament, etc?
7. What his last words? Father, forgive, etc.

Fourthly, Ponder Gods Perfectious. Fourthly, Look on Gods perfections.
1. He is our maker, we the work of his hands: Does not each Artist love his
own handiwork? Has not every one a natural proneness, to protect, improve,
profit, and perfect his own? Even so our loving Lord takes care of us; he hides
and harbors us, as the Hen her Chickens under her wings; he defends us as the
apple of his eye: If a mother can forget the fruit of her womb, yet will I
never forget you (says our Lord), because I have graven you in my hands and
heart. 2. He is All-mighty, All-wisdom, All-goodness: Put these together; I
have a Father and Maker, that loves me exceedingly; he knows my necessities,
and what is best for me; he is rich enough to provide for me: Will he let me
perish? will he reject me? Then reason thus further with your-self; In whom
shall I confide if not in God? In my self or others? We are all inconstant; all
ignorant of what is best; all impotent, and want means to help: O how much
better is it* to trust in God than men?

Fifthly, Reflect upon your own Fifthly our own experience.
Experience. 1. Whom did God ever deceive in his promises? 2. Who ever called
heartily on him and was refused? 3. Has he not hitherto merveilously protected
and preserved you, and disposed all for your good? Why then should you doubt or
distrust his providence for the time to come? No Lord, Blessed is the man that
trusts in thee: Heaven and earth may perish; but no tittle of my hope in
thee, my Dear and only Savior. This shall be my Anchor and stay: If he kill
me, I will trust in him. I will rest Secure in his Divine providence* and
endeavor to get an habitual and stable trust in his paternall protection,
(without any care or fear)* as does a child in his fathers b^som: This is the
ready way to become unmovable and immutable, quiet and content.

Is he God? Is he good? Is he my God? my Father? my Jesus? Jesus crucified? Is
his goodness infinite? Does he want power, wisdom or Will, to pardon, protect,
and perfect me? I must surely have little faith, less hope, and no love: If I
will not take thy words, (O Lord) thy works, thy wounds, thy life and thy love
for secure pledges of thy care toward me, and sufficient motives to place my
whole confidence in thee.

The 28. Maxim.
That the measure of our progress in Perfection^, is the Conformity of our Wi^^
with the divine will.
1. FOr our perfection consists in love: and the greatest sign of love, is to
have one and the same Will with the beloved: So that look how much we have of
our own Will, so much less have we of Gods will and love, and consequently are
so much the further from the Union of our spirit with him. 1. In this exercise
of conformity, consists all perfection.


O what holiness and happiness, what privilege and prerogative is it, to have
one Will and spirit with God? Is not this to be a Saint, an Angel, a little
Christ or a little God? Did not Christ say; Those that do the (...) of my
Father, are my Brethr^n, sisters, mother, and kindred? Oh who would not change
Wills with God? 2. All things come from God, and for our good.


2. What can befall me, (sin only excepted, which is from my will) but from thee
my most sweet Lord, and loving Father? Good and bad, comfort and confusion,
life and death are from thee; And what can happen to me from thee, but for my
good* If my Father be my Physician, shall I not drink the chalice he tempers
for me? What better sacrifice can I offer up to thee than my will? In all other
oblations, I give but a part of my self, or something belonging to my self: But
in this I give the principal, leaving no right to my self; nay I am no more my
self, but thy servant and slave. 3. Why were we 3. This is the end of our life,
and being.
placed in this world (o my soul) but to perform the will of God? Why entered we
into the school of perfection, but to learn to practice it purely and
perfectly? To what end are all our prayers, communions, exercises, etc. but to
know Gods holy will, and to follow it? What profit have we reaped by following
hither to our own will? What will become of us, if we continue in it? What
means is there to amend it for the future, but humble obedience, and absolute
submission of our will in all, and to all, leaving all to God, doing all for
God, and receiving all from God* that he only may be all in all? What can
endamage me but my will? what will? past, present, or to come. The past I
detest; my present is, that Gods will be done; for time to come, I desire this
my will may stand irrevocable for ever. How often have I done the will of
others for my own ends, to please them or pleasure my self? and shall I not do
now as much, to please my Lord God? Yes, Lord, I will what thou will, neither
more nor less, without exception without reservation, witho^t delay.

4. What fruits shall I reap by this 4. The profits of this exercise.
Conformity of my Will? 1 Having no will, I can neither sin, err, nor be
deluded. 2. There is neither judgment nor hell for me. 3. ^ shall find peace
and rest* and rema^ constant and content amidst a^ chances and changes; and so
beg^ my Paradise of delights, in this (...) of tears. 4. I shall be freed from
all troublesome fears, scruples, d^quiets, indiscretions, and illusions, both
in prayer, and in the pract^ce of virtue: All which are derived from the
disorder of my Will, and for want of this true conformity and indifferency. 5.
This gives every thing I do* leave, or suffer, a double grace, merit, and
crown. O only sweet, short and sure way! who would not leave, yea loath his own
Will, for so many profits and pleasures?

5. What do heaven and earth, Angels and Saints but Gods Will? 5. All
Creatures do the will of God.
What do the souls in hell, but suffer for having done their own Will? What did
Christ Jesus, and Blessed Mary upon earth? The one said, I came not to do my
own Will but his that sent me: The other said, Behold, O Lord, thy handmaid,
do with me as thou will. I say also, with heart and mouth; O my Lord, I am
entirely thine, put me where thou will; give me what thou will, use me how thou will, so thou will go with me, and give me leave to bear and embrace thee with
the two arms of perfect conformity, and lively Confidence.

6. What made the Apostles, 6. Examples of this Conformity.
Martyrs, Virgins, so constant and content, amidst their torments and trials?
What made those Saints so courageously to defy the devils (flocking about them
like so many Lions and Monsters); If God S. Antony, and others.
have given you power and permission over us, take us, devour us, hurry us
headlong into hell, we will not contradict his Will; but if not, why do you
labor in vain? What made Job so patient on his dunghill? Abraham so resolute
to sacrifise his son? And finally, what made Christ in his bloody sweat, to cry
out; Not my will, O Father, Lu. 22. 42.
but thine be done? All this was caused by the Will of God, which they desired
to follow and fulfill, to the last gasp and drop of their blood. O holy and
happy souls! When shall I imitate you? O my sweet God, that thou would say of
me, as thou did of that thy servant; I have found a man David.
according to my heart, who will do whatsoever I will: Or that I could say as
heartily as he did; My heart is ready, O God* to accept and execute thy holy
Will in all things whatsoever! O my Lord, let all s^lf-will and self-love,
hereafter dye in me! and let thy only Will and love remain and reign in my
spirit; For I am most sure, till I faithfully follow this rule, I shall never
find real peace or content.

The 29. Maxim.
That Unquietness of mind is the bane of Devotion, and curse of Contemplation.
FOr it is not a single and simple Disquiet is not a single evil.
temptation, but a source whence many spring, a monster with many heads, and
the greatest evil, (sin only excepted) which seizes on the soul: Let us
therefore shun it with all possible speed and diligence, and refuse to give it
the least entrance into our hearts, upon what pretense soever.

If we perceive our selves inclined How to prevent it.
to be easily troubled; let us duly practice these two points: First, carefully
fore-arm and fortify our interiours, against all future contrarieties,
crosses, and contingencies, by devoutly performing our morning prayers and
exerci^es of Recollection. Secondly, prudently put off company and occasions of
extroversion, bridle our tongues till the tempest be blown over, hide our
selves in a corner* turn our souls to our Savior, read something of devotion,
and (in matters of moment) impart our minds to some virtuous friend, etc.

If we will always keep internal A rule to keep inward peace.
peace, we must observe these three rules: First, We must do nothing only to
edify others, without a further end of God's honor; nor any thing, which may
justly displease, distaste, dis-edify, or contristate them. Secondly, we must
not be eager, eurious, or solicitous to please or satisfy our selves, yea or to
perform our duty's to God-wards, by doing all things in print, perfectly and
exactly. Thirdly, All our pleasure must be to please God; yet we must not
please our selves in the pleasure we find in serving and pleasing him. For
generally it suffiseth, that we are heartily willing, and quietly careful to
serve our Creator, please him in all things, and displease neither him nor any
one in any thing and so go on in our Introversion with perfect freedom and
liberty, simplicity and purity, without further fears or reflections.

Let us, I say, keep on soft and fair, according to order and obedience, in our
exercises of Humility, recollection, and inward conversation with God; checking
and We must curb importunate desires.
curbing all importune pretensions, desires and resolutions of doing strange
matters; and resting content in what God sends, and our poverty affords;
neither running before his grace, nor beyond our own strength.

Let us leave all intermedling Of little meddling comes great peace.
with others doings and affairs, looking only to our own care and charge,
thinking all others more perfect than our selves; and being truly glad, that
our dear Lord is purely loved and perfectly served by them: This is a sure way
to avoid many stumbling blocks of our enemies; to begin to taste the joys of
heaven in this life; to live without solicitude, and dye without fear or
trouble.

For the further practice of this Further practices of this point.
important point, and to obtain this happy quiet and content of mind,

First, We must carefully avoid and contemn all curiosity, to see, hear, know,
or have a hand in what concerns us not.

Secondly, we must labor to be, (as it were), blind, deaf, dumb, insensible;
passing by all things, or letting them pass by us; For all is vanity,
[Salomon.] One to one, [S. Giles.] My God and all, [S. Francis.] Whatsoever
has an end; is nothing, [S. ^erese]. What is that to thee? follow thou me,
[Jesus Christ.]

Thirdly, What is it we will see, hear, or know? novelty, vanity, a transitory
toy, a foolish fable, an impertinent object, a flying shadow, a false deceit.

Fourthly, to what end? Either it will defile our souls; or disquiet our minds;
or distract our spirits; or divert our intentions; or imprint idle images, or
excite our passions; or renew our vicious affections: All which, are great
hindrances in a spiritual and contemplative course. Ah! poor souls! what
amiable and admirable light and love, do we leave and lose for a vain
curiosity? etc.

The 30. Maxim.
That Crosses are to be suffered, not sought; to be taken, not made; to be
concealed, not complained of.
IT is far beter to take crosses, when, where, and how we find them, than to
make them our selves; for this is loss of time, and a nourishment of
Self-love. Let us not therefore cast our selves indiscreetly upon difficulties,
or seek out occasions of humility and patience; but be ready to receive, and
indifferent to accept such as befall us, and we shall find enough to do.

Let us make as little outward show as may be of our inward sufferings; but
keep that secret to our selves, till obedience and just reason induce us to
reveal it, and then let us do it simply, sincerely, and resignedly. O what
peace, what profit, what pleasure, shall we find in this real proceeding?
Complaints are commonly accompanied with self-seeking, and small troubles are
sooner cured by quiet suffering, than much showing or speaking of them: Does
this cross come from See the Conflict. chapter 10. n. 2.
men; and is it not rather permitted and provided by our beloved Lord from all
eternity, to purify us from pride, to purge us from the love of creatures, and
to dispose us for heaven and happiness?

The 31. Maxim.
That Temptations cannot hurt us, if we cast our whole care upon God.
WHen temptations, passions, 4. Rules of practice.
repugnancies, or repinings, rage in the inferior portion of our souls; we
are presently to reflect 1. That we have made choice of God's love for our
end, and resolve to stand to it till death. 2. That we must willingly submit to
the trouble, as long as it shall please God to permit it. 3. That we must
continue in our practices of piety and Recollection, as if we felt no
afflictions, neither thinking on them, nor fearing them; but assuring our
selves that nothing can injure us, so long as we rely upon God and resent our
own weakness. 4. That Prayer may be our chief refuge, and support against all
their surprisals: and therefore we may say briefly and heartily; Perfect thy
strength, (O powerful Lord,) in my weakness; let thy mercy triumph on the
throne of my misery: I detest from my heart whatsoever is contrary to thy holy
will in this point N. and all things: I resign my self to suffer it, as long
and in what manner thou please, though never so cross to my crooked nature.
Sweet Savior remain with me, and let thy love reign in me, and then I neither
want other company, nor desire further comfort.

The 32. Maxim.
That Desolations, derelictions, afflictions, distractions, are to be
transcended by generous Resolutions.
IN time of desolation, etc. we are not to dispute with our selves nor examine
the causes or circumstances of our sufferings, for we are then neither
competent nor indifferent judges, but we must referr that until the time of
Prayer; talk not now with your passionate and partial heart, but speak to God
about some other thing; transcending and dissembling your trouble in some such
manner; Good God! when shall this Pilgrimage have an end? My life is a
continual warfare upon earth, wherein all is vanity, all is affliction of
spirit, all is full of frailty, misery, instability. O Lord, what is man that
thou should mind him? a weak reed, wagg'd with every wind, and contristated
with every little cross and contrariety, burdensome to himself, and troublesome
to others, etc.

There is more profit, and less danger to suffer Desolation, than to abound
with Consolation; to desire sensible love and contrition, than to feel it; to
resist temptations, distractions, passions, with patience and resignation, than
to have none at all.

It Is a sign of high and heroic virtue, 1. To be Resigned, when it seems we
neither are nor can be resigned. 2. To be Patient, when we are fullest of
motions to anger. 3. To be Humble, meek and quiet, in time of sickness, serious
business, multiplicity of employments. 4. To be Constant and invariable in all
the diversities, and varieties of our own changeable humors, dispositions,
inclinations, internal invitations, external instigations.

Let us not think we lose our time when we are involuntarily distracted in
Prayer, but rather comfort our selves in being deprived of all comfort, because
we then remain in that state in which God would have us.

Let us conceive our selves as within the walls of a strong castle; without
which are great noises, outcries, tumults, alarms, but we safe and secure
within, sleighting their vain attempts: If our desires be to love God, and our
intentions to be with him, and we hold no discourse with other divertisments,
we have made a good and profitable Prayer, etc.

The 33. Maxim.
That Perfection consists in putting off all Propriety, and putting on pure and
naked Charity.
THis will make us love God above all things, and all things in and for him
only; uniting our spirits to God, and in him to our neighbors.

The practice of this spiritual uncloathing of our souls.
Behold, o my Lord and love! I generally and totally renounce all things but
thee; casting my self into the arms of thy most holy disposition and
protection: O my soul! return sweetly to thy seat of rest; repose quietly and
confidently in the bosom of Divine bounty; Remain here without diverting or
distracting thy self to other objects; Rely securely upon his mercy and
providence, cutting off incontinently all superfluous cares and solicitudes,
and protesting thou desire nothing but the advancing of his honor,
accomplishing of his will, his love, and himself.

Take courage, my naked soul! for if thou art uncloathed sometimes, and deprived
of thy Lovers embraces, feelings of his comforts, and pleasures of his
presence, it is only, that himself alone may purely possess thee. O my Lord and
lover! Look upon this soul, which I have endeavored to strip entirely from all
sensual affection: therefore I have not only abandoned, but hated, Father,
Mother, brethren, sisters, lands, living, liberty, yea and my own life, that I
might become thy disciple: And were it yet to do again, I would cast off
Mother, and run over Father to come to thee my loving Jesus: Confirm, O Lord,
my courage! Live O rich nakedness! Live my beloved to me and I to him! Let me
see no one but only Jesus! Let alone his other gifts, though never so excellent
and holy, I am indifferent to leave them or keep them, in the manner and
measure he pleases* it is naked Jesus I only seek and sigh after.

Uncloath me then, my Lord, 1. Of all sin, great and small. 2. Of all affection
to it, even the least venial. 3. Of all curiosity. 4. Of all sensuality. 5. Of
all inordinate passion. 6. Of all vanity. 7. Of all self-love and self-will.
Let me be reduced to nothing; Put off my self, and put on me thy self
crucified; Deprive me of all that distasteth thee; that thou may say of me,
This is my beloved son in Mat. 12. 18
whom I please my self: This is my disciple whom I Jesus love; This is my rest
for ever; Here I will dwell, because I have made choice of it: In this heart,
is my harbor, there you shall infallibly find me.

The 34. Maxim.
That Zeal and eagerness must be tempered with Moderation and discretion.
WE must moderate our natural vivacity, activity, and agility of spirit, by
shunning all precipitation, and indiscreet forwardness and fervor: Soft and
sure; Let us look before we leap: Let us take our eyes in our hands; For that
which is well done is twice done, and a thing warily begun, is well nigh half
brought about. Let us lend our hands, and not give our hearts to any work; Let
us endeavor to perform all our actions with a free and disinteressed mind,
without which all is drudgery and slavery.

Let us not be over eager: Perfection consists not in multiplicity of action,
but in simplicity of intention; not in variety of exercises and devotions, but
in peace of mind, and purity of heart; not in saying or doing much, but in
suffering and loving much, etc.

Let us sometimes check our importunate spirit, as Jesus did Martha: Martha,
Martha, thou art Luc. 10. 41
troubled about many things, when as there is but one thing only necessary,
which is, A real, cordial, and total Abnegation of thy self in all things.

Let not indiscreet zeal serve for a cloak to cover our passionate hearts, and
inward hatred of others: True Zeal is full of compassion free from indignation;
and perfect charity either will not see what is amiss in others, or seek out
the best interpretation of it; excusing the fault, and pitying the party.

The 35. Maxim.
That we must never rely upon our own natural judgment, experience, and
knowledge.
THis has deceived many, and cast them headlong into confusion and despair:
hence so many Apostasies, rebellions, dissensions, divisions and scandals in
Religion: O how pleasant, beautiful, and edifying a thing is it, to see
persons of great perfection, glorious endowments, venerable for age, honorable
for learning, renowned in dignity, etc. to be truly humble, supple, simple,
soft like Wax, capable of any impression, and condescending to others reason
and command. Blessed are the meek, humble, and obedient spirits; for God will
not permit them to go astray, or be deceived.

The 36. Maxim.
That we must seek no comfort in any creature.
FOr the practice of this; We must The practice.
cheerfully forsake all, and be content to be forsaken by all: resting only in
God, by prayer, patience and confidence. Adieu friends, familiars, Confessors,
counselors, books, exercises, Angels: Welcome solitude, crosses, eclipses,
shames, wounds, want^, darknesses, desolations, deaths: Yes, O Father because
thou so please. Is the creature in which I delight more loving, lovely or
beautiful than God my Creator? Has it been more bountiful or beneficial
tome? Can it more justly require, or more liberally requite my love? Can it
make me holy or happy, quiet or content? Shall I leave light for darkness, life
for death, substance for shadows, All for nothing? Answer impartially, and
resolve effectually.

The higher practice of this The higher practice.
Maxim, in order to Contemplation, is,
To estimate things according to Read the Spir. Con. chapter 4. n. 3.
their real value: And then, Alas! what comfort can a devout soul, which has
tasted the sweets of her beloved in Contemplation, find in the best of
creatures? How far are they from affoording her any solid and substantial
satisfaction in her spiritual sorrows, sadness or desolation!

Therefore show wisely and carefully keeps her self to holy Recollection,
resigns her self absolutely to the divine pleasure, continues steadfastly in the
presence of her Creator; seeks to treat with him one to one; and leaves
worldlings to follow their appetites, as the horse and mule which are void of
under standing. Oh! how much more happiness is it to suffer in the sweet
company of God, than to enjoy all such false and fantastical pleasures, as
all creatures can confer, in the company of men: My soul refuses this comfort,
I remember my God, and in him I am only delighted.

And indeed, they who faithfully The true Contemplatives are never sad or
solicitous.
and fervently addict themselves to spiritual Recollection, are neither sad
nor solicitous, but only in show: For what can they want, who are with God? In
him they find gardens to walk in, fountains to bath in, palaces to dwell in,
dainties to feed on, and all pleasures to delight in, with such infinite
advantages, that they ravish'dly cry out, My God and All: These contemplatives
need not your compassion, O worldlings! They are not so drowned in melancholy,
so plunged in sorrow, so little enjoying themselves, as you esteem and censure?
No, your own poor souls are seriously to be pitied, which are so wide of
wisdom, and so wedded to sensuality, as to relinquish true life and liberty,
sincere comfort and content, for the shadows and smokes of the world: For this
is most certain, that whosoever leaves Recollection to look after earthly
consolation, enjoys neither God nor the world; whereas a soul which retires her
self from the world to possess God, enjoys truly both God and the world
together.

The 37. and last Maxim.
That we must walk, and persever, in these our Spiritual Exercises, with the
two feet of Faith and Obedience.
To perform this we must 1. Leave all for one. All others for God Our selves
for God God himself when he withdraws himself, By recollection. By abnegation.
By resignation.

2. Leave one for all. 3. Leave one and all.

The practice of this Maxim consists in these five points.
1. TO have an ardent desire, affection, The practice.
and intention, to love, see, please, and enjoy God.

2. To curb our senses from all curiosity, vanity, apprehensions, etc. which
may either defile our souls, or disturb our minds, or distract our spirits;
Either seduce us from the right way, or affright us when we are in it.

3. Then we must take Jesus by the right hand, by faith and confidence,
abandoning our selves totally to his mercy, and resting in his providence, with
a filial indifferency.

4. We must take our spiritual guide by the left hand, by punctual obedience.

5. In our way, we must have these or the like thoughts, recollections, and
devotions. Well, I am going to heaven; to my Father and Creator; to my eternal
rest and Center; to see, love and praise my God for evermore: There only is
true life, true love, true light, and true liberty: O Jesu! how long! O
Jerusalem, when!

Jesus is with me, and for me, him I will follow, after him I will sigh, and
for him I will suffer, come what can. If I err, let my guide look to it, for I
am obedient; If I stumble, Jesus will not let me fall, for I am faithful.

If I cannot have the fruit of Penance, I will keep that of Obedience; What I
cannot get by Recollection, I will procure by Resignation; What I want by
Indifferency, I will supply by Confidence; though my Deserts fail, my Desires
shall prevail. What has an end, is nothing. Live Eternity!

Sometimes let us hearken to Jesus speaking. O my child, my servant, my spouse:
What are all things to thee? follow thou me: Let all pass, I am here: All is
one, and One is all; trouble not thy self with multiplicity. Be silent, and I
will answer for thee; be content, I am thy sufficiency; Be indifferent, all is
my will; be confident, all is well: I forgive thee all thou demandest; I will
give thee all thou desire; I will never desert thee, nor withdraw my eyes,
hand, heart, from thee; therefore go on quietly, courageously, confidently.

Other times let us answer him meekly and faithfully: O good Jesu! save me, for
I am thine; O sweet Savior, support me, for I am weak; O loving guide, direct
me, for I am blind, etc.

Thus boldly let us keep on our way, 1. Letting pass all, by insensibility. 2.
Out-passing all, by fervor. 3. Passing under all, by humility. 4. Passing over
all, by generosity and elevation of spirit.

Under this Maxim, are solved many material doubts arising in our daily
progress to perfection.

The first Doubt.
If we fear that God will forsake us, by reason of our Ingratitude and
disloyalty?
It Is true, we have been, are still, and ever shall be ungrateful, tepid, and
defective in our correspondencies to the divine love and light; and God may in
justice forsake us, and yet be a good God; but we must be confident in his
mercy that he will not do it, for Jesus sake, in fury and rigor; though he
may sometimes withdraw the feelings of his presence to try our loyalty: His
holy will be done: Let us never say, God will forsake us; but say, We will
never forsake God: Let us first say, Does God love us? who can doubt it? And
do we love him? If we will, we do. Let us never say, We shall never amend,
all is lost; But let us often say, We are sinners, wicked, wretched, weak, none
more than we: but it truly grieves us to be so; we will endeavor to remedy
all; sure we are, our God is Almighty, all-mercy, all-meekness, him we will
serve, and in him we will trust in despite of nature, and maugre the devil;
and for him all desolation, and death it self is most welcome unto us.

The 2. Doubt.
If our sins trouble us, in respect of Confession and Satisfaction?
LEt us cast off servil fear; and be confident that what is past is pardoned,
by Gods mercy and our humble confession; and what is to come may be prevented
by Gods grace and our diligence and endeavors.

The 3. Doubt.
If we can neither Pray with fervor, nor Suffer with patience; neither feel
God present, nor be content in his absence?
LEt us have recourse to these four things, which will supply our defects, and
satisfy for our faults. 1. Obedience. 2. Resignation. 3. Confidence. 4. Good
desires. Therefore in all our fears, crosses, and troubles, let us make use of
these four points in this or The practice.
the like manner. O my Lord God, who deservest from me all love and honor, and
whom I desire to serve with all my soul; behold I come out of confidence in thy
mercy, having no other end, but only to please and praise thee: wherefore I
resign my self to thy will, beseeching thee to turn all to thy glory and my
good.

The 4. Doubt.
If we are doubtful that God is angry with us, that we want grace, that we
only seek our selves, that we yield to all temptations? etc.
LEt us build upon these three foundations: Humility in acknowledging our own
deformity; Sincerity in confessing it; and Confidence of pardon for it: and so
persevering constantly and courageously in a course of Prayer, according to
direction and obedience, we shall soon find ease, rest and peace.

The 5. Doubt.
If our Consciences are unquiet, and our souls fearful, by reason of our
proness to sin? etc.
LEt us Apply these following plasters, and put these tents into our spiritual
wounds, as deep as we can, every day for a time, till the cure be perfected.

1. Let us be assured that we are Plasters for a troubled conscience.
now at this present in the state of grace (supposing we have already, or are
now resolved to do what is necessary for the expiation of our past sins, and
the avoiding all sins for the future.)

2. That having a will to please God, and perform our duties, our Prayers are
profitable to us and acceptable to God, and we may without presumption take
courage and comfort, though we are yet full of passions and ^mperfections.

3. That the feeling of troubles, fears, temptations etc. are neither sins in
us, nor signs of Gods anger against us.

4. That we are not bound to reflect continually whether we have consented to
sin or not; nor to judge whether this or that consent he mortal or venial:
Nor to meddle with the sins of our life past, having endeavored to discharge
our consciences once of them in Confession.

5. That we may and must convert our hearts to God at any time, humbly and
confidently, in what estate so ever we be, without hesitation or apprehension,
preferring his will before our own quiet.

6. That in saying our Office, or Prayers, it suffices that we have a good
intention to praise and please God, and satisfy our obligation, using moral
diligence in driving out bad thoughts, and we need trouble our selves no
further.

7. That so long as we make choice of God for our God, and of his will for our
only end; and can say cordially, I love God, I will no sin; we need fear
nothing.

8. That we are not bound to do still that which our Conscience dictates, or
what our fancy tells us is a divine call; for this is the way never to have
true peace, and to be ever subject to illusions. Therefore The old plain rule:
Trust and obey, Let pass and Pray.
let us follow the old, simple, and secure rule: 1. Trust and 2 Obey, 3 Let
pass, and 4 Pray: these will prove our safest haven in the Sea of this world,
and our heaven upon earth; thus we may enjoy the peace of God, and lodge in our
hearts the God of peace; be blind, and yet see God.

Note well, that these aforesaid warrants, are to be followed according to
discretion, and with the approbation of our spiritual director.

The 6. Doubt.
If we are full of fears and apprehensions of our estate, by reason we feel in
our souls such slender effects of Gods grace and love, and have little
devotion, no inward peace? etc.
SUch souls can never be cured* till they submit their judgments, look with
more confidence upon Gods mercy, and seek less their own satisfaction and
assurance: For, this is an infallible truth, That in An infallible maxim.
this life (without revelation), we can have no certainty of our estate, but
must still live in ignorance as to that knowledge; to hold the contrary is an
heresy, and to seek it inordinately is self-love and curiosity. We must
therefore work our salvation betwixt fear and hope; and if we should see or
feel any thing in our selves which should make us secure, it were very
suspicious and dangerous.

Let us humbly observe these three points. 1. Resolve still to serve and please
God in the best manner we can. 2. Resign our selves to his will and divine
ordinance, for time and eternity, without further reflections. Read Blosius, in
spec. spirituali. cap. 7. Read the Imit. of Christ. l. 3. cap. 59.
3. Build upon the word and warrant of our guide, and rest quiet and confident.
They who seek more knowledge and satisfaction by feelings and reasons, seek but
their own trouble and ruin; and if we find not here peace and comfort, we may
thank our selves, since it is our disobedience and self-seeking which causes
it.

The 7. Doubt.
If some extreme cross, calamity, or affliction, has seized our hearts? etc.
LEt us hasten to our Lord God with an humble and confident affection, and
placed before him, 1. Kiss the Crucifix, saying, O my The practice.
dear Lord, O my sweet Jesus, O my all and only good! 2. Then tell him you are
troubled, as you would tell your Spiritual directour, and that you know not
what to say or do. 3. Acknowledge heartily that you deserve no comfort, but to
have heaven shut against you, and hell let loose to torment you. 4. If you
would seek comfort, you would not have it out of him, or in any thing contrary
to his Divine Will and liking. 5. Then say; O Lord, I have no other Physician
for my soul but thee, behold my wounds; thou art my Father, behold my wants;
thou art my only Friend, behold my wishes and desires: then expose them unto
him, and hearken what counsel and comfort he will give you. 6. Take again the
Cross, kiss it, embrace it, resign your self to suffer; 7. And with an
internal act of indifferency, being confident that this cross and trouble is
his will, and will be for your good, desire to bear it and whatsoever else he
shall lay upon you, knowing he will enable you to do it. 8. Have no recourse to
creatures for your contentment, but drink purely and plentifully at the
fountain head: and be not weary; you suffer for eternity.

The 8. Doubt.
If we desire to conquer the Devil, and overcome all temptations whatsoever?
LEt us often read, observe, and General Remedies against temptations. The 1.
Remedy. Jam. 4. 7.
practice these general Remedies.

The first is, A strong courage, and firm resolution, to fight and get the
victory, and not to yield even to our last gasp. If we resist the Devil, he
will fly from us; if we fear him, he will follow us, and insult over us; If we
play the Pigmeys, he will play the Lion; but let us be Lions, and he will soon
show himself a coward: Let us then fight manfully as befits Christ's Soldiers,
to give him the honor, and the Devil the terror, who is already chained to
our hands, and may bark, S. Hierome Thou may persuade, but can not
precipitate. 1 Cor. 4. 9.
but cannot bite, unless by blindness and madness we come within his reach.

Let us remember in our combats, that we are made a spectacle to God, his
Angels, and all his heavenly court: who would not fight valiantly and
confidently before such spectators? God beholds us, as our Judge to reward and
crown us if we overcome; Christ as our Captain helps us to overcome; all the
rest pray for us that we may overcome. Fear not my soul, there 2 Par. 32. 7
are more with us than against us: God and his Angels are on our side, who can
withstand us?

Let us further reflect, that we plead not only our own cause, but Gods; whom
in our persons the Devil seeks to injure and dishonor: Let us then rather die
than suffer our good Masters honor to be stained by our cowardice; our dearest
blood will be well spilt for such a King and country? Oh! what privilege, to
suffer for Jesus sake! Arise Lord, let thy enemies be dispersed, Psalm. 42.
judge thine own cause: Thine is the quarrel, We are thy Champions.

Let us also ponder well what S. Paul tells us on Gods part; That he is
faithful in his promises, and will not permit us to be tempted 1 Cor. 10. 13.
beyond our strength, but will draw our good out of our temptations: he knows
what mold we are made of, what force we have, and (which is above all) he loves
us as the apple of his eye: If he seems sometimes to sleep a while, yet he both
sees and succors us. Courage therefore, if we be already at hell-gates, he can
and will bring us back again, if we walk amidst the shadows of death, Psalm. 22.
4.
let us fear no ill, etc.

The second Remedy, is, A distrust The 2. Remedy. Psa. 17. 31
in our own forces, and trust in Gods help. God protects them that hope in him;
and the general reason of the Scripture why God helps his servants, is,
because they hope and trust in him; so that his honor becomes interessed, if
we rely upon his succor: whereas if we trust to our own forces, we have little
to do with God; and challenging much to our selves, quickly fall into blindness
of heart, unless God bring us to the acknowledgement of our own nothing by some
strong affliction, and make us cry out with Job, There is no help for me in my
self.

The third Remedy, is Prayer: The 3. Remedy. Mat. 26. 41
Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation. Let us turn our hearts to
converse with God, which is better than to reflect upon our temptations and
troubles. Let us be so attentive to him, that we have neither leave nor leisure
to give ear to devilish suggestions, but transcend them by a generous
resolution, rather to die than admit any thing contrary to our Lords love and
pleasure.

The fourth Remedy, is, To observe The 4.
the root, groundwork and occasion of the temptation, and to pull it up, cut it
off and destroy it.

The fifth Remedy, is, to cure one contrary by another. If we be The 5.
tempted to Pride, let Hum^lity be our aim; let us never cease from speaking,
writing, reading, meditating, praying and practicing it, till we get an
habitual loathing of pride.

The sixth Remedy, is, to Resist at 6. Resist. at the beginning.
the beginning, when it is yet weak. Let us kill the Cockatrice in the shell,
lest being hatched it poison us; let us be wise, and not save a penny, to pay a
pound, nay to lose all we are worth eternally.

The seventh Remedy, is, to reveal 7. Reveal it.
it to him who is incharged with our souls: this diminishes our grief, lessens
our trouble, is an act of humility meriting grace and comfort, and confounding
our enemy, who cannot brook to have his deceits discovered.

The 8. Remedy, is, to avoid Idleness: 8. Avoid Idleness. This was the rule of
the Egyptian Monks.
Let the Devil always find us well employed, and we shall easily avoid his
temptations; He that is idle has ten Devils to impugn him he that is well
busied, has but one: Let us therefore distribute certain exercises for all
times* that we may be sure to avoid this mother of all sin and mischief, and
the greatest bane of our souls, Idleness.

The 9. Doubt.
If we want Comfort in long and dangerous temptations and troubles?
LEt us consider what Experience and Scriptures teach us: That the life of man
is a continual Job. 7.
warfare. That wars and commotions James. 4.
are within us from our concupiscences and original corruption. That there is
a law in our Members, Romans 7.
rebelling against the law of our minds, That when we are resolved Eccles. 12
to give our selves to Gods service, we must prepare our hearts for temptation.
The great Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 8.
and vessel of election was sore tempted, and shall we poor worms, and
sensual creatures, wonder to feel contradiction and combats in our nature?

Let us not deceive our selves, thinking to find present quiet, as soon as we
convert our selves to God by prayer, for then chiefly the Devil will storm,
the Flesh rebel, the World murmr, when they most fear to lose their
possession: And if it were not so, what need Colos. 3. 5
such continual Mortification? Why did our heavenly Master Luc. 11. 4.
teach us to pray that we might not be led into Temptation?

Christ himself was tempted, and Mat. 4. 1.
why should we be dismayed? Are we less pleasing to God for that we are
tempted, and not rather more acceptable for suffering for his sake? Thou
errest, brother (says St. St. Hierom ad Heliod.
Jerome), if thou think a Christian can be ever free from persecution; thou
art then most dangerously impugned, when thou know not that thou art
impugned. For all 2 Timothy 3. 12.
they who will live devoutly, shall suffer persecution; whereas others, who
live sensually may seem to feel no rebellion: because having nothing of Gods
Spirit in them, their enemies find nothing to war against.

Let us not then be troubled that we are tried with Temptations; for it is a
most assured sign that we fight not under the Devils banner, but are revolted
against him; who persecutes not his Friends but his Enemies, etc.

The 10. Doubt.
If we wonder that God will have us suffer Temptation: sithence our frailty is
subject to yield, and so offend his divine Majesty?
HE has good Reason; 1. Lest we should become careless in our duties:
Therefore he tells us, I Isay 54.
have for saken thee for a moment, but I will return and recall thee, and be
mindful of thee in my eternal pity: What is a moment in respect of Eternity;
wherein he means to overflow us with delights, Ne viator tendens ad patriam
amet stabulum pro domo sua. S. Aug. 2. Tim. 2. 12. Pro. 17. 3. Revel. 2. 17.
in his own kingdom? etc. 2. Lest we should take this place of banishment for
our Country, this Pilgrimage for our Paradise, etc. 3. To purge us for our past
follies, sins, and ingratitudes, to satisfy for future Purgatory, and to
prepare and perfect us for a Crown of glory. 4. To make us truly wise, truly
humble, truly virtuous. 5. To Isay 28. 19.
keep us in exercise: for many would otherwise neglect prayer, slight
obedience, and shun mortification, whereas now they stand carefully upon their
guards. 6. To teach us how to help our neighbors by our own trials: whereas he
that has Ecclus. 43.
never been tempted, what knows he, either for himself or others?

The 11. Doubt.
If we are solicited by our enemy to Unchastness?
1. KNow, that God has called us Read and put in practice the 11. chap. of the
Spir. Con.
to serve him with purity and integrity of body and soul: this is the end of
our Vocation, Let us look how we walk worthy of it, lest that terrible sentence
of the holy Ghost be pronounced against us; He ^ath done wickedly in the land
Isay. 26. 10.
of Saints, he shall not see Gods glory, which none can see but clean eyes.

2. Let us comfort our selves in Wisdom. 8. 21.
this; That as it is not sinful but natural to feel rebellious motions; So it
is not only possible, but easy Philip. 4. 6 I can do all things in God my
comforter.
to overcome them; not in our selves, but in God the gracious giver of strength
and comfort.

3. Let us have an ardent desire to live chaste, and make firm and frequent
resolutions so to continue what ever it costs us: How many thousand chaste
spouses of God, made of the same mould that we are, keep perpetual integrity?
etc.

4. Let us seek diligently, and practice seriously such Remedies, as are proper
for the preservation of this Jewel. Amongst which the chiefest is
Mortification of our rebellious flesh by Austerities: hence S. Thomas calls
Chastity from chastising: S. Thomas of Aquin.
It is better our Stomakes pain us, than our Consciences, and that we lose
health of body, than purity of soul, and salvation of both. This remedy of
Mortification is absolutely necessary when carnal motions arise first in the
body, and thence redound into the Imagination: but if from the Fancy they
descend to the body, we are to apply these following remedies: 1. Let us avoid
idleness. 2. Let us Amor otiosorum negotium.
change our Employments; if we are assaulted in company, let us seek solitude,
if in solitude, let us hasten into company, etc. 3. Silence, temperance S.
Ephrem.
and custody of senses, are three powerful preservers of Chastity. 4. Let us
make great account of little things, and shake off the first Motions of this
nature, as we would a burning coal from off our new garment. 5. Ler us humbly
(but modestly and discreetly) lay open their nature and manner to our
spiritual guide. 6. Let us carefully avoid all suspected company, familiarity,
meetings, etc. though our intention be never so spiritual. 7. Let us strive
rather to slight, scorn, and neglect these temptations, than formally to resist
them.

5. In vehement temptation. 1. Make the sign of the cross upon your heart. 2.
Use some brief and burning aspirations; as, Lord, deliver me. I suffer
violence; O my God, answer for me. I am thine, O Jesu, body and soul, help me.
3. Defy the Devil with St. Antony: Fie Isay 38. 14. S. Antony.
beast! thou were an Angel: I who am now a beast, will aim to be an Angel,
and get thy lost place: be gone, the lodging is already taken up; Jesus is
here, who is my Lord and love, I am preingag'd in a former and purer affection.

6. Let us prepare beforehand certain places of refuge for our shelter and
succor till the storm be passed over. 1. The presence of God and his Angels;
saying, How is it possible? God sees me, and shall I sin in his sight? 2. Death
and eternity; The delight is momentary, the punishment is etern^l^; death is at
my door, and shall I adventure? 3. Christ's sacred wounds; let us there hide and
secure our selves, and say, My God hangs on the Cross, and shall I think of
taking my pleasure? 4. The love of God; O Jesus! my love and my life! I will
either love thee, or love nothing at all; Let me rather lose my life than thy
love. 5. Humility; Thou art just, O my Lord God; thy will be done. My Pride is
cause of this villainy which I feel, etc. And take We must be humble, or we
shall not be long chaste.
this for an infallible truth; we must be humble, or we shall not be long
chaste: Let us be obedient to our Superiors, or let us not look to have our
flesh obedient to our spirits. 6. Devotion to Saints excelling in this virtue,
especially to the chastest Virgin Mary.

7. The last Remedy, is, to make use of these antidotes timely, orderly, and
discreetly, without which no rules, documents, or directions will ought avail
us.

The 12. Doubt.
If we are in extraordinary Desolation and darkness?
WE must live by Faith in this case: and know that a sensible choice of God and
goodness, is not now necessary; but a Rational adhering to him is sufficient.
Our fidelity to God, is showed, in the performance of our duties now as at
other times; without losing either our Confidence in him, or seeking Comfort in
our sufferings* but aspiring, if not sweetly yet sincerely, in this or the like
manner: Lord I choose thee, and accept of thy divine pleasure and providence in
all things. I reject whatsoever may possess that place and dominion in my soul,
which is due to thee alone. Dispose of me and mine, as shall be most for thy
honor and glory. Let me be either all thine, or nothing at all.

The 13. Doubt.
If we are tempted to despair of Gods mercy, by reason of our frequent falls,
and relapses into sin?
THis grievous Malady springs from three causes or errors: For they who are
troubled in this point, do not truly weigh, 1. What God is. 2. What sin is. 3.
What contrition and sorrow of heart is.

1. Almighty God is a boundless 1. What God is.
and bottomless Sea of mercy; he is natural bounty it self* he is ever ready to
receive, revive, and relieve a penitent soul, though she alone had committed a
thousand times a day the sins of the whole world. He considers not what she
has been, but what she desires and resolves now to be: and who so denis his
power or Will to pardon sinners, as often as there are moments in time, goes
about to deprive him of his honor and divinity it self; for he could not be God
if he were not good, and faithful in his promise. O loving Lord God who art
not only ready to receive a penitents petition, but even wooest him to present
it; Who can truly consider what thou art, and despair of thy mercy? 2. Sin 2.
What sin.
is a volunta^y and deliberate Aversion from God, and Conversion to creatures.
3. Contrition is of that efficacy, that it delivers from all sin, 3. What
Contrition.
giving confidence of pardon for the past, and courage to avoid it for the
future. Let us apply this to our comfort.

The 14. Doubt.
If we are perplexed with great sadness?
THis Passion, is a great hindrance to devotion and perfection; it is the bait
of the Devil, the bane of our spirits, the root, mother, and nursery of
infinite miseries and mischiefs.

The chief causes of Sadness, The causes of sadness. 1. Nature.
are these,

1. Nature, when Melancholy over-sways the sanguin humor, this can neither
merit nor demerit, but the Devil takes thereby occasion to fill our spirits
with unquietness. These have need as well of corporal as spiritual Physic.

2. A tenderness of heart, and 2. Self-love.
passionate love of our selves: we cannot brook the least contrad^ction, etc.
but we sigh and sob, as if all the world were interessed in our misfortune, and
should bear a part in our doleful ditty. The Remedy were to bid such weep on
for their penance, or use some coporall austerity.

3. An immortification of our Passions, which (when we seek in 3. Passions
good earnest to root out), assault us so strongly, that it seems impossible to
cure them, and hence we grow sad. The Remedy is, to conquer this bad nature by
counsel, courage, and diligence, etc. Let us pray heartily, suffer willingly,
stoop humbly; It Is for heaven we fight and suffer.

4. A secret root of pride, vain 4. Secret Pride.
esteem, and false opinion we have of our selves, when things fall not out
according to our liking, expectation, or importunate desire; whereupon, we grow
sad and troubled. Surely the proud have no true Isay 48. 2^
rest, there is no peace to the wicked. Let us Remedy it therefore by learning
of Christ true humility, and meekness, out of which there is no hope of quiet.

5. An indiscreet Zeal, and 5. Indiscreet zeal.
over-greediness of perfection, which makes us eat more than we can digest,
and so cast it up again with great pain* undertaking austerities, exercises,
introversion, etc. beyond our capacities without counsel; and so we remain
afflicted, being unable to go forward, and ashamed to go backward. Let us
Remedy this by humble obedience to a discreet guide.

6. Want of fervor in our vocation, 6. Instability of heart.
instability of heart, and inconstancy in our exercises, leaving, changing,
interrupting them through laziness or lightness; This leaves a worm gnawing
upon our conscience, with continual disquiet and sadness. Let us Remedy this
with S. Bernards counsel; Will thou never S. Bernard.
be sad? live well. A good man is always merry; and a good conscience is a
continual feast.

7. Disordinate love and affections 7. Love to creatures.
to creatures. Let us love all only for God, and we shall be content and quiet
in the loss of the most lovely and beloved creature in the world: God alone
will supply all other loves and losses.

8. A jealous and envious eye: 8. An envi^us eye.
This is a dangerous and lamentable cross; For all the Perfections of others
are ours, when we love them ^n others; but when we hate them, they are nails in
our eyes, and thorns in our hearts, which do extremely torment us. O madness!
Have we Parum tibi est, si ipse sis foelix, nisi alter sit infoelix?
not sufficient miseries at home, in our selves, but we must suck poison like
Spiders out of others Honey, and what is their crown, must be our cross? What
greater wickedness than to pine away with grief at others good? The Remedy of
this is by endeavoring to get true Charity, the property whereof, is to weep
with the weepers, rejoice with the joyful, to love others good, as our own.
Let us avoid Curiosity if we will eschew Envy, for a Curious eye is the fuel of
an Envious heart; let us remain like Bees in our hive of Introversion, and
there make provision for the Winter of Death and Eternity, etc.

9. Frequent failings in good 9. Frequent relapses.
purposes, and relapses into sin. We question whether our sins past are
pardoned, and are uncertain that our present Confessions are good; This is of
one evil to make two; for we have done amiss, and now by losing Courage and
confidence, we make our selves unfit to do better. Let us Remedy it, by
acknowledging our fault, using violence to our selves, and following direction.

Other Remedies against Sadness. Orher Remedies against sadness. Jam. 5. 13. 1.
Prayer.

1. Prayer is a sovereign Remedy. Is any one sad amongst you? Let him pray. God
is our only joy and comfort: Let us lift up our hearts to him, and lay open our
wants and desires before him with Resignation, who both can and will abundantly
comfort us. Ah! my poor soul, why art thou sad, and whence comes it that thou
thus troublest me? Is not our God good and gracious, who hears thy sighs, and
sees thy sorrow? what want thou, which he cannot or will not give thee, when
he sees it most expedient for thee?

2. Sometimes let us sing spiritual 2. Singing
Songs; which greatly confound the Devil.

3. Other times we may fitly divert 3. Recre^tion.
our thoughts by some external Recreations or employments.

4. Let us endeavor to make 4. Fervent acts.
external and internal Acts with fervor, though without gust; as, embracing
and kissing a Crucifix, and speaking reverently and lovingly unto it, etc.

5. A discreet taking of a Discipline, 5. A discipline.
obtains wonderful comfort; for the soul is called from the inward troublesome
pensiveness, to the outward pain: and the Devil flies away, seeing his
companion the Flesh so hardly handled.

6. Frequent Communinn is an 6. Communion.
excellent cordial, strengthening our hearts, and rejoicing our spirits.

7. Let us discover the effects 7. Discovery of it.
and manner of our sadness to our spiritual guide, and take his advice simply
and humbly: This is the remedy of remedies.

8. Let us take heed of making 8. Indifferency.
use of these Remedies, only that we may be at ease, and avoid affliction; but
for the prevention of danger which may ensue; and for the rest, remain
perfectly indifferent and resigned.

9. If we will be free from Sadness, 9. Few desires.
we must labor to keep far from us unquietness of mind; if we w^ll have our
minds quiet, we must have few desires, and those few only to love and please
God.

10. Finally let us beware of 10. Plaindealing.
three things. 1. Of following our Sensuality, in meat, drink, talk, ease, etc.
2. Of vain Complacence, and self-opinion, etc. 3. And above all of
Hypocondriacy, Hypocrisy, double dealing and sleights with our guide; for no
mervail if he starves and pines away, who l^es to the holy Ghost. If we are
simple as children, our loving Father will give us sweetmeats: Woe be to
Hypocrites, for it Mat. 23. 13.
will go il with them in the latter day.

Another Antidote against Melancholy and Pusillanimity.
The reason of our being so often Pufillanimity procee^s from want,
troubled and shaken, is because our spiritual edifice is not supported by
these solid props.

1. Faith: For if we captivate 1. of Faith
our Understandings to believe what God himself has told us, what his Church
has taught us, and what our ghostly guides still preach unto us, how can we
chose but be comforted and satisfied?

2. Abnegation: For if we have 2. Of Abnegation.
made good Confessions, have endeavored to satisfy God, and our guide, and
have a will to obey them in all things, we may rest secure: Let us not say,
What shall become of us? Shall we persever? for the desire to know this, argues
our hearts of secret pride and propriety: Let us therefore deny our selves,
saying, Gods holy will be done in and with us for all time and eternity, and
what ever becomes of us, we will serve him till death, because his love
deserves it: What need we seek a further security of Gods friendship toward us
in this life, than to find in our souls these two things; First, for the time
past, we have done penance, consisting in Confession, Contrition and
Satisfaction: Secondly, for the time to come, we give our selves totally t^
God, to serve and please him the residue of our life, in the best manner
possible. Let us put our souls in this estate, and go on with courage, and
never more trouble our selves.

3. Solid Confidence. For if we 3. of Confidence.
know God is merciful and Jesus has suffered enough for all sinners, (whereof
we are the chief) how can we but hope that he will be our Jesus? Let us think
thus: God loves us, and we desire with all our hearts to love him, and we trust
in his love, and for it we will both sigh and suffer, pray and obey, deny our
selves, and die to all creatures: This sauce will digest all our bitterness.

The 15. Doubt.
If we suspect that our Sad^ess, and temptations proceed from our own fault or
negligence, or some secret sin, or our want of correspondency with Gods grace?
etc.
1. IF it be so; must we therefore complain, and not rather the more conform
our selves to Gods Will? We have often deserved hell; Our past sins, and
present negligences merit eternal punishments; and is it not a special favor
to be punished in this life with small troubles and temptations? This is not
Hell; nor Eternity of discomfort, nor what we deserv^; Why then are we not both
Content and Grateful?

2. In this fatherly chastisement there is both Mercy and Justice: Justice,
because we have often shut the doors of our hearts against God, giving a deaf
ear to his calls, and therefore it is just that we should now call and knock at
the gate of his mercy, and not be heard: Mercy, because our sufferings are
small in comparison of our deservings. If this be most true, why lament we our
misfortune? Is there any proportion between time and eternity? betwixt this
desolation, and the never-ending lamentations of the damned in hell?

3. Let us then receive and kiss his paternal rod with a filial reverence,
crying out with S. Augustine: O S. Augustine
Lord, spare us not here, so thou spare us hereafter? We have merited Hell, and
dare we ask Sweetness in prayer? O pride and presumption! It Is sufficient Lord
that thou admittest us into thy presence, and permittest us to open our
unworthy mouths unto thee, and lament our misery before thy Divine Majesty: And
shall we have hearts to Murmr, or tongues to complain of any Usage?

The 16. Doubt.
If we doubt that God is displeased with our Prayers; that our Afflictions
befall us through our own occasion, and cannot satisfy our selves to think we
have done what God requires?
1. WE must firmly believe, that (besides our own fault which deserves it) our
chastisement is a disposition of the most high and holy Providence of God,
whose wisdom imparts his blessings as he knows best for his servants: If all
receive not spiritual gust and joy in Prayer, let them say with S. Bernard,
Give me O Lord, Simplicity, S. Bernard.
Humility, and Charity; but for higher favors, as I am unworthy of them, so I
am incapable to make use of them; I leave them therefore for thy special
friends and favorites.

2. Let us therefore conceive these affl^ctions to be sent us from God, 1. To
humble us: for should he visit us with great lights, and elevate us in
Contemplation; we should presently take complacency in our imaginary devotion,
and prefer our selves before others. 2. To try our Fidelity and perseverance in
his love: for the chief end of Prayer, is to obey and please God, and offer him
all that we are and have; but to receive relief and comfort is only the
secondary end.

3. Let us further consider, that this very internal Trouble and anguish, may
and ought to comfort us, as being a token of Gods love: for Love is the first
wheel of our natural and spiritual clock, setting all the other passions a
work; if therefore we grieve that we serve God so tepidly, etc. this Grief
proceeds of love, and is an evident sign of a good will to serve him.

4. Let us ground our selves in that often repeated Maxim; That al things do
not only befall us by Gods permission, but also that he sends them for our good:
And therefore let us say with confident and courageous Judith; Take heart, for
our Jud. 8. 27.
God has sent us these Afflictions to amend us, and not to destroy us.

The 17. Doubt.
If Nature has showed her-self a Stepmother unto us, in giving us a hard and
harsh disposition; whence proceeds a reluctance to works of Virtue, and
mortification of Vice; So that we distrust of ever overcoming our selves?
LEt us take courage: The violent Mat. 11. 12
get the Kingdom of heaven: And let us lay hold on these two Truths,

1. That Gods will is, all should Two verities. 1. Gods will is, that all
should be saved,
be saved; and therefore gives every one sufficient Grace and means to that
end: if then we have the worst Nature in the world, and do but correspond
diligently with that Grace which God gives us, we have no reason at all to
fear. Let us fight valiantly under Christ our good Captain, with the Armor of
Prayer and Mortification, and not cease to be his Soldiers as long as any
blood and breath remains in our bodies. Let us learn to discover, and then (as
others do) to detest our own peevish and perverse disposition; Let us not
flatter our selves, but lay the ax to the root, not to the branches; to wit,
Resolve to humble our proud hearts in all occasions with courage, constancy and
confidence, for one year, and we shall find more peace and quiet than we can
imagine. If we sweat drops of blood, it is for Eternity; where not one drop
shall be lost, nor one wound uncounted, nor one soldier uncrowned.

2. That to have bad natures, and 2. Bad natures are no sins, etc.
to feel motions against grace, reason, etc. is neither Sin nor Imperfection;
so long as we yield not our consent to their leading, etc.

The 18. Doubt.
If on the contrary, our Nature is so facil and flexible, that we scareely find
difficulty in any thing; we wonder to hear mention of Rebellions,
Contradictions, Desolations, etc. from all which we are secure and quiet: And
therefore we fear our actions are rather of a natural promptitude, than solid
Virtue?
It Is true, that Devotion and Perfection consist not in this external quiet and
ease; but in the Victory over our selves, in habits of solid Virtues, in pure
Charity and Indifferency. We are therefore in A dangerous peace.
this case to Humble our selves, and to conceive we know not what
Mortification* and Abnegation mean. What marvail if a soul, which is seldom
Introverted, is rarely distracted? if they who have no care of their Senses,
nor custody of their Hearts, are not troubled with their Evagations? If where
there is no sap of solid Devotion, there is no sense of Dryness and desolation?
O dangerous and unquiet Peace!

The 19. Doubt.
If we so addict our selves to Recollection, that we look upon works of
Obedience and Charity, and the external practices of our duty, as impediments
to Perfection?
SUch know not by what Spirit they Luke 12. 25.
are led. Let us not vainly adhere to our imaginary Devotions, so as to neglect
the least work of Obligation. Without Charity and Obedience, all our prayers
are abominable Prove. 17. 15.
in his sight, who said, Not every one that cries, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
my Kingdom, but Mat. 7. 25.
he that does my Will, etc.

The 20. Doubt.
If we find such a calm in our Passions, imperfections, and temptations, that
we hope the worst is past?
LEt us never flatter our selves Read the Conflict. chapter 20.
with such fancies, or admit the least conceit, that we have entirely conquered
any one passion or imperfection: but humbly, vigorously, and constantly,
keeping on in our track of Mortification, Recollection, Introversion; think
that these calms, comforts, and Time videre unde possis cadere; Noli fieri
perversa simplicitate securus. S. August.
cessations, are sent us as hony-sops, and milk for children, because we are
yet weak, and want courage to encounter such stronger Temptations, wherewith
others are tried; And that our Loving Lord, communicates these his favors and
friendships unto us, not as best meriting them, but most needing them.

The 21. Doubt.
If Scrupulosity overwhelms us?
AS Carelessness is a dangerous impediment of Perfection, when one shall say,
This is not Mortal, this is but a Counsel, not a Precept; this of Perfection,
not of Obligation: (For whosoever will obtain the true Spirit of Devotion and
Recollection, must be far from this opinion:) So Scrupulosity is another
extreme, equally hindering our spiritual progress, and hurting more than sin it
self.

For this trouble of Spirit, takes The danger of scrupulosity.
away all internal strength, comfort, and courage of well-doing, and makes us
slide insensibly into Despair of doing better; till at length, we give up all,
and either pine away in these melancholy and desperate thoughts, or else yield
our selves to Pleasure and Sensuality, and sometimes to the Devil himself, to
find some means of solace and satisfaction. Believe it, inordinate Fear,
Sadness, and Scrupulosity, will soon bring a soul into a laberinth of miseries,
and a hell of mischiefs; and therefore she must speedily get Confidence in
Confidence in Gods mercy is the remedy.
Gods mercy, and raise up her self to Alacrity of mind, or she will never be
able to overcome her difficulties, nor persever long in Spirit.

The way to get this Confidence and Joy, is briefly this: The means to get this
confidence.

1. To Trust and Obey her discreet guide: who is to assign her a set form of
Confession for once a week. 2. He must be resolute and rigorous, taking all
upon his own conscience, if she promise faithfully to obey him. 3. He must
assure her, that she more offends in want of Confidence and Obedience, than in
all other sins; and that if sh^^ will not believe this, her disease is
incurable. This is the short and safe cure of tbis dangerous Disease: but that
we may better understand the nature of our malady, Let us Note Seven sorts of
Consciences.

1. A cauteriz'd, corrupted, large 7. Sorts of Consciences.
and libertine Conscience, making scruple of nothing, but swallowing down all
things. 2. A chiverell Conscience, stretching to all, and caring for nothing,
but to avoid great and grievous sins. 3. A quiet Conscience, yet not good,
because they take occasion to sin out of a confidence in Gods goodness, and
hope of his merry. 4. A troubled Conscience, but not good, for want of
confidence. 5. A troubled, and also a good Conscience, yet weak; of those who
being newly converted to God, lament their past life with bitter tears, and yet
are full of rebellious passions, etc. 6. A good, quiet, and confident
Conscience of those who are careful to please God, to avoid all sin, to be
beneficial to all, burdensome to none; making use of friends by favor, foes
by patience, and all men by good will, etc. 7. An erroneous, timorous and
scrupulous Conscience, making doubts and difficulties of all things.

So that there are, generally speaking, 2. Sorts of bad consciences.
two sorts of bad Consciences: The one too large, calling good evil, and evil
good; The other too narrow, finding sin where there is none, and taking
imaginations for offenses, and shadows for substances.

The first of these Consciences, 1. Over large: Which must be cured by removing
the causes. 1 Cor. 14. 38.
(which is over large) must be cured by removing the causes, which are
generally four.

1. Negligence to learn what belongs to our Religion, vocation, profession,
obligation and salvation: for who so knows not what he is bound to know, shall
not be known by God. 2. Pride, and shame to ask and inform our selves. 3.
Obstinacy and presumption, when we will trust to our own judgments and
abilities, and not submit to our betters. 4. Bad affections, and perverse wills,
led by passion, and blinded with self-love, from seeing the truth. These have
one foot already in hell; which they must pluck out by violence, using the
contrary remedies.

The Second Conscience, which 2. Over-strait, which must also be cured by the
removal of the causes.
is over-strait, and scrupulous, may be also cured by the removal of the
causes, which may be reduced to these. 1. A fearful nature, coming from
abundance of cold; here is need of a twofold Physician, One for the Body to
prescribe them good diet; The other for the Soul, to confirm them in Hope, by
the consideration of Gods mercy, Christ's merits, Scriptures promises, Superiors
warrants, etc. 2. Some infirmity or sickness, as Mania, which hurts the
forepart of the head, and diminishes the Imagination; Melancholy, which infects
the middle part, and diminishes Reason; Phrensy, which seizes on the purses
or nets of the brain, which are the cells of Judgment. This cause has need of
the like cure. 3. The Devil, by Gods permission, for diverse causes. This is
cured by not caring what humor we are in, but to endeavor with courage and
confidence to please God, whether we are sad or merry, fervent or desolate;
making use of Prayer and Counsel. 4. An indiscreet and preposterous treating
of our bodies. The way to cure this is to follow the rules of Discretion, and
to find out their own strength and complexion; yet still taking heed of the
contrary extremity, of flattering our sensuality under pretense of
spirituality. 5. The keeping company with scrupulous persons, or
misunderstanding some Spiritual Books. Remedy this by shunning such Company,
laying aside such Books, and obtaining from your Director, a Rule to rely upon,
and believing nothing against that. 6. A secret and subtle Self-love and
Pride, under the counterfeit mask of fear and care of our souls. Against which
we must submit our judgment to Ob^dience, for we are all blind in our own
cause; and this is not only the best, but even the necessary Remedy* for such
as are particularly bound to Obedience. 7. Ignorance of the mysteris of our
faith, and of Gods mercy, which makes us think our obligation greater than
indeed it is, God more severe than he is, and his yoke more heavy than it is.
Which to Remedy, we must see and consider wherein we judge amiss, and whereupon
we ground our particular fears; for that is the easiest way to remove them. 8.
Let us weigh the virtue of the Physic The virtue of the Physic which must
cure us.
which must cure our Disease: to wit, First, the infinite goodness of God, and
Christ's merits: And what Soul can fear, having so gracious a God, and so great
a Ransom? 2. The Credit and Compassion of the Blessed Virgin, and the Prayers
and Patronage of Saints and Angels, who being secure for themselves, are
solicitous for us. 3. The testimony and sweet promises of holy Scriptures: For
how often has God told us; I am prone to pity; I am ready to receive sinners;
I will help them who do their endeavors. If therefore he denis not his mercy
to them that seek it, and they seek it who do what lys in them, let us be
confident he will not deny us his mercy. He also frequently calls on us, Turn
to me, and I will turn to you: Now he cannot but say truth, aad fulfill his
promise; and does not that soul convert her self to God, who does her best to
get his grace, and be reconciled unto him? Who then can choose but be of good
Comfort, if he be of good Will?

By this Doctrine, and these prescribed Remed^es, it appears that the only way
to overcome Scruples, is,

1. To obey our Spiritual Director.

2. To do our best endeavor.

But here arise two difficulties, in this easy lesson.

The first is, If our Directo^^ The first difficulty.
knowledge be small, his experience less, and his conscience not very good,
how dare we trust our souls upon his Warrant?

Gerson answers: Thou wi^e Gerson's answer.
Judger, I say thou errest and a^^ deceived, for thou have not committed thy
self and thy soul to a man, because of his discretion and learning, but to God
himself; and for his love thou obeyest man, because he is by him ordained thy
Prelat and Superior. Therefore our obedience will be oftentimes so much more
pleasing to God, and profitable to our souls, by how much more infirm and
unworthy he is whom we refuse not to obey for Gods sake.

The other difficulty is; If we The second difficulty.
cannot satisfy our selves, that we do our best Endeavors, nor know that we
have performed our duty?

S. Thomas answers; We must St. Thomas answer.
first remove that which hinders grace, to wit, Sin: 2. We must convert our
hearts from creatures to our Creator. In a word, we must detest Sin, and choose
God, and follow his ordinary means appointed in his Church for our direction:
and this is the Summary of our duty.

The 22. Doubt.
If we fear we detest not Sin sufficiently, because we feel not so great sorrow
for the offense of God, as we do sometimes for a temporal loss?
LEt us assure our selves, First, We can never have so much sorrow for our
Sins, as Gods justice in rigor requires. 2. God does not exact it of us,
because it is not in our power. 3. True sorrow consists not in feeling, but in
Reason and Freewill. 4. It is better to have sorrow sometimes only in desire
than feeling. 5. It is not necessary this corporal or sensible grief be so
great for spiritual as for temporal loss, but it suffices to use humane and
moral diligence, with firm purpose of a voiding Sin. 6. It ls dangerous to
make such comparisons and reflections for weak and fearful Consciences: as, If
such a thing should happen, what should I do? Should I rather choose death,
than such a Sin? and the like: I say, there is no obligation to make such acts.

The 23. Doubt.
If we cannot ground our selves in a firm Hope of mercy; for that we are so
frail and inconstant; We sin daily, and amend not our lives; We receive Gods
blessings, and repay ill for good; We promise, protest, and vow fidelity, and
practice nothing less.
TEll me, afflicted Souls! Should you see Christ dye daily for your daily sins,
would you despair of mercy? Even so efficacious is his former death. If you
fall hourly, rise again courageously, and purpose to stand more constantly,
and fear nothing; but draw Humility out of your Frailty, saying, Whereof am I
proud now? Where are my strong Resolutions? Why do I judge others? Who is so
feeble sickle, frail, as I am? O Lord this is the Worm that is so proud: Then
cast ^ll into Christ's sacred wounds; and leaving all there, go on with as much
quiet and Confidence, as if you had not sinned.

The 24. Doubt.
If we go not on with alacrity, because we know not that our Sins are forgiven,
that our Confessions are good, and that we are in state of Grace?
WE must take notice, that in seeking these assurances, we may oftentimes
directly lose them: 1. In seeking them too eagerly and unquietly. 2. In being
self-lovers, and unwilling to be troubled. 3. In being ignorant of what we are
bound to know: for (it seems) we conceive those works nothing worth, which are
performed without gust, content, satisfaction to our selves, and quiet.

The way then is briefly this: 1. To seek true peace. 2. In God. 3. From his
mercy, not our own industry. 4. To be resigned to want peace if he please. 5.
To omit nothing we would or should do by reason of the trouble we feel.

The 25. Doubt.
Though we cannot (in this life) assure our selves infallibly to be in good
estate, yet if we could comfort our selves with most probable tokens of grace,
whereby we might feel the pulses of our hearts, and somewhat ease our anguish?
SAint Thomas and S. Bernard assign 4. Signs of a good conscience out of S.
Tho. and Bernard.
these four signs of a good conscience. 1. To feel a ready Willingness in our
hearts, to hear Gods word, and to learn the means to love and serve him. 2. To
feel a Forwardness to do good Works. 3. To feel a hearty Sorrow for the offense
of God. 4. To feel a firm Purpose to avoid all Sin.

Gerson adds a fifth: Who so can A ^. out of Gerson. To pronounce these three
verities.
pronounce heartily and sincerely these three Verities, though he had committed
all sins, and should be prevented with sudden death, let him secure himself he
is in state of Grace.

The first Verity. O Lord! If in Oh! that we would often recite these three
truths; especially when we feel our consciences burdened! What infinite profit
and comfort would redound to our souls?
this or that I have sinned against thy goodness, it truly displeases and
grieves me, and I am ready to do penance for it, because I have offended thee,
who art worthy of all honor, and have transgressed thy Law and Will, which is
most holy, just, and reasonable.

The second Verity. O Lord! I have a good purpose and desire by thy grace to
take heed I fall not into sin again, and to avoid to my power the occasions
thereof, and to mortify my passions, and bad inclinations.

The third Verity. O Lord! I have a good Will and purpose to Confess my sins
entirely, in due time and place, according to thy Ordinance, and that of thy
holy Church.

We may ad to these, the devout frequentation Three other signs.
of the Sacraments, which give life and justifying grace; The warrant of a
skilful guide; And a lively confidence in the Divine bounty.

The 26. Doubt.
If we are troubled, because we know not well when we give consent to sinful
Thoughts?
1. IF when the Thought is represented, Rules to know when we consent to sin.
we presently fly to the crucifix, expel it, disdain it, dislike it; it is not
Sin, but Merit. 2. But if we carelessly linger in it when well perceived, it is
Venial. 3. And if we consent to the Thought, and desire the Action, our sin is
equal to the act, if it were committed. 4. But if we intend not the Act, but
linger delightfully in the Thought, and the thing it self be Mortal, and
deliberately entertained, it is also Mortal.

The 27. Doubt.
If we cannot well distinguish between Venial and Mortal sin?
1. WHat need we determine; let us Confess it, as it is committed.

2. Mortal sin cannot be committed without great corruption of Him who commits
it, or great hurt to his Neighbor, or great contempt and neglect of God, (says
Richardas a S. Victore): And S. Thomas Rich. a S. Victore. S. Thomas.
says; He sins Mortally, whose total intention of mind is withdrawn from God,
who is our last end.

3. Let us conclude with S. Augustine S. August. Gerson.
and Gerson: That it is dangerous, even in Prelates and Confessors, to define
what is mortal sin, or give Rules therein.

The 28. Doubt.
If that saying of Divines terrifies Faciens contra dubium incidit in peccatum.
In dubiis securior pars est eligenda.
us; He that does against his doubt, sins: And, In things which are doubtful,
the securer part is to be chosen?
WE may, in things which are Doubtful, securely follow a Probable opinion: Now
Scruples are not Doubts, but false apprehensions; and therefore on all sides,
we may (and sometimes must) go against our own erroneous consciences, especially
when Obedience commands it. Let us therefore, with S. Augustine, S. Augustine
Tene certum, dimitte incertum.
lay hold of that which is certain, and let go the uncertain: And what way is
more sure and secure than Obedience?



The 29. And last Doubt.
If finally we are apprehensive and fearful lest we should grow weary in the
way of Virtue, and not Persever constantly in our Spiritual Exercises?
LEt us excite our Tepidity by the frequent perusal of this following
discourse, and practice accordingly.

The Patriarch Jacob, in hope of obtaining the beautiful Rachel, served Laban
seven years with diligence and patience: But being cousened by that disloyal
worldling with il favored Lia; what does he? He neither loses Courage nor
Confidence; but with new constancy begins his other seven years service, with
such admirable alacrity, and a heart so fixed upon his desired reward, that the
time seemed Genesis 29.
but a week to him.

O my soul! thou seek and sighest after eternal Beatitude, consisting
essentially in the blessed vision and fruition of God, (signified by Rachel,
according to S. Bernard); For S. Bernard.
this thou have bound thy self to serve God; But alas! The world, the flesh,
and the Devil, do so often beguile and blind thee, that thou take blear-eyed
Lia, for beautiful Rachel, the world for heaven, the flesh for the Spirit, and
diabolical Illusions for Divine inspirations.

But what? Lose not courage, nor confidence; Renew thy protestation of loyal
service; Serve God one other seven years; Suffer another slavery to get heaven,
to die in final grace, and to be eternally joined to that blessed beauty thou
love; Follow Jesus to mount Calvary, to consummatum est, to thy last gasp; If
thou stumblest, fall not; If thou fallest, up again and march; Stand not, but
go forward; for he only that persevers till the end, shall be saved. Let
neither frequent temptations, nor fearful imaginations, nor strong passions,
nor bad inclinations, nor often fallings, nor ordinary frailty, daunt or dismay
thee. God is good and gracious, meek and merciful; Thy reward is infinite and
eternal; Thy friends are more in heaven, than on earth; persever then, and go
forward; if thou can not run, at least go fair and softly, and securely,
after Christ thy Captain, crying, Draw me unto thee, o most dear Lord; for I
desire to follow thee and no other: but I am weak and lame, and therefore I
make use of two crutches, A strong resolution never to forsake thy love, and a
lively confidence in thy grace, goodness, and mercy.

O holy and happy, O precious and highly to be prized Perseverance! O final
grace! the patrimony only of the elect, and portion of the predestinate! Fight
manfully, o my soul! get good habits timely; resist sin valiantly; fast, watch,
pray, sigh and suffer perseverantly: heaven is worth thy pains. Persever, O my
soul! Persever, Persever; that done, all is done; that wanting, all is undone.
This, O Satan! thou know full well; and therefore little car'st to see me
zealous for a Lent, for a year, for a time, so in the end thou may make me
tire, tepide, and careless of my progress and P^rseverance: it is my
Perseverance S. Bernard.
which thou only enviest at; because that only conquers thee, and crowns me
eternally. I discover thy two main snares, (o subtle enemy!) into which thou
would allure my unwary soul; and thy first design failing, which was to delay
my eonversion to Gods service, thou pursuest thy Second, which is, to weary me
in my well-begun enterprise.

To shift off my Conversion, thou urgedst youth, long life, time enough; (thy
daily and dangerous deceits, by which more Christians perish, than by any other
thy guiles and stratagems:) Thou know the peril of delay, in a matter so
important, as is our conversion, perfection, salvation; Thou art not ignorant
how one sin draws on another; how he that to day is unfit, will be less to
morrow; how custom grows into nature, breeds blindness, hardness of heart, and
insensibility; how old diseases are hardly and rarely cured; how God withdraws
his grace when it is abused, refused, neglected; how much his justice by delay
is exasperated, and that we heap coals on our own heads by our negligence.
Thou art well skilled in the uncertainty of our frail life, know the
dangers, chances, changes, and accidents, which may speedily overwhelm us:
therefore thou whisperest, stay a little, deferr yet for a time; till God in
whose hands are the moments of all time, takes from us all time, (who have so
long abused the opportunity of time), and sends us into pains eternal without
time.

But seeing me resolutely and violently breaking all thy chains, running and
crying with S. Augustine; S. Augustine
Why shall I longer say to morrow? why not now? even at this instant? thou now
strivest to undermine my Perseverance: But take courage, o my soul! thy time of
enduring will soon end, and thy ensuing joy will be without end. Hearken not to
thy sworn enemies enchantments; sit not, stand not, sleep not; but pray, watch,
and walk, whilst thou have light and life, that the darkness of eternal night
and death overtake thee not.

And since thy Loving Lord, is both able and willing to succor and support
thee, and to turn every thing to thy advantage, ^ven thy imperfections,
frailties and failings, (For thou art warranted, that so Rusbrochius.
sure as God is God, so sure it is, that he will permit nothing to befall us,
but for our greatest good, and his own glory, and that it is most grateful
unto him we so judge of him;) doubt not of his providence and protection, not
fear to permit him to deal with thee as he best pleases, and to remain in a
perfect indifferency to all his divine ordinances and dispositions, saying;
Since it is thy will, O Lord, it is certain to be n^y good; be it so: I am as
sure thou love me, as that thou live with me: A way then all diffidence,
disloyalty, inconstancy: How many Saints have you perverted? how many souls
have you damned? Without thee O holy Perseverance all is lost, with thee all is
se^ure; Grace till the end, Glory without end: Welcome holy Confidence! the
main support of my life, and the life of my Perseverance; I am content, O my
Lord, to be conducted by thee for time and eternity, as thou best please;
Lead me by land or water, by desolation or devotion, by darkness or day, by
sickness or health, I will adhere to thee constantly.

If it be thy blessed will, O Loving Lord, that I creep as a snail toward
Perfection, I will neither be troubled nor dismayed, I desire not to fly faster
than thou enablest me, I quiet my self with the grace thou give me, which I
acknowledge to be not only beyond my deserts, but better for me than my own
desires. Finally I here make a general Resolution, and a generous Resignation
of my whole self into thy holy hands; hoping that it will give worth and value
to all my actions and sufferings.

O my Sovereign and sweet maker! A form of general Resolution.
my whole Will and desire (according to my great obligation, former profession,
and present protestation) is to serve and love thee, and to fulfill thy blessed
Will in all things, and to be wholly thine at all times, and in all things
whatsoever. It Is thy Honor I only aim at, thy Glory I only intend, and thy
Will, I only seek to accomplish: To thee alone I render and wish all
benediction and eternal praise, and with cordial Joy I say Amen to all that
is possessed by thy most amiable and perfect goodness; and joining my humble
desires and devotions with all those that love thee, I implore that we may be
all thine, and that thou will be All in us all.

And now, O my soul, since thou have in some sort happily begun a course of
Prayer, Recollection, Abnegation, and Humility, according to Obedience, and
supported by Confidence; For further helps to perseverance, read the 22. 23.
24. chapter of St. Teresa's life, Written by her self; And her book entitled, The
way to Perfection.
Let the Devil storm, let Flesh and blood rebel, let the World murmr;
Answer them all, Quod scripsi, scripsi; my Vows and Promises must and shall
stand and I am content to sign it with my blood: I will sooner dye than swerve
from my well-setled Resolutions, or cancel the free deed and gift of my self
to my Saviors service; Darkness, Desolation, Death and Devil shall never make
me change.

Live my good Purposes to love my dear Lord unchangeably, irrevocably,
eternally.



Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. 2 Timothy c. 4 v. 7* 8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;

Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which our Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing.

James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when he is
tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which our Lord has promised to them
that love him. Revelation 2. 10. Be thou faithful until death, and I will
give thee the crown of life. FINIS.
Errata.
In the Conflict.

PAge 32. line 2. for from read form, p. 45. l. 15. for weary r. wary, p. 69.
l. 25. for mediations r. meditations, p. 143. l. 28. for his r. he, p. 143. l.
29. for its r. his, p. 161. l. 29. for ordinary r. ordinarily, p. 201. l. 2.
for pleasure r. please, p. 277. l. 2. for many r. may.

In the Conquest.

PAge 3. l, 29. for some r. son. In the Exercises.

Page 103. l. 12. for ^at his r. eat a^ his. In the Maxims.


