OF THE MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS.

An Excellent Piece Written in ITALIAN BY DON BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of St.
BENEDETTO ALOYSIO, and Professor of the Mathematics to Pope URBAN VIII. in
ROME.

Englished from the Third and best Edition, with the addition of a Second Book
not before extant:

By THOMAS SALUSBURY.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM LEYBOURN, 1661.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE TO Pope URBAN VIII.
I Lay at the Feet of your Holiness these my Considerations concerning the
MENSURATION OF RUNNING WATERS: Wherein if I shall have succeeded, being a
matter so difficult and unhandled by Writers both Ancient Modern, the discovery
of any thing of truth has been the Effect of Your Holinesses Command; and if
through inability I have missed the Mark, the same Command will serve me for an
Excuse with Men of better Judgment, and more especially with Your Holiness, to
whom I humbly prostrate my self, and kiss Your Sacred Feet.

From ROME. Your Holinesses Most humble Servant BENEDETTO. A Monk of Cassino.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Author and Work.
DON BENEDETTO CASTELLI, the famous Author of these ensuing Discourses of the
Mensuration of Running Waters, is descended from the Worshipful FAMILY of the
CASTELLII, and took his first breath near to the lake THRASIMENVS, (where
Hanibal gave a fatal overthrow to the Roman Legions) in that sweet and fertile
part of happy ITALY, called the Territory of PERUGIA, a branch of the Dukedom
of TUSCANY, which at present submits to the Jurisdiction of the Church, as
being a part of St. PETER'S Patrimony. His Parents, who were more zealous of
the good of his Soul than observant of the Propension of his Genius, dedicated
him (according to the Devotion of that Country) to the Service of the Church;
and entered him into the Flourishing Order of Blackfriars, called from the
place Moncks of Monte Casino, and from the Founder Benedictines. Nature, that
She might consummate the Profusion of her Favors upon him, sent him into the
World in an Age that was so ennobled and illuminated with Eminent Scholars in
all Kinds of Literature, that hardly any Century since the Creation can boast
the like.

. In particular, the SCIENCES MATHEMATICAL had then got that Fame and Esteem in
the Learned World, that all men of Spirit or Quality became either Students in,
or Patrons of those Sublime Knowledges. On this occasion the Curiosity of our
AUTHOR being awakened, his Active Wit could not endure to be any longer
confined to the Slavish Tuition of Hermetical Pedagogues; but in concurrence
with the Genius of the Age, he also betook himself to those most Generous and
Liberal Studies. His helps in this his design were so many, and so
extraordinary, that had his Inclination been weaker, or his Apprehension
lesser, he could hardly have failed attaining more than a Common Eminency in
these Sciences. For besides the Deluge of Learned and Useful Books, which the
Press at that time sent forth from all parts of EUROPE, he had the good
Fortune to fall into the Acquaintance, and under the Instruction of the most
Demonstrative and most Familiar Man in the World, the Famous GALILEO: whose
success being no less upon this his Pupil than upon the rest of those
Illustrious and Ingenious Persons that resorted from all parts to sit under his
Admirable Lectures, he in a short time attained to that Name in the
Mathematics, that he was invited to ROME, Complemented, and Preferred by his
then Holiness the Eighth URBAN, upon his very first Accession to the Papacy,
which was in the Year 1623.

. This Pope being moved with a Paternal Providence for the Concerns of his
Subjects in that part of ITALY about BOLOGNA, FERRARA, and COMMACHIO, lying
between the Rivers of PO and RENO, which is part of Lo Stato della Chiesa, or
the Church Patrimony, appoints this our CASTELLI in the Year 1625, to accompany
the Right Honorable Monsignore CORSINI (a most observant and intelligent
person in these affairs, and at that time Superintendent of the General
Draines, and President of ROMAGNA) in the Grand Visitation which he was then
ordered to make concerning the disorders occasioned by the Waters of those
parts.

. CASTELLI, having now an Opportunity to employ, yea more, to improve such
Notions as he had imbued from the Lectures of his Excellent MASTER, falls to
his work with all industry: and in the time that his Occasions detained him in
ROMAGNA he perfected the First Book of this his Discourse concerning the
Mensuration of Running Waters. He confesses that he had some years before
applied himself to this part of Practical Geometry, and from several
Observations collected part of that Doctrine which at this time he put into
Method, and which had procured him the Repute of so much Skill that he began to
be Courted by sundry Princes, and great Prelates. In particular about the
beginning of the Year 1623. and before his Invitation to ROME he was employed
by Prince Ferdinando I, Grand Duke of TUSCANY, to remedy the Disorders which at
that time happened in the Valley of PISA in the Meadows that lie upon the Banks
of Serchio and Fiume Morto: and in the presence of the Grand Duke, Grand
Duchess Mother, the Commissioners of Sewers, and sundry other Persons in a
few hours he made so great a progress in that affair, as gave his Most Serene
Highness high satisfaction, and gained himself much Honor.

. No sooner had he in his forementioned Voyage to ROMAGNA (which was but few
Months after, in the same Year) committed his Conceptions to paper, but he
communicated them to certain of his Friends. In which number we find Signore
Ciampoli Secretary of the Popes Private Affairs; whom in the beginning of the
First Book he gratefully acknowledges to have been contributary, in his Purse,
toward defraying the charge of Experiments, and in his Person, toward the
debating and ^^^pleating of Arguments upon this Subject. Some few years after
the importunity of Friends, and the Zeal he had for the Public Good prevailed
with him to present the World with his First Discourse, accompanied with a
Treatise of the Geometrical Demonstrations of his whole Doctrine. What
Reception it found with the Judicious must needs be imagined by any one that
has observed how Novelty and Facility in conjunction with Verity make a Charm
of irresistible Operation.

. New it was, for that no man before him had ever attempted to Demonstrate all
the three Dimensions, to wit, the Length, Breadth and Profundity, of this Fluid
and Current Element. And he detecteth such gross Errors in those few that had
untertook to write upon the Subject (of which he instanceth in Frontinus and
Fontana, as those that include the rest) and delivers such singular and
unheard of Paradoxes (for so they sound in Vulgar Ears) as cannot but procure
unspeakable delight to his Reader.

. Easy it is likewise and True; and that upon so Familiar Experiments and
Manifest Demonstrations, that I have often questioned with my self which merited
the greater wonder, he, for discovering, or all men that handled the Argument
before him for not discovering a Doctrine of such strange Facility and
Infallibility. But yet as if our Author designed to oblige the whole World to
him by so excellent a Present, he selects a Subject that he knew would be
carressed by all persons of Nobler Souls, upon the accounts aforementioned, and by
all Mankind in General, as gratifying them in their much adored Idol Utility.
And to render his Art the more profitable, he reduces the lofty, and
easie-to-be-mistaken Speculations of the Theory, into certain and facile
Directions for Practice; teaching us how to prevent and repair the Breaches of
Seas, and Inundations of Rivers; to draine and recover Fenns and Marches; to
divert, conveigh and distribute Waters for the Flowing and Stercoration of
Grounds, strengthening of Fortifications, serving of Aquaducts, preserving of
Health (by cleansing Streets, and scowring Sewers) and maintaining of Commerse
(by defending Bridges, clearing Rivers, and opening Ports and Channels) with
innumerable other Benefits of the like nature. And, that I may omit no
circumstance that may recommend my Author, the Fortune of this his Treatise
has been such, that as if he intended a Plus ultra by it, or as if all men
despaired to outdo it, or lastly, as if CASTELLI has been so great a Master
that none have presumed to take Pencil in hand for the finishing of what he
Pourfoild, this small Tract like the Arabian Phoenix (of which it is said Unica
semper Avis) did for several years together continue single in the World, till
that to verify it to be truly Phoenician, it renewed its Age by undergoing a
second Impression. And as if this did not make out the Immortal virtue of it,
it has had Anno 1660 a third Circulation, and risen in this last Edition as it
were from the Vrne of its Author; and that so improved by the Addition of a
second part, that it promises to perpetuate his Merits to all Posterity. To be
brief, the mere Fame of this Work resounded the Honorable Name of CASTELLI
into all the Corners of Italy, I may say of Europe; insomuch, that, in hopes to
reap great benefit by his Art, the respective Grandees of the adjacent
Countries courted his Judgment and Advice about their Draining of Fenns,
Diversion of Rivers, Evacuation of Ports, Preventing of Inundations, etc. So
that every Summer he made one or more of these Journies or Visitations.
Particularly, the Senate of Venice consulted him about their Lake; to whom he
delivered his Opinion in May 1641. and upon farther thoughts he presented them
with another Paper of Considerations the 20 December following. Prince LEOPOLDO
of TUSCANY likewise requested his Advice in the beginning of the ensuing year
1642, which occasioned his Letter to Father Francesco di San Giuseppe, bearing
date February 1, To which Signore Bartolotti opposing, he writes a second
Letter, directed to one of the Commissioners of Sewers, vindicating his former,
and refuting Bartolotti, both which I here give you.

. The Preferments which his Merits recommended him unto, were first to be Abbot
of Cassino, from which he was removed Anno 1640, or thereabouts, unto the Abbey
of Santo Benedetto Aloysio; and much about the same time preferred to the
Dignity of Chief Mathematician to his grand Patron Pope URBAN VIII. and
Public Professor of Mathematics in the University of ROME.

. Here a Stop was put to the Carier of his Fortunes, and being fuller of Honor
than of Years, was by Death, the Importunate Intrerupter of Generous Designs,
prevented in doing that farther Good which the World had good reason to promise
it self from so Profound and Industrious a Personage, leaving many Friends and
Disciples of all Degrees and Qualities to lament his loss, and honor his
Memory.

. His singular Virtues and Abilities had gained him the Friendship of very
many; as to instance in some, he had contracted strict Amity with Monsignore
Maffei Barberino a Florentine, Prefect of the Public Ways, and afterward
Pope with the Name of URBAN VIII. as was said before; with the abovenamed
Monsignore Corsini Superintendant of the General Draines: with Monsignore
Piccolomini Archbishop of Siena: with Cardinal Serra: with Cardinal Caponi,
who has studied much and writ well upon this Subject; and with Cardinal
Gaetano who frequently consulted with him in his design of Draining the Fenns
of ROMAGNA. Moreover Prince LEOPOLDO, and his Brother the Grand Duke had very
great kindness for him; which speaks no small attractions in him, considering
him as a favorite of the Family of Barberini, between whom and the House of
Medeci there is an inveterate Fewd. Amongst persons of a lower Quality he
acknowledges Signore Ciampoli the Popes Secretary, Sig. Ferrante Cesarini,
Sig. Giovanni Basadonna Senator of Venice; and I find mentioned Sig. Lana, Sig.
Albano, Padre Serafino, Pad. Francesco de San. Giuseppe, and many others.

. The Works in which he will survive to all succeeding Ages are first His solid
and sober Confutation of the Arguments of Signore Lodovico dell Columbo, and
Signore Vincentio di Gratia against the Tract of Galileo Delle cose che stanno
sopra Aqua, wherein he vindicates bis said Master with a Gratitude that Tutors
very rarely reap from the pains they take in Cultivating their Pupils. This
Apology was first Printed Anno 1615. and was a second time published, as also
those of his Antagonists, amongst the Works of GALILEO, set forth by the
Learned Viviani 1656. He has likewise writ several other curious Pieces, as I
am informed by the most Courteous Carolo Manolessi of Bologna; amongst others
an excellent Treatise concerning Colors, which he puts me in hopes to see
printed very speedily. And last of all these Discourses and Reflections upon
the Mensuration of Running Waters, with the addition of a Second Book, three
Epistles, and four Considerations upon the same Argument, which conduce much to
Illustrate his Doctrine and Facilitate the Practice of it; and which with a
Relation of Monsignore Corsini, make the second part of my First Tome.

. I might here sally forth into the Citation of sundry Authors of Good
Account, that have transmitted his Character to Posterity, but shall confine my
self to only two; the one is of his Master, the other of his Scholar; than
whom there cannot be two more competent Judges of his Accomplishments. To begin
with his Master, the Quick-sighted, and truly Lyncean GALILEO, who speaking of
his Abilities in Astronomy says Nella continuatione dell Nuntio ^iderio.
Che la felicita del suo ingegno non la fa bisognosa dell' opera suo. And again,
submitting a certain Demonstration, which he intended to divulge, to the
Judgment of this our Abbot, he writes to him in this manner: Lettera al P.
Abbate D. B. Castelli D'Arcetro; li. 3. December. 16^9.
Questo lo comunico a V. S. per lettera prima che ad alcun altro, con
attenderne principalmente il parer suo, e doppo quello de' nostri Amici
discosti, conpensiero d' inviarne poi altre Copy ad altri Amici d' Italia, e
di Francia, quando io ne venga da lei configliato: e qui pregandola a farci
part d' alcuna delle sue peregrine speculationi; con sincerissimo affetto,
etc. And the most acute Mathematician Signore Evangelista Terricelli, late
Professor to the Grand Duke in immediate Succession after GALILEO, makes this
Honorable and Grateful Mention of him, and his Book: De Motu Aquarum. Lib. 2.
Prop. 37. p. 191.
Omitto magnum illum nutantis Maris motum; Praetereo etiam omnem Fluminum,
Aquarumque Currentium tum mensurum, tum usum, quarum omnis doctrina reperta
primum fuit ab Abbate BENEDICTO CASTELLIO Preceptore meo. Scripsit ille
Scientiam suam, and illam non solum demonstratione, verum etiam opere
confirmavit, maxima cum Principum and populorum utilitate, majore cum
admiratione Phylosophorum. Extat illius Liber, vere aureus.

. I have only two particulars more to offer the English Reader: The one
concerns the Book, and it is this, That after the general Aprobation it has
had in Italy, I cannot but think it deserves the same Civil Entertainment with
us, in regard that it comes with no less Novelty, Facility, Verity, and
Utility to us than to those whom the Author favored with the Original. Our
Rivers and Sewers through Public Distractions and Private Encroachments are
in great disorder, as those Channels for instance which formerly were Navigable
unto the very Walls of York and Salisbury, etc: Our Ports are choked and
obstructed by Shelfes and Setlements: Our Fenns do in a great part lie waste
and unimproved: Now all these may be (and, as I find by the Confession of some
whose Practices upon the Copy of the First Book only of our Author has got
them both Money and Reputation, in part have been) remedied by the Ways and
Means he here sets down. The truth is the Argument has been past over with an
Universal Silence; so that to this day I have not seen any thing that has been
written Demonstratively and with Mathematical Certainty concerning the same,
save only what this Learned Prelate has delivered of his Own Invention in
these Treatises: who yet has so fully and plainly handled the Whole Doctrine,
that I may affirm his Work to be every way absolute. It must be confessed the
Demonstration of the Second Proposition of the Second Book did not well please
the Author, and had he lived he would have supplied that defect, but being
prevented by Death, the Reader must content himself with the Mechanical Proof
that he gives you of the truth of so Excellent a Conclusion.

. The other particular that I am to offer is, that out of my desire to
contribute what lies in me to the completing of this Piece for English
Practice, I have exeeded my promise not only in giving you the Second and
following Books which were not extant at the time of tendering my Overtures,
but also in that I have added a Map or Plat of all the Rivers, Lakes, Fenns,
etc. mentioned thorowout the Work. And if I have not kept touch in point of
Time, let it be considered that I am the Translator and not the Printer. To
conclude, according to your acceptance of these my endeavors, you may expect
some other Tracts of no less Profit and Delight. Farewell.

T. S.

ERRATA of the second PART of the first TOME.
In PREFACE, read Ferdinando II. ibid. l'Aqua.

Page 2. LINE 26, for must read much. P. 3. l. 22, r. and let. l. 25. r. water,
(...). 41. r. Tappe, ( as every where else). Page 4. l. 18. r. cords. Page 6.
l. 9. r. acquire, or* Page 9. l. 1. r. irreperable. P. 10. l. 13. r.
dissimboguement. For Page 17. r. P. 15. P. 15. l. 27, r. in. l. 36, r. is as.
l. 38, r. (...). P. 17. l. 12, Giuli^. l. ^7. r. Measurers. l. 25, r. measured
it, r. necessarily. P. 23. l. 19. r. for help. for Page 31. r. P. 32. P. 24* l.
14, r. to. l. 17, r. namly, of the. l. 23, r. easy. P. 25. l. 38. r. Cock. p.
29. l. 7. r. lasted, p. 31. l. 32. r. So. p. 41. l. 20. r. to the line. p. 48.
l. 19. r. us the *. id. Figure false p. 52. l. 30, and 31. for Theorem r.
Proposition. p. 53. l. 29. r. again. p. 57. l. 19, r. same if* l. 44. r.
bodily. p. 58. l. 9. r. gathering. l. 40. omit;. p. 60. l. 2. omit, if. p. 65.
l. 1. r. tid^ dele;. p. 66. l. 35. r. Stoppage of. p. 68. l. 12, for Lords the
r. Lords. l. ult. for they r. it. p. 69. l. 14. r. to one. id. carried dele to.
p. 71. l. 20, r. and that. l. 25, r. Braces; it. l. 29. r. Braces. l. 44, r.
the Brent. p. 72. l. 23. r. Serene Highness. p. 73. l. 24, r. deliberation: l.
26, for sum r. Moddel. l. 40. r. Months. p. 79. l. 18. r. that into. p. 82.
l. 22. dele;. p* 85. l. 9, 10. dele a free drame. p. 88. l. 5. r. Palms. p.
89. l. 8. r. Princes. p. 92. l. 3. r. Discourses. p. 93. l. 31. r. Tautologie.
p. 94. l. 9. r. miracle;. p. 97. l. 13. r. weighty. p. 101. l. 21. r. Marrara.
p. 107. l. 28, r. Patrimony. l. 40. r. above. p. 111. l. 16. r. said. For p.
432. r. p. 114. p. 114. l. 35. r. of 200. l. 41. r. closed. p. 115. l. 29. r.
constant;.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters.
LIB. I.
WHat, and of how great moment the consideration of Motion is in natural
things, is so manifest, that the Prince of Peripateticks pronounced that in his
Schools now much used Sentence: Ignorato motu, ignoratur natura. Thence it is
that true Philosophers have so travailed in the contemplation of the Celestial
motions, and in the speculation of the motions of Animals, that they have
arrived to a wonderful height and sublimity of understanding. Under the same
Science of Motion is comprehended all that which is written by Mechanitians
concerning Engines moving of themselves, Machins moving by the force of Air,
and those which serve to move weights and immense magnitudes with small force.
There appertains to the Science of Motion all that which has been written of
the alteration not only of Bodies, but of our Minds also; and in sum, this
ample matter of Motion is so extended and dilated, that there are few things
which fall under man's notice, which are not conjoined with Motion, or at least
depending thereupon, or to the knowledge thereof directed; and of almost every
of them, there has been written and composed by sublime wits, learned
Treatises and Instructions. And because that in the years past I had occasion
by Order of our Lord Pope Urban 8. to apply my thoughts to the motion of the
Waters of Rivers, (a matter difficult, most important, and little handled by
others) having concerning the same observed some particulars not well observed,
or considered till now, but of great moment both in public and private
affairs; I have thought good to publish them, to the end that ingenious spirits
might have occasion to discuss more exactly then hitherto has been done, so
necessary and profitable a matter, and to supply also my defects in this short
and difficult Tractate. Difficult I say, for the truth is, these knowledges,
though of things next our senses, are sometimes more abstruce and hidden, then
the knowledge of things more remote; and much better, and with greater
exquisitness are known the motions of the Planets, and Periods of the Stars,
than those of Rivers and Seas: As that singular light of Philosophy of our
times, and my Master Signore Galileo Galilei wisely observes in his Book
concerning the Solar spots. And to proceed with a due order in Sciences, I will
take some suppositions and cognitions sufficiently clear; from which I will
afterward proceed to the deducing of the principal conclusions. But to the end
that what I have written at the end of this discourse in a demonstrative and
Geometrical method, may also be understood of those which never have applied
their thoughts to the study of Geometry; I have endeavored to explain my
conceit by an example, and with the consideration of the natural things
themselves, must after the same order in which I began to doubt in this matter;
and have placed this particular Treatise here in the beginning, adverting
nevertheless, that he who desires more full and absolute solidity of Reasons,
may overpass this prefatory discourse, and only consider what is treated of in
the demonstrations placed toward the end, and return afterward to the
consideration of the things collected in the Corollaries and Appendices; which
demonstrations notwithstanding, may be pretermitted by him that has not seen
at least the first six Books of the Elements of Euclid; so that he diligently
observes that which follows.

I say therefore, that having in times past, on diverse occasions heard speak of
the measures of the waters of Rivers, and Fountains, saying, such a River is
two or three thousand feet of water; such a spring water is twenty, thirty, or
forty inches, etc. Although in such manner I have found all to treat thereof in
word and writing, without variety, and as we are wont to say, constanti
sermon, yea even Artists and Ingeneers, as if it were a thing that admitted
not of any doubt, yet howsoever I remained still infolded in such an obscurity,
that I well knew I understood nothing at all, of that which others pretended
full and clearly to understand. And my doubt arose from my frequent observation
of many Trenches and Channels, which carry water to turn Mills, in which
Trenches, and Channels, the water being measured, was found pretty deep; but if
afterward the same water was measured in the fall it made to turn the Wheel of
the Mill, it was much less, not amounting often to the tenth part, nor
sometimes to the twentieth, insomuch, that the same running water came to be
one while more, another while less in measure, in diverse parts of its Channel;
and for that reason this vulgar manner of measuring running Waters, as
indeterminate and uncertain, was by me justly suspected, the measure being to
be determinate, and the same. And here I freely confess that I had singular
help to resolve this difficulty from the excellent and accurate way of
discoursing, as in allother matters, so also in this, of the Right Honorable
and Truly Noble Signior Ciampoli, Secretary of the Popes secret affairs. Who
moreover, not sparing for the costs of the same, generously gave me occasion a
few years past to try by exact experiments that which past concerning this
particular. And to explain all more clearly with an example; we suppose a
Vessel filled with Water, as for instance a Butt, which is kept full, though
still water runs out, and the Water run out by two Taps equal of bigness,
one put in the bottom of the Vessel, and the other in the upper part; it is
manifest that in the time wherein from the upper part shall issue a determinate
measure of water from the inferior part there shall issue four, five, and many
more of the same measures, according to the difference of the height of the
Taps, and the distance of the upper Tap from the Superficies and level of the
water of the Vessel: and all this will always follow, though, as has been
said, the Taps be equal, and the water in discharging keep the said Taps
always full. Where first we note, that, although the measure of the Taps be
equal, nevertheless there issues from them in equal times unequal quantities
of water, And if we should more attentively consider this business, we should
find, that the water by the lower Tap, runs and passes with much greater
velocity, then it does by the upper, whatever is the reason. If therefore we
would have such a quantity of Water discharge from the upper tap, as would
discharge from the nether in the same time, it is plain, that either the upper
Tap^ must be multiplied in such sort, that so many more Taps in number be
placed above than below, as the nether tap shall be more swift than the upper,
or the upper Tap made so much bigger than the nether, by how much that beneath
shall be more swift than that above; and so then in equal times, the same
quantity of Water shall discharge from the upper, as does from the nether part.

I will declare my self by another example. If we should imagine, that two
cords or lines of equal thickness, be drawn through two holes of equal bore;
but so that the first pass with quadruple velocity to the second: It is
manifest, that if in a determinate time, we shall by the first bore have drawn
four Else of the line, in the same time, by the second hole we shall have drawn
but one Ell of cord only; and if by the first there pass twelve Else, then
through the second there shall pass only three Else; and in short the
quantity of cord shall have the same proportion to the cord, that the volocity
has to the velocity. And therefore we desiring to compensate the tardity of
the second cord, and maintaining the same tardity to draw through the second
hole as much cord as through the first, it will be necessary to draw through
the second bore four ends of cord; so that the thickness of all the cords by
the second hole, have the same proportion to the thickness of the cord which
passes only by the first, as the velocity of the cord by the first hole has
reciprocally to the velocity of the cod's by the second hole. And thus its
clear, that when there is drawn through two holes equal quantity of cords in
equal time, but with unequal velocity, it will be necessary, that the thickness
of all the four cords shall have the same reciprocal proportion to the
thickness of the swifter cord, that the velocity of the swifter cord has to
the velocity of the slower. The which is verified likewise in the fluid Element
of Water.

And to the end that this principal fundamental be well understood, I will also
note a certain observation made my me in the Art of Wyer-drawing, or spinning
Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, and it is this; That such Artificers desiring
more and more to disgrosse and subtillize the said Metals, having wound about a
Rocket or Barrel, the thread of the Metal, they place the Rocket in a frame
upon a steadfast Axis, in such sort that the Rocket may turn about in it self;
then making one end of the thread to pass by force through a Plate of Steel
pierced with diverse holes, greater and lesser, as need requires, fastening the
same end of the thread to another Rocket, they wind up the thread, which
passing through a bore less than the thickness of the thread, is of force
constrained to disgrosse and subtillize. Now that which is intensly to be
observed in this business, is this, That the parts of the thread before the
hole, are of such a thickness, but the parts of the same thread after it is
passed the hole, are of a lesser thickness: and yet nevertheless the mass
and weight of the thread which is drawn forth, is ever equal to the mass and
weight of the thread which is winded up. But if we should well consider the
matter, we should find, that the thicker the thread before the hole is, than
the thread passed the hole, the greater reciprocally is the velocity of the
parts of the thread passed the hole, than the volocity of the parts before the
hole: Insomuch that if v^rbi gratia the thickness of the thread before the
hole, were double to the thickness after the hole, in such case the velocity
of the parts of the thread passed the hole, should be double to the velocity of
the parts of the thread before the hole; and thus the thickness compensates
the velocity, and the velocity compensates the thickness. So that the same
occurreth in the solid Metals of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, etc. that eveneth
also in the fluid Element of Water, and other liquids, namely, That the
velocity bears the same proportion to the velocity, that the thickness of
the Metal, or Water, has to the thickness.

And therefore granting this discourse, we may say, that as often as two Taps
with different velocity discharge equal quantities of Water in equal times, it
will be necessary that the Tap less swift be so much greater, and larger, than
the Tap more swift, by how much the swifter superates in velocity the slower;
and to pronounce the Proposition in more proper terms, we say; That if two Taps
of unequal velocity, discharge in equal times equal quantities of Water, the
greatness of the first shall be to the greatness of the second, in reciprocal
proportion, as the velocity of the second to the velocity of the first. As for
example, if the first Tap shall be ten times swifter than the second Tap, it
will be necessary, that the second be ten times bigger and larger than the
first; and in such case the Taps shall discharge equal quantities of water in
equal times; and this is the principal and most important point, which ought to
be kept always in mind, for that on it well understood depend many things
profitable, and worthy of our knowledge.

Now applying all that has been said nearer to our purpose, I consider, that
it being most true, that in diverse parts of the same River or Current of
running water, there does always pass equal quantity of Water in equal time
(which thing is also demonstrated in our first Proposition) and it being also
true, that in diverse parts the same River may have various and different
velocity; it follows of necessary consequence, that where the River has less
velocity, it shall be of greater measure, and in those parts, in which it has
greater velocity, it shall be of less measure; and in sum, the velocity of
several parts of the said River, shall have eternally reciprocal and like
proportion with their measures. This principle and fundamental well
established, that the same Current of Water changes measure, according to its
varying of velocity; that is, lessening the measure, when the velocity
increases, and increasing the measure, when the velocity decreaseth; I pass
to the consideration of many particular accidents in this admirable matter, and
all depending on this sole Proposition, the sense of which I have often repeated,
that it might be well understood.

COROLLARIE I.
ANd first, we hence conclude, that the same Streams of a Torrent, namely,
those streams which carry equal quantity of Water in equal times, make not the
same depths or measures in the River, in which they enter, unless when in the
entrance into the River they acquired; or to say better, keep the same
velocity; because if the velocicities acquired in the River shall be different,
also the measures shall be diverse; and consequently the depths, as is
demonstrated.

COROLLARIE II.
ANd because successively, as the River is more and more full, it is
constituted ordinarily in greater and greater velocity: hence it is that the
same streams of the Torrent, that enter into the River, make less and less
depths, as the River grows more and more full; since that also the Waters of
the Torrent being entered into the River, go acquiring greater and greater
velocities, and therefore diminish in measure and height.

COROLLARIE III.
WE observe also, that while the main River is shallow, if there fall but a
gentle rain, it suddenly much increases and rises; but when the River is
already swelled, though there fall again another new violent shower, yet it
increases not at the same rate as before, proportionably to the rain which
fell: which thing we may affirm particularly to depend on this, that in the
first case, while the River is low, it is found also very slow, and therefore
the little water which enters into it, passes and runs with little velocity,
and consequently occupies a great measure: But when the River is once
augmented, by new water being also made more swift, it causes the great Flood
of water which falls, to bear a less measure, and not to make such a depth.

COROLLARIE IV.
FRom the things demonstrated is manifest also, that whilst a Torrent enters
into a River, at the time of Ebb, then the Torrent moves with such a certain
velocity, what ever it be, passing by its extremest parts, wherewith it
communicates with the River; in which parts, the Torrent being measured, shall
have such a certain measure: but the River swelling and rising, also those
parts of the Torrent augment in greatness and measure, though the Torrent, in
that instant, dis-imbogue no more water than it did before: so that the River
being swelled, we are to consider two mouths of the same Torrent, one less
before the rising, the other greater after the rising, which mouths discharge
equal quantities of water in equal times; therefore the velocity by the lesser
mouth shall be greater than the velocity by the greater mouth; and thus the
Torrent shall be retarded from its ordinary course.

COROLLARIE V.
FRom which operation of Nature proceeds another effect worthy of
consideration; and it is, that the course of the water retarding, as has been
said in those ultimate parts of the Torrent, if it shall happen that the
Torrent grow torbid and muddy, and its stream be retarded in such a degree,
that it is not able to carry away those minute grains of Earth, which compose
the muddinesse; in this case the Torrent shall clear away the mud, and carry
away the Sand at the bottom of its own Chanel, in the extreme parts of its
mouth, which raised and voided Sand, shall again afterward be carried away,
when the River abating, the Torrent shall return to move with its primitive
velocity.

COROLLARIE VI.
WHilst it is demonstrated, that the same water has different measures in its
Chanel or course, according as it varieth in velocity; so that the measure of
the water is always greater, where the velocity is lesser; and on the
contrary, the measure lesser, where the velocity is greater: from hence we may
most elegantly render the reason of the usual Proverb, Take heed of the still
waters: For that if we consider the self same water of a River in those parts,
wherein it is less swift, and thence called still or smooth water, it shall be,
of necessity, of greater measure than in those parts, in which it is more
swift, and therefore ordinarily shall be also more deep and dangerous for
passengers; whence it is well said, Take heed of the still Waters; and this
saying has been since applied to things moral.

COROLLARIE VII.
LIkewise, from the things demonstrated may be concluded, that the winds,
which stop a River, and blowing against the Current, retard its course and
ordinary velocity shall necessarily amplify the measure of the same River, and
consequently shall be, in great part, causes; or we may say, potent con-causes
of making the extraordinary inundations which Rivers use to make. And its most
certain, that as often as a strong and continual wind shall blow against the
Current of a River, and shall reduce the water of the River to such tardity of
motion, that in the time wherein before it run five miles, it now moves but
one, such a River will increase to five times the measure, though there should
not be added any other quantity of water; which thing indeed has in it
something of strange, but it is most certain, for that look what proportion the
waters velocity before the wind, has to the velocity after the wind, and
such reciprocally is the measure of the same water after the wind, to the
measure before the wind; and because it has been supposed in our case that
the velocity is diminished to a fifth part, therefore the measure shall be
increased five times more than that, which it was before.

COROLLARIE VIII.
WE have also probable the cause of the inundations of Tyber, which befell at
Rome, in the time of Alexander the Sixth, and of Clement the Seventh; which
innundations came in a serene time, and without great thaws of the Snows; which
therefore much puzzled the wits of those times. But we may with much
probability affirm, That the River rose to such a height and excresence, by the
retardation of the Waters dependant on the boistrous and constant Winds, that
blew in those times, as is noted in the memorials.

COROLLARIE. IX.
IT being most manifest, that by the great abundance of Water the Torrents may
increase, and of themselves alone exorbitantly swell the River; and having
demonstrated that also without new Water, but only by the notable retardment
the River rises and increases in measure, in proportion as the velocity
decreaseth: hence it is apparent, that each of these causes being able of it
self, and separate from the other to swell the River; when it shall happen that
both these two causes conspire the augmentation of the River, in such a case
there must follow very great and irrepable innundations.

COROLLARIE X.
FRom what has been demonstrated, we may with facility resolve the doubt which
has troubled, and still poseth the most diligent, but incautelous observers of
Rivers, who measuring the Streams and Torrents which fall into another River;
as those for instance, which enter into the Po, or those which fall into Tiber;
and having summed the total of these measures, and conferring the measures of
the Rivers and Brooks, which fall into Tiber, with the measure of Tiber, and
the measures of those which disimbogue into Po, with the measure of Po, they
find them not equal, as, it seems to them, they ought to be, and this is
because they have not well noted the most important point of the variation of
velocity, and how that it is the most potent cause of wonderfully altering the
measures of running Waters; but we most facilly resolving the doubt, may say
that these Waters diminish the measure, being once entered the principal
Channel, because they increase in velocity.

COROLLARIE XI.
THrough the ignorance of the force of the velocity of the Water, in altering
its measure, and augmenting it when the velocity diminishes; and diminishing
it when the velocity augmenteth: The Architect Giovanni Fontana, endeavored to
measure, and and to cause to be measured by his Nephew, all the Brooks and
Rivers which discharged their Waters into Tiber, at the time of the
Innundation; which happened at Rome in the year 1598, and published a small
Treatise thereof, wherein he summeth up the measures of the extraordinary Water
which fell into Tiber, and made account that it was about five hundred Else
more than ordinary; and in the end of that Treatise concludes, that to remove
the Innundation wholly from Rome, it would be necessary to make two other
Channels, equal to that at present, and that less would not suffice; and
finding afterward that the whole Stream passed under the Bridge Quattro-Capi,
(the Arch whereof is of a far less measure then five hundred Else) concludes,
that under the said Bridge past a hundred fifty one Else of Water compressed,
(I have set down the precise term of comprest Water, written by Fontana)
wherein I find many errors.

The first of which is to think that the measures of these Waters compressed in
the Channels of those Brooks and Rivers, should maintain themselves the same in
Tiber, which by his leave, is most false, when ever those waters reduced into
Tiber, retain not the same velocity which they had in the place in which
Fontana and his Nephew measured them: And all this is manifest from the things
which we have above explained; for, if the Waters reduced into Tiber increase
in velocity, they decrease in measure; and if they decrease in velocity, they
increase in measure.

Secondly, I consider that the measures of those Brooks and Rivers, which enter
into Tiber at the time of Innundation, are not between themselves really the
same, when their velocities are not equal, though they have the same names of
Else and Feet; for that its possible that a disinboguement of ten Else
requadrated (to speak in the phrase of Fontana) of one of those Brooks, might
discharge into Tiber at the time of Innundation, four, ten, and twenty times
less Water, than another mouth equal to the first in greatness, as would occur
when the first mouth were four, ten, or twenty times less swift than the
second. Whereupon, whilst Fontana sums up the Else and Feet of the measures
of those Brooks and Rivers into a total aggregate, he commits the same error
with him, which would add into one sum diverse moneys of diverse values, and
diverse places, but that had the same name; as if one should say ten Crowns of
Roman money, four Crowns of Gold, thirteen Crowns of Florence, five Crowns of
Venice, and eight Crowns of Mantua, should make the same sum with forty
Crowns of Gold, or forty Crowns of Mantua.

Thirdly, It might happen that some River or Current in the parts nearer Rome,
in the time of its flowing, did not send forth more Water than ordinary; and
however, its a thing very clear, that whilst the stream came from the superior
parts, that same Brook or River would be augmented in measure, as has been
noted in the fourth Corollary; in such sort, that Fontana might have
inculcated, and noted that same River or Current as concurring to the
Innundation, although it were therein altogether unconcerned.

Moreover, in the fourth place we must note, That it might so fall out, that
such a River not only was uninteressed in the Innundation, though augmented in
measure, but it might I say happen, that it was instrumental to the asswaging
the Innundation, by augmenting in the measure of its own Channel; which matter
is sufficiently evident; for if it be supposed that the River in the time of
flood, had not had of it self, and from its proper springs more Water than
ordinary, its a thing certain, that the Water of Tiber rising and increasing;
also that River, to level it self with the Water of Tiber, would have retained
some of its Waters in its own Chanel, without discharging them into Tyber, or
else would have ingorged and swallowed (if I may so say) some of the water of
Tyber; and in this case, at the time of Inundation, less abundance of water
would have come to Rome, and yet nevertheless the measure of that River would
have been increased.

Fifthly, Fontana deceives himself, when he concludes, that to remove the
Inundation from Rome, it would be necessary to make two other Channels of
Rivers, that were as large as that, which is the present one, and that less
would not suffice, which, I say, is a fallacy: and to convince him easily of
his error, it suffices to say, that all the Streams being passed under the
Bridge Quattro-Capi, as he himself attests, a Channel would suffice only of the
capacity of the said Bridge, provided that the water there might run with the
same velocity, as it did under the Bridge at the time of Inundation; and on the
contrary, twenty Currents of capacity equal to the present one, would not
suffice, if the water should run with twenty times less velocity, than it made
at the time of the Inundation.

Sixthly, to me it seems a great weakness to say, that there should pass
under the Bridge Quattro-Capi, an hundred fifty one else of water compressed;
for that I do not understand that water is like Cotton or Wool, which matters
may be pressed and trod, as it happens also to the air, which receives
compression in such sort, that after that in some certain place a quantity of
air shall be reduced to its natural constitution; and having taken up all the
said place, yet nevertheless compressing the first Air with force and
violence, it is reduced into far less room, and will admit four or six times as
much air, as before, as is experimentally And as is at large demonstrated by
that most excellent and Honorable personage Mr. Boil in the industrious
experiment of his Pneumatical Engine.
seen in the Wind-Gun, invented in our days by M. Vincenzo Vincenti of Vrbin,
which property of the Air of admitting condensation, is also seen in the
portable Fountains of the same M. Vincenzo: which Fountains spirt the Water on
high, by force of the Air compressed, which whilst it seeks to reduce its self
to its natural constitution, in the dilation causes that violence. But the
water can never, for any thing I know, crowd, or press so, as that if before
the compression it held or possessed a place, being in its natural constitution,
I believe not, I say, that it is possible, by pressing and crowding to make it
possess less room, for if it were possible to compress the Water, and make it
to occupy a less place, it would thence follow, that two Vessels of equal
measure, but of unequal height, should be of unequal capacity, and that should
hold more water which was higher; also a Cylinder, or other Vessel more high
than broad, would contain more water erected, than being laid along; for that
being erected, the water put therein would be more pressed and crowded.

And therefore, in our case, according to our principles we will say, that the
water of that Stream passes all under the said Bridge Quattro-Capi, for that
being there most swift, it ought of consequence to be less in measure.

And here one may see, into how many errors a man may run through ignorance of
a true and real Principle, which once known and well understood, takes away all
mists of doubting, and easily resolves all difficulties.

COROLLARIE. XII.
THrough the same inadvertency of not regarding the variation of velocity in
the same Current, there are committed by Ingineers and Learned men, errors of
very great moment (and I could thereof produce examples, but for good reasons I
pass them over in silence) when they think, and propose, by deriving new
Channels from great Rivers, to diminish the measure of the water in the River,
and to diminish it proportionally, according to the measure of the Water which
they make to pass through the Channel, as making v.g. a Channel fifty foot
broad, in which the derived water is to run waste, ten foot deep, they think
they have diminished the measure of the Water in the River five hundred feet,
which thing does not indeed so fall out; and the reason is plain; for that the
Chanel being derived, the rest of the main River, diminishes in velocity, and
therefore retains a greater measure than it had at first before the derivation
of the Chanel; and moreover, if the Chanel being derived, it shall not conserve
the same velocity which it had at first in the main River, but shall diminish
it, it will be necessary, that it has a greater measure than it had before in
the River; and therefore to account aright, there shall not be so much water
derived into the Channel, as shall diminish the River, according to the
quantity of the water in the Channel, as is pretended.

COROLLARIE. XIII.
THis same consideration gives me occasion to discover a most ordinary error,
observed by me in the business of the water of Ferara, when I was in those
parts, in service of the most Reverend and Illustrious Monsignor Corsini; the
sublime wit of whom has been a very great help to me in these contemplations;
its very true, I have been much perplexed, whether I should commit this
particular to paper, or pass it over in silence, for that I have ever doubted,
that the opinion so common and moreover confirmed with a most manifest
experiment, may not only make this my conjecture to be esteemed far from true,
but also to discredit with the World the rest of this my Treatise:
Nevertheless I have at last resolved not to be wanting to my self, and to
truth in a matter of it self, and for other consequences most important; nor
does it seem to me requisite in difficult matters, such as these we have in
hand, to resign our selves to the common opinion, since it would be very
strange if the multitude in such matters should hit on the truth, nor ought
that to be held difficult, in which even the vulgar do know the truth and
right; besides that I hope moreover to prove all in such sort, that persons of
solid judgment, shall rest fully persuaded, so that they but keep in mind the
principal ground and foundation of all this Treatise; and though that which I
will propose, be a particular, as I have said, pertaining only to the
interests of Ferara; yet nevertheless from this particular Doctrine well
understood, good judgment may be made of other the like cases in general.

I say then, for greater perspecuity, and better understanding of the whole,
That about thirteen miles above Ferara, near to Stellata, the main of Po,
branching it self into two parts, with one of its Arms it comes close to
Ferara, retaining the name of the Po of Ferara; and here again it divides it
self into two other branches, and that which continues on the right hand, is
called the Po of Argenta, and of Primaro; and that on the left the Po of
Volana. But for that the bed of the Po of Ferara being heretofore augmented and
raised, it follows that it rests wholly deprived of the Water of the great
Po, except in the time of its greater swelling; for in that case, this Po of
Ferara being restrained with a Bank near to Bondeno, would come also in the
overflowings of the main Po, to be free from its Waters: But the Lords of
Ferara are wont at such time as the Po threateneth to break out, to cut the
bank; by which cutting, there disgorgeth such a Torrent of Water, that it is
observed, that the main Po in the space of some few hours abateth near a foot,
and all persons that I have spoken with hitherto, moved by this experiment,
think that it is of great profit and benefit to keep ready this Vent, and to
make use of it in the time of its fulness. And indeed, the thing considered
simply, and at the first appearance, it seems that none can think otherwise;
the rather, for that many examining the matter narrowly, measure that body of
Water which runs by the Channel, or Bed of the Po of Ferara, and make
account, that the body of the Water of the great Po, is diminished the quantity
of the body of the Water which runs by the Po of Ferara. But if we well
remember what has been said in the beginning of the Treatise, and how much the
variety of the velocities of the said Water imports, and the knowledge of
them is necessary to conclude the true quantity of the running Water, we shall
find it manifest, that the benefit of this Vent is far less than it is
generally thought: And mereover, we shall find, if I deceive not my self, that
there follow from thence so many mischiefs, that I could greatly incline to
believe, that it were more to the purpose wholly to stop it up, than to
maintain it open: yet I am not so wedded to my opinion, but that I am ready to
change my judgment upon strength of better reasons; especially of one that
shall have first well understood the beginning of this my discourse, which I
frequently inculcate, because its absolutely impossible without this
advertisement to treat of these matters, and not commit very great errors.

I propose therefore to consideration, that although it be true, that whilst
the water of the main Po is at its greatest height, the Bank and Dam then cut
of the Po of Ferara, and the superior waters having a very great fall into the
Channel of Ferara, they precipitate into the same with great violence and
velocity, and with the same in the beginning, or little less, they run toward
the Po of Volana, and of Argenta on the sea coasts; yet after the space of some
few hours, the Po of Ferara being full, and the superior Waters not finding so
great a diclivity there, as they had at the beginning of the cutting, they fall
not into the same with the former velocity, but with far less, and thereby a
great deal less Water begins to issue from the great Po; and if we diligently
compare the velocity at the first cutting, with the velocity of the Water after
the cutting made, and when the Po of Ferara shall be full of Water, we shall
find perhaps that to be fifteen or twenty times greater than this, and
consequently the Water which issues from the great Po, that first impetuosity
being past, shall be only the fifteenth or twentieth part of that which issued
at the beginning; and therefore the Waters of the main Po will return in a
small time almost to the first height. And here I will pray those who rest not
wholly satisfied with what has been said, that for the love of truth, and the
common good, they would please to make diligent observation whether in the time
of great Floods, the said Bank or Dam at Bondeno is cut, and that in few hours
the main Po diminishes, as has been said about a foot in its height; that
they would observe I say, whether, a day or two being past, the Waters of the
main Po return almost to their first height; for if this should follow, it
would be very clear, that the benefit which resulteth from this diversion or
Vent, is not so great as is universally presumed; I say, it is not so great as
is presumed; because, though it be granted for true, that the Waters of the
main Po, abate at the beginning of the Vent, yet this benefit happens to be but
temporary and for a few hours: If the rising of Po, and the dangers of breaking
forth were of short duration, as it ordinarily befalls in the overflowings of
Torrents, in such a case the profit of the Vent would be of some esteem: But
because the swellings of Po continue for thirty, or sometimes for forty days,
therefore the gain which results from the Vent proves to be inconsiderable. It
remains now to consider the notable harms which follow the said Sluice or
Vent, that so reflection being made, and the profit and the detriment compared,
one may rightly judge, and choose that which shall be most convenient. The
first prejudice therefore which arises from this Vent or Sluice, is; That the
Channels of Ferara, Primaro, and Volana filling with Water, all those parts
from Bondeno to the Sea side are allarmed and endangered thereby. Secondly, The
Waters of the Po of Primaro having free ingresse into the upper Valleys, they
fill them to the great damage of the Fields adjacent, and obstruct the course
of the ordinary Trenches in the same Valleys; insomuch that all the care, cost,
and labor about the draining, and freeing the upper Valleys from Water, would
also become vain and ineffectual. Thirdly, I consider that these Waters of the
Po of Ferara being passed downwards toward the Sea, at the time that the main
Po was in its greater excrescences and heights, it is manifest by experience,
that when the great Po diminishes, then these Waters passed by the Po of
Ferara begin to retard in their course, and finally come to turn the current
upwards toward Stellata, resting first in the intermediate time, almost fixed
and standing, and therefore deposing the muddinesse, they fill up the Channel
of the River or Current of Ferara. Fourthly and lastly, There follows from
this same diversion another notable damage, and it is like to that which
follows the breaches made by Rivers; near to which breaches in the lower
parts, namely below the breach, there is begot in the Channel of the River, a
certain ridge or shelf, that is, the bottom of the River is raised, as is
sufficiently manifest by experience; and thus just in the same manner cutting
the Bank at Bondeno, there is at it were a breach made, from which follows
the rising in the lower parts of the main Po, being past the mouth of Pamaro;
which thing, how pernicious it is, let any one judge that understands these
matters. And therefore both for the small benefit, and so many harms that ensue
from maintaining this diversion, I should think it were more sound advice to
keep that Bank always whole at Bondeno, or in any other convenient place, and
not to permit that the Water of the Grand Po should ever come near to Ferara.

COROLLARIE XIV.
IN the Grand Rivers, which fall into the Sea, as here in Italy Po, Adige,
Artesia.
and Arno, which are armed with Banks against their excrescencies, its observed
that far from the Sea, they need Banks of a notable height; which height goes
afterward by degrees diminishing, the more it approaches to the Seacoasts:
in such sort, that the Po, distant from the Sea about fifty or sixty miles at
Ferara, shall have Banks that be above twenty feet higher than the ordinary
Water-marks; but ten or twelve miles from the Sea, the Banks are not twelve
feet higher than the said ordinary Water-marks, though the breadth of the River
be the same, so that the excrescence of the same Innundation happens to be far
greater in measure remote from the Sea, then near; and yet it should seem, that
the same quantity of Water passing by every place, the River should need to
have the same altitude of Banks in all places: But we by our Principles and
fundamentals may be able to render the reason of that effect, and say; That
that excess of quantity of Water, above the ordinary Water, goes always
acquiring greater velocity; the nearer it approaches the Sea, and therefore
decreaseth in measure, and consequenly in height. And this perhaps might have
been the cause in great part, why the Tyber in the Innundation Anno 1578.
issued not forth of its Channel below Rome toward the Sea.

COROLLARIE XV.
FRom the same Doctrine may be rendered a most manifest reason why the falling
Waters go lessening in their descent, so that the same falling Water, measured
at the beginning of its fall, is greater, and bigger, and afterward by degrees
lesseneth in measure the more it is remote from the beginning of the fall.
Which depends on no other, than on the acquisition, which it successively
makes of greater velocity; it being a most familiar conclusion among
Philosophers, that grave bodies falling, the more they remove from the
beginning of their motion, the more they acquire of swiftness; and therefore
the Water, as a grave body, falling, gradually velocitates, and therefore
decreaseth in measure, and lesseneth.

COROLLARIE XVI.
ANd on the contrary, the spirtings of a Fountain of Water, which spring on
high, work a contrary effect; namely in the beginning they are small, and
afterward become greater and big; and the reason is most manifest, because
in the beginning they are very swift, and afterward gradually relent their
impetuosity, and motion, so that in the beginning of the excursion that they
make, they ought to be small, and afterward to grow bigger, as in the effect
is seen.

APPENDIX I.
INto the error of not considering how much the different velocities of the
same running water in several places of its current, are able to change the
measure of the same water, and to make it greater; or less, I think, if I be
not deceived, that Giulio Frontino a noble ancient Writer, may have fallen in the
Second Book which he writ, of the Aqueducts of the City of Rome: Whilst finding
the measure of the Water Commentarius bears many senses, but in this place
signifies a certain Register of the quantities of the Waters in the several
public Aquiducts of Rome; which word I find frequently used in the Law Books
of ancient Civilians: And by errogation we are to understand the distribution
or delivering out of those stores of Water.
Commentariis less than it was in erogatione 1263. Quinaries, he thought that
so much difference might proceed from the negligence of the Measures, and when
afterward with his own industry he measured the same water at the beginnings
of the Aqueducts, finding it near 10000. Quinaries bigger than it was in
Commentariis he judged, that the overplus was imbeziled by Ministers and
Partakers; which in part might be so, for it is but too true, that the public
is almost always defrauded; yet nevertheless, I verily believe withal, that
besides the frauds of these Officers, the velocities of the water in the place
wherein Frontino measured, it might be different from those velocities, which
are found in other places before measured by others; and therefore the measures
of the waters might, yea ought necessarily to be different, it having been by
us demonstrated, that the measures of the same running water have reciprocal
proportion to their velocities. Which Frontino not well considering, and
finding the water in Commentariis 12755. Quinaries in erogatione 14018, and in
his own measure ad capita ductuum, at the head of the fountain 22755.
Quinaries, or thereabouts, he thought, that in all these places there past
different quantities of water; namely, greater at the fountain head then that
which was in Erogatione, and this he judged greater than that which was in
Commentariis.

APPENDIX II.
A Like mistake chanced lately in the Aqueduct of Acqua-Paola, which Water
should be 2000 Inches, and so many effectively ought to be allowed; and it has
been given in so to be by the Signors of Bracciano to the Apostolick-Chamber;
and there was a measure thereof made at the beginning of the Aqueduct; which
measure proved afterward much less and short, considered and taken in Rome,
and thence followed discontents and great disorders, and all because this
property of Running-Waters, of increasing in measure, where the velocity
decreased; and of diminishing in measure, where the velocity augmented, was not
looked into.

APPENDIX III.
A Like error, in my judgment, has been committed by all those learned men,
which to prevent the diversion of the Reno of Bologna into Po by the Channels,
through which it at present runs, judged, that the Reno being in its greater
excrescence about 2000* feet, and the Po being near 1000. feet broad, they
judged, I say, that letting the Reno into Po, it would have raised the Water of
Po two feet; from which rise, they concluded afterward most exorbitant
disorders, either of extraordinary Inundations, or else of immense and
intolerable expenses to the people in raising the Banks of Po and Reno, and
with such like weaknesses, often vainly disturbed the minds of the persons
concerned: But now from the things demonstrated, it is manifest, That the
measure of the Reno in Reno, would be different from the measure of Reno in Po;
in case that the velocity of the Reno in Po, should differ from the velocity of
Reno in Reno, as is more exactly determined in the fourth Proposition.

APPENDIX IV.
NO less likewise are those Ingeneers and Artists deceived, that have affirmed,
That letting the Reno into Po, there would be no rise at all in the Water of
Po: For the truth is, That letting Reno into Po, there would always be a
rising; but sometimes greater, sometimes less, as the Po shall have a swifter
or slower Current; so that if the Po shall be constituted in a great velocity,
the rise will be very small; and if the said Po shall be slow in its course,
then the rise will be notable.

APPENDIX V.
ANd here it will not be besides the purpose to advertise, That the measures,
partments, and distributions of the Waters of Fountains, cannot be made
exactly, unless there be considered, besides the measure, the velocity also of
the Water; which particular not being thoroughly observed, is the cause of
continual miscariages in such like affairs.

APPENDIX VI.
LIke consideration ought to be had with the greater diligence, for that an
error therein is more prejudicial; I say, ought to be had by those which part
and divide Waters; for the watering of fields, as is done in the Territories
of Brescia, Bergama, Crema, Pavia, Lodigiano, Cremona, and other places: For if
they have not regard to the most important point of the variation of the
velocity of the Water, but only to the bare Vulgar measure, there will
always very great disorders and prejudices ensue to the persons concerned.

APPENDIX VII.
IT seems that one may observe, that whilst the Water runs along a
Channel, Current, or Conduit, its velocity is retarded, withheld, and impeded
by its touching the Bank of side of the said Channel or Current; which, as
immovable, not following the motion of the Water, interrupteth its velocity:
From which particular, being true, as I believe it to be most true, and from
our considerations, we have an occasion of discovering a very nice mistake,
into which those commonly fall who divide the Waters of Fountains. Which
division is wont to be, by what I have seen here in Rome, performed two ways;
The first of which is with the measures of like figures, as Circles, or
Squares, having cut through a Plate of metal several Circles or Squares, one of
half (...) inch, another of one inch, another of two, of three, of four, etc.
with which they afterward adjust the Cocks to dispense the Waters. The other
manner of dividing the Waters of Fountains, is with rectangle paralellograms,
of the same height, but of different Bases, in such sort likewise, that one
paralellogram be of half an inch, another of one, two, three, etc. In which
manner of measuring and dividing the Water it should seem that the Cocks being
placed in one and the same plain, equidistant from the level, or superior
superficies of the water of the Well; and the said measures being most exactly
made, the Water ought consequently also to be equally divided, and parted
according to the proportion of the measures. But if we well consider every
particular, we shall find, that the Cocks, as they successively are greater,
discharge always more Water than the just quantity, in comparison of the
lesser; that is, to speak more properly, The Water which passes through the
greater Cock, has always a greater proportion to that which passes through
the lesser, than the greater Cock has to the lesser. All which I will declare
by an example.

Let there be supposed for more plainness two Squares; (the same may be
understood of Circles, and other like Figures) The first Square is, as we will
suppose, quadruple to the other, and these Squares are the mouths of two Cocks;
one of four inches, the other of one: Now its manifest by what has been said,
that the Water which passes by the less Cock, finds its velocity impeded in
the circumference of the Cock; which impediment is measured by the said
circumference. Now it is to be considered, that if we would have the Water
which passes through the greater Cock, to be only quadruple to that which
passes through the less, in equal spaces of time, it would be necessary, that
not only the capacity and the measure of the greater Cock be quadruple to the
lesser Cock, but that also the impediment be quadrupled. Now in our case it is
true, That the belly and mouth of the Cock is quadrupled, and yet the
impediment is not quadrupled, but is only doubled; seeing that the
circumference of the greater Square, is only double to the circumference of
the lesser Square; for the greater circumference contains eight of those
parts, of which the lesser contains but four, as is manifest by the described
Figure; and for that cause there shall pass by the greater Cock, above four
times as much Water, as shall pass by the lesser Cock.

The like error occurreth also in the other manner of measuring the Water of
a Fountain, as may easily be collected from what has been said and observed
above.

APPENDIX VIII.
THe same contemplation discovers the error of those Architects, who being
to erect a Bridge of sundry Arches over a River, consider the ordinary breadth
of the River; which being v. g. forty fathom, and the Bridge being to consist
of four Arches, it suffices them, that the breadth of all the four Arches
taken together, be forty fathom; not considering that in the ordinary Channel
of the River, the Water has only two impediments which retard its velocity;
namely, the touching and gliding along the two sides or shores of the River:
but the same water in passing under the Bridge, in our case meets with eight
of the same impediments, bearing, and thrusting upon two sides of each Arch (to
omit the impediment of the bottom, for that it is the same in the River, and
under the Bridge) from which inadvertency sometimes follow very great
disorders, as quotidian practice shows us.

APPENDIX IX.
IT is also worthy to consider the great and admirable benefit that those
fields receive, which are wont to drink up the Rainwater with difficulty,
through the height of the water in the principal Ditches; in which case the
careful Husbandman cutteth away the reeds and rushes in the Ditches, through
which the waters pass; whereupon may be presently seen, so soon as the reeds
and rushes are cut, a notable Ebb in the level of the water in the Ditches;
insomuch that sometimes it is observed, that the water is abated after the said
cutting a third and more, of what it was before the cutting. The which effect
seemingly might depend on this, That, before those weeds took up room in the
Ditch, and for that cause the water kept a higher level, and the said Plants
being afterward cut and removed, the water came to abate, possessing the place
that before was occupied by the weeds: Which opinion, though probable, and at
first sight satisfactory, is nevertheless insufficient to give the total reason
of that notable abatement which has been spoken of: But it is necessary to
have recourse to our consideration of the velocity in the course of the water,
the chiefest and true cause of the variation of the measure of the same
Running-Water; for, that multitudes of reeds, weeds, and plants dispersed
through the current of the Ditch, do chance notably to retard the course of the
water, and therefore the measure of the water increases; and those impediments
removed, the same water gains velocity, and therefore decreaseth in measure,
and consequently in height.

And perhaps this point well understood, may be of great profit to the fields
adjacent to the Pontine Fens, and I doubt not but if the River Ninfa, and the
other principal Brooks of those Territories were kept well cleansed from weeds,
their waters would be at a lower level, and consequently the drains of the
fields would run into them more readily; it being always to be held for
undoubted, that the measure of the water before the cleansing, has the same
proportion to the measure after cleansing, that the velocity after the
cleansing has to the velocity before the cleansing: And because those weeds
being cleansed away, the course of the water notably increases, it is
therefore necessary that the said water abate in measure, and become lower.

APPENDIX. X.
WE having above observed some errors that are committed in distributing the
waters of Fountains, and those that serve to water fields; it seems now fit,
by way of a close to this discourse, to advertise by what means these divisions
may be made justly and without error. I therefore think that one might two
several ways exquisitly divide the water of Fountains; The first would be by
diligently examining, First, how much water the whole Fountain discharges in a
determinate time, as for instance: How many Barrels, or Tuns it carries in a
set time; and in case you are afterward to distribute the water, distribute it
at the rate of somany Barrels or Tuns, in that same time; and in this case the
participants would have their punctual shares: Nor could it ever happen to send
out more water, than is reckoned to be in the principal Fountain; as befell
Giulio Frontino, and as also it frequently happens in the Modern Aqueducts,
to the public and private detriment.

The other way of dividing the same waters of a Fountain, is also sufficiently
exact and easy; and may be, by having one only size for the Cock or Pipe, as
suppose of an inch, or of half an inch; and when the case requires to dispense
two, three, and more inches, take so many Cocks of the said measure as do
evacuate the water, which is to be emitted; and if we are to make use only of
one greater Cock, we being to place one to discharge for example four inches;
and having the former sole measure of an inch, we must make a Cock that is
bigger, its true, than the Cock of one inch; but not simply in a quadruple
proportion, for that it would discharge more than just so much water, as has
been said above; but we ought to examine diligently how much water the little
Cock emitteth in an hour; and then enlarge, and contract the greater Cock, so,
that it may discharge four times as much water as the lesser in the same time;
and by this means we shall avoid the disorder hinted in the seventh Appendix.
It would be necessary nevertheless, to accommodate the Cocks of the Cistern so,
that the level of the water in the Cistern may always rest at one determinate
mark above the Cock, otherwise the Cocks will emit sometimes greater, and
sometimes less abundance of water* And because it may be that the same water
of the Fountain may be some times more abundant, sometimes less; in such case
it will be necessary to adjust the Cistern so, that the excess above the
ordinary water, discharge into the public Fountains, that so the particular
participants may have always the same abundance of water.

APPENDIX XI.
MUch more difficult is the division of the waters which serve to water the
fields, it not being possible to observe so commodiously, what quantity of
water the whole Ditch sends forth in one determinate time, as may be done in
Fountains: Yet nevertheless, if the second proposition by us a little below
demonstrated, be well understood, there may be thence taken a very safe and
just way to distribute such waters. The Proposition therefore by us
demonstrated is this: If there be two Sections, (namely two mouths of Rivers)
the quantity of the water which passes by the first, has a proportion to that
which passes by the second, compounded of the proportions of the first Section
to the second, and of the velocity through the first, to the velocity through
the second: As I will declare for example by help of practice, that I may be
understood by all, in a matter so important. Let the two mouths of the Rivers
be A, and B, and let the mouth A be in measure and content thirty two feet, and
the mouth B, eight feet. Here you must take notice, that it is not always
true, that the Water which passes by A, has the same proportion to that which
passes by B, that the mouth A has to the mouth B; but only when the
velocityes by each of those passages are equal: But if the velocityes shall be
unequal, it may be that the said mouths may emit equal quantity of Water in
equal times, though their measure be unequal; and it may be also, that the
bigger does discharge a greater quantity of Water: And lastly, it may be, that
the less mouth discharges more Water than the greater; and all this is
manifest by the things noted in the beginning of this discourse, and by the
said second Proposition. Now to examine the proportion of the Water that
passes by one Ditch, to that which passes by another, that this being known,
the same Waters and mouths of Ditches may be then adjusted; we are to keep
account not only of the greatness of the mouths or passages of the Water, but
of the velocity also; which we will do, by first finding two numbers that have
the same proportion between themselves, as have the mouths, which are the
numbers 32 and 8 in our example: Then this being done, let the velocity of the
Water by the passages A and B, be examined (which may be done keeping account
what space a piece of Wood, or other body that swimmeth, is carried by the
stream in one determinate time; as for instance in 50 pulses) and then work by
the golden Rule, as the velocity by A, is to the velocity by B, so is the
number 8, to another number, which is 4. It is clear by what is demonstrated in
the said second Proposition, that the quantity of water, which passes by the
mouth A, shall have the same proportion of that which passes by the mouth B,
that 8 has to 1. Such proportion being composed of the proportions of 32 to 8,
and of 8 to 4; namely, to the greatness of the mouth A, to the greatness of the
mouth B, and of the velocity in A, to the velocity in B. This being done, we
must then contract the mouth which discharges more then its just quantity of
water, or enlarge the other which discharges less, as shall be most commodious
in practice, which to him that has understood this little that has been
delivered, will be very easy.

APPENDIX XII.
THese opperations about Water, as I have hitherto on sundry occasions
observed, are involved in so many difficulties, and such a multiplicity of most
extravagant accidents, that it is no marvel if continually many, and very
important errors be therein committed by many, and even by Ingeneers
themselves, and Learned-men; and because many times they concern not only the
public, but private interests: Hence it is, that it not only belongs to
Artists to treat thereof, but very often even the vulgar themselves pretend to
give their judgment therein: And I have been troubled many times with a
necessity of treating, not only with those, which either by practice, or
particular study, understood somewhat in these matters; but also with people
wholly void of those notions, which are necessary for one that would on good
grounds discourse about this particular; and thus many times have met with more
difficulty in the thick skulls of men, than in precipitous Torrents, and vast
Fennes. And in particular, I had occasion some years past to go see the Cave or
Emissary of the Lake of Perugia, made many years agon by Braccio Fortobraccio,
but for that it was with great ruins by Time decayed, and rendered unuseful, it
was repaired with industry truly heroical and admirable, by Monsignor Maffei
Barberino, then Prefect for the Ways, and now Pope. And being necessitated,
that I might be able to walk in the Cave, and for other causes, I let down the
Sluices of the said Cave, at the mouth of the Lake: No sooner were they stopped,
but a great many of the people of the Towns and Villages coasting upon the Lake
flocking thither, began to make grievous complaints, that if those Sluices were
kept shut, not only the Lake would want its due Vent, but also the parts
adjacent to the Lake would be over flown to their very great detriment. And
because at first appearance their motion seemed very reasonable, I found my
self hard put to it, seeing no way to persuade such a multitude, that the
prejudice which they pretended I should do them by keeping the Sluices shut for
two days, was absolutely insensible; and that by keeping them open, the Lake
did not ebb in the same time so much as the thickness of a sheet of Paper: And
therefore I was necessitated to make use of the authority I had, and so
followed my business as cause required, without any regard to that Rabble
tumultuously assembled. Now when I am not working with Mattock or Spade, but
with the Pen and Discourse, I intend to demonstrate clearly to those that are
capable of reason, and that have well understood the ground of this my
Treatise, that the fear was altogether vain which those people conceited. And
therefore I say, that the Emissary or Sluice of the Lake of Perugia, standing
in the same manner as at present, and the water passing through it with the same
velocity as now; to examine how much the Lake may abate in two days space, we
ought to consider, what proportion the superficies of the whole Lake has to
the measure of the Section of the Emissary, and afterward to infer, that the
velocity of the water by the Emissary or Sluice, shall have the same proportion
to the abatement of the Lake, and to prove thoroughly and clearly this discourse,
I intend to demonstrate the following Proposition.

Suppose a Vessel of any bigness, and that it has an Emissary or Cock, by
which it discharges its water. And look what proportion the superficies of the
vessel has to the measure of the section of the cock, such proportion shall
the velocity of the Water in the Cock have to the abatement of the Lake. Let
the Vessel be ABCD, HILB, through which the Water runs, the superficies of
the Water in the Vessel AD, and the section of the Cock H L: and let the Water
in the Vessel be supposed to have fallen in one determinate time from A to F. I
say that the proportion of the superficies of the Vessel AD is in proportion to
the measure of the section of the Emissary HL, as the velocity of the Emissary
or Cock to the line AF; which is manifest, for that the Water in the Vessel
moving by the line AF; as far as F, and the whole mass of Water AG discharging
it self, and in the same time the same quantity of Water being discharged by
the section of the Emissary HL; it is necessary by what I have demonstrated in
the third Proposition, and also explained in the beginning of this Treatise,
that the velocity by the Emissary or Cock be in proportion to the velocity of
the abatement, as the superficies of the Vessel to the measure of the section
of the Emissary, which was to be demonstrated.

That which has been demonstrated in the Vessel, falls out exactly also in our
Lake of Perugia, and its Emissary; and because the immensity of the superficies
of the Lake is in proportion to the superficies of the Emissary or Sluice, as
many millions to one, as may be easily calculated; it is manifest, that such
abatement shall be imperceptible, and almost nothing, in two days space, nay
in four or six: and all this will be true, when we suppose that for that time
there enters no other Water into the Lake from Ditches or Rivolets, which
falling into the Lake would render such abatement yet less.

Now we see, that it is necessary to examine such abatements and risings, with
excellent reasons, or at least, with accurate experiments, before we resolve
and conclude any thing; and how far the vulgar are distant from a right
judgment in such matters.

APPENDIX XIII.
FOR greater confirmation of all this which I have said, I will instance in
another like case, which also I met with heretofore, wherein, for that the
business was not rightly understood, many disorders, vast expenses, and
considerable mischiefs have followed. There was heretofore an Emissary or
Sluice made to drain the Waters, which from Rains, Springs, and Rivolets fall
into a Lake; to the end, the shores adjoining on the Lake, should be free from
the overflowing of the Waters; but because perhaps the enterprise was not well
managed and carried on, it fell out, that the Fields adjacent to the said
Chanel could not drain, but continued under water; to which disorders a present
remedy has been used, namely, in a time convenient to stop up the Sluice, by
means of certain Floodgates kept on purpose for that end; and thus abating the
Level of the Water in the Emissary, in the space of three or four days, the
Fields have been happily drained. But on the other part, the proprietors
bordering on the Lake opposed this, grievously complaining, that whilst the
Floodgates are shut, and the course of the Water of the Sluice hindered, the
Lake overflowes the Lands adjacent, by means of the Rivers that fell into it,
to their very great damage; and so continuing their suits, they got more of
vexation than satisfaction. Now, being asked my opinion herein, I judged it
requisite (since the point in controversy was about the rising and falling of
the Lake) that the said abatement, when the Floodgates are open, and increase
when they are shut should be exactly measured, and told them, that it might be
easily done at a time when no extraordinary Waters fell into the Lake, neither
of Rain, or otherwise; and the Lake was undisturbed by winds that might drive
the Water to any side, by planting near to an Islet, which is about the middle
of the Lake, a thick post, on which should be made the marks of the Lakes
rising and falling for two or three days. I would not, at that time, pawn, or
resolutely declare, my judgment, in regard I might be, by diverse accidents
missed. But this I told them, that (by what I have demonstrated, and
particularly that which I have said above touching the Lake of Perugia) I
inclined greatly to think, that these risings and fallings would prove
imperceptible, and inconsiderable; and therefore, that in case experience
should make good my reason, it would be to no purpose for them to continue
disputing and wrangling, which causes, (according to the Proverb) A great deal
of cry, but produces not much Wool.

Lastly, it importing very much to know what a Rain continued for many days
can do in raising these Lakes, I will here insert the Copy of a Letter, which I
writ formerly to Signior Galilaeo Galilaei, chief Philosopher to the Grand Duke
of Tuscany, wherein I have delivered one of my conceits in this business, and
it may be, by this Letter, I may, more strongly, confirm what I have said above.

The Copy of a Letter to Signore GALILAEO GALILAEI, Chief Philosopher to the
most Serene Great Duke of TVSCANY.
Worthy and most Excellent SIR,
IN satisfaction of my promise, in my former Letters of representing unto you
some of my Considerations made upon the Lake Thrasimeno, I say, That in times
past, being in Perugia, where we held our General Convention, having understood
that the Lake Thrasimeno, by the great drought of many Months was much abated,
It came into my head, to go privately and see this novelty, both for my
particular satisfaction, as also that I might be able to relate the whole to my
Patrons, upon the certitude of my own sight of the place. And so being come to
the Emissary of the Lake, I found that the Level of the Lakes surface was ebbed
about five Roman Palms of its wonted watermark, insomuch that it was lower
than the transome of the mouth of the Emissary, by the length of -- this
described line, and therefore no Water issued out of the Lake, to the great
prejudice of all the places and villages circumjacent, in regard that the Water
which used to run from the said Lake turned 22 Mills, which not going,
necessitated the inhabitants of those parts to go a days journey and more, to
grind upon the Tiber. Being returned to Perugia, there followed a Rain, not
very great, but constant, and even, which lasted for the space of eight hours,
or thereabouts; and it came into my thoughts to examine, being in Perugia, how
much the Lake was increased and raised by this Rain, supposing (as it was
probable enough) that the Rain had been universal over all the Lake; and like
to that which fell in Perugia, and to this purpose I took a Glass formed like
a Cylinder, about a palm high, and half a palm broad; and having put in water
sufficient to cover the bottom of the Glass, I noted diligently the mark of
the height of the Water in the Glass, and afterward exposed it to the open
weather, to receive the Raine-water, which fell into it; and I let it stand for
the space of an hour; and having observed that in that time the Water was risen
in the Vessel the height of the following line --, I considered that if I had
exposed to the same rain such other vessels equal to that, the Water would have
risen in them all according to that measure: And thereupon concluded, that also
in all the whole extent of the Lake, it was necessary the Water should be
raised in the space of an hour the same measure. Yet here I considered two
difficulties that might disturb and altar such an effect, or at least render it
inobserveable, which afterward well weighed, and resolved, left me (as I will
tell you anon) in the conclusion the more confirmed; that the Lake ought to be
increased in the space of eight hours, that the rain lasted eight times that
measure. And whilst I again exposed the Glass to repeat the experiment, there
came unto me an Ingeneer to talk with me touching certain affairs of our
Monastary of Perugia, and discoursing with him, I showed him the Glass out at
my Chamber window, exposed in a Courtyard; and communicated to him my fancy,
relating unto him all that I had done. But I soon perceived that this brave
fellow conceited me to be but of a dull brain, for he smiling said unto me;
Sir, you deceive your self: I am of opinion that the Lake will not be increased
by this rain, so much as the thickness of a A Coin of Pope Julius worth six
pence.
Julio. Hearing him pronounce this his opinion with freeness and confidence, I
urged him to give me some reason for what he said, assuring him, that I would
change my judgment, when I saw the strength of his Arguments: To which he
answered, that he had been very conversant about the Lake, and was every day
upon it, and was well assured that it was not at all increased. And importuning
him further, that he would give me some reason for his so thinking, he proposed
to my consideration the great drought passed, and that that same rain was
nothing for the great parching: To which I answered, I believe Sir that the
surface of the Lake, on which the rain had fallen was moistened* and therefore
saw not how its drought, which was nothing at all, could have drunk up any part
of the rain. For all this he persisting in his conceit, without yielding in the
least to my allegation; he granted in the end (I believe in civility to me)
that my reason was plausible and good, but that in practice it could not hold.
At last to clear up all, I made one be called, and sent him to the mouth of the
Emissary of the Lake, with order to bring me an exact account, how he found the
water of the Lake, in respect of the Transome of the Sluice. Now here, Signore
Galilaeo, I would not have you think that I had brought the matter in hand to
concern me in my honor; but believe me (and there are witnesses of the same
still living) that my messenger returning in the evening to Perugia, he brought
me word, that the water of the Lake began to run through the Cave; and that it
was risen almost a fingers breadth above the Transome: Insomuch, that adding
this measure, to that of the lowness of the surface of the Lake, beneath the
Transome before the rain, it was manifest that the rising of the Lake caused by
the rain, was to a hair those four fingers breadth that I had judged it to be.
Two days after I had another bout with the Ingeneer, and related to him the
whole business, to which he knew not what to answer.

Now the two difficulties which I thought of, able to impede my conclusion,
were these following: First, I considered that it might be, that the Wind
blowing from the side where the Sluice stood, to the Lake-ward; the mole and
mass of the Water of the Lake might be driven to the contrary shore; on which
the Water rising, it might be fallen at the mouth of the Emissary, and so the
observation might be much obscured. But this difficulty wholly vanished by
reason of the Aires great tranquillity; which it kept at that time, for no Wind
was stirring on any side, neither whilst it rained, nor afterward.

The second difficulty which put the rising in doubt, was, That having observed
in Florence, and elsewhere, those Ponds into which the rainwater, falling from
the house, is conveyed through the Common-shores: And that they are not thereby
ever filled, but that they swallow all that abundance of water, that runs into
them by those conveyances which serve them with water; insomuch that those
conveyances which in time of drought maintain the Pond, when there comes new
abundance of water into the Pond, they drink it up, and swallow it: A like
effect might also fall out in the Lake, in which there being many veins (as it
is very likely) that maintain and feed the Lake; these veins might imbibe the
new addition of the Rainwater, and so by that means annull the rising; or else
diminish it in such sort, as to render it inobservable. But this difficulty was
easily resolved by considering my Treatise of the measure of Running-Waters;
forasmuch as having demonstrated, that the abatement of a Lake bears the
reciprocal proportion to the velocity of the Emissary, which the measure of the
Section of the Emissary of the Lake, has to the measure of the surface of the
Lake: making the calculation and account, though in gross; by supposing that
its veins were sufficiently large, and that the velocity in them were notable
in drinking up the water of the Lake; yet I found nevertheless, that many weeks
and months would be spent in drinking up the new-come abundance of water by
the rain, so that I rested sure, that the rising would ensue, as in effect it
did.

And because many of accurate judgment, have again caused me to question this
rising, setting before me, that the Earth being parched by the great drought,
that had so long continued, it might be, that that Bank of Earth which
environed the brink of the Lake, being dry, and imbibing great abundance of
Water from the increasing Lake, would not suffer it to increase in height: I
say therefore, that if we would rightly consider this doubt here proposed, we
should, in the very consideration of it, see it resolved; for, it being
supposed that that list or border of Banks which was to be occupied by the
increase of the Lake, be a Brace in breadth quite round the Lake, and that by
reason of its dryness it sucks in water, and that by that means this proportion
of water co-operates not in raising of the Lake: It is absolutely necessary on
the other hand, that we consider, That the Circuit of the water of the Lake
being thirty miles, as its commonly held, that is to say, Ninety thousand
Braces of Florence in compass; and therefore admitting for true, that each
Brace of this Bank drink two quarts of water, and that for the spreading it
require three quarts more, we shall find, that the whole agregate of this
portion of water, which is not employed in the raising of the Lake, will be
four hundred and fifty thousand Quarts of water; and supposing that the Lake be
sixty square miles, three thousand Braces long, we shall find, that to
dispense the water possessed by the Bank about the Lake, above the total surface
of the Lake, it ought to be spread so thin, that one sole quart of water may
overspread ten thousand square Braces of surface: such a thinness, as must
much exceed that of a leaf of beaten Gold, and also less than that skin of
water which covers the Bubbles of it: and such would that be, which those men
would have subtracted from the rising of the Lake: But again, in the space of
a quarter of an hour at the beginning of the rain, all that Bank is soaked by
the said rain, so that we need not for the moistning of it, employ a drop of
that water which falls into the Lake. Besides we have not brought to account
that abundance of water which runs in time of rain into the Lake, from the
steepness of the adjacent Hills and Mountains; which would be enough to supply
all our occasions: So that, neither ought we for this reason to question our
pretended rising. And this is what has fallen in my way touching the
consideration of the Thrasimcnian Lake.

After which, perhaps somewhat rashly, wandering beyond my bounds, I proceeded
to another contemplation, which I will relate to you, hoping that you will
receive it, as collected with these cautions requisite in such like affairs;
wherein we ought not too positively to affirm any thing of our own heads for
certain, but ought to submit all to the sound and secure deliberation of the
Holy Mother Church, as I do this of mine, and all others; most ready to change
my judgment, and conform my self always to the deliberations of my Superiors.
Continuing therefore my abovesaid conceit about the rising of the water in the
glass tried before, it came into my mind, that the forementioned rain having
been very gentle, it might well be, that if there should have fallen a Rain
fifty, an hundred, or a thousand times greater than this, and much more intense
(which would ensue as often as those falling drops were four, five or ten times
bigger than those of the abovementioned rain, keeping the same number) in such
a case its manifest, that in the space of an hour the Water would rise in our
Glass, two, three, and perhaps more Yards or Braces; and consequently, if such
a Rain should fall upon a Lake, that the said Lake would rise, according to
the same rate: And likewise, if such a Rain were universal, over the whole
Terrestrial Globe, it would necessarily, in the space of an hour, make a
rising of two, or three braces round about the said Globe. And because we have
from Sacred Records, that in the time of the Deluge, it rained forty days and
forty nights; namely, for the space of 960 hours; its clear, that if the said
Rain had been ten times bigger than ours at Perugia, the rising of the Waters
above the Terrestrial Globe would reach and pass a mile higher than the tops of
the Hills and Mountains that are upon the superficies of the Earth; and they
also would concur to increase the rise. And therefore I conclude, that the rise
of the Waters of the Deluge have a rational congruity with natural Discourses,
of which I know very well that the eternal truths of the Divine leaves have no
need; but however I think so clear an agreement is worthy of our consideration,
which gives us occasion to adore and admire the greatness of God in his mighty
Works, in that we are sometimes able, in some sort, to measure them by the
short Standard of our Reason.

Many Lessons also may be deduced from the same Doctrine, which I pass by, for
that every man of himself may easily know them, having once stablished this
Maxim; That it is not possible to pronounce any thing, of a certainty,
touching the quantity of Running Waters, by considering only the single vulgar
measure of the Water without the velocity; and so on the contrary, he that
computes only the velocity, without the measure, shall commit very great
errors; for treating of the measure of Running Waters, it is necessary, the
water being a body, in handling its quantity, to consider in it all the three
dimensions of breadth, depth, and length: the two first dimensions are observed
by all in the common manner, and ordinary way of measuring Running Waters; but
the third dimension of length is omitted; and happily such an oversight is
committed, by reason the length of Running Water is reputed in some sense
infinite, in that it never cease to move away, and as infinite is judged
incomprehensible; and such as that there is no exact knowledge to be had
thereof; and so there comes to be no account made thereof; but if we should
make strict reflection upon our consideration of the velocity of Water, we
should find, that keeping account of the same, there is a reckoning also made
of the length; forasmuch as whilst we say, the Water of such a Spring runs with
the velocity of passing a thousand or two thousand paces an hour: this in
substance is no other than if we had said, such a Fountain discharges in an
hour a Water of a thousand or two thousand paces long. So that, albeit the
total length of Running water be incomprehensible, as being infinite, yet
nevertheless its rendered intelligible by parts in its velocity. And so much
suffices to have hinted about this matter, hoping to impart on some other
occasion other more accurate Observations in this affair.

LAVS DEO.
GEOMETRICAL DEMONSTRATIONS OF THE MEASURE OF Running Waters.

BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of CASSINA, and Mathematician to P. URBAN.
VIII.

DEDICATED To the most Illustrious, and most Excellent Prince DON THADDEO
BARBERINI, PRINCE OF PALESTRINA, AND GENERAL of the HOLY CHURCH.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCLXI.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters.
SUPPOSITION I.
LEt it be supposed, that the banks of the Rivers of which we speak be erected
perpendicular to the plane of the upper superficies of the River.

SUPPOSITION II.
WE suppose that the plane of the bottom of the River, of which we speak is at
right angles with the banks.

SUPPOSITION III.
IT is to be supposed, that we speak of Rivers, when they are at ebb, in that
state of shallowness, or at flowing in that state of deepnesse, and not in
their transition from the ebb to the flowing, or from the flowing to the ebb.

Declaration of Terms.
FIRST.
IF a River shall be cut by a Plane at right angles to the surface of the water
of the River, and to the banks of the River, that same dividing Plane we call
the Section of the River; and this Section, by the Suppositions above, shall be
a right angled Parallelogram.

SECOND.
WE call those Sections equally Swift, by which the water runs with equal
velocity; and more swift and less swift that Section of another, by which the
water runs with greater or less velocity.

AXIOM I.
SEctions equal, and equally swift, discharge equal quantities of Water in
equal times.

AXIOM II.
SEctions equally swift, and that discharge equal quantity of Water, in equal
time, shall be equal.

AXIOM III.
SEctions equal, and that discharge equal quantities of Water in equal times,
shall be equally swift.

AXIOM IV.
WHen Sections are unequal, but equally swift, the quantity of the Water that
passes through the first Section, shall have the same proportion to the
quantity that passes through the Second, that the first Section has to the
second Section. Which is manifest, because the velocity being the same, the
difference of the Water that passes shall be according to the difference of
the Sections.

AXIOM V.
IF the Sections shall be equal, and of unequal velocity, the quantity of the
Water that passes through the first, shall have the same proportion to that
which passes through the second, that the velocity of the first Section, shall
have to the velocity of the second Section. Which also is manifest, because the
Sections being equal, the difference of the Water which passes, depends on
the velocity.

PETITION.
A Section of a River being given, we may suppose another equal to the given,
of different breadth, height, and velocity.

PROPOSITION I.
The Sections of the same River discharge equal quantities of Water in equal
times, although the Sections themselves he unequal.
LEt the two Sections be A and B, in the River C, running from A, toward B; I
say, that they discharge equal quantity of Water in equal times; for if greater
quantity of Water should pass through A, than passes through B, it would
follow that the Water in the intermediate space of the River C, would increase
continually, which is manifestly false, but if more Water should issue through
the Section B, than enters at the Section A, the Water in the intermediate
space C, would grow continually less, and always ebb, which is likewise false;
therefore the quantity of Water that passes through the Section B, is equal to
the quantity of Water which passes through the Section A, and therefore the
Sections of the same River discharge, etc. Which was to be demonstrated.

PROPOSITION II.
In two Sections of Rivers, the quantity of the Water which passes by one
Section, is to that which passes by the second, in a Proportion compounded of
the proportions of the first Section to the second, and of the velocitie
through the first, to the velocitie of the second.
LEt A, and B be two Sections of a River; I say, that the quantity of Water
which passes through A, is to that which passes through B, in a proportion
compounded of the proportions of the first Section A, to the Section B; and of
the velocity through A, to the velocity through B: Let a Section be supposed
equal to the Section A, in magnitude; but of velocity equal to the Section B,
and let it be G; and as the Section A is to the Section B, so let the line F be
to the line D; and as the velocity A, is to the velocity by B, so let the line
D be to the line R: Therefore the Water which passes through A, shall be to
that which passes through G (in regard the Sections A and G are of equal
bigness, but of (...) equal velocity) as the velocity through A, to the
velocity through G; But as the velocity through A, is to the velocity through
G, so is the velocity through A, to the velocity through B; namely, as the line
D to the line R: therefore the quantity of the Water which pass the through A,
shall be to the quantity which passes through G, as the line D is to the line
R; but the quantity which passes through G, is to that which passes through
B, (in regard the Sections G, and B, are equally swift) as the Section G to the
Section B, that is, as the Section A, to the Section B; that is, as the line F
to the line D: Therefore by the equal and perturbed proportionality, the
quantity of the Water which passes through A, has the same proportion to that
which passes through B, that the line F has to the line R; but F to R, has a
proportion compounded of the proportions of F to D, and of D to R; that is, of
the Section A to the Section B; and of the velocity through A, to the velocity
through B* Therefore also the quantity of Water which passes through the
Section A, shall have a proportion to that which passes through the Section B,
compounded of the proportions of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the
velocity through A, to the velocity through B: And therefore in two Sections of
Rivers, the quantity of Water which passes by the first, etc. which was to be
demonstrated.

COROLLARIE.
THe same follows, though the quantity of the Water which passes through the
Section A, be equal to the quantity of Water which passes through the Section
B, as is manifest by the same demonstration.

PROPOSITION III.
In two Sections unequal, through which pass equal quantities of Water in equal
times, the Sections have to one another, reciprocal proportion to their
velocitie.
LEt the two unequal Sections, by which pass equal quantities of Water in equal
times be A, the greater; and B, the lesser: I say, that the Section A, shall
have the same Proportion to the Section B, that reciprocally the velocity
through B, has to the velocity through A; for supposing that as the Water that
passes through A, is to that which passes through B, so is the line E to the
line F: therefore the quantity of water which passes through A, being equal to
that which passes through B, the line E shall also be equal to the line F:
Supposing moreover, That as the Section A, is to the Section B, so is the line
F, to the line G; and because the quantity of water which passes through the
Section A, is to that which passes through the Section B, in a proportion
composed of the proportions of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the
velocity through A, to the velocity through B; therefore the line E, shall be
the line to F, in a proportion compounded of the same proportions; namely, of
the proportion of the Section A, to the Section B, and of the velocity through
A, to the velocity through B; but the line E, has to the line G, the
proportion of the Section A, to the Section B, therefore the proportion
remaining of the line G, to the line F, shall be the proportion of the velocity
through A, to the velocity through B; therefore also the line G, shall be to
the line E, as the velocity by A, to the velocity by B: And conversly, the
velocity through B, shall be to the velocity through A, as the line E, to the
line G; that is to say, as the Section A, to the Section B, and therefore in
two Sections, etc. which was to be demonstrated.

COROLLARIE.
HEnce it is manifest, that Sections of the same River (which are no other than
the vulgar measures of the River) have betwixt themselves reciprocal
proportions to their velocities; for in the first Proposition we have
demonstrated that the Sections of the same River, discharge equal quantities of
Water in equal times; therefore, by what has now been demonstrated the
Sections of the same River shall have reciprocal proportion to their
velocities; And therefore the same running water changes measure, when it
changes velocity; namely, increases the measure, when it decreaseth the
velocity, and decreaseth the measure, when it increases the velocity.

On which principally depends all that which has been said above in the
Discourse, and observed in the Corollaries and Appendixes; and therefore is
worthy to be well understood and heeded.

PROPOSITION IV.
If a River fall into another River, the height of the first in its own Chanel
shall be to the height that it shall make in the second Chanel, in a proportion
compounded of the proportions of the breadth of the Chanel of the second, to
the breadth of the Chanel of the first, and of the velocitie acquired in the
Chanel of the second, to that which it had in its proper and first Chanel.
LEt the River AB, whose height is AC, and breadth CB, that is, whose Section
is ACB; let it enter, I say, into another River as broad as the line OF, and
let it therein make the rise or height DE, that is to say, let it have its
Section in the River whereinto it falls DEF; I say, that the height AC has to
the height DE the proportion compounded of the proportions of the breadth OF,
to the breadth CB, and of the velocity through DF, to the velocity through AB.
Let us suppose the Section G, equal in velocity to the Section AB, and in
breadth equal to OF, which carries a quantity of Water equal to that which the
Section AB carries, in equal times, and consequently, equal to that which DF
carries. Moreover, as the breadth OF is to the breadth CB, so let the line H
be to the line I; and as the velocity of DF is to the velocity of AB, so let
the line I be to the line L; because therefore the two Sections AB and G are
equally swift, and discharge equal quantity of Water in equal times, they shall
be equal Sections; and therefore the height of AB to the height of G, shall be
as the breadth of G, to the breadth of AB, that is, as OF to CB, that is, as
the line H to the line I: but because the Water which passes through G, is
equal to that which passes through DEF, therefore the Section G, to the
Section DEF, shall have the reciprocal proportion of the velocity through DEF,
to the velocity through G; but also the height of G, is to the height DE, as
the Section G, to the Section DEF: Therefore the height of G, is to the height
DE, as the velocity through DEF, is to the velocity through G; that is, as the
velocity through DEF, is to the velocity through AB; That is, finally, as the
line I, to the line L; Therefore, by equal proportion, the height of AB, that
is, AC, shall be to the height DE; as H to L, that is, compounded of the
proportions of the breadth OF, to the breadth CB, and of the velocity through
DF, to the velocity through A B: So that if a River fall into another River,
etc. which was to be demonstrated.

PROPOSITION V.
If a River discharge a certain quantity of Water in a certain time; and after
that there come into it a Flood, the quantity of Water which is discharged in
as much time at the Flood, is to that which was discharged before, whilst the
River was low, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of the velocity of
the Flood, to the velocity of the first Water, and of the height of the Flood,
to the height of the first Water.
SUppose a River, which whilst it is low, runs by the Section AF; and after a
Flood comes into the same, and runs through the Section DF, I say, that the
quantity of the Water which is discharged through DF, is to that which is
discharged through AF, in a proportion compounded of the proportions of the
velocity through DF, to the velocity through AF, and of the height DB, to the
height AB; As the velocity through DF is to the velocity through AF; so let the
line R, to the line S; and as the height DB is to the height AB, so let the
line S, to the line T; and let us suppose a Section LMN, equal to DF in height
and breadth; that is LM equal to DB, and MN equal to BF; but let it be in
velocity equal to the Section AF, therefore the quantity of Water which runs
through DF, shall be to that which runs through LN, as the velocity through
DF, is to the velocity through LN, that is, to the velocity through AF; and the
line R being to the line S, as the velocity through DF, to the velocity through
AF; therefore the quantity which runs through DF, to that which runs
through LN, shall have the proportion of R to S; but the quantity which runs
through LN, to that which runs through AF, (the Sections being equally
swift) shall be in proportion as the Section LN, to the Section AF; that is, as
DB, to AB; that is as the line S, to the line T: Therefore by equal proportion,
the quantity of the water which runs through DF, shall be in proportion to
that which runs through AF, as R is to T; that is, compounded of the
proportions of the height DB, to the height AB, and of the velocity through DF,
to the velocity through AF; and therefore if a River discharge a certain
quantity, etc. which was to be demonstrated.

ANNOTATION.
THe same might have been demonstrated by the second Proposition above
demonstrated, as is manifest.

PROPOSITION VI.
If two equal streams of the same Torrent, fall into a River at diverse times,
the heights made in the River by the Torrent, shall have between themselves the
reciprocal proportion of the velocities acquired in the River.
LEt A and B, be two equal streams of the same Torrent, which falling into a
River at diverse times, make the heights CD, and FG; that is the stream A,
makes the height CD, and the stream B, makes the height FG; that is, Let
their Sections in the River, into which they are fallen, be CE, and FH; I say,
that the height CD, shall be to the height FG, in reciprocal proportion, as the
velocity through FH, to the velocity through CE; for the quantity of water
which passes through A, being equal to the quantity which passes through B,
in equal times; also the quantity which passes through CE, shall be equal to
that which passes through F H: And therefore the proportion that the Section
CE, has to the Section FH; shall be the same that the velocity through FH,
has to the velocity through CE; But the Section CE, is to the Section FH, as
CD, to FG, by reason they are of the same breadth: Therefore CD, shall be to
FG, in reciprocal proportion, as the velocity through FH, is to the velocity
through CE, and therefore if two equal streams of the same Torrent, etc. which
was to be demonstrated.

OF THE MENSURATION OF Running Waters.
Lib. II.
HAving, in the close of my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running Waters
promised to declare upon another occasion other particulars more obscure, and
of very great concern upon the same argumement: I now do perform my promise on
the occasion that I had the past year 1641. to propound my thoughts touching
the state of the Lake of Venice, a business certainly most important, as being
the concernment of that most noble and most admirable City; and indeed of all
Italy, yea of all Europe, Asia, and Africa; and one may truly say of all the
whole World. And being to proceed according to the method necessary in
Sciences, I will propose, in the first place certain Definitions of those Terms
whereof we are to make use in our Discourse: and then, laying down certain
Principles we will demonstrate some Problemes and Theoremes necessary for the
understanding of those things which we are to deliver; and moreover, recounting
sundry cases that have happened, we will prove by practice, of what utility
this contemplation of the Measure of Running Waters is in the more important
affairs both Public and Private.

DEFINITION I.
TWo Rivers are said to move with equal velocity, when in equal times they
pass spaces of equal length.

DEFINITION II.
RIvers are said to move with like velocity, when their proportional parts do
move alike, that is, the upper parts alike to the upper, and the lower to the
lower; so that if the upper part of one River shall be more swift than the
upper part of another; then also the lower part of the former shall be more
swift than the part correspondent to it in the second, proportionally.

DEFINITION III.
TO measure a River, or running Water, is in our sense to find out how many
determinate measures, or weights of Water in a given time passes through the
River, or Channel of the Water that is to be measured.

DEFINITION IV.
IF a Machine be made either of Brick, or of Stone, or of Wood, so composed
that two sides of the said Machine be placed at right angels upon the ends of a
third side, that is supposed to be placed in the bottom of a River, parallel to
the Horizon, in such a manner, that all the water which runs through the
said River, passes through the said Machine: And if all the water coming to be
diverted that runs through the said River, the upper superficies of that
third side placed in the bottom do remain uncovered and dry, and that the dead
water be not above it; This same Machine shall be called by us Or Sluice.
REGULATOR: And that third side of the Machine which stands Horizontally is
called the bottom of the Regulator; and the other two sides, are called the
banks of the Regulator; as is seen in this first Figure: ABCD, shall be the
Regulator; BC the bottom; and the other two sides AB, and CD are its banks.

DEFINITION V.
BY the quick height, we mean the Perpendicular from the upper superficies of
the River, unto the upper superficies of the bottom of the Regulator; as in the
foregoing Figure the line. GH.

DEFINITION VI.
IF the water of a River be supposed to be marked by three sides of a
Regulator, that Rightangled Parallelogram comprehended between the banks of the
Regulator, and the bottom, and the superficies of the Water is called a Section
of the River.

ANNOTATION.
HEre it is to be noted, that the River it self may have sundry and diverse
heights, in several parts of its Chanel, by reason of the various velocities of
the water, and its measures; as has been demonstrated in the first book.

SUPPOSITION I.
IT is supposed, that the Rivers equal in breadth, and quick height, that have
the same inclination of bed or bottom, ought also to have equal velocities, the
accidental impediments being removed that are dispersed throughout the course
of the water, and abstracting also from the external winds, which may
velocitate, and retard the course of the water of the River.

SUPPOSITION II.
LEt us suppose also, that if there be two Rivers that are in their beds of
equal length, and of the same inclination, but of quick heights unequal, they
ought to move with like velocity, according to the sense explained in the
second definition.

SUPPOSITION III.
BEcause it will often be requisite to measure the time exactly in the
following Problems, we take that to be an excellent way to measure the time,
which was showed me many years since by Signore Galilaeo Galilaei, which is as
follows.

A string is to be taken three Roman feet long, to the end of which a Bullet of
Lead is to be hanged, of about two or three ounces; and holding it by the other
end, the Plummet is to be removed from its perpendicularity a Palm, more or
less, and then let go, which will make many swings to and again, passing and
repassing the Perpendicular, before that it stay in the same: Now it being
required to measure the time that is spent in any whatsoever operation, those
vibrations are to be numbered, that are made whilst the work lasts; and they
shall be so many second minutes of an hour, if so be, that the string be three
Roman feet long, but in shorter strings, the vibrations are more frequent, and
in longer, less frequent; and all this still follows, whether the Plummet be
little or much removed from its Perpendicularity, or whether the weight of the
Lead be greater or lesser.

These things being pre-supposed, we will lay down some familiar Problems, from
which we shall pass to the Notions and questions more subtle and curious; which
will also prove profitable, and not to be slighted in this business of Waters.

PROPOSITION I. PROBLEM I.
A Chanel of Running-Water being given, the breadth of which passing through a
Regulator, is three Palms; and the height one Palm, little more or less, to
measure what water passes through the Regulator in a time given.
FIrst, we are to dam up the Chanel; so that there pass not any water below the
Dam; then we must place in the side of the Chanel, in the parts above the
Regulator three, or four, or five Bent-pipes, or Siphons, according to the
quantity of the water that runs along the Chanel; in such sort, as that they
may drink up, or draw out of the Chanel all the water that the Chanel bears
(and then shall we know that the Siphons drink up all the water, when we see
that the water at the Dam does neither rise higher, nor abate, but always
keeps in the same Level.) These things being prepared, taking the Instrument
to measure the time, we will examine the quantity of the water that issues by
one of those Siphons in the space of twenty vibrations, and the like will we do
one by one with the other Siphons; and then collecting the whole sum, we will
say, that so much is the water that passes and runs through the Regulator or
Chanel (the Dam being taken away) in the space of twenty second minutes of an
hour; and calculating, we may easily reduce it to hours, days, months, and
years: And it has fallen to my turn to measure this way the waters of Mills
and Fountains, and I have been well assured of its exactness, by often
repeating the same work.

CONSIDERATION.
ANd this method must be made use of in measuring the waters, that we are to
bring into Conducts, and carry into Cities and Castles, for Fountains; and that
we may be able afterward to divide and share them to particular persons
justly; which will prevent infinite suits and controversies that every day
happen in these matters.

PROPOSITION II. THEOREM I.
If a River moving with such a certain velocitie through its Regulator, shall
have a given quick height, and afterward by new water shall increase to be
double, it shall also increase double in velocitie.
LEt the quick height of a River in the Regulator ABCD, be the perpendicular
FB, and afterward, by new water that is added to the River, let the water be
supposed to be raised to G, so that GB may be double to EB. I say, that all the
water GC shall be double in velocity to that of EC: For the water GF, having
for its bed the bottom OF, equally inclined as the bed BC, and its quick height
GE being equal to the quick height EC, and having the same breadth BC, it shall
have of it self a velocity equal to the velocity of the first water FC: but
because, besides its own motion, which is imparted to it by the motion of the
water EC, it has also over and above its own motion, the motion of EC. And
because the two waters GC, and EC, are alike in velocity, by the third
Supposition; therefore the whole water GC shall be double in velocity to the
water EC; which was that which we were to demonstrate.

This demonstration is not here inserted, as perfect, the Author having by
several letters to his friends confessed himself unsatisfied therewith; and
that he intended not to publish the Theorem without a more solid demonstration,
which he was in hope to light upon. But being overtaken by Death, he could not
give the finishing touch either to this, or to the rest of the second Book. In
consideration of which, it seemed good to the Publisher of the same, rather to
omit it, than to do any thing contrary to the mind of the Author. And this he
hints, by way of advertisement, to those that have Manuscript Copies of this
Book, with the said demonstration. For this time let the Reader content himself
with the knowledge of so ingenious and profitable a Conclusion; of the truth of
which he may, with small expense and much pleasure, be assured by means of the
experiment to be made in the same manner, with that which is laid down in the
second Corollary of the fourth Theorem of this, with its Table, and the use
thereof annexed.

COROLLARIE
HEnce it follows, that when a River increases in quick height by the
addition of new water, it also increases in velocity; so that the velocity
has the same proportion to the velocity that the quick height has to the
quick height; as may be demonstrated in the same manner.

PROPOS. III. PROBLEM II.
A Chanel of Water being given whose breadth exceeds not twenty Palms, or
thereabouts, and whose quick height is less than five Palms, to measure the
quantity of the Water that runs through the Chanel in a time given.
PLace in the Chanel a Regulator, and observe the quick height in the said
Regulator; then let the water be turned away from the Chanel by a Chanellet of
three or four Palms in breadth, or thereabouts: And that being done, measure
the quantity of the water which passes through the said Chanellet, as has been
taught in the second Proposition; and at the same time observe exactly how much
the quick height shall be abated in the greater Chanel, by means of the
diversion of the Chanellet; and all these particulars being performed, multiply
the quick height of the greater Chanel into it self, and likewise multiply into
it self the lesser height of the said bigger Chanel, and the lesser square
being taken, from the greater, the remainder shall have the same proportion to
the whole greater square, as the water of the Chanellet diverted, has to the
water of the bigger Chanel: And because the water of the Chanellet is known by
the Method laid down in the first Theorem, and the terms of the Theorem being
also known, the quantity of the water which runs through the bigger Chanel,
shall be also known by the Golden Rule, which was that that was desired to be
known. We will explain the whole business by an example.

Let a Chanel be, for example, 15 Palms broad, its quick height before its
diversion by the Chanellet shall be supposed to be 24 inches; but after the
diversion, let the quick height of the Chanel be only 22 inches. Therefore the
greater height to the lesser, is as the number 11. to 12. But the square of 11.
is 121, and the square of 12. is 144, the difference between the said lesser
square and the greater is 23. Therefore the diverted water, is to the whole
water, as 23. to 144: which is well near as 1 to 6 6/23: and that is the
proportion that the quantity of the water which runs through the Chanellet
shall have, to all the water that runs through the great Chanel. Now if we
should find by the Rule mentioned above in the first Proposition, that the
quantity of the water that runs through the Chanellet, is v. g. an hundred
Barrels, in the space of 15 second minutes of an hour, it is manifest, that the
water which runs through the great Chanel in the said time of 35 min. sec.
shall be about 600 Barrels.

The same operation performed another way.
ANd because very often in applying the Theory to Practice it happens, that
all the necessary particulars in the Theory cannot so easily be put in
execution; therefore we will here add another way of performing the same
Problem, if it should chance to happen that the Chanellet could not
commodiously be diverted from the great Chanel, but that it were easier for the
water of another smaller Chanel to be brought into the greater Chanel; which
water of the smaller Chanel might be easily measured, as has been shown in
the first Problem; or in case that there did fall into a greater Chanel, a
lesser Chanel that might be diverted and measured. Therefore I say in the first
case, If we would measure the quantity of the water that runs in a certain
time through the greater Chanel, into which another lesser Chanel that is
measurable may be brought, we must first exactly measure the Chanellet, and
then observe the quick height of the greater Chanel, before the introduction of
the lesser; and having brought in the said Chanellet, we must agnin find the
proportion that the water of the Chanellet has to all the water of the great
Chanel; for these terms of the proportion being known, as also the quantity of
the water of the Chanellet, we shall also come to know the quantity of the
water that runs through the great Chanel. It is likewise manifest, that we
shall obtain our intent, if the case were that there entered into the great
Chanel, another lesser Chanel that was measurable, and that might be diverted.

CONSIDERATION.
IT would be necessary to make use of this Doctrine in the distribution of the
waters that are employed to overflow the fields, as is used in the Brescian,
Cremonese, Bergamase, Lodigian, Milanese territories, and many other places,
where very great suits and differences arise, which not being to be determined
with intelligible reasons, come oftentimes to be decided, by force of arms;
and instead of flowing their Grounds with Waters, they cruelly flow them with
the shedding of humane blood, impiously inverting the course of Peace and
Justice, sowing such disorders and feuds, as that they are sometimes
accompanied with the ruin of whole Cities, or else unprofitably charge them
with vain, and sometimes prejudicial expenses.

PROPOS. IV. THEOR. II.
If a River increase in quick height, the quantity of Water which the River
discharges after the increase, has the Proportion compounded of the
Proportions of the Quick height to the Quick height, and of the velocity to the
velocity.
LEt there be a River, which whilst it is low, runs through the Regulator DF,
with the Quick height AB, and afterward let a Flood come; and then let it run
with the height DB, I say, that the quantity of the Water that is discharged
through DF, to that which discharges through AF, has the proportion
compounded of the proportions of the velocity through DF to the velocity
through AF, and of the height DB to the height AB. As the velocity through DF
is to the velocity through AF, so let the line R be to the line S; and as the
height DB is to the height AB; so let the line S be to the line T. And let a
Section be supposed LMN equal to the Section DF in height and length, but let
it be in velocity equal to the Section AF. Therefore the quantity of the Water
that runs through DF to that which runs through LN, shall be as the
velocity through DF, to the velocity of LN, that is, to the velocity through
LN, that is, to the velocity through AF. therefore the quantity of Water which
runs through DF, to that which passes through LN, shall have the proportion
that R has to S; but the quantity of the Water that runs through LN, to
that which runs through AF; (the Sections being equally swift) shall have
the proportion that the Section LN has to the Section AF, that is, that the
height BD has to the height BA, that is, that S has to T. Therefore, by equal
proportion, the quantity of the Water which runs by DF, to that which
runs by AF, shall have the proportion of R to T, that is, shall be
compounded of the proportions of the height DB, to the height AB; and of the
velocity through DF, to the velocity through AF. And therefore if a River
increase in quick height, the quantity of the Water that runs after the
increase, to that which runs before the increase, has the proportion
compounded, etc. Which was to be demonstrated.

COROLLARIE I.
HEnce it follows, that we having shown, that the quantity of the Water which
runs, whilst the River is high, to that which ran, whilst it was low, has
the proportion compounded of the velocity to the velocity, and of the height to
the height. And it having been demonstrated, that the velocity to the velocity
is as the height to the height; it follows, I say, that the quantity of the
Water that runs, whilst the River is high, to that which runs, whilst it
is low, has duplicate proportion of the height to the height, that is, the
proportion that the squares of the heights have.

COROLLARIE II.
Upon which things depends the reason of that which I have said, in my second
Consideration, that if by the diversion of 5/9 of the Water that enters by
the Rivers into the Moor or Fen, the Water be abated such a measure, that same
shall be only one third of its whole height; but moreover diverting the 4/9, it
shall abate two other thirds, a most principal point; and such, that its not
having been well understood, has caused very great disorders, and there would
now, more than ever, follow extreme damage, if one should put in execution the
diversion of the Sile and other Rivers; and it is manifest, that in the same
manner, wherewith it has been demonstrated, that the quantity of the Water
increasing quadruple, the height would increase only double, and the quantity
increasing nonuple, the height increases triple; so that, by adding to units
all the odd numbers, according to their Series, the heights increase according
to the natural progression of all the numbers, from units. As for example,
there passing through a Regulator such a certain quantity of Water in one time;
adding three of those measures, the quick height is two of those parts, which
at first was one; and continuing to add five of those said measures, the
height is three of those parts which at first were one; and thus adding seven,
and then nine, and then 11. and then 13, etc. the heights shall be 4. then 5,
then 6. then 7, etc. And for the greater facility of the Work, we have
described the following Table, of which we will declare the use: The Table is
divided into three Series or Progressions of Numbers: the first Series
contains all the Numbers in the Natural Progression, beginning at a Unit, and
is called the Series of the Heights; the second contains all the odd
numbers, beginning at an unit, and is called the Series of the Additions: the
third contains all the square numbers, beginning at an unit, and is called
the Series of Quantity.

Heights. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Additions. 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21
Quantities. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100 121

The use of the aforementioned Table.
FIrst, if we suppose the whole quick height of a River of Running Water to be
divided into any number of equal parts, at pleasure, and would abate the same
one fifth, by means of a division; let there be found in the Table in the Series
of heights the number 5. the denominator of the part which the River is to
abate, and take the number that is immediately under it in the row of
Additions, which is 9. which let be subtracted from the number 25. placed
underneath the same in the row of Quantities, the remainder 16. signifies that
of the 25. parts of Water that ran in the River, whilst it was 5 measures high,
there do only run 16. parts; so that to make it abate 1/5 it is necessary to
take 9/25 from the Water that the whole River did carry; so that with
substracting somewhat more than one third of the Water of the River, it is
abated but only one fifth.

2. And thus, in the second place, if one the contrary, one would know how much
water is to be added to the said River to make it increase one fifth more in
height, so as that it may run in the Regulator 6. of those parts high; of which
it ran before but 5. let 6 be found in the row of heights, and let the number
11. standing under the same be taken and added to the number 25. that is placed
under the number 9. in the Additions, and 5. in the heights, and you shall have
36; which is the quantity of the water that runs with the height of the
River, when it is high 6 of those parts, whereof it was before but 5.

3. But if it should be desired, to know how much water it is requisite to add
to make the River rise so, as that it may run in height 8. of those parts of
which before it ran but 5; one ought to take the sum of the number of the
Series of Additions standing under 8. 7. and 6, which are 15. 13. and 11. that
is, 39. and this shall be the sum that must be added to 25: So that to make
the River to run 8. of those parts in height, of which it before did run 5, it
will be necessary to add 39. of those parts, of which the River before was 25.

4. Likewise the same Table gives the quantity of water that runs from time
to time through a River, that increases by the addition of new water to the
same in one of its heights, the quantity of its water be known. As for example:
If we knew that the River in one minute of an hour discharges 2500. of those
measures of water, and runs in height 5. parts in the Regulator, and
afterward should see that it runs 8 Palms high, finding in the row of
quantity the number placed under 8. which is 64. we would say that the River
heightened, carries of water 64. of those parts whereof it carried before but
25; and because before it carried 2500. measures, by the Golden Rule we will
say, that the River carries 6400. of those measures, of which before it
carried 2500.

In this progress of Nature, is one thing really curious, and that at first
sight seems to be somewhat Paradoxal, that we proceeding ordinately in the
diversions and additions, with additions and diversions so unequal, the
abatings do notwithstanding always prove equal, and so do the risings: And who
would ever think that a River in height, v. g. 10. Palms, running and carrying
an hundred measures in a minute of an hour, is to abate but one Palm, only by
the diversion of 19. of those measures; and then again, that the buisiness
comes to that pass, that it abateth likewise a Palm by the diversion of three
only of those measures, nay, by the diversion of but one measure? and yet it
is most certain: And this truth meets with so manifest proofs in experience,
that it is very admirable! And for the full satisfaction of those, who not
being able to comprehend subtle demonstrations, desire to be clearly informed
by the matters of fact, and to see with their bodily eyes, and touch with their
hands, what their understanding and reason cannot reach unto: I will hear add
another very easy way to reduce all to an experiment, the which may be made in
little, in great, or in very great; of which I make use frequently, to the
admiration of such as see it.

I prepared an hundred Siphons, or, if you will, bowed Pipes, all equal; and
placed them at the brim of a Vessel, wherein the water is kept at one and the
same level (whether all the Siphons work, or but a certain number of them) the
mouths by which the water issues being all placed in the same level, parallel
to the Horizon; but lower in level than the water in the Vessel; and gathered
all the water falling from the Siphons into another Vessel standing lower than
the former, I made it to run away through a Chanel, in such manner inclined,
that wanting water from the Siphons, the said Chanel remained quite dry.

And this done, I measured the quick height of the Chanel with care, and
afterward divided it exactly into 10 equal parts, and causing 19. of those
Siphons to be taken away, so that the Chanel did not run water, save only with
81 of those Siphons, I again observed the quick height of the water in the same
site observed before, and found that its height was diminished precisely the
tenth part of all its first height; and thus continuing to take away 17. other
Siphons, the height was likewise diminished 1/10 of all its first quick height;
and trying to take away 15. Siphons, then 13, then 11, then 9, then 7, then 5,
and then 3. always in these diversions, made in order as has been said, there
ensued still an abatement of 1/10 of the whole height.

And here was one thing worthy of observation, that the water increasing in [
or through] the Chanel, its quick height was different in different sites of
the Chanel, that is still lesser, the more one approached to the Outlet;
notwithstanding which the abatement followed in all places proportionably, that
is in all its sites the first part of the height of that site diminished: And
moreover the water issued from the Chanel, and dilated into a broader course,
from which likewise having diverse Out-lets and Mouths; yet nevertheless in that
breadth also the quick heights successively varied and altered in the same
proportions. Nor did I here desist my observation, but the water being
diminished, that issued from the Siphons, and there being but one of them left
that discharged water; I observed the quick height that it made in the
abovesaid sites, (the which was likewise 1/10 of all the first height) there
being added to the water of that Siphon, the water of three other Siphons; so
that all the water was of 4 Siphons, and consequently quadruple to the first
Siphon; but the quick height was only double, and adding five Siphons, the
quick height became triple, and with adding seven Siphons, the height increased
quadruple; and so by adding of 9. it increased quintuple, and by adding of 11.
it increased sextuple, and by adding of 13. it increased septuple, and by
adding of 15. octuple, and by adding of 17. nonuple, and lastly by adding 19.
Siphons; so that all the water was centuple to the water of one Siphon, yet
nevertheless the quick height of all this water was only decuple to the first
height conjoined by the water that issued from one only Siphon.

For the more clear understanding of all which, I have made the following
Figure; in which we have the mouth A, that maintains the water of the Vessel
BC in the same level; though it continually run; to the brim of the Vessel are
put 25. Siphons (and there may be many more) divided into 5 Classes, DEFGH, and
the first D, are of one only Siphon; the second E, of three Siphons; the third
F, of five; the fourth G, of 7; the fifth H, of 9; and one may suppose the
sixth of 11, the seventh of 13 Siphons, and so of the other Classes, all
containing in consequent odd numbers successively (we are content to represent
in the Figure no more but the five forenamed Classes to avoid confusion) the
gathered water DEFGH, which runs through the Chanel IKL, and falls into the
outlet MNOP; and so much suffices for the explanation of this experiment.



PROPOS. V. PROB. III.
Any River of any bigness, if being given to examine the quantity of the Water
that runs through the River in a time assigned.
BY what we have said already in the two preceding Problems, we may also
resolve this that we have now before us; and it is done, by diverting in the
first place from the great River a good big measurable Chanel, as is taught in
the second Problem, and observing the abatement of the River, caused by the
diversion of the Chanel; and finding the proportion that the Water of the
Chanel has to that of the River, then let the Water of the Chanel be measured
by the second Problem, and work as above, and you shall have your desire.

CONSIDERATION. I.
ANd although it seems as if it might prove difficult, and almost impossible
to make use of the Regulator number, if one be about to measure the water of
some great River, and consequently would be impossible, or at least very
difficult to reduce the Theory of the first Problem into practice: Yet
nevertheless, I could say that such great conceits of measuring the water of a
great River, are not to come into the minds of any but great Personages, and
potent Princes; of whom it is expected for their extraordinary concerns, that
they will make these kind of enquiries; as if here in Italy it should be of
the Rivers Tyber, Velino, Chiana, Arno, Serchio, Adice, in which it seems
really difficult to apply the Regulator, to find exactly the quick height of
the River: But because in such like cases sometimes it would turn to account to
be at some charge, to come to the exact and true knowledge of the quantity of
water which that River carries, by knowledge whereof, other greater
disbursments might afterward be avoided, that would often times be made in vain;
and prevent the disgusts, which sometimes happen amongst Princes: Upon this
ground I think it will be well to show also the way how to make use of the
Regulator in these great Rivers; in which if we will but open our eyes, we
shall meet with good ones, and those made without great cost or labor, which
will serve our turn.

For upon such like Rivers there are Wears, or Locks made, to cause the Waters
to rise, and to turn them for the service of Mills, or the like. Now in these
Cases it is sufficient, that one erect upon the two extremes of the Wear two
Pilasters either of Wood or Brick, which with the bottom of the Wear do
compose our Regulator, wherewith we may make our desired operation, yea the
Chanel it self diverted shall serve, without making any other diversion or
union. And in brief, if the businesses be but managed by a judicious person,
there may ways and helps be made use of, according to occasion, of which it
would be too tedious to speak, and therefore this little that has been hinted
shall suffice.

CONSIDERATION II.
FRom what has been declared, if it shall be well understood, may be deduced
many benefits and conveniences, not only in dividing of Running Waters for
infinite uses that they are put to in turning of Corne-Mills, Paper-Mills,
Gins, Powder-Mills, Rice-Mills, Iron-Mills, Oil-Mills, Sawing-Mills,
Mirtle-Mills, Felling-Mills, Fulling-Mills, Silk-Mills, and such other
Machines; but also in ordering Navigable Channels, diverting Rivers and Channels
of Waters, or terminating and limiting the sizes of Pipes for Fountains: In all
which affairs there are great errors com^^^ed, to the loss of much expense,
the Channels and Pipes that are made, sometimes not being sufficient to carry
the designed Waters, and sometimes they are made bigger than is necessary;
which disorders shall be avoided, if the Engineer be advised of the things
abovesaid: and in case that to these Notions there be added the knowledge of
Philosophy and Mathematics, agreeable to the sublime Discoveries of Signore
Galilaeo, and the further improvement thereof by Signore Evangelista
Torricelli, Mathematician to the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who has subtly and
admirably handled this whole business of Motion, one shall then come to the
knowledge of particular notions of great curiosity in the Theoricks, and of
extraordinary benefit in the Practicks that daily occur in these businesses.

And to show, in effect, of what utility these Notions are, I have thought fit
to insert, in this place, the Considerations by me made upon the Lake of
Venice, and to represent, at large, by the experience of the last year 1641.
the most Serene Erizzo, then Duke of the said Republique. Being therefore at
Venice, in the year aforesaid, I was requested by the most Illustrious and most
Excellent Signore Giovanni Basadonna, a Senator of great worth and merit, that
I would ingenously deliver my opinion touching the state of the Lake of Venice;
and after I had discoursed with his Honor several times, in the end I had
order to set down the whole business in writing, who having afterward read it
privately, the said Signore imparted the same, with like privacy, to the most
Serene PRINCE, and I received order to represent the same to the full College,
as accordingly I did in the Month of May, the same year, and it was as
follows.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the LAKE OF VENICE. BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot
of S. Benedetto Aloysio, Mathematician to Pope URBAN VIII. and Professor in
ROME.
CONSIDERATION I.
THough the principal cause be but one only, that in my judgment threatens
irreparable ruin to the Lake of Venice, in the present state in which it now
stands; Yet nevertheless, I think that two Heads may be considered. And this
Consideration may peradventure serve us for to facilitate and explain the
opportune remedies, though not to render the state of things absolutely
unchangeable and eternal: an enterprise impossible, and especially in that
which having had some beginning, ought likewise necessarily to have its end; or
at least to prevent the danger for many hundreds of years; and possibly it may,
in the mean time, by the mutation it self be brought into a better condition.

I say therefore, that the present disorder may be considered under two Heads;
One is the very notable discovery of Land that is observed at the time of low
Water, the which, besides the obstructing of Navigation in the Lake and also in
the Channels, does likewise threaten another mischief and disorder worthy of
very particular consideration, which is, That the Sun drying up that mudde,
especially in the times of hot Summers, does raise thence the putrified and
pernicious vapors, fogs, and exhalations that infect the Air, and may render
the City unhabitable.

The second Head is the great Stoppage that daily is growing in the Ports,
especially of Venice, at Malamoco; concerning which matters I will hint certain
general points, and then will proceed to the more particular and important
affairs.

And first, I say, that I hold it altogether impossible to effect any thing,
though never so profitable, which does not bring with it some mischief; and
therefore the good and the hurt ought to be very well weighed, and then the
less harmful part to be embraced.

Secondly, I propose to consideration, that the so notable discovery of Earth
and Mud, has not been long observed, as I understand, from old persons that
can remember passages for fifty years past; which thing being true, as to me it
seems most true, it should appear that it could not but be good to reduce
matters to that pass that they were at formerly, (laying aside all affection
or passion that self-flattering minds have entertained for their own conceits)
or at least it shall be necessary speedily to consult the whole.

Thirdly, I hold that it is necessary to weigh, whether from the foresaid
discovery of Land, it follows, that only the Earth rises, as it is commonly
thought by all, without dispute; or whether the Waters are abated and fallen
away; or else whether it proceeds from both the one and other cause. And here
it would be seasonable to enquire, what share the said causes may have, each
considered apart in the foresaid effect. For, in the first case, if the Earth
have been raised, it would be necessary to consider of taking it down, and
removing it: But if the Waters have failed or abated, I believe that it would
be extremely necessary to restore and raise them: And if both these reasons
have conspired in this effect, it will be necessary to remedy them each apart.
And I do, for my part, think, that the so notable appearance of Shelves at the
time of low Water, proceeds principally from the decrease and abatement of the
Waters, which may confidently be affirmed to need no other proof, in regard
that the Brent has been actually diverted which did formerly discharge its
Water into the Lake.

As to the other point of the great Stoppage of Ports, I hold, that all
proceeds from the violence of the Sea, which being sometimes disturbed by
winds, especially at the time of the waters flowing, does continually raise
from its bottom immense heaps of sand, carrying them by the tide; and force of
the waves into the Lake; it not having on its part any sttength of current that
may raise and carry them away, they sink to the bottom, and so they choke up
the Ports. And that this effect happens in this manner, we have most frequent
experiences thereof along the Seacoasts: And I have observed in Tuscany on the
Romanshores, and in the Kingdom of of Naples, that when a river falls into
the Sea, there is always seen in the Sea it self, at the place of the rivers
outlet, the resemblance, as it were, of an Half Moon, or a great shelf of
settled sand under water, much higher then the rest of the shore, and it is
called in Tuscany, il Cavallo; and here in Venice, lo S^anto: the which comes
to be cut by the current of the river, one while on the right side; another
while on the left, and sometimes in the midst, according as the Wind sits. And
a like effect I have observed in certain little Rillets of water, along the
Lake of Bolsena; with no other difference, save that of small and great.

Now whosoever well considers this effect, plainly sees that it proceeds from no
other, than from the contrariety of the stream of the River, to the impetus of
the Sea-waves; seeing that great abundance of sand which the Sea continually
throws upon the shore, comes to be driven into the Sea by the stream of the
river; and in that place where those two impediments meet with equal force, the
sand setleth under water, and thereupon is made that same Shelf for Cavallo;
the which if the river carry water, and that any considerable store, it shall
be thereby cut and broken; one while in one place, and another while in
another; as has been said, according as the Wind blows: And through that
Chanel it is that Vessels fall down into the Sea, and again make to the river,
as into a Port. But if the Water of the river shall not be continual or shall
be weak, in that case the force of the Sea-Wind shall drive such a quantity of
sand into the mouth of the Port, and of the river, as shall wholly choke it up.
And hereupon there are seen along the Seaside, very many Lakes and Meers,
which at certain times of the year abound with waters, and the Lakes bear down
that enclosure, and run into the Sea.

Now it is necessary to make the like reflections on our Ports of Venice,
Malamocco, Bondolo, and Chiozza; which in a certain sense are no other than
Creeks, mouths, and openings of the shore that parts the Lake from the main
Sea; and therefore I hold that if the Waters in the Lake were plentiful, they
would have strength to scowr the mouths of the Ports thoroughly, and with great
force; but the Water in the Lake failing, the Sea will without any opposal,
bring such a drift of sand into the Ports; that if it does not wholly choke
them up, it shall render them at least unprofitable, and impossible for Barks
and great Vessels.

Many other considerations might be propounded concerning these two heads of
the stoppage of the Ports, and of the appearance of the Ouze and Mud in the
Lakes, but so much shall suffice us to have hinted, to make way for discoursing
of the operations about the oportune remedies.

Yet before that I propound my opinion, I say, That I know very well that my
proposal, at first sight, will seem absurd and inconvenient; and therefore, as
such, will perhaps be rejected by the most: and so much the rather, for that it
will prove directly contrary to what has hitherto been, and as I hear, is
intended to be done: And I am not so wedded to my opinions, but that I do
consider what others may judge thereof: But be it as it will, I am obliged to
speak my thoughts freely, and that being done, I will leave it to wiser men
than my self; when they shall have well considered my reasons, to judge and
deliberate of the quid agendum: And if the sentence shall go against me, I
appeal to the most equitable and inexorable Tribunal of Nature, who not caring
in the least to please either one party or another, will be always a punctual
and inviolable executrix of her eternal Decrees, against which neither humane
deliberations, nor our vain desires, shall ever have power to rebel. I added
by word of mouth that which follows.

Though your Highness interest your self in this Noble College, and cause it
to be confirmed in the In Pregadi, a particular Council, the Senators of which
have great Authority.
Senate by universal Vote, that the Winds do not blow, that the Sea does not
fluctuate, that the Rivers do not run; yet shall the Winds be always deaf, the
Sea shall be constant in its inconstancy, and the Rivers most obstinate: And
these shall be my Judges, and to their determination I refer my self.

By what has been said, in my opinion, that is made very clear and manifest,
which in the beginning of this discourse I glanced at; namely, That the whole
disorder, although it be divided into two heads, into the discovery of the Mud,
and of the stoppage Ports, yet nevertheless, by the application of one only
remedy, and that in my esteem very easy, the whole shall be removed: And this
it is; That there be restored into the Lake as much Water as can be possible,
and in particular from the upper parts of Venice, taking care that the Water be
as free from Mud as is possible. And that this is the true and real remedy of
the precedent disorders, is manifest: For in the passage that this Water shall
make through the Lakes, it shall of it self by degrees clear the Channels in
sundry parts of them, according to the currents that it shall successively
acquire, and in this manner being dispersed through the Lake, it shall maintain
the waters in the same, and in the Channels much higher, as I shall prove
hereafter; a thing that will make Navigation commodious; and that, which
moreover is of great moment in our business; those Shelves of Mud which now
discover themselves at the time of Low-Waters shall be always covered, so that
the putrefaction of the Air shall also be remedied.

And lastly, this abundance of Water being always of discharge it self into
the Sea by the Ports, I do not doubt, but that their bottomes will be scoured.
And that these effects must follow, Nature her self seems to persuade, there
remaining only one great doubt, whether that abundance of Water that shall be
brought into the Lake may be really sufficient to make the Waters rise so much
as to keep the Shelves covered, and to facilitate Navigation, which ought to be
at least half a A Venice Brace is 11/1^ of our yard.
Brace, or thereabouts. And indeed it seems at first sight to be impossible,
that the sole Water of the A River of that name.
Brent let into the Lake, and dispersed over the same, can occasion so notable
an height of water; and the more to confirm the difficulties, one might say,
reducing the reason to calculation, that in case the Brent were 40. Braces
broad, and two and an half high, and the breadth of the Lake were 20000.
Braces, it would seem necessary that the height of the water of the Brent
dilated and distended through the Lake would be but only 1/200 of a Brace in
height, which is imperceptible, and would be of no avail to our purpose; nay
more, it being very certain that the brent runs very muddy and foul, this
would occasion very great mischief, filling and contracting the Lake, and for
that reason this remedy ought, as pernicious, to be totally excluded and
condemned.

I here confess that I am surprised at the form of the Argument, as if I were
in a certain manner convinced, that I dare not adventure to say more, or open
my mouth in this matter; but the strength it self of the Argument, as being
founded upon the means of Gemoetrical and Arithmetical Calculation, has opened
me the way to discover a very crafty fraud that is couched in the same
Argument, which fraud I will make out to any one that has but any insight in
Geometry and Arithmetic. And as it is impossible, that such an argument should
be produced by any but such as have tasted of these, in such affairs, most
profitable, and most necessary Sciences; so do not I pretend to make my self
understood, save only by such, to whom I will evince so clearly, as that more
it cannot be desired, the error and fraud wherein those Ancients and Moderns
have been, and always are entangled, that have in any way yet handled this
matter of considering the Measure and Quantity of the Waters that move.

And so great is the esteem that I have for that which I am now about to say
touching this particular, that I am content that all the rest of my Discourse
be rejected; provided, that that be perfectly understood, which I am hereafter
to propose, I holding and knowing it to be a main Principle, upon which all
that is founded that can be said either well or handsomely on this particular.
The other Discourses may have an appearance of being probable, but this hits
the mark as full as can be desired, arriving at the highest degree of certainty.

I have, seventeen years since, as I represented to the most Serene Prince, and
to the Right Honorable the President of the Lords the Commissioners of the I.
Savii dell' Acque, a particular Council that take care of the Lakes and other
Aquatick affairs.
Sewers, written a Treatise of the Measure of the waters that move, in which I
Geometrically demonstrate and declare this business, and they who shall have
well understood the ground of my Discourse, will rest fully satisfied with that
which I am now about to propose: But that all may become the more easy, I will
more briefly explicate and declare so much thereof as I have demonstrated in
the Discourse, which will suffice for our purpose: And if that should not be
enough, we have always the experiment of a very easy and cheap way to clear
up the whole business. And moreover I will take the boldness to affirm, that
in case there should not for the present any deliberation be made concerning
this affair, according to my opinion; yet nevertheless it will be, at some
time or other; or if it be not, things will grow worse and worse.

For more clear understanding, therefore, it ought to be known, that it being
required, as it is generally used, to measure the waters of a River, its
breadth and its depth is taken, and these two dimensions being multiplied
together, the product is affirmed to be the quantity of that River: As for
example, if a River shall be 100. feet broad, and 20. feet high, it will be
said, that that River is 2000 feet of Water, and so if a Ditch shall be 15.
feet broad, and 5. feet high, this same Ditch will be affirmed to be 75. feet
of Water: And this manner of measuring Running Water has been used by the
Ancients, and by Moderns, with no other difference, save only that some have
made use of the Foot, others of the Palm, others of the Brace, and others of
other measures.

Now because that in observing these Waters that move, I frequently found, that
the same Water of the same River was in some sites of its Chanel pretty big,
and in others much less, not arriving in some places to the twentieth, nor to
the hundredth part of that which it is seen to be in other places; therefore
this vulgar way of measuring the Waters that move, for that they did not give
me a certain and stable measure and quantity of Water, began deservedly to be
suspected by me, as difficult and defective, being always various, and the
measure, on the contrary, being to be always determinate, and the same; it is
therefore written, that Pondus and Pondus, Mensura and Mensura, utrumque
abominabile est apud Deum, Exodus I considered that in the Territory of Brescia,
my native Country, and in other places, where Waters are divided to overflow
the Grounds, by the like way of measuring them, there were committed grievous
and most important errors, to the great prejudice of the Public and of
Private persons, neither they that sell, nor they that buy understanding the
true quantity of that which is sold and bought: In regard that the same square
measure, as is accustomed in those parts, assigned one particular person,
carried to sometimes above twice or thrice as much water, as did the same
square measure assigned to another. Which thing proves to be the same
inconvenience, as if the measure wherewith Wine and Oil is bought and sold,
should hold twice or thrice as much Wine or Oil at one time as at another. Now
this Consideration invited my mind and curiosity to the finding out of the
true measure of Running Waters. And in the end, by occasion of a most important
business that I was employed in some years since, with great intensenesse of
mind, and with the sure direction of Geometry, I have discovered the mistake,
which was, that we being upon the business of taking the measure of the Waters
that move, do make use of two dimensions only, namely, breadth and depth,
keeping no account of the length. And yet the Water being, though running, a
Body, it is necessary in forming a conceit of its quantity, in relation to
another, to keep account of all the three Dimensions, that is of length,
breadth, and depth.

Here an objection has been put to me, in behalf of the ordinary way of
measuring Running Waters, in opposition to what I have above considered and
proposed: and I was told, Its true, that in measuring a Body that stands still,
one ought to take all the three Dimensions; but in measuring a Body that
continually moves, as the Water, the case is not the same: For the length is
not to be had, the length of the water that moves being infinite, as never
finishing its running; and consequently is incomprehensible by humane
understanding, and therefore with reason, nay upon necessity it comes to be
omitted.

In answer to this, I say, that in the abovesaid Discourse, two things are to
be considered distinctly; First, whether it be possible to frame any conceit of
the quantity of the Body of the Water with two Dimensions only. And secondly,
whether this length be to be found. As to the first, I am very certain that no
man, let him be never so great a Wit, can never promise to frame a conceit of
the quantity of the Body of Water, without the third Dimension of length: and
hereupon I return to affirm, that the vulgar Rule of measuring Running water is
vain and erroneous. This point being agreed on, I come to the second, which is,
Whether the third Dimension of length may be measured. And I say, that if one
would know the whole length of the water of a Fountain or River, thereby to
come to know the quantity of all the Water, it would prove an impossible
enterprise, nay the knowing of it would not be useful. But if one would know
how much water a Fountain, or a River carries in a determinate time of an
hour, of a day, or of a month, etc. I say, that it is a very possible and
profitable enquiry, by reason of the innumerable benefits that may be derived
thence, it much importing to know how much Water a Chanel carries in a time
given; and I have demonstrated the same above in the beginning of this Book;
and of this we stand in need in the business of the Lake, that so we may be
able to determine how much shall be the height of the Brent, when it is spread
all over the Lake: For the three dimensions of a Body being given, the Body is
known; and the quantity of a Body being given, if you have but two dimensions,
the third shall be known. And thus diving farther and farther into this
Consideration, I found that the Velocity of the course of the water may be an
hundred times greater or lesser in one part of its Chanel than in another. And
therefore although there should be two mouths of Waters equal in bigness; yet
nevertheless it might come to pass, that one might discharge an hundred or a
thousand-times more water than another: and this would be, if the water in one
of the mouths should run with an hundred or a thousand times greater velocity,
than the other; for that it would be the same as to say, that the swifter was
an hundred or a thousand times longer, than the slower: and in this manner I
discovered that to keep account of the velocity, was the keeping account of the
Length.

And therefore it is manifest, that when two Mouths discharge the same quantity
of Water in an equal velocity, it is necessary that the less swift Mouth be so
much bigger than the more swift; as the more swift exceeds in velocity the
less swift; as for example.

In case two Rivers should carry equal quantity of water in equal times, but
that one of them should be four times more swift than the other, the more slow
should of necessity be four times more large. And because the same River in any
part thereof always discharges the same quantity of Water in equal times (as
is demonstrated in the first Proposition of the first Book He here intends the
Demonstrations following, at the end of the first Book
of the measure of Running Waters;) but yet does not run thorowout with the
same velocity: Hence it is, that the vulgar measures of the said River, in
diverse parts of its Chanel, are always diverse; insomuch, that if a River
passing through its chanel had such velocity, that it ran 100 Braces in the
1/60 of an hourand afterward the said River should be reduced to so much
tardi, ty of motion, as that in the same time it should not run more than one
Brace, it would be necessary that that same River should become 100. times
bigger in that place where it was retarded; I mean, 100. times bigger than it
was in the place where it was swifter. And let it be kept well in mind, that
this point rightly understood, will clear the understanding to discover very
many accidents worthy to be known. But for this time let it suffice, that we
have only declared that which makes for our purpose, referring apprehensive
and studious Wits to the perusal of my aforenamed Treatise; for therein he
shall find profit and delight both together.

Now applying all to our principal intent, I say, That by what has been
declared it is manifest, that if the Brent were 48. Braces broad, and 2 high,
in some one part of its Chanel, that afterward the same Water of the Brent
falling into the Lake, and passing through the same to the Sea, it should lose
so much of its velocity, that it should run but one Brace, in the time wherein
whilst it was in its Chanel at the place aforesaid, it ran 100. Braces. It
would be absolutely necessary, that increasing in measure, it should become an
hundred times Deeper.
thicker; and therefore if we should suppose that the Lake were 20000. Braces,
the Brent that already has been supposed in its Chanel 100. Braces, being
brought into the Lake, should be 100. times 100. Brates; that is, shall be
10000. Braces in thickness, and consequently shall be in height half a Brace;
that is, 100/200 of a Brace, and not 1/200 of a Brace, as was concluded in the
Argument.

Now one may see into what a gross error of 99. in 100. one may fall through
the not well understanding the true quantity of Running Water, which being well
understood, does open a direct way to our judging aright in this most
considerable affair.

And therefore admitting that which has been demonstrated, I say, that I would
(if it did concern me) greatly incline to consult upon the returning of the
Brent again into the Lake: For it being most evident, that the Brent in the
Chanel of its mouth, is much swifter than the Brent being brought into the
Lake, it will certainly follow thereupon, that the thickness of the Water of
Brent in the Lake, shall be so much greater than that of Brent in Brent, by how
much the Bront in Brent is swifter than thh Brent in the Lake.

1. From which operation does follow in the first place, that the Lake being
filled and increased by these Waters, shall be more Navigable, and passible,
than at present we see it to be.

2. By the current of these Waters, the Channels will be scoured, and will be
kept clean from time to time.

3. There will not appear at the times of low-waters so many Shelves, and such
heaps of Mud, as do now appear.

4. The Air will become more wholesome, for that it shall not be so infected by
putrid vapors exhaled by the Sun, so long as the Miery Ouze shall be covered
by the Waters.

5. Lastly, in the current of these advantageous Waters,, which must issue out
of the Lake into the Sea, besides those of the Tide, the Ports will be kept
scoured, and clear: And this is as much as I shall offer for the present,
touching this weighty business; always submitting my self to sounder
judgments.

Of the abovesaid Writing I presented a Copy at Venice, at a full College, in
which I read it all, and it was hearkened to with very great attention; and at
last I presented it to the Duke, and left some Copies thereof with sundry
Senators, and went my way, promising with all intenseness to apply my pains
with reiterated studies in the public service; and if any other things should
come into my mind, I promised to declare them sincerely, and so took leave of
His serenity, and that Noble Council. When I was returned to Rome, this
business night and day continually running in my mind, I happened to think of
another admirable and most important conceit, which with effectual reasons,
confirmed by exact operations, I with the Divine assistance, made clear and
manifest; and though the thing at first sight seemed to me a most extravagant
Paradox, yet notwithstanding, having satisfied my self of the whole business, I
sent it in writing to the most Illustrious and most Noble Signore Gio.
Basadonna; who after he had well considered my Paper, carried it to the
Council; and after that those Lords had for many months maturely considered
thereon, they in the end resolved to suspend the execution of the diversion
which they had before consulted to make of the River Sile, and of four other
Rivers, which also fall into the Lake; a thing by me blamed in this second
Paper, as most prejudicial, and harmful. The writing spoke as follows.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning the LAKE OF VENICE.
PART II.
IF the discoursing well about the truth of things, Most Serene Prince, were as
the carrying of Burdens, in which we see that an hundred Horses carry a greater
weight than one Horse only; it would seem that one might make more account of
the opinion of many men, than of one alone; But because that discoursing more
resembles running, than carrying Burdens, in which we see that one Barb alone
runs faster than an hundred heavy-heel'd Jades; therefore I have ever more
esteemed one Conclusion well managed, and well considered by one understanding
man, although alone, than the common and Vulgar opinions; especially, when they
concern abstruce and arduous points: Nay in such cases the opinions molded and
framed by the most ignorant and stupid Vulgar, have been ever suspected by me
as false, for that it would be a great wonder if in difficult matters a common
capacity should hit upon that which is handsome, good, and true. Hence I have,
and do hold in very great veneration the sum of the Government of the most
Serene, and eternal Republic of Venice; which although, as being in nature a
Commonwealth, it ought to be governed by the greater part; yet nevertheless,
in arduous affairs, it is always directed by the Grave Judgment of few, and
not judged blindly by the Plebeian Rout. It Is true, that he that propounds
Propositions far above the reach of common capacity, runs a great hazard of
being very often condemned without further Process, or knowledge of the Cause;
but yet for all that, the truth is not to be deserted in most weighty affairs,
but ought rather to be explained in due place and time with all possible
perspicuity; that so being well understood, and considered, it may come
afterward for the Common good to be embraced.

This which I speak in general, has often been my fortune in very many
particulars, not only when I have kept within the bounds of mere speculation,
but also when I have chanced to descend to Practice, and to Operations: and
your Highness knows very well what befell me the last Summer 1641. when in
obedience to your Sovereign Command, I did in full College represent my
thoughts touching the state of the Lake of Venice; for there not being such
wanting, who without so much as vouchsafing to understand me, but having only
had an inkling, and bad apprehension of my opinion, fell furiously upon me, and
by violent means both with the Pen and Press, full of Gall, did abuse me in
reward of the readiness that I had expressed to obey and serve them: But I was
above measure encouraged and pleased, to see that those few who vouchsafed to
hear me, were all either thoroughly persuaded that my opinion was well grounded,
or at least suspended their prudent verdict to more mature deliberation. And
though at the first bout I chanced to propose a thing that was totally contrary
to the most received and antiquated opinion, and to the resolutions and
consultations taken above an hundred years ago: Moved by these things, and to
satisfy also to the promise that I had made of tendering unto them what should
farther offer it self unto me touching the same business; I have resolved to
present to the Throne of your Highness, another Consideration of no less
importance, which perhaps at first sight will appear a stranger Paradox; but
yet brought to the Test and Touchstone of experience, it shall prove most
clear and evident. If it shall be accounted of, so that it succeeds to the
benefit of your Highness, I shall have obtained my desire and intent: And if
not, I shall have satisfied my self, and shall not have been wanting to the
Obligation of your most faithful Servant, and native subject.

That which I propounded in the Mouths pass, touching the most important
business of the Lake, though it did only expressly concern the point of the
diversion of the Mouth of the Lake, already made and put in execution; yet it
may be understood and applied also to the diversion under debate, to be made of
the other five Rivers, and of the Sile in particular.

Now touching this, I had the fortune to offer an admirable accident that we
meet with when we come to the effect, which I verily believe will be an utter
ruin to the Lake of Venice.

I say therefore, that by diverting these five Rivers that remain, although
their water that they discharge for the present into the Lake is not all taken
together 4/5 parts of what the Brent alone did carry, yet nevertheless the
abatement of the water of the Lake which shall ensue upon this last diversion
of four parts, which was the whole water, shall prove double to that which has
happened by the diversion of Brent only, although that the Brent alone carried
five parts of that water, of which the Rivers that are to be diverted carry
four: A wonder really great, and altogether unlikely; for the reducing all this
Proposition to be understood, is as if we should say, that there being given us
three Rivers, of which the first discharges five parts, the second three, and
the third one, and that from the diversion of the first, there did follow such
a certain abatement or fall; from the taking away of the second there ought to
follow also so much more abatement; And lastly, from the withdrawing of the
third the water ought to fall so much more, which is wholly impossible: And yet
it is most certain, and besides the demonstration that persuades me to it,
which I shall explain in due time, I can set before your eyes such an
experiment as is not to be denied by any one, although obstinate: and I will
make it plainly seen and felt, that by taking away only four parts of the five,
which shall have been taken away, the abatement proves double to the abatement
ensuing upon the diverting first of the five only; which thing being true, as
most certainly it is, it will give us to understand how pernicious this
diversion of five Rivers is like to prove, if it shall be put in execution.

By this little that I have hinted, and the much that I could say, let your
Highness gather with what circumspection this business ought to be managed,
and with how great skill he ought to be furnished who would behave himself well
in these difficult affairs.

I have not at this time explained the demonstration, nor have I so much as
propounded the way to make the Experiment, that I am able to make in
confirmation of what I have said, that so by some one or others
mis-apprehending the Demonstration, and maiming the Experiment, the truth may
not happen to shine with less clarity than it does, when all mists of
difficulty are removed: and if so be, no account should be made of the Reasons
by me alleged, and that men should shut their eyes against the Experiments
that without cost or charge may be made, I do declare and protest that there
shall follow very great damages to the Fields of the main Land, and
extraordinary sums shall be expended to no purpose. The Lake undoubtedly will
become almost dry, and will prove impassible for Navigation, with a manifest
danger of corrupting the Air: And in the last place there will unavoidably
ensue the choking and stoppage of the Ports of Venice.

Upon the 20th. of December, 1641. I imparted this my second Consideration to
the most Excellent Signore Basadonna, presenting him with a Copy thereof
amongst other Writings, which I have thought good to insert, although they seem
not to belong directly to our business of the Lake.

The way to examine the MUD and SAND that enters and remains in the LAKE OF
VENICE.
To the most Excellent SIGNORE GIO. BASADONNA.
TWo very considerable Objections have been made against my opinion concerning
the Lake of Venice: One was that, of which I have spoken at large in my first
Consideration, namely, that the Brents having been taken out of the Lake,
cannot have been the occasion of the notable fall of the Waters in the Lake, as
I pretend, and consequently, that the turning Brent into the Lake would be no
considerable remedy, in regard that the water of Brent, and the great expansion
of the Lake over which the water of Brent is to diffuse and spread being
considered, it is found that the rise proves insensible.

The second Objection was, that the Brent is very muddy, and therefore if it
should fall muddy into the Lake, the Sand would sink and fill up the same.

Touching the first Query, enough has been said in my first Consideration,
where I have plainly discovered the deceit of the Argument, and shown its
fallacy; It remains now to examine the second: to which in the first place I
say, that one of the first things that I proposed in this affair was, that I
held it impossible to do any act, though never so beneficial, that was not also
accompanied by some inconvenience and mischief; and therefore we are to
consider well the profit, and the loss and prejudice; and they both being
weighed, we shall be able to choose the lesser evil: Secondly, I admit it to be
most true, that Brent is at some times muddy, but it is also true, that for the
greater part of the year it is not muddy. Thirdly, I do not see nor understand
what strength this objection has, being taken so at large, and in general; and
methinks that it is not enough to say, that the Brent runs muddy, and to
assert that it deposes its Muddinesse in the Lake, but we ought moreover to
proceed to particulars, and show how much this Mud is, and in what time this
choking up of the Ports may be effected. For the Reasons are but too apparent
and particular, that conclude the ruin of the Lake, and that in a very short
time, (for mention is made of days) the Waters diversion being made, and
moreover we have the circumstance of an Experiment, the state of things being
observed to have grown worse since the said diversion. And I have demonstrated,
that in case the Diversion of the Sile and the other Rivers should be put in
execution, the Lake would in a few days become almost dry; and the Ports would
be lost, with other mischievous consequences. But on the other side, although
that we did grant the choking of them, we may very probably say, that it will
not happen, save only in the succession of many and many Centuries of years.
Nor can I think it prudent counsel to take a resolution and embrace a Design
now, to obtain a benefit very uncertain, and more than that, which only shall
concern those who are to come very many Ages after us, and thereby bring a
cetain inconvenience upon our selves, and upon our children that are now alive
and present.

Let it be alleged therefore, (although I hold it false) that by the
diversions of the Rivers the Lake may be kept in good condition for several
years to come.

But I say confidently, and hope to demonstrate it; That the Diversions will
bring the Lake, even in our days, to be almost dry, and at least will leave so
little water in it, that it shall cease to be Navigable, and the Ports shall
most infallibly be choked up. I will therefore say upon experience, in answer
to this Objection, that it is very necessary first well to discourse, and
rationally to particularize and ascertain the best that may be this point of
the quantity of this sinking Mud or Sand.

Now I fear I shall make my self ridiculous to those, who measuring the things
of Nature with the shallowness of their brains do think that it is absolutely
impossible to make this enquiry, and will say unto me, Quis mensus est pugillo
aquas, and terram palmo ponderavit? Yet nevertheless I will propound a way
whereby, at least in gross, one may find out the same.

Take a Vessel of Cylindrical Figure, holding two barrels of water, or
thereabouts; and then fill it with the water of Brent, at its Mouth or Fall
into the Lake; but in the Lake at the time that the Brent runs muddy, and
after it has begun to run muddy for eight or ten hours, to give the mud time
to go as far as S. Nicolo, to issue into the Sea; and at the same time take
another Vessel, like, and equal to the first, and fill it with the water of the
Lake toward S. Nicolo, (but take notice that this operation ought to be made
at the time when the waters go out, and when the Sea is calm) and then, when
the waters shall have settled in the aforesaid Vessels, take out the clear
water, and consider the quantity of Sand that remains behind, and let it be set
down, or kept in mind: And I am easily induced to think, that that shall be a
greater quantity of Sand which shall be left in the first Vessel, than that
left in the second Vessel. Afterward when the Brent shall come to be clear,
let both the operations be repeated, and observe the quantity of Sand in the
aforesaid Vessels; for if the Sand in the first Vessel should be most, it would
be a sign, that in the revolution of a year the Brent would depose Sand in the
Lake: And in this manner one may calculate to a small matter what proportion
the Sand that enters into the Lake, has to that which remains: And by that
proportion one may judge how expedient it shall be for public benefit. And if
at several times of the year you carefully repeat the same operations, or
rather observations, you would come to a more exact knowledge in this business:
And it would be good to make the said operations at those times, when the Lake
is disturbed by strong high Winds, and made muddy by its own Mud, raised by the
commotion of the Waters.

This notion would give us great light, if the same observations should be made
toward the Mouth of Lio, at such time as the waters flow and ebb, in calm
seasons; for so one should come to know whether the waters of the Lake are more
thick at the going out, than at the entrance. I have propounded the foregoing
way of measuring Sands and Mud, to show that we are not so generally, and
inconsiderately to pronounce any sentence, but proceed to stricter inquiries,
and then deliberate what shall be most expedient to be done. Others may propose
more equisite examinations, but this shall serve me for the present.

I will add only, that if any one had greater curiosity (it would be
profitable to have it) in investigating more exactly the quantity of the Water
that enters into the Lake, by the means that I have shown in the beginning
of this Book: When he shall have found the proportion of the quantity of water
to the quantity of Sand or Mud, he shall come to know how much Sand the Brent
shall leave in the Lake in the space of a year. But to perform these things,
there are required persons of discretion, and fidelity, and that are employed
by public Order; for there would thence result eminent benefit and profit.

Here are wanting LETTERS from several persons.

To the Reverend Father, Francesco di S. GIUSEPPE.
IN execution of the command that you laid upon me in your former Letters, by
order from the most Serene, my Lord, Prince Leopold; that I should speak my
judgment concerning the disimboguement of the River called Fiume morto,
whether it ought to be let into the Sea, or into Serchio; I say, that I chanced
18. years since to be present, when the said Mouth was opened into the Sea, and
that of Serchio stopped; which work was done to remedy the great Innundation that
was made in all that Country, and Plain of Pisa, that lies between the River
Arno, and the Mountains of S. Giuliano, and the River Serchio; which Plain
continued long under water, insomuch that not only in the Winter, but also for
a great part of the Summer, those fields were overflowed; and when that the
Mouth of Fiume morto was effectually opened into the Sea, the place was
presently freed from the waters. and drained, to the great satisfaction of the
Owners of those Grounds. And here I judge it worth your notice, that for the
generality of those that possess estates in those parts, they desired that the
Mouth of Fiume morto might stand open to the Sea, and those who would have it
open into Serchio, are persons that have no other concernment there, save the
hopes of gaining by having the dispose of Commissions, and the like, etc,

But for the more plain understanding of that which is to be said, it must be
known, That the resolution of opening the said Mouth into Serchio, was taken in
the time of the Great Duke Ferdinando the first, upon the same motives that are
at this time again proposed, as your Letters tell me, Since that, it manifestly
appearing, that Fiume morto had, and has its Mouth open to the Sea, the Plain
has been kept dry; and it being also true, that the fury of the South, and
South-West-Winds carried such abundance of sand into the Mouth, or Outlet of
Fiume morto, that it wholly stopped it up: especially when the waters on Pisa
side were low and shallow, And they think, that turning the Lake of Fiume morto
into Serchio, and the Serchio maintaining continually its own Mouth with the
force of its waters open to the Sea, and consequently also Fiume morto, they
would have had the Outlet clear and open; and in this manner they think, that
the Plain of Pisa would have been freed from the waters. The business passes
for current, at first sight; but experience proves the contrary, and Reason
confirms the same: For the height of the water of those Plains, was regulated
by the height of the waters in the Mouth of Fiume morto; that is, The waters at
the Mouth being high, the waters also do rise in the fields; and when the
waters at the Mouth are low, the waters of the fields do likewise abate: Nor is
it enough to say, That the Outlet or Vent of Fiume morto is continual, but it
must be very low: Now if Fiume morto did determine in Serchio, it is manifest
that it would determine high; for Serchio terminating in the Sea, when ever it
more and more abounds with water, and rises, it is necessary that also Fiume
morto has its level higher, and consequently shall keep the waters in the
Plains higher. Nay, it has happened sometimes (and I speak it upon my own
sight) that Fiume morto has reversed its course upwards toward Pisa; which
case will ever happen, whenever the Pisan waters chance to be lower than the
level of those of Serchio; for in that case the waters of Serchio return back
upon the Plains through Fiume morto in such sort, that the Muddinesses, and the
Serchio have been observed to be carried by this return as far as the Walls of
Pisa; and then before such time as so great waters can be assuaged, which come
in with great fury, and go out by little and little, there do pass very many
days, and months, nay sometimes one being never able to find the waters of
Serchio, when at the shallowest, so low as the Sea in level; (which is the
lowest place of the waters) it thence does follow, that the waters of Fiume
morto should never at any time of the year, so long as they determine in
Serchio, be so low; as they come to be when the same Fiume morto determines in
the Sea. It Is true indeed, that the Mouth of Fiume morto, opened into the Sea,
is subject to the inconvenience of being stopped up by the force of Winds: But in
this case, it is necessary to take some pains in opening it; which may easily
be done, by cutting that Sand a little which stays in the Mouth, after that
the Wind is laid, and it is enough if you make a Trench little more than two
Palms in breadth; for the water once beginning to run into it, it will in a few
hours carry that Sand away with it, and there will ensue a deep and broad
Trench that will drain away all the water of the Plains in very little time.
And I have found by practice, that there having been a great quantity of Sand
driven back, by the fury of the South-West-Wind, into the Mouth of Fiume morto,
I having caused the little gutter to be made in the Morning, somewhat before
Noon, a Mouth has been opened of 40. Braces wide, and notably deep, insomuch
that the water, which before had incommoded all the Champian ran away in less
than three days, and left the Country free and dry, to the admiration of all
men. There was present upon the place, at this business, on the same day that I
opened the Mouth, the most Serene great Duke, the most Serene Arch-Dutchess
Mother, all the Commissioners of Sewers; with many other Persons and Peasants
of those parts; and they all saw very well, that it was never possible that a
little Bark of eight Oars, which was come from Legorn to wait upon the great
Duke, should ever be able to master the Current, and to make up into Fiume
morto; and his Highness, who came with an intent to cause the said Mouth
toward the Sea to be stopped; and that into Serchio to be opened, changed his
judgment, giving order that it should be left open toward the Sea, as it was
done. And if at this day it shall return into Serchio, I am very certain that
it will be necessary to open it again into the Sea. And there was also charge
and order given to a person appointed for the purpose, that he should take care
to open the said Mouth, as has been said upon occasion. And thus things have
succeeded very well unto this very time. But from the middle of October, until
this first of February, there having continued high South, and
South-West-Winds, with frequent and abundant Rains; it is no wonder that some
innundation has happened; but yet I will affirm, that greater mischiefs would
have followed, if the Mouth had been opened into Serchio. This which I have
hitherto said, is very clear and intelligible to all such as have but competent
insight, and indifferent skill in these affairs. But that which I am now about
to propose farther, will, I am very certain, be understood by your self, but it
will seem strange and unlikely to many others. The point is, that I say, That
by raising the level of Fiume morto, one half Brace, only at its Mouth, (it
will penipenitrate into Serchio farther than it would into the Sea) it shall
cause the waters to rise three, or perhaps more Braces upon the fields toward
Pisa, and still more by degrees as they shall recede farther from the Seaside;
and thus there will follow very great Innundations, and considerable mischiefs.
And to know that this is true, you are to take notice of an accident, which I
give warning of in my discourse of the Measure of Running Waters: where also I
give the reason thereof, Lib. 1.
Coroll. 14. The accident is this, That there coming a Land-Flood, for example,
into Arno, which makes it to rise above its ordinary Mouth wthin Pisa, or a
little above or below the City six or seven Braces; this same height becomes
always lesser and lesser, the more we approach toward the Seaside; insomuch,
that near to the Sea the said River shall be raised hardly half a Brace: Whence
it follows of necessary consequence, that should I again be at the Seaside,
and knowing nothing of what happens, should see the River Arno raised by the
accession of a Land-flood, one third of a Brace; I could certainly infer, that
the same River was raised in Pisa those same six or seven Braces. And that
which I say of Arno, is true of all Rivers that fall into the Sea. Which thing
being true, it is necessary to make great account of every small rising, that
Fiume morto makes toward the Seaside by falling into Serchio. For although
the rising of Fiume morto, by being to disgorge its Waters into Serchio,
toward the Sea, were only a quarter of a Brace; we might very well be sure,
that far from the Sea, about Pisa, and upon those fields the rise shall be
much greater, and shall become two or three Braces: And because the Country
lies low, that same ^ise will cause a continual Innundation* of the Plains,
like as it did before; I caused the Mouth to be opened into the Sea. And
therefore I conclude that the Mouth of Fiume morto, ought by no means to be
opened into Serchio; but ought to be continued into the Sea, using all
diligence to keep it open after the manner aforesaid, so soon as ever the Wind
shall be laid. And if they shall do otherwise, I confidently affirm, that there
will daily follow greater damages; not only in the Plains, but also in the
wholesomness of the Air; as has been seen in times past. And again, It oughs
with all care to be procured, that no waters do by any means run or fall from
the Trench of Libra, into the Plain of Pisa, for these Waters being to
discharge into Fiume morto, they maintain it much higher than is imagined,
according to that which I have demonstrated in my consideration upon the state
of the Lake of Venice. I have said but little, but I speak to you, who
understands much, and I submit all to the most refined judgment of our most
Serene Prince Leopold, whose hands I beseech you in all humility to kiss in my
name, and implore the continuance of his Princely favor to me; and so desiring
your prayers to God for me, I take my leave.

Rome 1. Feb. 1642. Your most affectionate Servants, D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI.


The answer to a Letter written by BARTOLOTTI, touching the difficultyes
observed.
The former part of the Letter is omitted, and the discourse begins at the
first Head.
ANd first I say, Whereas I suppose that the level of the Serchio is higher
than that of Fiume morto; this is most true, at such time as the waters of
Fiume morto are discharged into the Sea; but I did never say that things could
never be brought to that pass, as that the level of Fiume morto should be
higher than Serchio: and so I grant that it will follow, that the waters of
Fiume morto shall go into Serchio, and its very possible, that the Drain of
Fiume morto into Serchio may be continuate; and I farther grant, that its
possible, that the Serchio does never disgorge through Fiume morto toward Pisa;
Nay, I will yet farther grant that it might have happened, that Fiume morto
might have had such a fall into Serchio, as would have sufficed to have turned
Mills: But then I add withal, that the Plains of Pisa, and the City it self
must be a mere Lake.

2. Signore Bartolotti says confidently, that when the Sea swells by the
South-West, or other Winds, the level of Serchio in the place marked A in the
Platt, distant about 200. Braces, rises very little: But that Fiume morto in
D, and in E, many miles more up into Land rises very much, and that certain
Fishermen confirm this, and show him the signs of the rising of the Water. I
grant it to be very true, and I have seen it with my own eyes: But this comes
to pass, when the Mouth of Fiume morto is stopped up by the Sea; as I shall show
by and by. And this rising near the Seaside, is of no considerable prejudice
to the fields. And this is as much as I find to be true in the assertion of
Signore Bartolotti, (without his confirming it by any other proof; as indeed it
needs none) That the level of Fiume morto rises in E, and many miles farther
upwards it rises much; nor did I ever affirm the contrary.

3. Concerning the difficulty of opening the Mouth of Fiume morto into the Sea,
that which Il Castellano says is most certain; namely, That at the entrance
upon the opening of the Mouth, it is necessary to make a deep Trench: But I
say, that at that time it is difficult to open it, unless upon great occasions;
for that the difficulty proceeds from the waters of Fiume morto being low,
and the fields drained.

4. As to the particular of the Causes that you tell me men press so much unto
the most Serene Grand Duke, and to the Prince, I have not much to say, because
it is not my profession; nor have I considered of the same: Yet I believe, that
when the Prince and his Highness see the benefit of his People and Subjects in
one scale of the Balance, and the accommodation of Huntsmen in the other, his
Highness will incline to the profit of his subjects; such have I always found
his Clemency and Nobleness of mind. But if I were to put in my vote upon this
business, I would say, that the points of Spears, and the mouths of Guns, the
yelping of Dogs, the wiliness of Huntsmen, who run through and narrowly search
all those Woods, Thickets and Heathes, are the true destroyers of Bucks and
Boares, and not a little Salt Water, which setleth at last in some low places,
and spreads not very far. Yet nevertheless, I will not enter upon any such
point, but confine my self solely to the business before me.

5. That Experiment of joining together the water of Fiume morto, and that of
Serchio by a little trench to see what advantage the Level E has upon the
Level I, does not give me full satisfaction, taken so particularly, for it may
come to pass, that sometimes E may be higher, and sometimes A lower, and I do
not question but that when Serchio is low, and Fiume morto full of Water, the
level of Fiume morto will be higher than that of Serchio. But Serchio being
full, and Fiume morto scant of Water, the contrary will follow, if the Mouth
shall be opened to the Sea. And here it should seem to me, that it ought to be
considered, that there is as much advantage from E to the Sea through the
little Trench opened anew into Serchio, as from E to the Sea by the Mouth of
Fiume morto. But the difficulty (which is that we are to regard in our case)
is, that the course of the Waters through the Trench is three times longer than
the course of the Mouth of Fiume morto, as appears by the Draught or Plat
which you sent me, which I know to be very exactly drawn, for that the
situation of those places are fresh in my memory. Here I must give notice, that
the waters of Fiume morto determining through the Trench in Serchio (the waters
of which Fiume morto are, for certain, never so low as the Sea) their pendency
or declivity shall, for two causes, be less than the pendency of those waters
through the Mouth toward the Sea, that is, because of the length of the line
through the Trench, and because of the height of their entrance into Serchio, a
thing which is of very great import in discharging the waters which come
suddenly, as he shall plainly see, who shall have understood my Book of the
Measure of Running Waters. And this was the Reason why all the Country did
grow dry upon the opening of the Mouth into the Sea. And here I propose to
consideration that which the Peasants about Pisa relate, namely, That the Water
in the Fields does no considerable harm by continuing there five or six, yea,
or eight days. And therefore the work of the Country is to open the Mouth of
Fiume morto, in such manner, that the Water being come, they may have the
Trench free and ready, when that the Water comes it may have a free drain, and
may not stay there above eight or nine days, for then the overflowings become
hurtful. It is to be desired also, that if any Proposition is produced touching
these affairs, it might be propounded the most distinctly that may be possible,
and not consist in generals, especially when the Dispute is of the risings, of
velocity, of tardity, of much and little water; things that are all to be
specified by measures.

6. Your Letter says, in the next place, that Signore Bartolotti confesses,
that if the Mouth of the Fiume morto might always be kept open, it would be
better to let it continue as it is: the which, that I may not yield to him in
courtesy, I confess, for the keeping it stopped on all sides would be a thing
most pernicious. But admitting of his confession I again reply, that Fiume
morto ought not to be let into Serchio, but immediately into the Sea; because
although sometimes the Mouth to Sea-wards be stopped up, yet for all that, the
raising of the Bank above the Plains (which is all the business of importance)
shall be ever lesser, if we make use of the Mouth leading to the Sea, than
using that of Serchio.

7. I will not omit to mention a kind of scruple that I have concerning the
position of Sign. Bartolotti, that is, where he says that the two Mouths A and
D are equal to the like Mouths into the Sea; Now it seems to me, that the Mouth
A of Fiume morto into Serchio is absolutely within Serchio, nor can it be made
lower, and is regulated by the height of Serchio: But the Mouth of Fiume morto
terminates, and ought to be understood to terminate in the Sea it self, the
lowest place. And this I believe was very well perceived by Sig. Bartolotti,
but I cannot tell why he past it over without declaring it: and we see not that
the Mouth D falls far from the Sea, which Mouth ought to be let into the Sea
it self, and so the advantage of the Mouth into the Sea more clearly appears.

8. That which Sig. Bartolotti adds, that when it is high Waters, at such
time as the Waters are out, and when Winds choke up Fiume morto, they not only
retard it, but return the course of the Waters upwards very leasurely,
persuades me more readily to believe that Sig. Bartolotti knows very well,
that the Mouth of Fiume morto let into Serchio is hurtful: for by this he
acknowledges that the Mouth toward the Sea does in such sort drain the
Country of the Waters, as that they become very low; and therefore upon every
little impetus the waters turn their course: And from the motions, being
exceeding slow, is inferred, that the abundance of Seawater that comes into
Fiume morto, is so much as is believed, and as Sig. Bartolotti affirms.

9. After that Sig. Bartolotti has said what he promises above, namely, that
when the Winds blowing strongly do stop up Fiume morto, and not only retard
but turn the course upwards, the time being Rainy, and the Mouth of Fiume morto
shut up, the Waves of the Sea pass over the Bank of Fiume morto; at that time,
says Signore Bartolotti, the Champain shall know the benefit of Fiume morto
discharged into Serchio, and the mouth A shall stand always open; and Fiume
morto may always constantly run out, as also the Rains and Rain-waters,
although the hurtful Tempest should last many days, etc. And I reply, that all
the Art consists in this; for the benefit of those Fields does not depend on,
or consist in saying, that Fiume morto is always open, and Fiume morto
draineth continually; But all the business of profit lies and consists in
maintaining the Waters low in those Plains, and those Ditches, which shall
never be effected whilst the World stands, if you let Fiume morto into Serchio;
but yet it may, by opening the mouth into the Sea: and so much reason and
nature proves, and (which imports) Experience confirms.

10. In the tenth place I come to consider the answer that was made to another
Proposition in the Letter which I writ to Father Francesco, which prudently of
it self alone might serve to clear this whole business. I said in my Letter,
That great account is to be made of every small rising and ebbing of the Waters
near to the Sea in Fiume morto, for that these risings and fallings, although
that they be small near to the Seaside, yet nevertheless, they operate and
are accompanied by notable risings and fallings within Land, and far from the
Seaside, and I have declared by an example of Arno, in which a Land-flood
falling, that made it increase above its ordinary height within Pisa six or
seven Braces, that this height of the same Flood becomes still lesser, the
nearer we approach to the Seacoasts. Nor shall the said River be raised hardly
half a Brace; whereupon it necessrily follows, that if I should return to the
Seaside, and not knowing any think of that which happens at Pisa, and seeing
the River Arno raised by a Land-flood half a Brace, I might confidently affirm
the said River to be raised in Pisa those six or seven Braces, etc. From such
like accidents I conclude in the same Letter, that it is necessary to make
great account of every little rise that Fiume morto shall make toward the Sea.
Now comes Bartolotti (and perhaps because I knew not how to express my self
better, understands not my Proposition) and speaks that which indeed is
true, but yet besides our case: Nor have I ever said the contrary; and withal
does not apply it to his purpose. Nay I say, that if he had well applied it,
this alone had been able to have made him change his opinion. And because he
says, that I said, that it is true, when the abatement proceeds from some
cause above, as namely by Rain, or opening of Lakes; But when the cause is from
below, that is, by some stop, as for instance some Fishers Wears or Locks, or
some impediment remote from the Sea, although at the Level it shall rise some
Braces where the impediment is, yet that rising shall go upwards; and here he
finisheth his Discourse, and concludes not any thing more. To which I say
first, that I have also said the same in the Proposition, namely, that a Flood
coming (which makes Arno to rise in Pisa six or seven Braces (which I take to
be a superior cause whether it be Rain or the opening of Lakes, as best
pleases Bartolotti) in such a case I say, and in no other (for toward the
Seacoasts it shall not cause a rising of full half a Brace; and therefore
seeing Arno at the Seaside to be raised by a Flood, whether of Rain, or of
opening of Lakes half a Brace) it may be inferred, that at Pisa it shall be
raised those six or seven Braces; which variety, well considered, explaineth
all this affair in favor of my opinion: For the rising that is made by the
impediment placed below, of Fishing Wears and Locks, operateth at the
beginning, raising the Waters that are near to the impediment; and afterward
less and less, as we retire upwards from the impediment: provided yet that we
speak not of a Flood that comes by accession, but only of the ordinary Water
impeded. But there being a new accession, as in our case, then the Water of the
Flood, I say, shall make a greater rising in the parts superior, far from the
impediment; and these impediments shall come to be those that shall overflow
the Plains, as happened eighteen or nineteen years ago, before the opening of
Fiume morto into the Sea, The same will certainly follow, if Fiume morto be let
into Serchio. Here I could allege a very pretty case that befell me in la The
Country or Province lying round the City, heretofore called Lati (...)
Campagna di Roma, near to the Seaside. where I drained a Bog or Fen, of the
nature of the Waters of Pisa, and I succeeded in the enterprise, the Waters in
their site toward the Sea abating only three Palms, and yet in the Fen they
fell more than fifteen Palms. But the business would be long, and not so
easily to be declared, and I am certain that Sig. Bartolotti having considered
this, would alter his judgment, and withal would know that remitting that
impediment anew, which I had left for less than three I alms toward the Sea,
the Waters in the Fen would return with the first Floods and Raines to the same
height as before, as likewise Fiume morto will do if it shall be let again into
Serchio.

Here I entreat your Honor to do me the favor to importune P. Francesco in my
behalf, that he would be pleased to declare my meaning in the aforesaid Letter
to Sig. Bartolotti, for I hope that if he will understand this point, he will
be no longer so tenacious in his opinion.

Next that these Lords in the Commission of Sewers, with the Right Honorable
the Marquess of S. Angelo, and your Honor do approve of my judgment, does
very much rejoice me; but because that I know that they do it not in design to
complement me, but only to serve his Highness our Grand Duke, I freely profess
that I will pretend no farther obligations from them therein, than I account my
self to owe to those whose opinions are contrary to mine, for that I know that
they have the same end. The definitive sentence of this whole business is, that
they give these Plains, these Draines, and these Waters far fetched
appellations.

11. As to the quantity of the Water that Fiume morto discharges into the Sea,
there are very great disputes about it, and I have been present at some of
them. But let your Honor believe me, that as this is not continual, but only
during a few days, so it will never be of any great prejudice to these Fields;
and if your Lordship would be ascertained thereof, you may please to go to
Fiume morto at about a mile's distance from the Sea, in the time of these
strong Winds, and observe the current from thence upwards, for you shall find
it extreme slow, and consequently will know that the quantity of the Water that
is repulsed is very small. And this seems to be contradicted by the rule of
Risings proceeding from causes below, which occasion no considerable alteration
far from the Sea.

I am necessitated to go to morrow out of Rome with his Eminence Cardinal
Gaetano about certain affairs touching Waters, therefore I shall not farther
enlarge, but for a close to this tedious Discourse, I conclude in few words,
that Fiume morto is by no means to be let into Serchio, nor are there any means
intermediate courses to be taken, for they will always be prejudicial; but
Fiume morto is to be discharged immediately into the Sea. When it is stopped up
by the fury of the Sea-waves, I affirm that it is a sign that there is no need
of opening it; and if there be any occasion to open it, it is easily done. As
for the rest your Lordship may please to keep account of all the particulars
that occur, for the memory of things past is our Tutresse in those that are to
come. If occasion shall offer, I entreat you to bow humbly in my name to His
Highness the Grand Duke, and the most Serene Prince Leopold; and to attend the
service of Their Highnesses, for you serve Princes of extraordinary merit; And
to whom I my self am also exceedingly obliged. In the controversies that arise
respect the pious end of speaking the Truth, for then every thing will succeed
happily. I kiss the hands of Padre Francesco, of Sig. Bartolotti, and of your
Lordship.

Rome, 14. March 1642. Your Honors most Obliged Servant D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI.


Upon this occasion I will here insert a Discourse that I made upon the
Draining and improvement of the Pontine Fens, for that I think that whatsoever
may be done well and to purpose in this matter has absolute dependence on the
perfect knowledge of that so important Proposition, by me demonstrated and
explained in my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running Waters, namely, That the
same water of a River does continually change Measures, according as it
alters and changes the velocity of its course; so that the measure of the
thickness of a River in one Site, to the measure of the same River in another
Site, has the same proportion reciprocally that the velocity in this site has
to the velocity in the first site. And this is a Truth so constant and
unchangeable, that it alters not in the least point on any occurrences of the
Waters that change: and being well understood, it opens the way to the
knowledge of sundry advertisements in these matters, which are all resolved by
this sole Principle; and from it are derived very considerable benefits; and
without these it is impossible to do any thing with absolute perfection.

A CONSIDERATION Upon the DRAINING OF THE Pontine Fenns. BY D. BENEDETTO
CASTELLI, Abbot of S. BENEDETTO ALOISIO, and Professor of the Methematicks to
P. Urban VIII. in the University of ROME.
CONSIDERATION III.
AMongst the enterprises by me esteemed, if not absolutely impossible,, at
least exceeding difficult, one was that famous one of Draining the Pontine
Fenns; and therefore I was thoroughly resolved never to apply my mind thereunto,
although by my Patrons I should be commanded to the same: accounting that it
was an occasion rather of losing reputation by the miscarriage of the attempt,
than of gaining fame by reducing things to a better pass then they now are at.
Yet nevertheless, having of late years observed the place, and sailed through
those Channels, and those Waters; after I had made some reflection thereupon, I
thought that the enterprise was not so difficult as I had at first conceited it
to be; and I am the more confirmed in this opinion, upon the inducement of that
which I have written Geometrically in my Treatise of the Mensuration of Running
Waters; so that talking with several persons, I adventured to affirm, in
discoures, that this improvement might possibly be brought into a good estate.

Now I have resolved to set down my thoughts in writing, and to honor this my
Paper with the Noble Name of your Lordship, to render it the more credible and
conspicuous at the first view, if it should chance that the Subject I treat of,
were not of such moment, as that it did deserve to be valued for any other
reason. Pardon me, Sir, if I have been too bold, and continue me in the number
of your Servants.

The enterprise of Draining a great part of the Territories of the Pontine
Fenns, has been undertaken both in the time of the ancient Romans, and last of
all, in our days; yea in the late times by Sixtus V. I do not doubt in the
least, but that it will be possible yet to reduce things to a very good pass;
and if I be not mistaken, with a very small charge in comparison of the profit
that would be received from those rich Grounds. This improvement was of great
expense in the time of Sixtus Quintus, but by reason the thing was not rightly
understood, there were made many Drains; a great part of which were
unprofitable and vain: and amongst so many operations, there happened some to be
made that succeeded, as was desired; but not being understood, they were held
in no account; and thus the business being neglected, the waters are returned
into the same state as they were at first, before the improvement. Here I have
by familiar discourses with my friends, explained this enterprise undertaken by
Sixtus V. and happily also by some more ancient, with the example of the Fable of
Orilo, in Ariosto. This Monster was made up with such enchantment, that men
fought with him always in vain; for though in the Combat he were cut in
pieces, those divided Members presently reunited, and returned to the fight
more fierce then ever. But the Paladine Astolfo coming to undertake him, after
a long dispute, at the end he cut his head sheer off from the shoulders at one
blow; and nimbly alighting from his Horse, took the Monstrous head, and
mounting again, as he rid away he fell to shave the Pole of that Monster, and
so he lost the Lock of Hair, in which alone the enchantment lay; and then the
horrible Head in an instant manifested signs of death, and the trunk which ran,
seeking to reunite to it anew, gave the last gasp, and in this manner the
enchantment ended. The Book of Fate served admirably to the Paladine, whereby
he came to understand that Charm; for by shaving his whole head, the enchanted
hairs came to be cut off amongst the rest: In the same manner, I say, that i^
has sometimes happened in Draining those Fields; for that amongst so many
trials as have been made, that also was light upon, on which the improvement
and remedy to the disorder did depend. And to us my forenamed Treatise shall
serve for a Rule, which being well understood, shall make us to know wherein
consists, and whereon depends this miscarriage, and consequently it will be
easy to apply thereunto a seasonable remedy.

And first I say, That there is no doubt but that the waters continue so high
on those Plains because they are so high in the principal River, which ought to
receive them, and carry them into the Sea. Now the Causes of the height of the
River, may in my judgment be reduced to one alone; which is that by me so
often mentioned for the most Potent one, and declared in my aforementioned
Tractate; to wit, The tardity of the motion of the waters, which does always
infallibly, and precisely cause the self same Running Water to change the
measure of its thickness at such a rate, that the more it increases in
velocity, the more it decreaseth in measure; and the more it decreaseth in
velocity, the more it increases in measure: As for example; If a River run in
such a place with the velocity of moving a mile in the space of an hour, and
afterward the same River in another place does increase in velocity, so as to
make three miles an hour; that same River shall diminish in thickness two
thirds: And on the contrary, If it shall diminish in velocity so, as that it
runs but half a mile in the same time, it shall increase the double in
thickness and measure. And in a word, look what proportion the velocity in the
first place, has to the velocity in the second, and such has reciprocally the
measure of the thickness in the second place, to the measure in the first; as I
have clearly demonstrated in my Treatise: Which I repeat so frequently, that I
fear the Professors of Polite Learning will charge me with Tuatologie, and vain
Repetition. But I am so desirous in this most important point to be well
understood, because it will then be easy to comprehend all the rest; and
without this it is impossible (I will not say difficult, but absolutely
impossible) to understand, or ever to effect any thing to purpose. And the
better to explain the example, let it be supposed, That the water of a River
AD, runs high at the level of AF, with such a certain velocity; and let it,
by the same water, be velocitated three times more; I say, that it will abate
1/3, and shall stand at the level in BE; and if it shall more velocitate, it
will abate the more at the Sea; But if it should retard more than it did at the
level AF, it would rise yet more above the said level AF; although that the
self same quantity of water runs all the while. By the abovenamed solid
Principle I resolve extravagant Problems in my Treatise, and assign the Reasons
of admirable effects of Running Waters: But as for what concerns our purpose
of the Pontine Fenns, we have the Causes very plain and clear; for which, by
the trampling of Cattle which pass through the Draining River, the waters abate
so notably, that it is as it were a miracle for those Reeds, Flags, and Weeds
that spring up, increase, and spread all over the River, stop and impede that
velocity of the waters which they would have by means of their declivity. But
that passage of those Beasts, treading down those Weeds unto the bottom of the
River, in such sort, as that they no longer hinder the Current of the Water;
and the same Waters increasing in their course, they do diminish in measure and
height; and by this means the Ditches of the Plains empty into the same
successfully, and leave them free from Waters, and Drained. But these Weeds in
a short time sprouting up anew, and raising their stalks through the body of
the Waters, they reduce things to the same evil state, as before, retarding the
velocity of the Water, making it to increase in height, and perhaps do occasion
greater mischiefs; seeing that those many knots which each plant shoots forth,
begets a greater multitude of Stalks, which much more incumbering the Water of
the River, are a greater impediment unto its velocity, and consequently make
the height of the waters to increase so much the more, and do more mischief
than before.

Another head to which these harms may be reduced, but proceeding from the same
Root, which has a great part in this disorder, is the impediment of those
Wears in the River which are made by heightning the bed of the same, for
placing of fishing-nets; of which Piscaries I reckoned above ten, when I made a
voyage through those waters to Sandolo. And these Fishing-Wears are such
impediments, that some one of them makes the water of the River in the upper
part to rise half a Palm, and sometimes a whole Palm, and more; so that when
they are all gathered together, these impediments amount to more than seven, or
possibly than eight Palms.

There concurreth for a third most Potent Cause of the waters continuing high
in the evacuating, or Draining Chanel, and consequently on the Plains; The
great abundance of water that issues from Fiume Sisto, the waters of which do
not keep within its Banks when they are abundant; but increasing above its
Chanel, they unite with those of the Evacuator, and dispersing through the Fens
are raised with great prejudice, and much greater than is conceived, according
to what has been demonstrated in the Second Consideration upon the Lake of
Venice. Nor is it to any purpose to say, that if we should measure all the
Waters that disimbogue from Fiume Sisto, and gather them into one sum, we
should not find them to be such, as that they shall be able to make the Waters
of the Fens to increase, by reason of the great expansion of them, over which
that body of water is to distend: for to this instance we answer with that
which we have given notice of in the First Consideration touching the Lake of
Venice, treating of the abatement that is caused by the Brent let into the
Lake. And moreover, if I shall add thereto that which I write in the Second
Consideration, it will be very apparent how greatly harmfull and prejudicial
these excursions of Waters from Fiume Sisto may be, which are not kept under,
and confined within the River: Therefore, proceeding to the provisions, and
operations that are to be accounted Principal, I reduce them to three Heads.

In the first place it is necessary to throw down those Wears, and to take the
Pisciaries quite away, observing a Maxim, in my judgment, infallible, that
Fishing and Sowing are two things that can never consist together; Fishing
being on the Water, and Sowing on land.

Secondly, it will be necessary to cut under Water in the bottom of the River
those Weeds and Plants that grow and increase in the River, and leave them to
be carried into the Sea by the Stream; for by this means these Reeds shall not
spring up and distend along the bottom of the River, by means of the Beasts
treading upon them; And the same ought to be done often, and with care, and
must not be delaied till the mischief increase, and the Champain Grounds be
drowned, but one ought to order matters so, as that they may not drown. And I
will affirm, that otherwise this principal point would become a most
considerable inconvenience.

Thirdly, it is necessary to make good the Banks of Fiume Sisto on the left
hand, and to procure that those Waters may run in the Chanel, and not break
forth. And it is to be noted, that it is not enough to do one or two of those
things, but we are to put them all in execution; for omitting any thing, the
whole machine will be out of tune, and spoiled. But proceeding with due care,
you shall not only Drain the Pontine Fens, but by means of this last particular
the Current of Fiume Sisto shall scowr its own Chanel of its self, even to the
carrying part of it away: and happily with this abundance of water that it shall
bear, the Mouth della Torre may be opened, and kept open into the Sea. And it
would, last of all, be of admirable benefit to cleanse Fiume Sisto from many
Trees and Bushes wherewith it is overgrown.

And with this I conclude, that the Improvement or Drain possible to be made
consists in these three particulars. First, in taking away the Fishing
Wears, leaving the Course of the Waters free. Secondly, in keeping the
Principal Rivers clear from Weeds and Plants. Thirdly, in keeping the water of
Fiume Sisto in its own Chanel. All which are things that may be done with very
little charge, and to the manifest benefit of the whole Country, and to the
rendering the Air wholsomer in all those Places adjoining to the Pontine Fens.

A CONSIDERATION Upon the DRAINING Of the Territories of Bologna, Ferrara, AND
Romagna.
BY D. BENEDETTO CASTELLI, Abbot of S. BENEDETTO ALOISIO, Mathematician to P.
Urban VIII. and Professor in the University of ROME.
THe weghty business of the Draining of the Territories of Bologna, Ferrara,
and Romagna having been punctually handled and declared in writing from the
excellent memory of the Right Honorable and Noble Monsignore Corsini, who was
heretofore Deputed Commissary General, and Visitor of those Waters; I am not
able to make such another Discourse upon the same Subject, but will only say
somewhat for farther confirmation of that which I have said in this Book upon
the Lake of Venice, upon the Pontine Fens, and upon the Draining of those
Plains of Pisa, lying between the Rivers Arno and Serchio; whereby it is
manifest, that in all the aforementioned Cases, and in the present one that we
are in hand with, there have, in times past, very gross Errors been
committed, through the not having ever well understood the true measure of
Running waters; and here it is to be noted, that the business is, that in
Venice, the diversion of the waters of the Lake, by diverting the Brent was
debated, and in part executed, without consideration had how great abatement of
water might follow in the Lake, if the Brent were diverted, as I have shown in
the first Consideration upon this particular, from which act there has insued
very bad consequences, not only the difficulty of Navigation, but it has
infected the wholsomnesse of the Air, and caused the stoppage of the Ports of
Venice. And on the contrary, the same inadvertency of not considering what
rising of the Water the Reno, and other Rivers being opened into the Valleys of
Bologna and Ferrara, might cause in the said Valleys, is the certain cause that
so many rich and fertile Fields are drowned under water, converting the happy
habitations and dwellings of men into miserable receptacles for Fishes: Things
which doubtless would never have happened, if those Rivers had been kept at
their height, and Reno had been turned into Main-Po, and the other Rivers into
that of Argenta, and of Volano. Now there having sufficient been spoken by the
abovenamed Monsig. Corsini in his Relation, I will only add one conceit of my
own, which after the Rivers should be regulated, as has been said, I verily
believe would be of extraordinary profit, I much doubt indeed that I shall
find it a hard matter to persuade men to be of my mind, but yet nevertheless I
will not question, but that those, at least, who shall have understood what I
have said and demonstrated concerning the manners and proportions, according to
which the abatements and risings of Running waters proceed, that are made by
the Diversions and Introductions of Waters, will apprehend that my conjecture
is grounded upon Reason, And although I descend not to the exactness of
particulars, I will open the way to others, who having observed the requisite
Rules of considering the quantity of the waters that are introduced, or that
happen to be diverted, shall be able with punctuality to examine the whole
business, and then resolve on that which shall be expedient to be done.

Reflecting therefore upon the first Proposition, that the Risings of a Running
Water made by the accession of new water into the River, are to one another, as
the Square-Roots of the quantity of the water that runs; and consequently,
that the same comes to pass in the Diversions: Insomuch, that a River running
in height one such a certain measure, to make it increase double in height, the
water is to be increased to three times as much as it ran before; so that when
the water shall be quadruple, the height shall be double; and if the water were
centuple, the height would be decuple only, and so from one quantity to
another: And on the contrary, in the Diversions; If of the 100. parts of water
that run through a River, there shall be diverted 19/100, the height of the
River diminishes only 1/10, and continuing to divert 17/100, the height of
the River abateth likewise 1/10, and so proceeding to divert 15/100 and then
13/100, and then 11/100, and then 9/100, and then 7/100, and then 5/100, and
then 3/100, always by each of these diversions, the height of the Running
Water diminishes the tenth part: although that the diversions be so unequal.
Reflecting I say upon this infallible Truth, I have had a conceit, that though
the Reno and other Rivers were diverted from the Valleys, and there was only
left the Chanel of Navigation, which was only the 1/20 part of the whole water
that falls into the Valleys; yet nevertheless, the water in those same
Valleys would retain a tenth part of that height that became conjoined by the
concourse of all the Rivers: And therefore I should think that it were the best
resolution to maintain the Chanel of Navigation (if it were possible)
continuate unto the Po of Ferrara, and from thence to carry it into the Po of
Volano, for besides that it would be of very great ease in the Navigation of
Bologna, and Ferrara, the said water would render the Po of Volano navigable as
far as to the very Walls of Ferrara, and consequently the Navigation would be
continuate from Bologna to the Seaside.

But to manage this enterprise well, it is necessary to measure the quantity of
the Water that the Rivers discharge into the Valleys, and that which the Chanel
of Navigation carries, in manner as I have demonstrated at the beginning of
this Book; for this once known, we shall also come to know, how profitable this
diversion of the Chanel of Navigation from the Valleys is like to prove; which
yet would still be unprofitable, if so be that all the Rivers that discharge
their waters into the Valleys, should not first be Drained, according to what
has been above advertised.

Abbot CASTELLI, in the present consideration referring himself to the Relation
of Monsig. Corsini, grounded upon the Observations and Precepts of the said
Abbot; as is seen in the present Discourse. I thought it convenient for the
completing of the Work of our Author, upon these subjects, to insert it in
this place.

A Relation of the Waters in the Territories of Bologna and Ferrara.
BY The Right Honorable and Illustrious, Monsignore CORSINI, a Native of
Tuscany, Superintendent of the general DRAINS, and President of Romagna.
THe Rheno, and other Brooks of Romagna, were by the advice of P. Agostino
Spernazzati the Jesuit, toward the latter end of the time of Pope Clement
VIII. notwithstanding the opposition of the Bolognesi, and others concerned
therein, diverted from their Channels, for the more commodious cleansing of the
Po of Ferrara, and of its two Branches of Primaro, and Volano; in order to the
introducing the water of the Main-Po into them, to the end that their wonted
Torrents being restored, they might carry the Muddy-water thence into the Sea,
and restore to the City the Navigation which was last, as is manifest by the
Brief of the said Pope Clement, directed to the Cardinal San Clemence, bearing
date the 22. of August, 1604.

The work of the said cleansing, and introducing of the said Po, either as
being such in it self, or by the contention of the Cardinal Legates then in
these parts; and the jarrings that happened betwixt them, proved so difficult,
that after the expense of vast sums in the space of 21. years, there has been
nothing done, save the rendering of it the more difficult to be effected.

Interim, the Torrents with their waters, both muddy and clear, have damaged
the Grounds lying on the right hand of the Po of Argenta, and the Rheno those
on its Banks; of which I will speak in the first place, as of that which is of
greater importance, and from which the principal cause of the mischiefs that
result from the rest does proceed.

This Rheno having overflowed the Or Lordship.
Tennency of Sanmartina, in circumference about fourteen miles given it before,
and part of that of Cominale given it afterward, as it were, for a receptacle;
from whence, having deposed the matter of its muddiness, it issued clear by the
Mouths of Masi, and of Lievaloro, into the Po of Primaro, and of Volano; did
break down the encompassing Bank or Dam toward S. Martino, and that of its new
Chanel on the right hand near to Torre del Fondo.

By the breaches on this side it streamed out in great abundance from the upper
part of Cominale, and in the parts about Raveda, Pioggio, Caprara, Ghiare di
Reno, Sant' Agostino, San Prospero, San Vincenzo, and others, and made them to
become incultivable: it made also those places above but little fruitful, by
reason of the impediments that their Draines received, finding the Conveyances
called Riolo and Scorsuro, not only filled by la Motta and la Belletta, but
that they turned backwards of themselves.

But by the Mouths in the enclosing Bank or Dam at Borgo di S. Martino issuing
with violence, it first gave obstruction to the ancient Navigation of la Torre
de la Fossa, and afterward to the modern of the mouth of Masi, so that at
present the Commerce between Bologna and Ferrara is lost, nor can it ever be in
any durable way renewed, whilst that this exceeds its due bounds, and what ever
moneys shall be employed about the same shall be without any equivalent
benefit, and to the manifest and notable prejudice of the The Popes Exchequer.
Apostolic Chamber.

Thence passing into the Valley of Marzara, it swells higher, not only by the
rising of the water, but by the raising of the bottom, by reason of the matter
sunk thither after Land-floods, and dilateth so, that it covers all the
Meadows thereabouts, nor does it receive with the wonted facility the Drains of
the upper Grounds, of which the next unto it lying under the waters that return
upwards by the Conveyances, and the more remote, not finding a passage for
Rain-waters that settle, become either altogether unprofitable or little better.

From this Valley, by the Trench or Ditch of Marzara, or of la Duca by la
Buova, or mouth of Castaldo de Rossi, and by the new passage it falls into
the Po of Argenta, which being to receive it clear, that so it may sink farther
therein, and receiving it muddy, because it has acquired a quicker course,
there will arise a very contrary effect.

Here therefore the superficies of the water keeping high, until it come to the
Sea, hinders the Valleys of Ravenna, where the River Senio, those of San
Bernardino where Santerno was turned, those of Buon' acquisto, and those of
Marmorto, where the Idice, Quaderna, Sellero fall in, from swallowing and
taking in their Waters by their usual In-lets, yet many times, as I my self
have seen in the Visitation, they drink them up plentifully, whereupon, being
conjoined with the muddinesse of those Rivers that fall into the same, they
swell, and dilate, and overflow some grounds, and deprive others of their
Drains in like manner as has been said of that of Marrara, insomuch that from
the Point of S. Giorgio, as far as S. Alberto all those that are between the
Valleys and Po are spoiled, of those that are between Valley and Valley many
are in a very bad condition, and those that are some considerable space above
not a little damnified.

In fine, by raising the bottom or sand of the Valleys, and the bed of Reno,
and the too great repletion of the Po of Primaro with waters, the Valleys of
Comacchio (on which side the Banks are very bad) and Polesine is a plat of
Ground almost surrounded with Bogs or waters, like an Island
Polesine di S. Giorgio are threatened with a danger, that may in time, if it be
not remedied, become irreparable, and at present feels the incommodity of the
Waters, which penetrating through the pores of the Earth do spring up in the
same, which they call Purlings, which is all likely to redound to the prejudice
of Ferrara, so noble a City of Italy, and so important to the Ecclesiastic
State.

Which particulars all appear to be attested under the hand of a Notary in the
Visitation which I made upon the command of His Holiness, and are withal
known to be true by the People of Ferrara.
Ferraresi themselves, of whom (besides the request of the Bolognesi) the
greater part beg compassion with sundry Memorials, and remedies, as well for the
mischiefs past, as also for those in time to come, from which I hold it a duty
of Conscience, and of Charity to deliver them.

Pope Clement judged, that the sufficient means, to effect this was the said
Introduction of the Main Po into the Chanel of Ferrara; a resolution truly
Heroical, and of no less beauty than benefit to that City, of which I speak
not at present, because I think that there is need of a readier and more
accomodate remedy.

So that I see not how any other thing can be so much considerable as the
removal of Reno, omitting for this time to speak of In Channels made by hand.
enclosing it from Valley to Valley until it come to the Sea, as the Dukes of
Ferrara did design, forasmuch as all those Ferraresi that have interest in the
Polesine di S. Giorgio, and on the right hand of the Po of Argenta do not
desire it, and do, but too openly, protest against it; and because that before
the Chanel were made as far as the Sea, many hundreds of years would be spent,
and yet would not remedy the damages of those who now are agrieved, but would
much increase them, in regard the Valleys would continue submerged, the Drains
stopped, and the other Brooks obstructed, which would of necessity drown not a
few Lands that lie between Valley and Valley; and in fine, in regard it has
not from San Martina to the Sea for a space of fifty miles a greater fall then
19, 8, 6, feet, it would want that force which they themselves who propound
this project do require it to have, that so it may not depose the matter of the
muddiness when it is intended to be let into Volana.

So that making the Line of the bottom near to Vigarano, it would rise to
those prodigious terms that they do make bigger, and they may thence expect
those mischiefs, for which they will not admit of introducing it into the said
Po of Volana.

Amongst the ways therefore that I have thought of for effecting that same
remotion, and which I have caused to be viewed by skilful men that have taken a
level thereof, (with the assistance of the venerable Father, D. Benedetto
Castelli of Casina, a man of much fidelity and honesty, and no less expert in
such like affairs touching waters, than perfect in the Mathematick Disciplines)
two only, the rest being either too tedious, or too dangerous to the City,
have seemed to me worthy, and one of them also more than the other, to offer to
your Lordship.

The one is to remit it into the Chanel of Volana, through which it goes of its
own accord to the Sea.

The other is to turn it into Main-Po at Stellata, for, as at other times it
has done, it will carry it to the Sea happily.

As to what concerns the making choice of the first way, that which seems to
persuade us to it is, that we therein do nothing that is new, in that it is but
restored to the place whence it was removed in the year 1522. in the time of
Pope Adrian, by an agreement made in way of contract, between Alfonso, Duke of
Ferrara, and the Bolognesi; and that it was diverted for reasons, that are
either out of date, or else have been too long time deferred.

In like manner the facility wherewith it may be effected, letting it run into
the divided Po, whereby it will be turned to Ferrara, or else carrying it by
Torre del Fondo, to the mouth of Masi, and from thence through the Trench made
by the Ferraresi, along by Panaro, where also finding an ample Bed, and high
and thick Banks, that will serve at other times for it, and for the waters of
Po, there may a great expense be spared.

That what ever its Fall be, it would maintain the same, not having other
Rivers, which with their Floods can hinder it; and that running confined
between good Banks, without doubt it would not leave la Motto by the way; but
especially, that it would be sufficient if it came to Codigoro, where being
assisted by the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, it would run no hazard of having
its Chanel filled up from thence downwards.

That there might thence many benefits be derived to the City, by means of the
Running Waters, and also no mean Navigation might be expected.

On the contrary it is objected, That it is not convenient to think of
returning this Torrent into the divided Po, by reason of the peril that would
thence redound to this City.

And that going by Torre del Fondo, through Sanmartina to the Mouth de Masi by
the Chapel of Vigarano unto the Sea, it is by this way 70. miles; nor is the
Fall greater than 26. 5. 6. Feet, so that it would come to fall but 4. inches
and an half, or thereabouts in a mile; whereas the common opinion of the
skillful (to the end that the Torrents may not depose their sand that they
bring with them in Land-Floods) requires the twenty fourth part of the
hundredth part of their whole length, which in our case, accounting according
to the measure of these places, is 16. inches a The inch of these places is
somewhat bigger than ours.
mile; whereupon the sinking of the Mud and Sand would most certainly follow,
and so an immense heightning of the Line of the Bottom, and consequently a
necessity of raising the Banks, the impossibility of maintaining them, the
danger of breaches and decays, things very prejudicial to the Islets of this
City, and of San Giorgio, the obstruction of the Drains, which from the Tower
of Tienne downwards, fall into the said Chanel; to wit, those of the Sluices of
Goro, and the Drains, of the Meadows of Ferrara: And moreover, the damages that
would arise unto the said Islet of S. Giorgio, and the Valleys of Comachio, by
the waters that should enter into the Goro or Dam of the Mills of Belriguardo,
through the Trenches of Quadrea, which cannot be stopped, because they belong to
the Duke of Modena, who has right of diverting the waters of that place at his
pleasure to the work of turning Mills.

The greater part of which Objections, others pretend to prove frivolous, by
saying, that its running there till at the last it was turned another way, is a
sign that it had made such an elevation of the Line, of its Bed as it required;
denying that it needs so great a declivity as is mentioned above; and that
for the future it would rise no more.

That the said Dra^ns and Ditches did empty into the same, whilst Po was there;
so that they must needs be more able to do so when only Reno runs that way.

That there would no Breaches follow, or if they did, they would be only of
the water of Reno, which in few hours might be taken away (in those parts they
call damming up of Breaches, and mending the Bank, taking away the Breaches)
and its a question whether they would procure more inconvenience than benefit,
for that its Mud and Sand might in many places, by filling them up, occasion a
seasonable improvement.

Now omitting to discourse of the solidity of the reasons on the oneside, or on
the other, I will produce those that move me to suspend my allowance of this
design.

The first is, that although I dare not subscribe to the opinion of those that
require 16. inches Declivity in a mile to Reno, to prevent its deposing of Mud;
yet would I not be the Author that should make a trial of it with so much
hazard, for having to satisfy my self in some particulars caused a Level to be
taken of the Rivers L'amone, Senio, and Santerno, by Bernardino Aleotti, we
found that they have more Declivity by much than Artists require, as also the
Reno has from la Botta de Ghislieri to the Chapel of Vigarano, for in the
space of four miles its BottomLine falls five feet and five inches. So that I
hold it greater prudence to depend upon that example, than to go contrary to a
common opinion, especially since, that the effects caused by Reno it self do
confirm me in the same, for when it was forsaken by the Po, after a few years,
either because it had choked up its Chanel with Sand, or because its too long
journey did increase it, it also naturally turned aside, and took the way of
the said Po toward Stellata. Nay, in those very years that it did run that
way, it only began (as relations say) to make Breaches, an evident sign that it
does depose Sand, and raise its Bed; which agrees with the testimony of some
that were examined in the Visitation of the Public Notary, who found great
benefit by having Running Water, and some kind of passage for Boats, and yet
nevertheless affirm that it for want of Running Water had made too high
Stoppages and Shelfes of Sand; so that if it should be restored to the Course
that it forsook, I much fear that after a short time, if not suddenly, it would
leave it a-again.

The second I take from the observation of what happened to Panaro, when with
so great applause of the Feraresi, it was brought by Cardinal Serra into the
said Chanel of Volana; for that notwithstanding that it had Running Waters in
much greater abundance than Reno; yet in the time that it continued in that
Chanel it raised its Bed well near five feet, as is to be seen below the Sluice
made by Cardinal Capponi to his new Chanel; yea, the said Cardinal Serra who
desired that this his undertaking should appear to have been of no danger nor
damage, was constrained at its Overflowings, to give it Vent into Sanmartina,
that it might not break in upon, and prejudice the City; which danger I should
more fear from Reno, in regard it carries a greater abundance of Water and
Sand.

Thirdly, I am much troubled (in the uncertainty of the success of the affair)
at the great expense thereto required; For in regard I do not approve of
letting it in, near to the Fortress, for many respects, and carrying it by la
Torre del Fondo to the Mouth de Masi, it will take up eight miles of double
Banks, a thing not easy to be procured, by reason that the Grounds lie under
Water; but from the Mouth de Masi unto Codigoro, it would also be necessary to
make new Scowrings of the Chanel; to the end, that the Water approaching (by
wearing and carrying away the Earth on both shores, might make a Bed sufficient
for its Body, the depth made for Panaro not serving the turn, as I conceive;
and if it should suffice, when could the people of Ferrara hope to be
re-imbursed and satisfied for the charge thereof?

Fourthly, it serves as an Argument with me, to see that the very individual
persons concerned in the Remotion or Diversion of the said Torrent, namely, the
Bolognesi do not incline unto it, and that the whole City of Ferrara, even
those very persons who at present receive damage by it, cannot endure to hear
thereof. The reason that induces these last named to be so averse thereto, is,
either because that this undertaking will render the introduction of the Water
of Main-Po more difficult; or because they fear the danger thereof; The others
decline the Project, either for that they know that Reno cannot long continue
in that Course, or because they fear that it is too much exposed to those men's
revengeful Cutting of it who do not desire it should; and if a man have any
other ways, he ought, in my opinion, to forbear that, which to such as stand
in need of its Removal, is less satisfactory, and to such as oppose it, more
prejudicial.

To conclude, I exceedingly honor the judgment of Cardinal Capponi, who having
to his Natural Ability and Prudence added a particular Study, Observation, and
Experience of these Waters for the space of three years together, does not
think that Reno can go by Volana; to which agrees the opinion of Cardinal S.
Marcello, Legate of this City, of whom, for his exquisite understanding, we
ought to make great account. But if ever this should be resolved on, it would
be materially necessary to unite the Quick and Running Waters of the little
Chanel of Cento, of the Chanel Navilio, of Guazzaloca, and at its very
beginning those of Dardagna, which at present, is one of the Springs or Heads
of Panaro, that so they might assist it in carrying its Sand, and the matter of
its Muddiness into the Sea; and then there would not fail to be a greater
evacuation and scowring; but withal the Proprietors in the Islet of San
Giorgio and of Ferrara must prepare themselves to endure the inconveniences of
Purlings or Sewings of the Water from the River through the Boggy Ground
thereabouts.

I should more easily incline therefore to carry it into Main-Po at Stellata,
for the Reasons that Cardinal Capponi most ingeniously enumerates in a short,
but well-grounded Tract of his: not because that indeed it would not both by
Purlings and by Breaches occasion some inconvenience; especially, in the
beginning: but because I hold this for the incomodities of it, to be a far less
evil than any of the rest; and because that by this means there is no occasion
given to them of Ferrara, to explain that they are deprived of the hope of ever
seeing the Po again under the Walls of their City: To whom, where it may be
done, it is but reason that satisfaction should be given.

It is certain that Po was placed by Nature in the midst of this great Valley
made by the Appennine Hills, and by the Alps, to carry, as the Master-Drain to
the Sea, that is the grand receptacle of all Waters; those particular streams
which descend from them.

That the Reno by all Geographers, Strabo, Pliny, Solimas, Mella, and others is
enumerated among the Rivers that fall into the said Po.

That although Po should of it self change its course, yet would Reno go to
look it out, if the works erected by humane industry did not obstruct its
passage; so that it neither is, nor ought to seem strange, if one for the
greater common good should turn it into the same.

Now at Stellata it may go several ways into Po, as appears by the levels
that were taken by my Order; of all which I should best like the turning of it
to la Botta de' Ghislieri, carrying it above Bondeno to the Church of
Gambarone, or a little higher or lower, as shall be judged least prejudicial,
when it comes to the execution, and this for two principal reasons: The one
because that then it will run along by the confines of the Church P trimony,
without separating Ferrara from the rest of it; The other is, Because the Line
is shorter, and consequently the fall greater; for that in a space of ten miles
and one third, it falls twenty six feet, more by much than is required by
Artists; and would go by places where it could do but little hurt,
notwithstanding that the persons interressed study to amplify it incredibly.

On the contrary, there are but only two objections that are worthy to be
examined; One, That the Drains and Ditches of S. Bianca, of the Chanel of
Cento, and of Burana, and all those others that enter into Po, do hinder this
diversion of Reno, by the increasing of the waters in the Po. The other is that
Po rising about the Transom of the Pilaster-Sluice, very near 20 feet, the Reno
would have no fall into the same; whereupon it would rise to a terrible height,
at which it would not be possible to make, or keep the Banks made, so that it
would break out and drown the Meadows, and cause mischiefs, and damages
unspeakable and irreparable; as is evident by the experiment made upon Panaro,
which being confined between Banks, that it might go into Po, this not being
neither in its greatest excrescense, it broke out into the territories of
Final, and of Ferrara. And though that might be done, it would thereupon ensue,
that there being let into the Chanel of Po, 2800. square feet of water (for so
much we account those of Reno and Panaro, taken together in their greatest
heights) the superficies of it would rise at least four feet, insomuch that
either it would be requisite to raise its Banks all the way unto the Sea, to
the same height, which the treasures of the Indies would not suffice to effect;
or else there would be a necessity of enduring excessive Breaches. To these two
Heads are the Arguments reduced, which are largely amplified against our
opinion; and I shall answer first to the last, as most material.

I say therefore, that there are three cases to be considered: First, Po high,
and Reno low. Secondly, Reno high, and Po low. Thirdly, Reno and Po both high
together.

As to the first and second, there is no difficulty in them; for if Po shall
not be at its greatest height, Reno shall ever have a fall into it, and there
shall need no humane Artifice about the Banks: And if Reno shall be low, Po
shall regurgitate and flow up into the Chanel of it; and also from thence no
inconvenience shall follow. The third remains, from which there are expected
many mischiefs; but it is a most undoubted truth, that the excrescencies of
Reno, as coming from the adjacent Appennines and Rains, are to continue but
seven, or eight hours at most, and so would never, or very rarely happen to be
at the same time with those of Po, caused by the melting of the snowes of the
Alps, at least 400. miles distance from thence. But because it sometimes may
happen, I reply, that when it comes to pass, Reno shall not go into Po, but it
shall have allowed it one or two Vents; namely, into the Chanel of Ferrara, as
it has ever had; and into Sanmartina, where it runs at present, and
wherewith there is no doubt, but that the persons concerned will be well
pleased, it being a great benefit to them, to have the water overflow their
grounds once every four or five years, instead of seeing it anoy them
continually. Yea, the Vent may be regulated, reserving for it the Chanel in
which Reno at present runs; and instead of turning it by a Dam at la Betta
de Ghislieri, perhaps, to turn it by help of strong Sluices, that may upon all
occasions be opened and shut. And for my part, I do not question but that the
Proprietors themselves in Sanmartina would make a Chanel for it; which
receiving, and confining it in the time of the Vents, might carry the Sand into
the Po of Primaro: Nor need there thence be feared any stoppage by Mud and
Sand, since that it is supposed that there will but very seldom be any
necessity of using it; so that time would be allowed, upon occasion, to scowr
and cleanse it.

And in this manner all those Prodigies vanish that are raised with so much
fear from the entrance of the Water of Reno swelled into Po, when it is high,
to which there needs no other answer; yet nevertheless we do not take that
quantity of Water, that is carried by Reno, and by Panaro, to be so great as is
affirmed: For that P. D. Benedetto Castelli has no less accutely than
accurately observed the measures of this kind, noting that the breadth and
depth of a River is not enough to resolve the question truly, but that there is
respect to be had to the velocity of the Waters, and the term of time, things
hitherto not considered by the Skilful in these affairs; and therefore they are
not able to say what quantity of Waters the said Rivers carry, nor to conclude
of the risings that will follow thereupon. Nay, it is most certain, that if all
the Rivers that fall into Po, which are above thirty, should rise at the rate
that these compute Reno to do, an hundred feet of Banks would not suffice, and
yet they have far fewer: So that this confirms the Rule of R. P. D. Benedetto,
namely, that the proportion of the height of the Water of Reno in Reno to the
height of the Water of Reno in Po, is compounded of the proportion of the
breadth of the Chanel of Po to that of Reno, and of the velocity of the Water
of Reno in Po to the velccity of the Water of Reno in Reno; a manifest argument
that there cannot in it, by this new augmentation of Waters follow any
alteration that necessitates the raising of its Banks, as appears by the
example of Panaro, which has been so far from swelling Po, that it has rather
assuaged it, for it has carried away many Shelfs and many Islets that had
grown in its Bed, for want of Waters sufficient to bear away the matter of
Land-floods in so broad a Chanel; and as is learnt by the trial made by us in
Panaro with the Water of Burana; for erecting in the River standing marks, and
shutting the said Sluice, we could see no sensible abatement, nor much less
after we had opened it sensible increasment; by which we judge that the same is
to succeed to Po, by letting in of Reno, Burana having greater proportion to
Panaro than Reno to Po, considering the state of those Rivers in which the
Observation was made. So that there is no longer any occasion for those great
raisings of Banks, and the danger of the ruptures as well of Reno as of Po do
vanish, as also the fear lest that the Sluices which empty into Po should
receive obstruction: which if they should, yet it would be over in a few hours.
And as to the Breaches of Panaro which happened in 1623. I know not why, seeing
that it is confessed that the Po was not, at that time, at its height, one
should rather charge it with the crime, than quit it thereof. The truth is,
that the Bank was not made of proof, since that the same now continues whole
and good, and Panaro does not break out; nay, there was, when it brake more
than a foot and half of its Banks above the Water, and to spare; but it broke
through by a Moles working; or by the hole of a Water-Rat, or some such vermin;
and by occasion of the badness of the said Banks, as I find by the testimony
of some witnesses examined by my command, that I might know the truth thereof.
Nor can I here forbear to say, that it would be better, if in such matters men
were more candid and sincere. But to secure our selves nevertheless, to the
utmost of our power, from such like Breaches which may happen at the first, by
reason of the newness of the Banks, I presuppose that from Po unto the place
whence Reno is cut, there ought to be a high and thick Fence made with its
Banks, so that there would be no cause to fear any whatsoever accessions of
Water, although that concurrence of three Rivers, which was by some more
ingeniously aggravated than faithfully stated by that which was said above were
true; to whom I think not my self bound to make any farther reply, neither to
those who say that Po will ascend upwards into Reno, since that these are the
same persons who would introduce a small branch of the said Po into the Chanel
of Ferrara, that so it may conveigh to the Sea, not Reno only, but also all
the other Brooks of which we complained; and because that withal it is
impossible, that a River so capacious as Po should be incommoded by a Torrent,
that, as I may say, has no proportion to it.

I come now to the business of the Ditches and Draines; and as to the
Conveyance of Burana, it has heretofore been debated to turn it into Main-Po,
so that in this case it will receive no harm, and though it were not removed,
yet would it by a Trench under ground pursue the course that it now holds,
and also would be able to dis-imbogue again into the said new Chanel of Reno,
which conforming to the superficies of the Water of Po, would continue at a
lower level than that which Panara had when it came to Ferrara, into which
Burana did nevertheless empty it self for some time.

The Conveyance or Drain of Santa Bianca, and the little Chanel of Cento may
also empty themselves by two subterranean Trenches, without any prejudice where
they run at present, or without any more works of that nature, they may be
turned into the said new Chanel, although with somewhat more of inconvenience;
and withal, the Chanel of Ferrara, left dry, would be a sufficient receptacle
for any other Sewer or Drain whatsoever, that should remain there.

All which Operations might be brought to perfection with 150. thousand Crowns,
well and faithfully laid out; which sum the Bolognesi will not be unwilling to
provide; besides that those Ferraresi ought to contribute to it, who shall
partake of the benefit.

Let me be permitted in this place to propose a thing which I have thought of,
and which peradventure might occasion two benefits at once, although it be not
wholly new. It was in the time of Pope Paul V. propounded by one Crescenzio an
Ingineer, to cut the Main-Po, above le Papozze; and having made a sufficient
evacuation to derive the water thereof into the Po of Adriano, and so to
procure it to be Navigable, which was not at that time effected, either by
reason of the oppositions of those, whose possessions were to be cut through, or
by reason of the great sum of money that was necessary for the effecting of it:
But in viewing those Rivers, we have observed, that the sedge cutting might
easily be made below le Papozze, in digging through the Bank called Santa Maria,
and drawing a Trench of the bigness that skilful Artists shall judge meet unto
the Po Of Adriano.
of Ariano, below the Secche of the said S. Maria; which as being a work of not
above 160. Perches in length, would be finished with only 12000. Crowns.

First; it is to be believed, that the waters running that way, would not fail
to open that Mouth into the Sea, which at present is almost choakt up by the
Shelf of Sand, which the new Mouth of Ponto Virro has brought thither; and
that it would again bring into use the Port Goro, and its Navigation.

And happily experience might teach us, that the superficies of Po might come to
fall by this asswagement of Water, so that the accession of Reno would
questionless make no rising in it: Whereupon, if it should so fall out, those
Princes would have no reason to complain; who seem to question, lest by this
new accession of water into Po, the Sluices might be endangered. Which I
thought not fit to omit to represent to your Lordship; not, that I propose it
to you as a thing absolutely certain, but that you might, if you so pleased,
lay it before persons whose judgments are approved in these affairs.

I return now from where I degrest, and affirm it as indubitable, that Reno
neither can, nor ought to continue longer where it at this day is; and that it
cannot go into any other place but that, whither Cardinal Capponi designed to
carry it, and which at present pleases me better than any other; or into
Volana, whence it was taken away; the vigilance of Men being able to obviate
part of those mischiefs, which it may do there.

But from its Removal, besides the alleviation of the harm which by it self is
caused, there would also result the diminution of that which is occasioned by
the other Brooks, to the right hand of the Po of Argenta; forasmuch as the said
Po wanting all the water of Reno, it would of necessity come to ebb in such
manner, that the Valleys would have a greater Fall into the same, and
consequently it would take in, and swallow greater abundance of water; and by
this means the Ditches and Draines of the Up-Lands would likewise more easily
Fall into them; especially if the scouring of Zenzalino were brought to
perfection, by which the waters of Marrara would fall into Marmorta: And if
also that of Bastia were enlarged, and finished, by which there might enter as
much water into the said Po of Argenta, as is taken from it by the removal of
Reno; although that by that means the water of the Valleys would assuage
double: Nor would the people of Argenta, the Isles of S. Giorgio, and Comacchio
have any cause to complain; for that there would not be given to them more
water than was taken away: Nay sometimes whereas they had Muddy waters, they
would have clear; nor need they to fear any rising: And furthermore, by this
means a very great quantity of ground would be restored to culture; For the
effecting of all which, the sum of 50. thousand Crowns would go very far, and
would serve the turn at present touching those Brooks, carrying them a little
farther in the mean time, to fill up the greater cavities of the Valleys, that
we might not enter upon a vaster and harder work, that would bring with it the
difficulties of other operations, and so would hinder the benefit which these
people expect from the paternal charity of His Holiness.

TO The Right Honorable, MONSIGNORE D. Ferrante Cesarini.
MY Treatise of the MENSURATION of RUNNING WATERS, Right Honorable, and most
Noble Sir, has not a greater Prerogative than its having been the production
of the command of Pope Urban VIII. when His Holiness was pleased to enjoin me
to go with Monsignore Corsini, in the Visitation that was imposed upon him in
the year 1625. of the Waters of Ferrara, Bologna, Romagna, and Romagnola; for
that, on that occasion applying my whole Study to my service and duty, I
published in that Treatise some particulars till then not rightly understood
and considered (that I knew) by any one; although they be in themselves most
important, and of extraordinary consequence. Yet I must render thanks to Your
Lordship for the honor you have done to that my Tract; but wish withal, that
your Esteem of it may not prejudice the universal Esteem that the World has of
Your Honors most refined judgment.

As to that Point which I touch upon in the Conclusion, namely, That the
consideration of the Velocity of Running Water supplyeth the consideration of
the Larghezza, but misprinted.
Length omitted in the common way of measuring Running Waters; Your Lordship
having commanded me that in favor of Practice, and for the perfect discovery
of the disorder that commonly happens now adays in the distribution of the
Waters of Fountains, I should demonstrate that the knowledge of the Velocity
serves for the finding of the Length: I have thought fit to satisfy your
Command by relating a Fable; which, if I do not deceive my self, will make out
to us the truth thereof; insomuch that the rest of my Treatise shall thereby
also become more manifest and intelligible, even to those who find therein
some kind of obscurity.

In the days of yore, before that the admirable Art of Weaving was in use,
there was found in Persia a vast and unvaluable Treasure, which consisted in an
huge multitude of pieces of Ermesin, or Damask, I know not whether; which, as I
take it, amounted to near two thousand pieces; which were of such a nature,
that though their Breadth and Thickness were finite and determinate, as they
use to be at this day; yet nevertheless, their Length was in a certain sense
infinite, for that those two thousand pieces, day and night without ceasing,
issued out with their ends at such a rate, that of each piece there issued 100.
Else a day, from a deep and dark Cave, consecrated by the Superstition of those
people, to the fabulous Arachne. In those innocent and early times (I take it
to have been, in that so much applauded and desired Golden age) it was left to
the liberty of any one, to cut off of those pieces what quantity they pleased
without any difficulty: But that felicity decaying and degenerating, which was
altogether ignorant of Meum and Tuum; terms certainly most pernicious, the
Original of all evils, and cause of all discords; there were by those people
strong and vigilant Guards placed upon the Cave, who resolved to make
merchandise of the Stuffes; and in this manner they began to set a price upon
that inestimable Treasure, selling the propriety in those pieces to diverse
Merchants; to some they sold a right in one, to some in two, and to some in
more. But that which was the worst of all, There was found out by the
insatiable avarice of these men crafty inventions to deceive the Merchants
also; who came to buy the aforesaid commodity, and to make themselves Masters,
some of one some of two, and some of more ends of those pieces of stuff; and in
particular, there were cetain ingenuous Machines placed in the more secret
places of the Cave, with which at the pleasure of the Guards, they did retard
the velocity of those Stuffs, in their issuing out of the Cave; insomuch, that
he who ought to have had 100. Else of Stuff in a day, had not above 50, and he
who should have had 400, enjoyed the benefit of 50. only; and so all the rest
were defrauded of their Rights, the surplusage being sold, appropriated, and
shared at the will of the corrupt Officers: So that the business was without
all order or justice, insomuch that the Goddess Arachne being displeased at
those people, deprived every one of their benefit, and with a dreadful
Earthquake for ever closing the mouth of the Cave, in punishment of so much
impiety and malice: Nor did it avail them to excuse themselves, by saying that
they allowed the Buyer the Breadth and Thickness bargained for; and that of the
Length, which was infinite, there could no account be kept: For the wise and
prudent Priest of the Sacred Grotto answered, That the deceit lay in the
length, which they were defrauded of, in that the velocity of the stuff was
retarded, as it issued out of the Cave: and although the total length of the
Piece was infinite, for that it never ceased coming forth, and so was not to be
computed; yet nevertheless its length considered, part by part, as it came out
of the Cave, and was bargained for, continued still finite, and might be one
while greater, and another while lesser, according as the Piece was constituted
in greater or lesser velocity; and he added withal, that exact Justice
required, that when they sold a piece of stuff, and the propriety or dominion
therein, they ought not only to have ascertained the breadth and thickness of
the Piece, but also to have determined the length, determining its velocity.

The same disorder and confusion, that was represented in the Fable, does come
to pass in the History of the Distribution of the Waters of Conduits and
Fountains, seeing that they are sold and bought, having regard only to the two
Dimensions, I mean of Breadth and Height of the Mouth that discharges the
Water; and to remedy such an inconvenience, it is necessary to determine the
length in the velocity; for never shall we be able to make a guess at the
quantity of the Body of Running Water, with the two Dimensions only of Breadth
and Height, without Length.

And to the end, that the whole business may be reduced to a most easy
practice, by which the waters of Aqueducts may be bought and sold justly, and
with measures always exact and constant.

First, the quantity of the Water ought diligently to be examined, which the
whole principal * Pipe discharges in a time certain, as for instance, in an
hour, in half an hour, or in a less interval of time, (for knowing which I
have a most exact and easy Rule) and finding that the whole principal pipe
discharges v. g. a thousand Tuns of Water in the space of one or more hours,
in selling of this water, it ought not to be uttered by the ordinary and false
measure, but the distribution is to be made with agreement to give and maintain
to the buyer ten or twenty, or a greater number of Tuns, as the bargain shall
be made, in the space of an hour, or of some other set and determinate time.
And here I add, that if I were to undertake to make such an adjustment, I
would make use of a way to divide and measure the time with such accuratenesse,
that the space of an hour should be divided into four, six, or eight thousand
parts without the least error; which Rule was taught me by my Master Sign.
Galilaeo Galilaei, Chief Philosopher to the most Serene Grand Duke of Tuscany.
And this way will serve easily and admirably to our purpose and occasion; so
that we shall thereby be able to know how many Quarts of Water an Aqueduct will
discharge in a given time of hours, months, or years. And in this manner we
may constitute a Cock that shall discharge a certain and determinate quantity
of water in a time given.

And because daily experience shows us, that the Springs of Aqueducts do not
maintain them always equally high, and full of Water, but that sometimes they
increase, and sometimes decrease, which accident might possibly procure some
difficulty in our distribution: Therefore, to the end that all manner of
scruple may be removed, I conceive that it would be convenient to provide a
Cistern, according to the occasion, into which there might always fall one
certain quantity of water, which should not be greater than that which the
principal pipe discharges in times of drought, when the Springs are bare of
water, that so in this Cistern the water might always keep at one constant
height. Then to the Cistern so prepared we are to fasten the Cocks of
particular persons to whom the Water is sold by the Reverend Apostolic
Chamber, according to what has been observed before; and that quantity of
Water which remains over and above, is to be discharged into another Cistern,
in which the Cocks of the Waters for public services, and of those which
people buy upon particular occasions are to be placed. And when the business
shall have been brought to this pass, there will likewise a remedy be found to
the so many disorders that continually happen; of which, for brevity sake, I
will instance in but four only, which concern both public and private
benefit, as being, in my judgment, the most enormous and intolerable.

The first inconvenience it, that in the common way of measuring, dispensing,
and selling the Waters of Aqueducts, it is not understood, neither by the Buyer
nor Seller, what the quantity truly is that is bought and sold; nor could I
ever meet with any either Engineer or Architect, or Artist, or other that was
able to decypher to me, what one, or two, or ten inches of water was. But by
our above declared Rule, for dispensing the Waters of Aqueducts we may very
easily know the true quantity of Water that is bought or sold, as that it is so
many Tuns an hour, so many a day, so many in a year, etc.

The second disorder that happens, at present, in the distribution of
Aqueducts is, that as the business is now governed, it lies in the power of a
^ordid Mason to take unjustly from one, and give undeservedly to another more
or less Water than belongs to them of right: And I have seen it done, of my
own experience. But in our way of measuring and distributing Waters, there can
no fraud be committed; and putting the case that they should be committed, its
an easy matter to know it, and amend it, by repairing to the Tribunal
appointed.

Thirdly, it happens very often, (and we have examples thereof both ancient and
modern) that in dispensing the Water after the common and vulgar way; there is
sometimes more Water dispended than there is in the Register, in which there
will be registered, as they say, two hundred inches (for example) and there will
be dispensed two hundred and fifty inches, or more. Which passage happened in
the time of Nerva the Emperor, as Giulio Frontino writes, in his 2. Book, De
Aquaductibus Vrbis Romae, where he observes that they had in Commentariis
12755. Quinaries of Water; and found that they dispensed 14018. Quinaries. And
the like Error has continued, and is in use also modernly until our times.
But if our Rule shall be observed, we shall incur no such disorder, nay there
will always be given to every one his share, according to the holy end of
exact justice, which dat unicuique quod suum est. As on the contrary, it is
manifest, that His Divine Majesty hates and abominateth Pondus and pondus,
Mensura and mensura, as the Holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of Solomon in the
Proverbs, Chap. 20. Pondus and Pondus, Mensura and Mensura, utrumque
abominabile est apud Deum. And therefore who is it that sees not that the way
of dividing and measuring of Waters, commonly used, is expressly against the
Law of God. Since that thereby the same measure is made sometimes greater, and
sometimes lesser; A disorder so enormous and execrable, that I shall take the
boldness to say, that for this sole respect it ought to be condemned and
prohibited likewise by human Law, which should Enact that in this business
there should be employed either this our Rule, or some other that is more
exquisite and practicable, whereby the measure might keep one constant and
determinate tenor, as we make it, and not, as it is now, to make Pondus and
Pondus, Mensura and Mensura.

And this is all that I had to offer to Your most Illustrious Lordship, in
obedience to your commands, reserving to my self the giving of a more exact
account of this my invention, when the occasion shall offer, of reducing to
practice so holy, just, and necessary a reformation of the Measure of Running
Waters and of Aqueducts in particular: which Rule may also be of great benefit
in the division of the greater Waters to overflow Grounds, and for other uses:
I humbly bow,

Your Most Devoted, and Most Obliged Servant, D. Benedetto Castelli, Abb. Casin.

FINIS.
A TABLE Of the most observable matters in this Treatise of the MENSURATION of
RUNNING WATERS.
A
A Batements of a River in different and unequal Diversions, is always equal,
which is proved with 100. Siphons. Page 75 Arno River when it rises upon a
Land-Flood near the Sea one third of a Brace, it rises about Pisa 6. or 7.
Braces. 82
B
Banks near to the Sea lower, than far from thence. Corollary XIV. 16 Brent
River diverted from the Lake of Venice, and its effects. 64 Brent supposed
insufficient to remedy the inconveniences of the Lake, and the falsity of that
supposition. 67 Brent, and its benefits in the Lake. 70 Its Deposition of Sand
in the Lake, how great it is. 78, 79 Bridges over Rivers, and how they are to
be made. Appendix VIII. 20 Burana River, its rising, and falling in Panaro. 110
C
Castelli applied himself to this Study by Order of Urban VIII. 2 Chanel of
Navigation in the Valleys of Bologna, and its inconveniences. 99 Carried into
the Po of Ferrara, and its benefits ibid. Ciampoli a lover of those
Observations of Waters. 3
D
Difficulty of this business of Measuring Waters. 2 Disorders that happen in
the distribution of the Waters of Aqueducts, and their remedies. 113
Distribution of the Waters of Fountains, and Aqueducts. Appendix X. 22
Distribution of Water to overflow Grounds. Appendix XI. 23, 69, 70 Diversion
of Reno and other Brooks of Romagna, advised by P. Spernazzati to what end it
was. 100 Drains and Ditches, the benefit they receive by cutting away the Weeds
and Reeds. Appendix IX. 21 Drains and Sewers obstructed, in the Diversion of
Reno into Main Po, and a remedy for the same. 110
E
Engineers unvers'd in the matters of Waters. 2 Erour found in the common way
of Measuring Running Waters: 68, 69 Error in deriving the Water of Acqua
Paola. Appendix II. 17, 18 Error of Bartolotti. 86, 87 Errors of Engineers in
the Derivation of Channels. Corollary, XII. 12 Error of Engineers in Measuring
of Reno in Po. Appendix III. ibid. Error of other Engineers; contrary to the
precedent. Appendix IV. Ibid. Error of Giovanni Fontana in Measuring Waters.
Corollary XI. 9 Error of Giulio Frontino in Measuring the Waters of Aqueducts.
Appendix I. 17 Errors committed in cutting the Bank at Bondeno, in the
swellings of Po: Corollary XIII. 81
F
Fenns Pontine, Drained by Pope Sixtus Quintus, with vast expense. 92 The ruin
and miscarriage thereof. 93 Tardity of the principal Chanel that Drains them,
cause of the Drowning. ibid. They are obstructed by the Fishing-Wears, which
swell the River. 94 Waters of Fiume Sisto, which flow in great abundance into
the Evacuator of the said Fenns. 94, 95 Remedies to the disorders of those
Fenns. 95, 96 Fontana Giovanni, his errors in Measuring Waters. Corollary XI.
9 Fiume Morto, whether it ought to fall into the Sea, or into Serchio, 79 Let
into Serchio and its inconveniences. 79, 80 The dangerous rising of its Waters:
when to be expected. 81 Its inconveniences when it is higher in level than
Serchio, and why it rises most On the Seacoasts, at such time as the Winds
make the Sea to swell. 83
G
Galilaeo Galilaei, honorably mentioned. Page 2, 28 His Rule for measuring the
time. 49
H
Height, vide Quick Heights different, made by the same stream of a Brook or
Torrent, according to the diverse Velocities in the entrance of the River.
Corollary I. 6 Heights different, made by the Torrent in the River, according
to the different heights of the River. Corollary II. ibid.
K
Knowledge of Motion how much i^ imports. 1
L
Lake of Perugia, and, be Observation made on it. Appendix XII. 42 Lake of
Thrasimenus and Considerations upon it, a Letter written to Sig. Galilaeo
Galilaei. 28 Lake of Venice, and Considerations upon it. 63, 73 Low Waters
which let the bottom of it be discovered. 64 The stoppage and choking of the
Ports, a main cause of the disorders of the Lake, and the grand remedy to those
disorders what it is. 66 Lakes and Meers along the Seacoasts, and the causes
thereof. 65 Length of Waters, how it is to be Measured. 70
M
Measure and Distributions of Waters. Appendix V. 18 Measure of Rivers that
fall into others difficult. Coroll. X: 9 Measure of the Running Water of a
Chanel of an height known by a Regulator of a Measure given, in a time
assigned. Proposition I. Problem I. 50 Measure of the Water of any River, of
any greatness, in a time given. Proposition V. Problem III. 60 Measure that
shows how much Water a River discharges in a time given. 48 Mole-holes,
Motion the principal subject of Philosophy. 1 Mud. Vide Sand.
N
Navigation from Bologna to Ferrara, is become impossible, till such time as
Reno be diverted. 101 Navigation in the Lake of Venice endangered, and how
restored. 65, 70
P
Perpendicularity of the Banks of the River, to the upper superficies of it. 37
Perpendicularity of the Banks to the bottom. 37 Perugia. Vide Lake. Pontine.
Vide Fenns. Ports of Venice, Malamocco, Bondolo, and Chiozza, choked up for
want of Water in the Lake. 65 Proportions of unequal Sections of equal
Velocity, and of equal Sections of unequal Velocity. Axiom IV. and V. 38
Proportions of equal and unequal quantities of Water, which pass by the
Sections of different Rivers. Proposition II. 39 Proportions of unequal
Sections that in equal times discharge equal quantities of Water. Proposition
III. 41 Proportion wherewith one River falling into another, varieth in height.
Proposition IV. 44 Proportion of the Water discharged by a River in the time of
Flood, to the Water discharged in an equal time by the said River, before or
after the Flood. Proposition V. 44 Proportion of the Heights made by two equal
Brooks or Streams falling into the same River. Proposition VI. 45 Proportion of
the Water which a River discharges increasing in Quick-height by the addition
of new Water, to that which it discharges after the increase is made.
Proposition IV. Theor. II. 54 Proportion of a River when high, to it self when
low. Coroll. I. 55
Q
Quantity of Running Waters is never certain, if with the Vulgar way of
Measuring them, their Velocities be not considered. 32 Quantities of Waters
which are discharged by a River, answer in equality to the Velocities and times
in which they are discharged. Axiom I, II, III. 38 Quick-Height of a River,
what it is. Definition V. 48
R
Reason of the Proverb, Take heed of the still Waters. Coroll. VI. 7 Reasons of
Monsignore Corsini against the diversion of Reno into the Po of Volano. 105
Reasons of Cardinal Capponi and Monsig. Corsini, for the turning of Reno into
Main Po. 106 Two objections on the contrary, and answers to them. 104 and 105
What ought to be the proportion of the Heights of Reno is Reno, and of Reno in
Po. 110 Regulator what it is. Definition IV. 48 Relation of the Waters of
Bologna and Ferrara, by Monsignore Corsini. 100 Reno in the Valleys, and its
bad effects. 100, 101 Two ways to divert it. 103 The facility and utility of
those ways. Ibid. The difficulties objected. 104 Reply to Bartolotti touching
the dangers of turning Fiume Morto into Serchio. 83 Retardment of the course of
a River caused by its Banks. Appendix VII. 19 Risings made by Floodgates but
small. Appendix XIII. 26 Rivers that are shallow swell much upon small showers,
such as are deep rise but little upon great Floods. Corollary III. 6 Rivers the
higher they are, the swifter. Ibid. Rivers the higher they are, thelesse they
increase upon Floods. 49 Rivers when they are to have equal and when like
Velocity. Ibid. Rivers in falling into the Sea, form a Shelf of Sand called
Cavallo. 65 Five Rivers to be diverted from the Lake of Venice, and the
inconveniences that would ensue thereupon. 74, 75 A River of Quick-height, and
Velocity in its Regulator being given, if the Height be redoubled by new Water,
it redoubleth also in Velocity. Proposition II. Theorem I. 51 Keeps the
proportion of the heights, to the Velocities. Corollary 52
S
Sand and Mud that enters into the Lake of Venice, and the way to examine it.
76 Seas agitated and driven by the Winds stop up the Ports. 64, 65 Sections of
a River what they are. Definition I. 37 Sections equally swift what they are.
Definition II. Ibid. Sections of River being given, to conceive others equal to
them, of different breadth, height and Velocity. Petition. 38 Sections of the
same River, and their Proportions to their Velocities. Coroll. I. 42 Sections
of a River discharge in any whatsoever place of the said River, equal
quantities of Water in equal times. Proposition I. 39 Sile River what
mischiefs it threatens, diverted from the Lake. 74 Spirtings of Waters grow
bigger the higher they go. Coroll. XVI. 16 Streams of Rivers how they increase
and vary. Coroll. I. 6 Streams retarded, and the effects thereof. Coroll. IX. 8
T
Table of the Heights, Additions, and Quantities of Waters, and its use. 56
Thrasimenus. Vide Lake. Time how its measured in these Operations of the
Waters. 49 Torrents increase at the increasing of a River, though they carry no
more Water than before: Coroll. IV. 6 Torrents when they depose and carry away
the Sand. Coroll. V. 7 Torrents and their effects in a River. 6, 7 Torrents
that fall into the Valleys, or into Po of Volano, and their mischiefs
prevented, by the diverting of Reno into Main Po. 100 Tyber and the causes of
its inundations, Coroll. VIII. 8
V
Valleys of Bologna and Ferrara, their inundations and disorders, whence they
proceed. 97 Velocity of the Water shown by several Examples. 3 Its proportion
to the Measure. 5 Velocities equal, what they are. 47 Velocities like, what
they are. 47, 48 Velocities of Water known, how they help us in finding the
Lengths. 113 A Fable to explain the truth thereof. Ibid. Venice. Vide Lake. Use
of the Regulator in measuring great Rivers. Consideration I. 60
W
Waters falling, why they disgross. Coroll. XVI. 16 Waters, how the Length of
them is Measured. 70 Waters that are employed to flow Grounds, how they are to
be distributed. 19, 53, 54 Waters to be carried in Pipes, to serve Aquaducts
and Conduits, how they are to be Measured. 115, 116 Way to know the rising of
Lakes by Raines. 28 Way of the Vulgar to Measure the Waters of Rivers. 68 Wind
Gun, and Portable Fountain of Vincenzo Vincenti of Urbin. 11 Winds contrary,
retard, and make Rivers increase. Coroll. VII. 8
The END of the TABLE of the Second Part of the First TOME,

