A Relation of some of the most material Matters that passed in a Public
Dispute at Thriploe in Cambridge-shire the 15th day of the 2d Month 1676.
between Francis Holdcraft, and Joseph Odd his Assistant, both Presbyterian
Priests, on the one Party, and Samuel Cater, with some others of the Friends of
Truth called Quakers.
I The aforesaid Samuel; being at a Meeting of our Friends in that Country,
where there were some told me of the Lies, Slanders, and Reproaches that were
frequently vented and cast upon us the people of God, called Quakers, by this
abovenamed Francis Holdcraft, and his Abettor Joseph Odd, (that is to say)
that the Quakers are deceivers, and that they did not believe in the True
Christ the Messiah and Savior of the World, and that they Preached another
Jesus, and not the True Jesus, and that they were Antechrists; and of this they
made their boast, that they would prove the same to any of our Faces, if we
would or durst come to that Town; upon the hearing of which, for the Truth
sake, for which the Lord has called me to bear Testimony thereunto, and for
the clearing of the Innocence of those that believe therein, and are led and
guided thereby, which I knew they had most grossly abused, I was made free in
the fear of the Lord to appoint a Meeting at that Town of Thriploe, and give
notice of it seven days before; in which time I desired that the Persons
abovenamed might have timely notice of it; which was done, that so they might
prove that to our faces if they could, which they had said of us behind our
backs, or receive reproofs for their unfruitful works of darkness. So when I
with some Friends were come to the Town, and were at a Friends house, there was
word brought to us, that F. H. was come to Town also, and that he thought it
not so convenient to come to our public Meeting, but rather desired to speak
with three or four of us more privately to discourse out the matters in
Controversy between us: then I sent him word; that he had reviled us, and our
Principles openly, and I did expect that he should come as openly, as he had
promised, to prove what he had said against us, or else to receive shame for
his work; and the time of day was now come to go to the place which was
appointed for the Meeting, where we did intend to go, and desired that he might
meet us there; but if they would not come to us, then we were resolved to come
to them after the Meeting, and we being gathered together, and waiting upon the
Lord some time before they came, there was a Friend declaring the Truth to the
people; when F. H. came to the door, and said, That if he would not hold his
peace, he would not come in; but the Friend having freedom, he did soon leave,
and then he came in: I stood up and spoke a few words unto the people by way of
Exhortation, That all might be sober and weighty in their minds, that so they
might be the better prepared to give a right Judgment of what might pass
between us: -- Then F. H. said, If I would not hold my Tongue, he would be gone.

John Webb Answered, Be patient a little and hear, and if we speak any thing
contrary to Truth, thou may judge us out of our own Mouths.

Francis Holdcraft. I will have no patience.


Samuel Cater. Then thou art unfit to be a Minister of Christ; but however F.
H. I would not have thee go away yet, for we do expect that thou should
perform what thou have promised, if thou can; that is, to prove us deceivers,
and thou have said we deny the True Christ, and that we Preach a false, and not
the Messiah the Savior of the World; and this is the business thou have
promised to do.


F. H. And this I shall do by the help of Almighty God.


F. H. Is your name Samuel Cater, and are you a Quaker?


S. C. My name is so, and I own, and have unity with all the honest and
upright-hearted people of God, called Quakers.


F. H. But do you own the Quakers Principles? let me know that, that I may have
a foundation to stand upon in our Discourse.


S. C, What Principle is it that thou art against that we hold, Repeat it, and
I shall give thee an Answer?


F. H. Do you own the Quakers Principles.


J. B. Another Friend standing by said, there is a Book of ours called Truths
Principles any one therein contained we will own, instance which you will.


S. C. As to answer to thee in short, that I own all that are published as the
Quakers Principles I shall not do; for this reason; there are envious and
evil-minded men have forged Principles, and called them the Quakers to abuse
us, and to present us, and our Principles odious; and therefore seeing thou will not tell us what Principle of ours thou art against, I shall here declare
the universal Principle, that I with the rest of my Brethren own, and turn
people unto; that is, Jesus Christ is the True Light, that Lights every man
that comes into the World, and that so many as love this Light, and bring
their deeds unto it, and are led and guided by it, are saved; and all that
disobey it, are condemned by it. This is our Principle, What say thou to it?


F. H. I say to affirm that every one is enlightened with the Light of Christ,
is Cursed Idolatry.


S. C. Then I say Francis, the Pit that thou have dug for the Quakers, thou
art fallen into thy self this day in the sight of all that have an Eye to see,
and an Ear to hear; for I Will prove by the Scriptures of Truth, that this Lord
Jesus Christ, that Lights every Man that comes into the World, is the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the World: See John 1 7, 8, 9. and 8. 12. and
29.


F. H. That every one is enlightened, I grant; but not with the Light of Christ.


S. C. What is it then that they are enlightened with?


F. H. A Creature.


S. C. What kind of Creature is it, a Man or a Beast? but in this he answered
nothing, and in this as well as many other things he was manifest to be in
great Confusion, and in his Knowledge to be more brutish than a Beast, to call
that a Creature, which the Scriptures of Truth calls the Life of God, and says
it is the Light of Men: Read John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.


F. H. I will prove that the Quakers deny the Man Christ Jesus, who is now at
the Right Hand of his Father in the Highest Heaven, and hold forth another
Christ, another Gospel, another Spirit.


S. C. Well, go on and do it if thou can, we ask no favor at thy hand. By
this time his Brother Joseph Odd came in, the other Priest, saying to him in a
fauning flattering manner, Sir, I am glad to see you here this day about so
good a work as this is; but to me and the rest of my Friends he spoke
revilingly, and told us we were a Generation of Vipers, and that they would
prove us so to be before they went from thence.


F. H. Do you own the Man Christ Jesus, body flesh and bone, to be at the Right
Hand of his Father in the Highest Heaven, yonder, yonder above the Stars,
pointing upward with his Hands and Eyes.


S. C. The True Christ I own, and believe in the same that the Prophet
prophesied of, and the Apostles Preached Salvation in his name, and am ready to
render a reason of the hope that is in me, when it is my place so to do; but
Francis it is not thy business to Catechize me at this time; but to prove that
we deny the True Christ; this thou have promised to do, and I expect thou
should do it, or else acknowledge thy error.


F. H. I said as much, you dare not own the True Christ, if you do say you do.


J. O. There, hold him there.


S. C. The True Christ I own, but thy Carnal Imaginations of him I deny; but
this I say, we are upon the defensive part; thou have said we deny Christ, it
is on thy part to prove it.


F. H. Urged the like question again; but never took in hand, nor went about to
prove what he had promised.


S. C. To the people I am not ashamed, nor afraid to confess my Faith and
belief concerning Jesus Christ, as this man would suggest into our minds, and
make you believe; but the reason yet why I have not done it is, because it is
not my business at this time; we are accused by this man to deny Christ, and he
says he will prove it, it is his place so to do if he can; and his asking me
whether I own Christ, implys as much as this, that he does not know whether we
own him, or deny him; so that he has done unjustly by us, and unwisely by
himself, in going to report that we deny the True Christ, behind our backs; and
now we call him in question before our faces: Instead of proving of it, he asks
us whether we own him or deny him; which question would have been more
seasonable, and more honest, to have been asked us before he had thus openly
reproached us, and slandered us; for it appears he has said that of us, which
he cannot prove; and therefore must return again upon himself, as the raiser,
or at least maintainer of these false reports; and he must, till he can clear
himself of these lies and slanders, which he so frequently vends out of his
mouth, and casts upon the Innocent, be numbered amongst the Liars for the Lake,
who are in the Steps which the Prophet speaks of; report, and we will report it.


F. H. Still balled and called out, whether I owned the True Christ?


S. C. For the sake of the people that are here, I do say, that the same Lord
Jesus Christ which the Scriptures Testify of, I believe in, and expect
Salvation by, and in no other; that is to say, the Christ of God that was born
of the Virgin Mary, and was Crucified by the Highpriests, and envious ones,
and was raised by the power of God, and Ascended far above all Heavens, and is
at the Right Hand of God; and is also knocking at every ones door for an
entrance into their Hearts, that he might dwell in and amongst them.


F. H. Then cried out to the people, this is a Cheat, this is to blind the
people.


S. C. How is it a Cheat, I speak as I do believe, and my words are according
to the Scripture?


F. H. You do not believe as you say.


S. C. How do thou know I do not believe as I say?


F. H. I can prove out of the Quakers Books, that you do not believe as you say.


S. C. Show us that Book of ours, that says we deny the True Christ:

But none he could show us.


S. C. I say again, the same Jesus in whose name the Lame Man was made whole,
that Peter and John bare Testimony to, (before them that Crucified him) in the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth; does this man stand before you whole this
day; This is the Stone, that is set at naught by you Builders, and is now
become the head of the Corner: I say, in this Christ, I with the rest of my
Brethren believe, and hope for Salvation, and in no other name or thing
whotsoever.

Then there was one called to us, that we might have some discourse concerning
Election and Reprobation; for these Men had declared before the people, that
some Children were in a state of Damnation before they were born; about which
some people were dissatisfied that heard them.

Then Joseph Odd desired to take the matter in hand.


J. O. spoke to this purpose, you do not understand neither the righteousness,
nor the sin as it is in Gods account.


S. C. Wherein do we not understand?


J. O. Do you not acknowledge that all men fell in Adam.


S. C. I do acknowledge according to the Scriptures, in Adam all sinned; which
was and is the fall from God.


J. O. This Adam represents all men, so that in him all are included, as if
there were but one in all.


S. C. The Apostle says, As was the offense, so also was the free gift; and as
in Adam all dyed, so in Christ all comes to be made alive again, Romans 5. 18.


J. O. All fell in Adam, and you have granted that all sinned in him; and
therefore Children while they are in the Womb, before they are born, so soon as
they have life, and are a Living Soul, they are guilty of Original sin, and are
Vessels of Wrath, and for destruction.


S. C. I Will prove this to be false Doctrine; and contrary to the mind and will
of God revealed in the Scriptures of Truth; for the Lord said by the Prophet
Ezekiel 18. Read from the beginning onward, that Proverb shall not be used in
Israel, saying, the Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth
are set on edge; but as the Soul of the Father is mine, the Soul of the Son is
mine also; the same Soul that sins shall die. Jer. 13. 30.


J. O. But death Reigned from Adam to Moses, will you not grant that?


S. C. Yes, over them that had sinned; and therefore thou must prove Children
to be sinners before they are born, (which thou and all thy Brethren can never
do) or else thou can not prove them damned.


J. O. Death Reigned from Adam to Moses over all men, and I will prove a Child
a Man before it is born; and therefore guilty of sin before it is born.


S. C. Prove that if thou can; People I desire you all to be still, and let
us hear how Joseph Odd will prove a Child a Man before it is born, by plain
Scripture, for no other proof we will accept of.


J. O. Christ says, A Woman has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she
is delivered, she remembers no more her pain, for joy that a Man is born into
the World.


S. C. This is no proof; for Christ does not say that it was a Man before it
was born.


F. H. Children are sinners before they are born; for David says, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin has my Mother Conceived me.


S. C. Whether was the sin in the Mother, or in the Child? for Christ speaks of
the state of a little Child to be happy, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven;
and you say some Children are for Hell and Destruction, which is a damnable
Doctrine, and altogether contrary to the Scriptures, and to the mind of God
revealed therein; which says, God would have all to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth; and therefore made none for destruction, but Man's
destruction is of himself, for want of receiving and obeying of Christ, the Son
of his Love, who is come a Light into the World, that all Men through him might
believe, John 1. 7.


F. H. There is none shall be saved but such as are elected.


S. C. You are strangers to that election, which hold, that God has made one
man for Salvation, and another for destruction, as they are the Workmanship of
his own Hands; But Francis, I ask thee this question, Whether thou thy self be
one of these elect thou speak of?


F. H. Yes I am.


S. C. And how came thou to be so?


F. H. By the free Grace of God.


S. C. And does not this same Grace appear unto all men, for the saving and
electing of all, as it does unto thee?


F. H. No, I deny that.


S. C. I Will prove by the Scripture that it does, People look in your Bibles,
and look into Titus 2. 11. and you may read it as I say.


F. H. I will Read it my self.


S. C. Do so.


F. H. Read thus, The Grace of God that brought Salvation, has appeared unto
Men.


S. C. Thou Readst wrong* and takes from the Scripture, thou leavest out the
word All, Read it as it is in thy own Book.


F. H. I Read it as it is in the Greek; for it is not so in the Greek, as it is
in our Books.

An indifferent person standing by called unto him, and told him, Francis what
do you bring your Bible hither for, if it be wrong translated.


S. C. We have no reason to go from the plain words of Scripture to believe
thee; for we believe the Scripture speaks as true in this as in any other
things that it declares of; and further, we understand the things of God in the
Language in which we were born, and we would not be so shuffled off, or baffled
out of our belief of the truth of the Scriptures, to believe what thou or any
man says, who say they are not true; and I told him then, I believed he did say
that which was not true of the Greek Copies; and as I then said, so I have
since found it to be; for since I desired some that understood the Greek and
Latin Tongues, and the word All Men, which he would not read, and impudently
said it was not in the Greek, which you may here read, Apparuit enim gratia Dei
salvatoris nostri omnibus hominibus, (...); Whereby all men may see this man's
deceit, who makes lies his refuge, and under falsehood hides himself, but in the
light he is seen, and by the Children of the light made manifest, and his
unfruitful works of darkness detected, and his Religion seen to be vain, who
does not bridle his Tongue from lying, and slandering of the Innocent; which is
known to have been his practice these several years, and yet so continues,
whereby he renders evil toward us for good, who suffered him to shelter
himself under us to get out of prison.


F. H. Pretended to shake the dust off his feet, and went his way.


S. C. Deceit, if thou go away, remember that thou have not yet proved that
we are such as thou have said we are, and I warn thee to cease from railing
against us any more; and this further I have to offer thee, and Joseph Odd, I
would have you both fit down and hear; for I have something upon me to declare
to the people, and I shall open my heart freely before you and them, and speak,
as to the things we have been speaking of; and if I speak any thing contrary to
Scripture, you shall have your liberty by the Scripture to reprove me; but they
hastened away with railing words in their mouths; and we continued some time
together, in which I cleared my Conscience to all that were there present; and
then we parted to our places in peace, having committed our Testimony unto the
Witness of God in every ones Conscience, which is the equal measure of what was
said and done that day.


And thus we have given an account in part of that days proceedings, for the
satisfying of all that desire to know the Truth of the matter, for the stopping
of all false reports which envious persons may spread abroad; the which we hear
these men are not wanting in, otherwise we could have been contented to have
been silent, and to have left it without further publication to the Witness of
God, in the Consciences of those who heard us that day, who are Friends to all
men; and in that we generally desire their Everlasting Peace and Rest with God,
in the Kingdom of his Dear Son.

S. Cater, J. Webb, J. B.



