Catechistical Guide TO SINNERS, And to such CONVERTS that are Babes in Christ.

Wherein all the necessary Points of Religion are methodically proposed in
Scripture Language, abundantly confirmed by the Holy Scriptures, and in some
Places concisely expounded.

In the whole, all Controversies are warily shunned: So that all true
Christians, of what Persuasion soever, may (if they need the help of others)
use this Catechism for their Children, or others that are under their Power and
Care.

Written upon request, by a lover of Truth and Peace.

London, Printed by J. D. to be sold by Fr. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in
Cornhil, and W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar: 1680.

READER,
THe Author of this Catechistical Discourse was well aware, that the World
abounds with Catechisms, and himself had read and considered very many of them,
written not only in our English; but in the Latin and Greek Tongues, and yet he
was persuaded there was somewhat wanting, which he has, with great industry and
accuracy, endeavored to supply. And I am persuaded, whoever he be that reads
this with consideration, will find it well worth his labor: for tho he may
thereby add nothing to his Knowledge, yet he may be well pleased to see the
necessary things of Christian Religion delivered in so plain a Method, so
distinctly, and with such pertinency of Scripture-Proofs. In all which, and
especially in the last, it is too usual to be defective. Yea, even
Scripture-Catechisms, wherein the Answers to the Questions are made wholly in
Scripture Sentences, are too often found faulty in that kind. He has (as he
tells you in his Title Page) warily shunned all controverted Points, that so he
might show that one may be a true Christian without determining them, and that
Children, and weak Persons of all Parties, may be instructed in all things
necessary to Salvation without meddling with them; that so (as the Apostle says)
He that is weak may be received, but not to doubtful Disputations. Surely if
this were diligently performed, it would tend much to the promoting of Peace
and Love among Christians.

A Catechistical Guide, etc.
The First Part.
Setting forth the Christian Religion in general.
Quest. WHat is the best and chiefest thing we are to learn?

Answ. The best and chiefest thing we are to learn, is, That Doctrine which
teaches us to know God, and Jesus Christ.

Quest. What do you mean by this name, God?

Answ. By this name [God] I mean, Him, who is the most High, and chiefest Lord,
Ruler, and Governor of all things.

Quest. What mean you by these names, Jesus Christ?

Answ. By these names, Jesus Christ, I mean, The only Son of God, who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of a Virgin.

Quest. Where may we find this Doctrine that teaches us to know God, and Jesus
Christ?

Answ. This Doctrine that teaches us to know God, and Jesus Christ, we may
find in the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament and the New; but especially in
the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, or Covenant.

[Jesus Christ said to the Jews; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me, John 5.39. Luke
testifies of those of Berea thus; These were more noble than those of
Thessalonica; in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so, etc. Act. 17.11.
The Apostle Paul says thus to Timothy; Continue thou in the things which thou
have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them:
and that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16,
17. Thus St. Luke begins his History of Jesus Christ: Forasmuch as many have
taken in hand to set forth in order a Declaration of those things which are
most surely believed among us, even as they delivered them unto us, which from
the beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word: It seemed good to
me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to
write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know
the certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed, Luke 1.1, etc.
Thus the Apostle John says of his Gospel: These things are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have life through his Name, John 20.21. The same John in his first
Epistle has this saying: That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you
that your joy may be full, 1 John 1.3, 4. see Chap. 5.13. Ephesians. 3.3, 4. 1 Timothy
3.14, 15. 1 Pet. 5.12. 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.]

* Quest. But why do you say that this Doctrine is to be found, especially in
the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament?

* Answ. It may be said, That the Doctrine which teaches us to know God, and
Jesus Christ, is to be found especially in the Scriptures of the New Testament,
for these causes.

1. Because that of this Doctrine which was hidden in the Old Testament, and
there contained in a Mystery, is in the New Testament opened and revealed.

2. Because the New Testament is an History of many things, which we are to
believe as already done; which in the Old Testament are only prophesied of, and
promised.

3. Because there are some things added in the New Testament, which are not to
be found in the Old.

[Rom. 16. v. 25, 26, 27. Now to him that is of power to establish you
according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ (according to the
revelation of the Mystery, which was kept secret since the World began; but now
is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the
Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the obedience
of Faith) to God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. Luke
24 24, etc. And Jesus said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto
you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which are
written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning
me. Then opened he their understandings, that they might understand the
Scriptures; And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ
to suffer, and to rise from the Dead the third day, etc. See Acts 13.36, etc. 1
Pet. 1.10, etc. 1 Cor. 11.2, 3.]

Quest. Can you show me from the Scripture, that the Doctrine there declared,
teaches us to know God, and Jesus Christ?

Answ. Yes; for Jesus Christ himself in his Prayer to the Father, said; This is
Life Eternal, [that is, This is that which the Doctrine, that has the promise
of Eternal Life, does teach and require for the obtaining of Eternal Life, to
wit] that they may know thee the only truly God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, Joh. 17.3.

Quest. Well: But what does Jesus Christ here intend by Men's knowing him who is
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent?

Answ. To know him who is the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, is (according to Christ's intendment here) not only to understand or
apprehend, that which must be known concerning him, who is the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; but also, to love them as such, or
according to such a knowledge of them to acknowledge them.

* Quest. But how can you prove that Jesus Christ here intends such a
knowledge as this?

* Answ. That Jesus Christ here intends such a knowledge of things necessary
to be known concerning the only true God, and him whom he has sent, which has
a suitable love to them, or answerable acknowledgment of them joined therewith,
I am able clearly to prove, and that abundantly.

* Quest. The proof of this being very needful, I am willing to hear it, and
therefore I now ask you, How it may be confirmed?

Answ. First, I shall offer this; That these Phrases or Expressions, To know
God, and To know Jesus Christ, are oftentimes so used in the Holy Scriptures:
Whence I gather, that it is not strange so to accept and take them here; Hos.
53.4. Tit. 1.16. Jer. 9.3. Chapter 31.34. Heb. 8.11. Dan. 11.32. Hos. 2.20. Joh.
15.21. Chapter 17.25. 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. Psalm. 36.10. Job 18.21. Isa. 53.11. 1 John 2.3,
4. Chapter 4.6.

* Quest. You do well to infer no more, seeing these Phrases are frequently
restrained to a mere knowledge or notion of God and Christ; or for knowledge as
distinct from Love and Acknowledgment: Yea, sometimes they are said to know
God, and to know Christ, who have only the means of knowing them, Romans 1.21.
Joh. 8.28. But what ground have you to conclude, that in this saying of Christ,
Love and Acknowledgment is implied in knowledge?

* Answ. It plainly appears that Jesus Christ here intends such a knowledge as
implies in it Love and Acknowledgment, if we consider only this, That Christ
here declares this to be sufficient for obtaining Eternal Life; namely, To know
the Father the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Now it is in
it self absurd to conceive, that it is enough only to understand and notion the
Truth concerning God and Jesus Christ.

* Quest. It is so: But have you any thing more to say in confirming it?

* Answ. I shall add this; That the Scriptures declare expressly, that more than
merely to know, or only to understand God and Jesus Christ, is necessary for
obtaining Eternal Life. This is so well known, that the citing of places will
be needless; notwithstanding I will repeat the saying of the Apostle Paul,
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity [Love] edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. The Devils have
knowledge of God and Christ, Jam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24. Act. 19.15. And so have some
of the worst of Men.

Quest. Seeing it is so as you have said, we may draw up, concerning the
Doctrine we are chiefly to learn, these two Propositions:

1. That it teaches us to know or apprehend him who is the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

2. That it teaches to love or acknowledge him who is the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

Concerning these two, I desire now to hear from you a general and brief
Account what you have learned out of the Holy Scriptures. And first I will ask
you some Questions touching the first Proposition. And my first Query shall be
this:

What are we to understand by the only true God?

Answ. By the only true God we are to understand, the only Creator and most
high Lord, or Governor of all things.

[2 Kings 19.19. Now therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save us out of
his hand, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth may know that thou art the Lord
God, even thou only. Jude 4. Certain Men crept in -- denying the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 King. 19.15. And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord,
and said, O Lord God of Israel which dwell between the Cherubims, thou art
the God, even thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the Earth; thou have made
Heaven and Earth. Isa. 44.24, etc. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he
that formed thee from the Womb, I am the Lord that makes all things, that
stretches forth the Heavens alone, that spreads abroad the Earth by my self;
that frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars, etc. Nehem. 9.6, etc. Thou, even thou
art Lord alone, thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their
Host, the Earth and all things that are therein, the Seas and all that is
therein; and thou preservest them all, and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee,
etc. Dan. 5.18, etc. O thou King, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy
Father a Kingdom, etc. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened
in pride, he was deposed from his Kingly Throne, etc. till he knew that the
most high God ruled in the Kingdom of Men, and that he appoints over it
whomsoever he will. Romans 1.25. They served the Creature more than the Creator,
who is blessed for ever. Amen. Matthew. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered and
said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, etc. Psalm. 22.18. The
Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor among the Nations. Romans 11.36. Of
him, and through him, and to him are all things: to whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

Quest. What are we to understand by Him whom the Father has sent?

Answ. By him whom the Father has sent, we are to understand him whom the
Father has sent to be the Savior of the World.

[1 John 4.14. And we have seen, and do testify, That the Father sent the Son
to be the Savior of the World. John 6.39, 40. And this is the Father's Will,
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day, etc.]

Quest. Now concerning the second Proposition, I shall ask you several
Questions; as first, How can you prove from the Scriptures, that we must not
only know him who is the only true God, but also love him as such?

Answ. We are not only to know him who is the only true God, but also to love
him as such: For it is written, Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord.
And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with all thy
Soul, and with all thy Might; Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5. Mat. 12.29, 30.

[ Knowledge puffs up, but Love edifieth: And if any Man think that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. But if any Man love God,
the same is known of him; 1 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3. see 1 John 4.7, 8.]

Quest. How does our love to God manifest and discover it self?

Answ. Our Love to God discovers it self, by our keeping the Commandments of
God, which require us to trust in him, and live to him, as the only true God.

[Deut. 10.12. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him; and to
serve the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul. 1 John 5.3.
This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. 1 John 4.20. If a Man
say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar.

Quest. How do you prove from Scripture, that we must not only know him whom
God has sent, but also love him as such?

Answ. I prove it from John 8.42. Jesus said unto them, If God were your
Father, ye would love me, for I proceeded forth, and came from God; neither
came I of my self, but he sent me.

Quest. How does our love to him whom God has sent, manifest and discover it
self?

Answ. Our love to him whom God has sent, discovers it self, in our keeping
his Commandments, which require us to trust in him, and live to him, as one
whom God has sent to be the Savior of the World.

[John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Verse. 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me. Verse. 23. If a Man
love me, he will keep my Words. Verse. 24. He that loves me not, keeps not my
sayings: the Word which ye hear is not mine, but my Fathers which sent me. 1
John 2.3, etc. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar, and the Truth is not in him. But whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is
the love of God perfected: Hereby know we that we are in him.]

Quest. Tell me now what you intend by the Acknowledgment of God, and of
Christ, which you have mentioned?

Answ. By the Acknowledgment of God and Christ, I intend nothing else, but that
Love now spoken of, as manifested by the keeping of God's Commandments.

Quest. Why do you call this an Acknowledgment of God and of Christ?

Answ. I so call it, because they who thus keep the Commandments of God, do
indeed acknowledge and confess, That he who sent Jesus Christ is the only true
God, and that Jesus Christ is he whom God has sent.

Quest. Does the Holy Scripture express it in the same way and manner?

Answ. Yes; and in many places.

[ Col. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.13. Col. 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.4. Chapter 4.3. 2 Timothy 2.25. Tit.
1.1. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. Prove. 3.6. 2 Cor. 1.13. 1 John 2.23. Romans 10.9, 10. 1 King.
8.33. Mat. 10.32. 1 Tit. 1.16. Heb. 3.1. Chapter 4.14. Chapter 10.23.]

Quest. You said, as I remember, in your first Answer, That the best and
chiefest thing we are to learn, is the Doctrine that teaches us to know God,
and Jesus Christ: But why said you so?

Answ. I said, that the Doctrine which teaches us to know God, and Jesus
Christ, is the best and chiefest thing we are to learn, for this Reason;
Because this Doctrine which is Truth, reveals to us the Promise of Eternal
Life, and directs us in the way and means of obtaining this Eternal Life.

Quest. How prove you this?

Answ. I prove it from the words of our Savior, which we have now been
discoursing of, namely, This is Eternal Life, that Men may know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Quest. What do you gather from these words?

Answ. First, I gather from them, that the Doctrine of Christ is a Doctrine
concerning Eternal Life *.

Secondly; That to know the Father, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent, is that which is required of us, for obtaining Eternal Life.

These things are clearly and plentifully witnessed in the Holy Scriptures.

[* 1 John 5.11. And this is the Record that God has given to us Eternal Life,
and this Life is in his Son. John 12.50. And I know that his Commandment is
Life Everlasting. John 6.68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall
we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life. 2 Timothy 1.10. Our Savior, Jesus
Christ, has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light,
through the Gospel.

1 John 2.24, 25. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the
beginning: If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you,
ye shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the Promise that
he has promised us, even Eternal Life. James 1.12. Blessed is the Man that
endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life,
which the Lord has promised to them that love him. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. But God has revealed them unto
us by his Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. Whom (to wit, Jesus Christ) having not seen,
ye love; in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end of your Faith, even the
Salvation of your Souls. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any Man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall take
vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge (or acknowledgment) of God, and of Jesus our Lord.]

Quest. What do you conclude of hence?

Answ. I hence conclude, That there is nothing in the World we should so esteem
of, and glory in, as the knowledge of God and of Christ.

[Jer. 9.23, 24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise Man glory in his Wisdom,
neither let the mighty Man glory in his Might: let not the rich Man glory in
his Riches; but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise Loving Kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness in the Earth; for in these things I delight, says the Lord.
Phil. 3.7, 8. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ;
yea, doubtless I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, etc.]

The Second Part.
Treating of Religion in the General, and more particularly of the Christian
Religion.
CHAP. I.
Q. YOu having now in the general showed the more necessary things, contained
in the best of Doctrines, I am willing to hear from you somewhat a more
particular (yet brief) account of the same matters; to wit, as concerning God
as considered in Himself, and in his Works: But first I will ask you, What kind
of Knowledge we may have concerning these things here in this Life?

A. That we may here have concerning God, considered in Himself and in his
Works, such a knowledge as is true and sufficient, has been already proved; but
a perfect knowledge of God, in himself, and in his Works, is not here in this
Life attainable.

[1 Cor. 13.9, etc. We know in part, and we prophesy in part: but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I
was a Child I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child:
but when I became a Man, I put away childish things. For now we see through a
glass darkly, but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know,
even as also I am known. Job 11.7, etc. Can thou by searching find out God?
Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as Heaven, etc.
See Job 36.26, etc. Psalm. 77.19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy Path in the
great Waters, and thy footsteps are well known. See Psalm. 36.5, 6. Eccles.
3.11. No Man can find out the Work that God makes from the beginning to the
end. See Job 37.5. Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are the Judgments of God, and
his Ways past finding out.]

Q. What are you taught from the Holy Scriptures concerning God, considered in
himself?

A. The Holy Scriptures teach me, concerning God, considered in himself, these
two things, namely, That God is one, and that God is a Spirit.

Q. Where do the Scriptures affirm, That God is one?

A. The Scriptures do in many places expressly affirm, that God is One, or that
there is one God.

[1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 4.6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all. See Deuteronomy. 6.4. with Mark 12.29. Mal. 2.10. Matthew.
19.17. Romans 3.30. 2 Cor. 8.4.6. Jam. 2.19. Zech. 14.9.]

Q. What are we to understand by this, That there is one God?

A. By this; That there is one God; or, That God is One; we are to understand,
that He alone, or He only is God, and that there is no other that has the same
Being, or the same Kingdom as he has.

[It is affirmed in the Scriptures, that JEHOVAH, (which is the Name of God,
Psalm. 83.18. Jer. 16.21. Exodus 15.3.) is God alone. Psalm. 86.10. Thou art
great, and do wondrous things; Thou art God alone. See 2 King. 19.15. Isa.
37.16. Neh. 9.6. That he only is God, 2 King. 19.19. Thou art the Lord God,
even thou only. Isa. 37.20. That he is the only true God. John 17.3. see Jude
v. 4. That there is no God else. Isa. 46.9. Remember the former things of old;
for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me. See
1 Kings 8.6. That there is no God besides him. Isa. 44.6. Thus says the Lord,
the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, I am the First, and I
am the Last, and besides me there is no God. Verse. 8. Is there a God besides
me? Yea, there is no God, I know not any. Isa. 45.5. I am the Lord, there is
none else, there is no God besides me. See Verse. 6, 14, 21, 22. 1 King. 8.60.
Deuteronomy. 4.35. 1 Chronicles. 17.20. That there is no other God. Exodus 34.14. That there
is no God with him, Deuteronomy. 32.39. 2 King. 5.15. Who is God, save the Lord? 2 Samuel 22.32. Psalm. 18.31. That there is no other God but one. 1 Cor. 8.4.
Therefore we must have before him no other God. Exodus 20.3. Nor worship another
God. Exodus 34.14. Psalm. 16.4. and 81.9. But we are to worship Jehovah, and
serve him only. Exodus 22.20. Mat. 4.10.]

Q. Why in your Answer were those words added, That there is no other that has
the same Being, or the same Kingdom as he has?

A. They were added, to show more distinctly and expressly, that God is alone
both in his Being and Kingdom, and that there is no other that has with him,
either the same Nature, or the same Majesty and Authority.

[By the Being and Kingdom of God we here intend the same which the Apostle
Paul in Romans 1.20. expresses thus; His eternal Power and Godhead.

These things are plainly held forth in the Holy Scriptures.

First; God as to his Being or Nature is One or Alone. What he is in this
respect no other is. He is therefore said to be One Jehovah, or Lord, Deuteronomy.
6.4. Mark 12.29. Hence is that saying of Christ to the young Man that called
him, Good Master. Why (says Jesus) call thou me Good? There is none good
but One, that is, God, Mat. 19.16, 17. For the same God is said to be only
wise, Romans 16.27. 1 Timothy 1.17. Jud. v. 25. and alone to have Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16.

Secondly; God in respect of his Kingdom and Government, is One or Alone, There
is no other that is such a King, Lord, or Governor as he. Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now,
(says the Lord) that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill, and
I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of
my hand. 1 Timothy 6.15. He is the only Potentate. Jam. 4.12. There is one
Lawgiver who is able to save, and to destroy. Psalm. 72.18. Blessed be the Lord
God, the God of Israel; who only does wondrous things. Isa. 43.11. I, even I am
the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior. See Hos. 13.4. 1 Cor. 12.6. It is
the same God that works all in all. In both respects God testifies of him,
That there is none like unto him, Isa. 46.9. Thus the Saints have professed
concerning him. 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the Lord; for there is none
beside thee: neither is there any Rock like our God. Exodus 15.11. Who is like
unto thee among the Gods? [or mighty Ones] who is like thee, glorious in
Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders? See Exodus 8.10. Deuteronomy. 32.26. 1
King. 8.23. Psalm. 35.10. and 86.8. and 89.8. and 113.5. Mich. 7.18.]

Q. Are not some others, even in a good sense, called Gods in the Holy
Scriptures?

A. Yes; both Angels and Men. And indeed some of both may not only be called
Gods, but also may in a good sense be Gods, but not in that sense as the Lord
our God is.

[1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. We know that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that
there is none other God but one. For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or in Earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) but to
us there is but [one God] the Father, of whom are all things, and we in [for]
him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.]

Q. But who are they that in a good sense may be called Gods?

A. They in a good sense may be called Gods, first, who in some Employment are
instead of God: Secondly, They who in Government are the Sons of God.

[Such, both Men and Angels, who in some Employment from God, are to others
instead of God, may be called by the very Name of the most high God. As for
instance; in Exodus 7.1. The Lord says to Moses, See I have made thee a God
[Elohim] to Pharaoh; that is, instead of God, as it is expressed in Exodus 4.16.
The Angel of the Lord appeared unto Moses in the flame of a Fire out of the
midst of a Bush; Exodus 3.2. This Angel is called, in verse. 4. Jehovah, and
Elohim; or, as we english it, The Lord and God. Also they who in Government
over others are the Sons of the most High, are called Gods. See Psalm. 82.1, 6.
God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: he judges among the Gods. -- I
have said, Ye are Gods; and [even] all of you are Children [Sons] of the most
High. John 10.32, etc. Jesus answered them, Many good Works have I showed you
from my Father; for which of these Works do ye stone me? The Jews answered him,
saying, For a good Work we stone thee not, but for Blasphemy, because that thou
being a Man, make thy self God. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in
your Law, I said, Ye are Gods? If he called them Gods, unto whom the Word of
God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of him whom the Father
has sanctified and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am
the Son of God? In Psalm. 8.5. we read thus; Thou have made him a little lower
than the Angels: In the Hebr. it is, than the Gods. Here, and in the like
places, a single Person is not Elohim, but Eloah, which is sometimes used of
the most High; as in Psalm. 18.32. Job 12.4.

Now the great God is in distinction from these, sometimes called, The God of
Gods, and Lord of Lords, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Josh. 22.22. Psalm. 136.2. Dan. 11.36.
(Chap. 2.42.) And he is said to be greater than all Gods, and above all Gods,
Psalm. 135.5. He is also said to be high above all the Earth, and exalted far
above all Gods, Psalm. 97.9. He is called, The high God, Psalm. 78.35, 56. The
most High, Numb. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 32.8. 2 Samuel 22.14. Dan. 4 17. and elsewhere
often; and in Acts 7.48. The most High God, Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.1. and elsewhere
often. The Lord the most high God, Genesis 14.22. The Lord most High, Psalm. 47.2.
In Psalm. 83.18. That Men may know, that thou whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art
the most High over all the Earth. See Dan. 5.21. In the place now quoted, the
same word is rendered, High, and most High.]

Q. You said, That God is a Spirit; How prove you that?

A. Jesus Christ himself has taught us, That God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24.

[ Jesus says unto the Woman of Samaria, Woman, believe me, the hour comes,
when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father; ye worship ye know not what. We know what we worship; for Salvation is
of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth, John 4.21, 22, 23, 24.]

Q. What must we understand by this, That God is a Spirit?

A. By this, That God is a Spirit, we must understand two things in the
general: First, That God is more excellent than all things. Secondly, That the
Spirit of Man may be unto us in some manner, a Shadow of God.

[Although Method challenges this place for the confirmation of this, That God
is said to be a Spirit, in way of allusion to the Spirit of Man; yet the proof
of it shall be reserved for the close of this Discourse concerning God, as
considered in himself, where it may be done more easily, and in fewer words.

The Excellency of God is diversely expressed in the Holy Scriptures. In 2 Pet.
1.17. He is called, The Excellent Glory. In the Scripture there is ascribed to
God, Excellency, Deuteronomy. 33.26. Job 13.11. Chapter 37.4. Psalm. 68.34. Isa. 35.2.
Greatness of Excellency, Exodus 15.7. He is said to be excellent in Power, Job
37.23. More excellent than the Mountains of Prey, Psalm. 76.4. O Lord our God,
how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! who have set thy Glory above the
Heavens, Psalm. 8.1. Let them praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name alone is
excellent. His Glory is above the Earth and Heaven, Psalm. 148.13. In the same
sense he is called, the great God, Tit. 2.13. Rev. 19.17. Dan. 2.45. Jer.
32.19. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. There is none like to the God of Jesurun, Deuteronomy.
33.26. And Solomon said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in
Heaven above, or on Earth beneath, 1 King. 8.23. All Nations before the Lord
are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing and vanity. To
whom then will ye liken God? or, what likeness will ye compare unto him? -- To
whom then will ye liken me? Or shall I be equal, says the Holy One? Isa.
40.17, 18, 25. To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me,
that we may be like? Isa. 46.5. Who in the Heaven can be compared unto the
Lord? Who among the Sons of the Mighty can be likened unto the Lord? Psalm.
89.6. As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts, Isa. 55.9. But will God indeed dwell
on the Earth? Behold, the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
thee, how much less this House that I have builded? 1 King. 8.27. See Jer.
23.23, 24. Acts 7.49.

But how may we gather that God is thus excellent from his being called a
Spirit? Thus; Jesus Christ here discovers the Divine Nature, by the most
excellent thing that is vulgarly known, to wit, the Spirit of Man: Hereby he
plainly signifies the Excellency of God. And in that he discovers this
Excellency, not as it is in it self, but by a Shadow, he clearly intimates,
that this Excellency of God is such, and so exceeding great, that we now cannot
perceive the same, as it is in it self, being far above the present strength of
our Understanding, and way of Knowledge.

The like we are to observe in many other scriptural forms of Speech,
concerning some things that are Spiritual, and those things that pertain to
another World. See John 3.10, 11, 12. It was said, That the Spirit of Man may
be unto us in some manner, a Shadow of God. It is necessary thus to conceive,
for otherwise, the term Spirit would here signify nothing at all: for it
cannot be taken in its proper signification here, and can in no other be
accepted, but in that we call Metaphorical.]

Q. Whence does it appear that God is more excellent than all things?

A. It appears that God is more excellent than all things: First, From his
Almightiness. Secondly, From his Eternity. Thirdly, From his Happiness or
Blessedness. For the Scriptures declare him to be Almighty, and to be Eternal,
and to be Happy or Blessed.

[God is called by the Name of The Almighty, Job 40.1, 2. Moreover, the Lord
answered Job and said; Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct
him? He that reproves God, let him answer it, Job 37.23. Touching the
Almighty, we cannot find him out; he is excellent in Power and in Judgment, and
in plenty of Justice. So elsewhere often.

He is also called, The Almighty God, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God. And
elsewhere often also, The Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. And I will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Also,
The Lord God Almighty, Rev. 21.22. And I saw no Temple therein; for the Lord
God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it.

He is called the Eternal God, Deuteronomy. 33.27. and the Everlasting God, Genesis
21.33. Romans 16.26. See Isa. 57.15. Both his Almightiness and Eternity are
mentioned together; Rev. 4.8. They said, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come. Also in other places he is called, The happy
or blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. The happy, or blessed Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.]

Q. What are we to conceive by this, That God is Almighty?

A. By this, that God is Almighty, we are to conceive, that God needs not any
thing; that he can do every thing, which is neither wicked nor unequal; that he
does whatsoever he pleases, and is one, of whom, by whom, and for whom are all
things.

[Acts 17.24, 25. God that made the World, and all things therein, seeing that
he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands:
Neither is worshipped with Men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he
gives to all life, and breath, and all things. Job 22.1, etc. Can Man be
profitable unto God? etc. Job 42.1, 2. Then Job answered the Lord, and said, I
know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought of thine can be
hindered. Matthew. 3.9. God is able of these Stones to raise up Children unto
Abraham. Luke 1.37. With God nothing is impossible. Mat. 19.26. With God all
things are possible. Here understand things that are not wicked, nor unequal:
For it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. He cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. He
cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Far be it from God that he should do
wickedness, and from the Almighty, that he should commit Iniquity: for the Work
of a Man shall he render unto him, and cause every Man to find according to his
ways. Yea surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert
Judgment, Job 34.10, 11, 12. God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts
he any Man, Jam. 1.13. see Psalm. 5.4. 1 Chronicles. 29.17. God does whatsoever he
pleases. Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in Heaven, he has done whatsoever he
pleased. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in
Earth, and in the Seas, and in all deep places. Isa. 46.10. My Counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Isa. 48.14. Hear the words of
Nebuchadnezzar concerning God; All the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as
nothing: and the most High does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven,
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, What do thou? Dan. 4.25. See Isa. 55.11. God is he, of whom, by whom,
and for whom are all things, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 11.12. 2 Cor. 5.18. Heb. 2.10.]

Q. What are we to conceive by this, That God is Eternal?

A. By this, That God is Eternal, we are to conceive, that God is from
everlasting to everlasting, and always the same.

[Psal. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had
formed the Earth and the World; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God. See Isa. 43.10. and 44.6. and 48.12. and elsewhere. He is from
Everlasting, or from Eternity; or, as we express it, without beginning: Psalm.
93.2. Thou art from Everlasting. In this sense he is called, The Everlasting
God; Isa. 40.28. He is to Everlasting, or to Eternity; or, as we express it,
without Ending: He shall endure for ever, Psalm. 102.13. See Psalm. 92.8. Hence
he is said to be Incorruptible, Romans 1.23. Immortal, 1 Timothy 1.17. and alone to
have Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. He is always the same, Psalm. 102.26, 27. Heb.
1.11, 12. -- They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea all of them shall
wax old like a Garment, etc. But thou art the same, and thy Years shall have no
end. Jam. 1.17. With the Father of Lights is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not.]

Q. What may we conceive by this, That God is Happy or Blessed?

A. By this, That God is Happy or Blessed, we may conceive that God has full
and eternal Satisfaction, Joy, and Pleasure in his own Self, and in his own
Works.

Q. You having now spoken of the first Reason, Why God is said to be a Spirit,
namely, Because he is more excellent than all things, it remains that you speak
of the second Reason, which was this, Because the Spirit of Man may be unto us,
in some manner, a shadow of God; whence we may have somewhat a more particular
conception of him: Wherefore I now ask you, In what the Spirit of Man may be
unto us, in some manner, a shadow of God?

A. The Spirit of Man may be unto us, in some manner, a shadow of God, in that
we may thence conceive, in some manner, what God is not, and what he is.

Q. What do you thence conceive, That God is not?

A. I thence conceive, That God is not more than One, and that God is not
visible; for the Spirit of Man is but one, and is not visible.

[Concerning God, as being but One, we have already spoken.

He is not visible, therefore called, The Invisible God, Col. 1.15. 1 Timothy
1.17. His Eternal Power and Godhead are said to be the Invisible things of God,
Romans 1.20. He is said to dwell in the Light which no Man can approach unto, and
to be one, whom no Man has seen, nor can, see 1 Timothy 6.16. It is said, Heb.
11.27. That Moses saw him that was Invisible: that is, He saw God by the Eyes
of his Mind, who was not to be seen by the Eyes of his Body. But it is said of
some, That they have seen God face to face, as in Genesis 32.30. Numb. 14.14. In
these, and the like places, we must understand, by the Name God, an Angel that
did represent him. This appears by comparing Genesis 32.30. with verse. 24. and
Hos. 12.4. Thus Manoah said to his Wife, concerning him whom he knew to be an
Angel of the Lord, We shall surely die, because we have seen God, [Elohim.]
Judge. 13.22. There is a seeing of God wherein our happiness lies, and is
attainable only in another World. Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart; for
they shall see God. Then the Sons of God shall see him as he is, and face to
face, 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.12.]

Q. What do you conceive that God is, from this shadow of him the Spirit of Man?

A. Although we cannot know here, what God is, as he is: yet may we here have
such a knowledge of what he is, as is sufficient for us; and this from the
shadow of him, the Spirit of Man, considered in its natural Powers, and
acquired Virtues.

Q. But are we after the same manner to conceive of the Divine Nature, as of
the Powers and Virtues of an humane Spirit?

A. No, in no wise; for in all we must consider God, as Almighty, Eternal, and
Happy or Blessed, and as one whom we cannot here know as he is.

Q. What after this manner may we conceive of God, from his Shadow, the Spirit
of Man?

A. The Powers of a Man's Spirit, endowed with their proper Virtues, may be
considered in a respect to inward and outward Actings, and so the eternal Power
of God may be shadowed forth thereby.

Q. What are those Powers of an humane Spirit, which as respecting inward
Actings, and which as endued with Virtues, may shadow forth unto us the Nature
of God?

A. These Powers are those which we commonly call the Understanding and the
Will.

Q. What do you conceive concerning God, from that in the Spirit of Man, which
we call the Understanding?

A. I conceive thence, that God who is Eternal and Almighty, has Knowledge and
Wisdom, wherein he excels all others, as being perfect in both, and having
no Instructor nor Counselor with him, but is the giver of all Knowledge and
Wisdom.

[God has Knowledge, Wisdom, and Understanding. He is a God of Knowledge, [or
Knowledges] 1 Samuel 2.3. See Psalm. 139. and Psalm. 103.14. With him is Wisdom and
Strength; he has Counsel and Understanding, Job 12.13. Rev. 7.12.

God excels all others in Knowledge and Wisdom, for he is perfect therein,
Job 37.16. There is no searching of his Understanding, Isa. 40.28. O the depth
of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans 11.33. He knows
all things, 1 John 3.20. He knows the Hearts, and the secrets thereof, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Acts 15.8. Psalm. 44.21. and 94.11. Luke 16.15. Times are not hid
from the Almighty, Job 24.1. He knows not only things present, but also
things past, having them in remembrance, Psalm. 105.8. Yea things to come, Isa.
43.22, 23, 26. and 44.7, 8. and 48.3, 5, 6, 7, 14, etc. God has no Instructor
nor Counselor with him; that is, the Knowledge and Wisdom of God are from no
other, Job 21.22. Isa. 40.13, 14. All the Knowledge and Wisdom that others have
is from God, Eccles. 2.26. and elsewhere.]

Q. What do you conceive concerning God, from that in the Spirit of Man, which
we call the Will?

A. I conceive thence, That God who is Eternal and Almighty, has a Will, and
so, that he can purpose, intend, love, hate, and the like, and so only as he
who is the only Wise, Holy, Good, and Righteous God.

[A Will, and the Act of Willing, is ascribed to God, Gal. 1.4. Heb. 2.4. The
Scripture mentions the Intents of his Heart, Jer. 30.21. and he is often said
to purpose, to love, to hate, etc. He can no otherwise purpose, and the like,
etc. than according to his own Nature, who is the only Wise, Holy, Good, and
Just or Righteous God. Romans 16.27. Rev. 15.4. Mat. 19.17. Isa. 45.21. He is
Light [that is, most Pure, Holy, and Righteous] and in him is no darkness at
all, 1 John 1.5. He is Love, that is, most Loving, 1 John 4.8.]

Q. You having now showed, That the Eternal Power of God, may in some manner be
shadowed forth, by that Power which the Spirit of Man has for inward Actings;
Now what do you conceive of God, from that Power which the Spirit of Man has
for outward Actings; for it is the Spirit that gives Life to the Body; and this
has a Power over the Body, and is the principal cause of its motions?

A. I conceive thence, that the Eternal and Almighty God, has a Power whereby
he is able to do whatsoever he pleases.

[Of this Power the Scriptures often speak, as in Mat. 22.29. 2 Cor. 13.4.
Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17. Luke 12.5. Ephesians. 3.20. And it is there called, The Word
of God, the Breath, or Spirit of God, the Hand of God, the Arm of God, and the
like, as in Isa. 55.11. Zech. 4.6. Psalm. 89.13. Isa. 50.2.

By this Power God is able to do whatsoever he will, Dan. 3.17. Mat. 3.9. Romans
4.21. Ephesians. 3.20. Heb. 5 7. and 11.19. For God is excellent in Power, Job
37.23. O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? Psalm. 89.8.
None is able to withstand him, 2 Chronicles 20.6. The Breath of the Almighty has
given me Life, Job 33.4. In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa.
26.4. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure, Isa. 46.10.]

Q. What have you further to say concerning God, from this shadow of him the
Spirit of Man?

A. I am taught to add no more, but to conclude, That this God who is a Spirit,
is the Living and true God.

[God is often called the Living God, Psalm. 42.2. Mat. 16.16. The living and
true God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Now because the confirmation of this, That God is said
to be a Spirit, in allusion to the Spirit of Man, was reserved for this place,
I shall therefore here perform it: And although my Discourse thereof will be
contracted to that brevity the Tract in hand does require, yet I hope it will
give satisfaction to all that are unprejudiced and considerate.

In this saying, God is a Spirit; the term Spirit must be udderstood either
properly or improperly; not properly, for so it denotes Wind, or rather a
Blast (to wit) of Wind, as the word answering it in Hebrew is rendered, 2 King.
19.7. And thus it is used John 3.8. The Wind blows where it lists. In an
improper sense it is not imaginable how it should be accepted, unless
metaphorically. And thus it cannot be taken immediately from its primary
signification; and therefore must have respect, either to those incorporeal
Beings, which from their Office are commonly called Angels; or the principal
and more noble part of Man, both which are named Spirits or Ghosts, as bearing
some resemblance in respect of invisibility and might to Blasts, or Ghosts, or
Gusts of Wind. Now it is altogether unlikely, that our Savior, especially in
speaking to a Woman of Samaria, should in this term Spirit, allude to Angelical
Spirits, it being a matter much to be doubted, whether these Creatures were at
this time known to any in the World (unless a few) by the name of Spirits. But
however this is certain, That such a Metaphor or Comparison would have been,
when used by our Savior, of little or no use at all in the World; for that
there were any such Beings, that were Spirits or incorporeal Substances, was a
thing not generally known in the World, and denied by a considerable Party
among the Jews themselves: for, as we read Acts 23.8. The Sudduces say, That
there is no Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit; That is to say, no Angel
which is a Spirit, or incorporeal Substance: For it is not imaginable that the
Sadduces, who owned the five Books of Moses, should deny that there were any
Angels, there being in those Writings so evident and frequent mention of them:
but it is easily conceivable, that they might deny Angels to be incorporeal, in
that the History of Moses does often speak of their appearance with Bodies,
like unto Men: But that which fully and clearly determines the Matter, is that
which follows in the Text; namely these words, but the Pharisees confess both.
Whence it appears that the preceding words contain in them no more than two
things denied by the Sadduces, which cannot be, unless my Interpretation be
admitted: for they must needs be three, if we distinguish betwixt Angel and
Spirit, as different Subjects; as any may reckon that can but tell three; for
Resurrection, Angel, and Spirit, must needs be three. My Exposition may also be
defended from that which follows in verse. 9. and from the Absurdities which
will follow the denial of it. But to return, I say, That if our Savior, by the
term Spirit, intended an allusion to Angels, the word would import little or
nothing at all; For what could Men conceive thence concerning God? That he is
not corporeal? Be it so. Notwithstanding this is certain, that some would not
thence so conceive; and that at least the Woman of Samaria, and others of the
vulgar sort, could hardly, if at all, find any such document in the similitude.
But what else could Men from this Metaphor learn concerning God? Little else
upon any clear and undoubted evidence, the nature of these Spirits being so
little known by the wisest of Men. Surely our Savior intended in this
Metaphor, a clear and plentiful instruction concerning God, and for the use of
the vulgar sort. Whence I conclude, that Jesus has not respect here to
Angelical Spirits in this Comparison, but to the Spirit of Man. In this sense
the Comparison is suited to vulgar Capacities: for there is no Man but
experimentally knows that he has a Spirit. And there is nothing vulgarly known
in the whole Creation of God, that does excel, or may be equal to humane
Spirits. And moreover, this noble part of Man passes commonly under this name
of Spirit. How fruitful of instruction the Similitude is, as thus understood,
has already in some measure been showed. It only remains, that I show how well
this sense of the term Spirit agrees with the Context. This in as few words as
may be, thus:

To what the Woman of Samaria said, verse. 20. Our Fathers worshipped in this
Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where Men ought to
worship. To this, I say, our Savior replies in verse. 21, 22, 23, 24. In this
reply we have both a prophetical and doctrinal discovery. For in verse. 21. he
foretells the destruction of both Temples, that in Jerusalem, and that also in
Samaria, and the removal of the Jews and Samaritans out of their own Countries:
So that they should not worship in the places about which they contended, what
mind soever they might have thereunto. Woman, says our Savior, believe me,
the hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father. In the next place our Savior teaches the Woman diverse
things of no mean importance. For in respect of former times, and the time
present he informs her, that in the Controversy now mentioned, the Jews had
Truth on their side, and the Samaritans were in a wrong Opinion, and that not
only in respect of the place of Worship, but also in the manner of worshipping.
This Jesus asserteth thus, verse. 22. Ye worship ye know not what; or, ye know
not after what manner ye worship; that is, ye Samaritans have no good reason or
ground for your way of worshipping, but we Jews know after what manner we
worship, having a good ground for worshipping at Jerusalem, by offering
Sacrifices there, and for the way of worshipping. Then our Savior thus
confirms it: for Salvation is of the Jews; that is, the Doctrine teaching Men
so to worship God as to please him, and obtain Salvation, is from Prophets that
are of the Jewish Nation. In verse. 23, 24. our Savior informs the Woman, as to
the future time, which was now at hand, these two things.

1. That there must be a new kind of Worshippers, whom he calls True
Worshippers, because typified by, and more excelcellent than legal Worshippers;
and a new way of worshipping, to wit, in Spirit and Truth; that is to say, in
such a manner as is different from the legal way, and was typified by it, and
which therefore is more excellent. This Worship the Doctrine of the New
Covenant teaches: for this Doctrine abrogates the legal Form, and does
introduce that Worship, which the legal Worship was a type and shadow of. This
new Covenant Doctrine is upon this account called Spirit and Truth, as the
Mosaical Doctrine, in relation to it, is called the Letter; and is said to have
the shadow of good things to come, 2 Cor. 3.6, etc. Joh. 1.17. Heb. 10.1.

2. Our Savior shows, why such Worshippers, and such a way of Worship must be:
This he does first barely express in these words, For such the Father seeks
to worship him, verse. 23. Then he briefly explains it, verse. 24. where he
discovers;

1. Why the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit. Therefore now
at length, having a mind to discover himself more clearly than in times past,
he will no longer be worshipped after the more gross and carnal way of the Law,
but in a more spiritual and excellent way, yet in such as was prefigured by the
Law. This is to worship in Spirit and Truth, i.e. in such a way, as being
compared with the legal, does as much differ from it, and excel it, as the
Spirit, that is, the signification of a Letter differs from, and excels the
Letter it self. The like may be said of a Shadow and its Body; see Romans 3.29.
and 7.6. Col. 3.3.

2. What it is for the Father to seek such to worship him. To seek, is, to
command, which is here signified by the moral necessity that Men have of
worshipping the Father in Spirit and Truth. And therefore they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth.

Now let the Reader judge.]

CHAP. II. Of God considered in his Works of Creation.
Q. NOw seeing we have discoursed of God as considered in himself, we are in
the next place to discourse of him as considered in his Works: Wherefore I
shall first ask you, What are the Works of God?

A. The Works of God we ought to consider; and although they are manifold, yet
they may be said in the general to be twofold; namely, His Work of Creation,
and his Work of Government.

[ Job 37.14, 16. Eccles. 7.13. Psalm. 77.12. and 46.8. and 111.2. Romans 1.20.]

Q. What is God's Work of Creation?

A. God's Work of Creation, is that Work of his, whereby he has made Heaven,
the Heaven of Heavens, with all their Host; the Earth, and all things that are
therein; the Seas, and all that is therein.

[Nehem. 9.6. See Genesis 1. Job 38.4, etc. Psalm. 104.5, etc. and 136.5, etc. Thus
says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the Womb, I am the
Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone, that
spreads abroad the Earth by my self, Isa. 44.24. Act. 4.24. and 14.15. and
17.24. Rev. 10.6. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens, and
stretched them out, he that spread forth the Earth, and that which comes out
of it; he that gives breath unto the People upon it, and Spirit to them that
walk therein, Isa. 42.5. See Isa. 45.12, 18. Mark 10.6.]

Q. In what manner did God create the World, and the things that are therein?

A. God by reason of his Will and Pleasure, did in his Wisdom, by his Power,
and for himself, make, form, or create in six days, all things, and all very
good.

[ He created all things by reason of his Will or Pleasure, Rev. 4.11. Thou, O
Lord, have created all things, and for (or by reason of) thy pleasure, they are
and were created. See also before.

God created them in his Wisdom. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy
Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all. Prove. 3.19.20. The Lord by Wisdom
has founded the Earth; by Understanding has he established the Heavens; by
his Knowledge the Depths are broken up, and the Clouds drop down the Dew, Psalm.
136.5.

He has created all things by his Power. Jer. 10.12. He has made the Earth by
his Power; he has established the World by his Wisdom, and has stretched out
the Heavens by his Discretion. Jer. 32.17. Ah Lord God, behold thou have made
the Heaven and the Earth by thy great Power and stretched-out Arm, and there is
nothing too hard for thee; or, nothing hid from thee. See Isa. 40.26. 2 Pet.
3.5. Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made; and all the
Host of them by the breath of his Mouth. Verse. 9. For he spoke, and it was
done; he commanded, and it stood fast. See Psalm. 148.5. Genesis 1.3. God said, Let
there be Light, and there was Light. 2 Cor. 4.6. God commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness. Job 26.13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens;
his Hand has formed the crooked Serpent. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made
me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life. Prove. 16.1. He made all
things for himself. He made all things in six days, and all very good, Genesis 1.
and Chapter 2.1, 2. Exodus 20.11.]

Q. What are the principal Creatures that God did make?

A. The principal Creatures that God did make, are Angels and Men.

Q. What have you learned concerning the Creation of Men?

A. I have learned concerning the creation of Men, That God after he had made
all other Creatures, created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created
he him, Male and Female created he them: and that God blessed them, and said
unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it,
and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and
over every living thing that moves upon the Earth, Genesis 1.27, 28. Jam. 3.9.

Q. Can you express more distinctly the Creation of Men?

A. Yes; after this manner. The Lord God created at the first only a Man and a
Woman, called Adam and Eve. For the Lord God formed the Man [of] the Dust of
the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and the Man
became a living Soul. Afterward the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon
Adam, and he slept, and he took one of his Ribs, and closed up the Flesh
instead thereof. And of the Rib which the Lord God had taken from the Man, made
he a Woman, and brought her to the Man to be his Wife, and a meet help unto
him. Of these two have all others of Mankind descended, by that blessing, of
Multiplying and increasing, which God gave to Adam and his Wife, Genesis 2.7, 18,
21, 22. and 5.1, 2. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9. 1 Timothy 2.13. Job 4.17. and 32.22. and 33.6.
and 34.19. Psalm. 139.13, etc. Jer. 1.5. Zech. 12.1. Eccles. 11.5. Job 10.8,
etc. and 31.15.

CHAP. III. Of God's Work of Government in General; and in Special as relating
to Angels.
Q. LEt us now speak of God's Work of Government, concerning which I shall
first ask you this Question; What mean you by God's Work of Government?

A. By God's Work of Government, I mean, that Work of his, in which by his
Power he rules and reigns over all, throughout all Generations for ever and
ever, as Lord of Heaven and Earth, and as a great King above all Gods.

[God rules or reigns (or does exercise Dominion and Kingship) over all.
Psalm. 103.19, etc. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens; and his
Kingdom rules over all. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels that excel in strength,
that do his Commandments; harkening to the Voice of his Word. Bless the Lord
all ye his Hosts; ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. Bless the Lord, all
his Works in all places of his Dominion: Bless the Lord, O my Soul. See Job
25.2, 3. Josh. 2.11. Isa. 66.1.

God by his Power rules and reigns throughout all Generations for ever and
ever. Psalm. 66.7. He rules by his Power for ever; his Eyes behold the Nations.
Psalm. 145.13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, [or a Kingdom of all Ages]
and thy Dominion endures throughout all Generations. Psalm. 93.2. Thy Throne is
established of old, thou art from everlasting. Psalm. 10.16. The Lord is King
for ever and ever. 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible,
the only Wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen. See Psalm.
29.16. Jer. 10.10. Psalm. 146.10. Dan. 4.3, 34. Jude 25. 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Then
comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, etc. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may
be all in all.

God rules and reigns as Lord of Heaven and Earth, and as a great King above
all Gods. Genesis 14.19. The Possessor of Heaven and Earth. Deuteronomy. 10.14. Behold,
the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords thy God; the Earth also,
with all that therein is. Psalm. 95.3. The Lord is a great God, and a great King
above all Gods. See Psalm. 97.9. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. Thine, O Lord, is the
Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; for
all that is in the Heaven and in the Earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom, O
Lord, and thou art exalted as Head above all. Both Riches and Honor come of
thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in
thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. 1 Cor. 11.3. But
I would have you know that the Head of every Man is Christ; and the Head of the
Woman is the Man, and the Head of Christ is God. Psalm. 113.4, etc. The Lord is
high above all Nations, and his Glory above the Heavens. Who is like unto the
Lord our God, who dwells on high? who humbles himself to behold the things
that are in Heaven, and in the Earth. 1 Timothy 6.15. He is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. See Psalm. 93. and 97. and 99.
Psalm. 24.7. and 145.12. Rev. 19.6. 2 Chronicles. 20.6.]

Q. What have you learned more particularly touching God's Government in
respect of Angels?

A. Touching God's Government in respect of Angels, I have learned a few things
that are more easy and needful to be known: as this in the general, that part
of those Spirits, called Angels, having sinned, God spared them not, but cast
them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved
unto Judgment; but that part of those Spirits abode in the Truth, and are now
called the Holy Angels, and the like; when the name of Devils, and the like, is
given to those that sinned. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude v. 6. Joh. 8.44. Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1
Cor. 10.20. Mat. 25.31.

Q. What have you learned in special concerning those Spirits that sinned not?

A. Concerning those Spirits that sinned not, I have learned, that there is an
innumerable company of them, and that God has made them to be his Angels,
[that is, Messengers] and his Ministers in the exercise of his Government, and
has made them all subject to Jesus Christ, even those that were among them,
Thrones and Dominions; that is, Kings and Lords. Heb. 12.22. Heb. 1.7. 1 Pet.
3.22. Ephesians. 1.20.

Q. What have you learned in special concerning those Spirits that sinned?

A. Concerning those Spirits that sinned, I have learned, That their number is
very great; that one of them is the Prince or Chief, and that the rest are his
Angels. He is called, The Devil, Satan, and the like; who as a roaring Lion
walks about seeking whom he may devour; but is now under the Power of Jesus
Christ.

[Mark 5.9. Ephesians. 2.2. Mat. 25.41. Mark 1.13. Mat. 12.28. Heb. 2.8, 14. Phil.
2.9, etc. The name Devil signifies a Slanderer, or one that seeks to deceive by
lies; and Satan signifies an Adversary. See Rev. 12.9.]

CHAP. IV. Of God's Government relating to Men, before the sin of our first
Parents, and thence to the times wherein Christ was raised up.
Q. WHat have you learned more particularly touching God's Government in
respect of Men?

A. Touching God's Government in respect of Men, I have learned several things,
according to its difference in different times; namely, the time before our
first Parents sinned, and the times after it.

Q. What have you been taught concerning the Government of God, as it respects
the time before our first Parents sinned?

A. Concerning God's Government as relating to the time before our first
Parents sinned, I am taught some general things; namely, That they had for the
place of their abode, the Garden of Eden, which the Man was to dress and keep;
that they had given to them for Meat, every Herb, and the Fruit of all Trees,
except the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, which God forbad them to eat
of: Also that they both transgressed this Commandment; the Woman first, being
seduced by the Serpent, the Devil; then the Man, whom his Wife drew to eat of
the forbidden Fruit. Genesis 1. and 2. and 3. Chapters. 1 Timothy 2.14. 2 Cor. 11.3.

Q. What have you been taught concerning the Government of God, as it respects
the times after our first Parents had sinned?

A. I am taught in the general, That when Man had sinned, and so became subject
to the Judgment of God, then God published his Promise of Christ, whom since he
has raised up; and since by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men: The Government of God toward Man is to
be considered according to the times in which Christ was promised, and the
times after his being raised up. Genesis 3.8, etc. Romans 3.19. and 5.12. Luke 1.68,
69, etc. Acts 13.23.

Q. What have you been taught touching God's Government toward Men in the
times when Christ was promised?

A. I am taught, That the Government of God did then respect Men's being in the
World, and their seeking of God therein, and both in a way agreeable to Men
that were subjected to a natural Death, and by their sins liable to eternal
Death; and in a way suitable to the times before the appearing of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality
to light by the Gospel. Act. 17.25, etc. Romans 5.12. and 6.23. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Matthew. 11.20, etc. 2 Timothy 1.10.

Q. How did this Government of God respect the Being of Men in the World?

A. This Government did respect Men's Being in the World, in that God gave unto
them places wherein to live, and supplies for the sustaining of their Lives,
and the maintaining of good order amongst them.

[Gen. 3.23, 24. Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 115.16. Act. 17.26. Exodus 23.20. Neh. 9.6.
Psalm. 36.6. Nehem. 9.21. Psalm. 65. and 147. Prove. 24.12. 1 King. 8.45. Job.
10.22. Romans 13.1, etc.]

Q. How did this Government of God respect Men's seeking of God in the World?

A. This Government of God did respect Men's seeking of him, in that he dealt in
such a way and manner with them, that they might so seek him as to find mercy
and favor with him. Heb. 11.6. Psalm. 105.4. and 14.2. Act. 17.27. Jer. 29.13,
etc. Jer. 6.16. Prove. 21.21. Genesis 6.8. Ps. 33.22. and 63.13. Nehem. 1.5. Psalm.
25.10. and 32.10. and 86.5. and 103.11. Prove. 8.35, 36.

Q. What is it so to seek God, as to find mercy and favor with him?

A. To seek God so as to find Mercy and Favor with him, is, To fear God, and
to hope in his Mercy.

[This is variously expressed in the Scriptures; sometimes as in the Answer. So
in Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 33.18. Sometimes more concisely, as in Psalm. 103.11.
For as the Heaven is high above the Earth; so great is his Mercy toward them
that fear him: And in Psalm. 33.22. Let thy Mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according
as we hope in thee. It is sometimes set forth by Repentance, Jer. 8.6. Job
42.6. 1 King. 8.47. Ezekiel. 14.6. and 18.30, etc. Joel 2.14. Also thus, To turn
to the Lord, and to be obedient to his Voice, Deuteronomy. 4.29, 30. To acknowledge our
Offenses, and seek the face of the Lord, Hos. 5.15. To return to the Lord and
seek him, Hos. 7.10. Sow to your selves in Righteousness, reap in Mercy: break
up your fallow Ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain
Righteousness upon you, Hos. 10.12. See Prove. 3.1, etc. If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? Genesis 4.7. Noah found Grace in the Eyes of the Lord. Noah
was a just Man, upright in his Generations, and walked with God, Genesis 6.8, 9.
There was a Man in the Land of Uz whose name was Job, and that Man was perfect
and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.1. He has
showed thee, O Man, what is Good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? [or to humble
thy self to walk with thy God] Mich., 6.8. Then Peter opened his Mouth, and
said Of a truth I perceive that God is no respector of Persons: But in every
Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him,
Act. 10.34, 35. God will render to every Man according to his Deeds: To them
who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, he will render eternal Life, etc. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.]

Q. How did God make known unto Men this way of seeking him?

A. God by his Works and Word made known unto Men this way of seeking him,
Psalm. 19.

Q. Did God, both by his Works and Word, make known unto all Men this way of
seeking him?

A. No; For this way of seeking God was made known unto some, only by his Works
of Creation, and by some Works of his in the Government of the World.

[Psal. 147.19, 20. He shows his Words unto Jacob, his Statutes and his
Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his
Judgments, they have not known them. Romans 1.19, etc. That which may be known of
God, was manifest in [among] them, [to wit, the Gentiles] for God has showed
it unto them. For the invisible Things of him from the Creation of the World
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse: Because that when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, etc. Romans
2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
Repentance? Act. 14.16, 17. God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in
their own ways. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he
did good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our
Hearts with Food and Gladness.]

Q. Was there no more made known by the Word of God, then was made known by his
Works?

A. Much more was made known by the Word of God, than was by his Works. Ps.
147.19, 20. and 19.7, etc.

Q. What more was there made known by the Word of God, than by his Works?

A. First, This Doctrine; That there is forgiveness with God, that he may be
feared, (which is the substance of the Doctrine of Christ) was more plainly
made known by the Word of God, than by his Works. Psalm. 130. Deuteronomy. 34.6, 7.
Romans 3.1, 2. Joh. 5.39, etc.

Q. What else was made known by the Word of God, that was not by his Works?

A. The Works of Righteousness were more fully made known by the Word of God,
than by his Works. Deuteronomy. 4.5, etc.

Q. Is there any thing else wherein the Word of God did excel his Works, in
point of Instruction?

A. Yes; For those Ordinances which were shadows of good things to come, and
were to be done away by Christ, were made known only by the Word of God. Psalm.
99.7. Ephesians. 2.15. Col. 2.14, etc.

Q. Where are these Ordinances to be found?

A. These Ordinances are to be found especially in the Law of Moses: for they
appertain only to the times of the Old Covenant, wherein Christ was promised.
Exodus 18.20. 2 Kings 17.37. Heb. 9.1, 10.

Q. What mean you by the Old Covenant?

A. By the Old Covenant, I mean that Covenant which God made with them, whom he
brought out of Egypt, to give the Land of Canaan to them, I mean the Children
of Israel, the Son of Isaac, the Son of Abraham, to whom and to whose Seed were
the Promises made. Heb. 8.9. Gal. 3.16.

CHAP. V. Of God's Government since Christ has been raised up, and
particularly of God's raising up of Christ.
Q. YOu having showed a few things (and enough for the present) which you have
been taught concerning God's Government, relating to the times wherein Christ
was promised: It remains now that we discourse of God's Government in the times
since Christ has been raised up: I ask you therefore, What have you learned
concerning this Divine Government?

A. Concerning God's Government since the raising up of Christ, I have learned,
That I am first and chiefly to mind the Work of God in raising up Christ, and
his Work in ruling by him amongst Men unto the end of the World.

Q. What have you learned concerning the Work of God in raising up Christ?

A. Concerning the Work of God in raising up Christ, I have learned, That God,
according to his Promise, raised up the Christ, even Jesus, by causing him to
be born, and to become the Christ.

[Luke 1.68, 69, etc. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited
and redeemed his People: And has raised up an Horn of Salvation for us, in the
House of his Servant David; as he spoke by the Mouth of his Holy Prophets,
which have been since the World began. Act. 2.30. Therefore David being a
Prophet, and knowing that God has sworn with an Oath to him, That of the Fruit
of his Loins, according to the Flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit upon his
Throne, etc. Acts 3.26. Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities. Act.
13.27. Heb. 5.4.5. And no Man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself, to be made
[or become] an High Priest: but he [glorified him] that said unto him, Thou art
my Son, to day have I begotten thee. Verse 9. And being made perfect, he became
the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. Acts 2.26.
Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that
same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.]

Q. How did God cause Jesus to be born?

A. God did cause Jesus to be born, by the Holy Ghost coming upon the Virgin,
of whom he was born, Mat. 1.18. Luke 1.35.

Q. Tell me by the way, How is this Jesus to be known and distinguished from
all others?

A. This Jesus who in the days of his Flesh, was by Face known from all others,
is now of us to be known and distinguished from all others; by that description
the Scriptures give us of him, in the History of his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven.

Q. I would learn of you a brief account of this Matter; and first, What is the
relation you have concerning the Birth of Jesus?

A. It is this: When Herod was King of Judea, and Caesar Augustus was Emperor
of the World, then Jesus was born at Bethlehem in Judea, of a Virgin named
Mary, who conceived him in her Womb, by the Holy Ghost, and Power of the
Highest coming upon her, and over-shadowing her for that end and purpose.

Q. What is the relation you have concerning the Life of Jesus?

A. It is this: That Jesus when he had lived about thirty Years a private Life
with his Mother Mary, and Joseph her Husband; and when John the Baptist, the
Son of Zacharias the Priest, had, by preaching the Baptism of Repentance,
prepared the way before him, Jesus, I say, then came into the World, to bear
witness to the Truth, and in this exercise continued about three Years,
confirming his Testimony by Signs and Miracles.

Q. What is the relation you have concerning the Death of Jesus?

A. It Is this: That Jesus when he had finished the Work the Father gave him to
do, was by wicked Men put to Death, and Crucified.

Q. What is the relation you have concerning the Resurrection of Jesus from the
Dead?

A. It Is this: That Jesus who died and was buried, rose again the third day
from the Dead.

Q. What is the relation you have concerning the Ascension of Jesus into Heaven?

A. It is this: That Jesus after his Resurrection, when he had showed himself
alive to his Apostles (and others) by many infallible Proofs, and was seen of
them forty days, did in their sight ascend into Heaven.

Q. Now to return; How did God cause Jesus to become the Christ?

A. God did cause Jesus to become the Christ, by choosing him, and calling him
to be the Christ. Mat. 12.18. with Isa. 42.1. 1 Pet. 2.4. Isa. 42.6. and 49.1.
Heb. 5.4, 10.

Q. What is it for Jesus to be the Christ?

A. Jesus is the Christ, That is, God's anointed Prophet, Priest, and King, by
whom alone, and by whom always unto the end of the World, God will rule over
all.

[The Name Jesus signifies a Savior, Mat. 1.21. And the Christ, or Messiah, or
Messiah, (which in the Hebrew Language are the same that Christ is in the
Greek, and are sometimes used in our Translation, as in Dan. 9.25, 26. Joh.
1.41. and 4.24.) is in English, The Anointed. We read in John 1.41. thus in the
Line, We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ; but
in the Margin, The Anointed. It is to be observed that these terms, Messiah and
Christ, are in the Scriptures applied to Jesus two manner of ways. For
sometimes they denote his Person; for as Jesus is his Name, so also Christ is
used for his Name, Matthew. 1.16, 17. So Messiah, Dan. 9.26. He is called in the
Scriptures, not only Jesus, and Christ, but also Jesus Christ, Christ Jesus,
the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

But sometimes these terms, Christ and Messiah, or Messiah, denote his Office,
as Joh. 1.41. and 4.26. In Act. 18.28. For he [Paul] mightily convinced the
Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus was Christ. And
thus it is to be taken in the present Question and Answer. This Jesus, the
Christ, is called the Lord's Christ, Luke 2.26. Act. 4.26. Rev. 11.15. and
God's Christ, or the Christ of God, Luke 9.20. Rev. 12.10. because he was one
so greatly loved of God, that God appointed and furnished him to be a Prophet,
Priest, and King, whereunto he was of God raised and anointed, Act. 3.22. Luke
4.18. Act. 10.28. Heb. 7.15. Act. 2.30. Jer. 30.9. There never was, or will be,
any such Anointed one as he. He had no Predecessor, and shall have no
Successor. Of these things, see what follows in this Discourse.

CHAP. VI. Of God's Work of Government in ruling amongst Men by Jesus Christ
unto the end of the World; and in particular, of his Work for the saving of Men
by Jesus Christ, according to the New Covenant Promise, which here is
discoursed of.
Q. YOu said, That in God's Government, since the raising up of Christ, you
were taught chiefly to mind; First, The Work of God in raising up of Christ, of
which we have now discoursed. Secondly, The Work of God in ruling among Men by
Jesus Christ unto the end of the World, concerning which we are now to
discourse: Tell me therefore, What you mean by this Work of God?

A. This Work of God, in ruling among Men by Jesus Christ, unto the end of the
World, does especially consist; 1. In his Work for saving of Men by Jesus
Christ. 2. In his Work of judging the World by Jesus Christ.

Q. What mean you by that Work of God which is for the saving of Men by Jesus
Christ?

A. I mean that Work of God, and that Work of Jesus the Christ of God, that Men
may be saved, or be partakers of the Promise of God in Christ by the Gospel.

[Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved. Joh. 12.47. I came not (says Christ) to
judge [condemn] the World, but to save the World. That which God and Christ do
for the Salvation of Men, is often in the Scriptures (as here afterward will
appear) called the Work of God, and of Christ. This Work is, That Men may be
partakers of the Promise of God in Christ by the Gospel. Ephesians. 3.6. That the
Gentiles should be fellow-Heirs, and of the same Body, and partakers of his
Promise in Christ by the Gospel. That is, That the Gentiles may participate in
the Promise of God with the Jews as Coheirs; that is, by a common right, and
as being of the same Body, that is, by equal right with them, and this by
Christ, on the terms and conditions which the Gospel makes known and requires.]

Q. It will be convenient that first we discourse of the End and Intent of the
Work of God and Christ, and then of the Work it self: Wherefore I shall ask you
a few Questions concerning the Intent of this Work, and in the first place
this: What are we to understand here by the Promise of God?

A. By the Promise of God we are here to understand that Promise, whereby God,
according to his purpose, has promised to give Eternal Life, in or by Jesus
Christ, unto all that believe in him, through his Son Jesus Christ, that they
may be to the praise of his Glory.

Q. For the setting forth of this Promise more distinctly, I shall query
concerning the several parts of your Answer; as first, What is that eternal
Life which God has promised?

A. That Eternal Life which God has promised, is that Salvation which is in
Christ Jesus with Eternal Glory.

[John 2.25. And this is the Promise that he has promised us, even Eternal
Life. This Matter of the Promise is often called Eternal or Everlasting Life,
also Life. Now this Eternal Life does consist in that Salvation that is in
Christ Jesus, and also in Eternal Glory, as we learn from 2 Timothy 2.10.

Q. But what is the Salvation that is in Christ Jesus?

A. The Salvation that is in Christ Jesus, is a deliverance from the Wrath to
come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

Q. And what is this Eternal Glory?

A. This Eternal Glory, is a likeness to God, by seeing him as he is, 1 John
3.2.

[These two, Salvation and Eternal Glory, are in the Scriptures sometimes noted
by one of these names; as, by Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. and elsewhere. Also by
Eternal Glory, as 1 Pet. 5.10. and Glory, as Romans 9.23. The Glory of God, Romans
5.2. and the like.]

Q. You said, That God has promised to give Eternal Life in or by Jesus
Christ, What mean you by this?

A. God gives Eternal Life in or by Jesus, in that Jesus Christ is the
Mediator between God and Men, in God's giving of Eternal Life unto them.

[Rom. 6.23. Eternal Life is the Gift of God through [in or by] Jesus Christ
our Lord. 1 John 5.11. This is the Record, That God has given us Eternal Life,
and this Life is in his Son. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, etc. Who (to wit, God our Savior)
will have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge [acknowledgment] of
the Truth: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, etc. Joh. 14.6. Jesus faith
unto him, I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life; no Man comes unto the
Father but by me.]

Q. You said, That God has promised to give Eternal Life to all that believe
in him through Jesus Christ: But who are they?

A. They that believe in God through Jesus Christ are they, who so believe the
Promise of God, as to hope in God, and live to him through Jesus Christ, and
that to the end.

[1 Pet. 1.20, 21. Who [which Christ] verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the World, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by
[thorow] him [Christ] do believe in God that raised him up from the Dead, and
gave him Glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in God. These Persons in the
Scriptures are set forth, sometimes only by believing, as Gal. 3.22. The
Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe. Sometimes by believing in the
Father, as in Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my
Word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from Death unto Life. Sometimes by
believing in Christ, as in Joh. 6.47. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that
believes on me bath Everlasting Life.

These, and many the like Expressions of the same signification, we meet with
in the Holy Scripture. Now we are to understand, that wheresoever Eternal Life,
in the possession of it, is promised to Believing, there such a Believing is
intended that the Gospel requires, which is an hoping in God, and living to him
through Jesus Christ, and that to the end: For mere Belief is not sufficient;
Jam. 2.14, etc. Joh. 2.23. and 8.30. and 12.42. Nor is any Faith sufficient
that lasts not to the end, Heb. 10.38, etc.

Q. But what is it to hope in God through Jesus Christ?

A. To hope in God through Jesus Christ, is to hope or trust unto the end, both
in God and Christ for Eternal Life, as the Gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, and is such a hope, that is laid up in Heaven, and as such a Grace that
is to be brought unto us at the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

[ We are saved by Hope, Romans 8.24. This Hope must be an Hope in God, 1 Pet.
1.21. Act. 24.15. 1 Timothy 4.10. and 6.17. And in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 Thessalonians.
1.3. 1 Timothy 1.1. Romans 15.12. Ephesians. 1.12, 13. That which by this Hope is to be
looked for and expected, is eternal Life, Tit. 1.2. and 3.7. which eternal Life
is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.22. and of all Gifts
the best; for it is the Hope, or Good hoped for, which is laid up in Heaven,
Col. 1.6. and the blessed, or happy, that is happy making Hope, Tit. 2.13. and
the last Gift, being the Gift which is to be brought at the Revelation [or
coming] of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. It is also called Grace, because a Gift
that proceeds from the Grace of God, and of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. 2 Thessalonians.
1.11, 12. Hence it appears that this future Good, must be sought chiefly and
humbly; and that all which is necessary for obtaining it, must also be hoped
for from God through Jesus Christ, Mat. 6.33. Luke 17.10. 1 Pet. 5.5. Joh.
16.23, 24.

And thus we must hope to the end, or constantly, 1 Pet. 1.13. Col. 1.23. Heb.
3.6.]

Q. And what is it to live to God through Jesus Christ?

A. To live to God through Jesus Christ, is, To live to God and Christ, in
serving the God and Father of Jesus Christ, in Holiness and Righteousness
before him, all the days of our Life; and in serving Jesus Christ, as Lord of
all, and as the Head and Husand of Believers, who are his Church and Body.

[Rom. 6.11. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto Sin,
but alive [living] unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Gal. 2.19. For I
through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God. 2 Cor. 5.15.
And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Ye
turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God, etc. Luke 1.74, 75.
That he [the Lord God of Israel] would grant unto us, that we being delivered
out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him, all the days of our Life. See Mat. 4.10. Romans 1.9. 2 Timothy 1.3. Heb. 9.14. and 12.28. Romans 14.18. For he that in these things
[Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost] serves Christ, is acceptable
to God, and approved of Men. See Joh. 12.26. Romans 16.18. Rev. 1.1. In Ephesians.
5.22, etc. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands as unto the Lord:
for the Husband is the Head of the Wise, even as Christ is the Head of the
Church, and he is the Savior of the Body. Therefore as the Church is subject
unto Christ; so let the Wives be unto their own Husbands in every thing. To
serve God and Christ, is from Love to obey them, as having respect to the
Authority of both, and aiming at the Glory of both. 1 Pet. 1.2. and v. 14. Heb.
5.9. Joh. 5.27. Mat. 28.18, etc. Romans 16.27. Ephesians. 3.21. Phil. 1.11. 1 Cor.
10.31. Romans 15.6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.12. Thus to live, is to live, not to the Lusts of
Men, but to the Will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2.]

Q. You said, That God according to his purpose did thus promise, What mean you
thereby?

A. I mean, That God having through his Grace so purposed before the World
began, did at length bring to light this purpose of his, and that by Jesus
Christ.

[ Tit. 1.1, 2, 3. Paul a Servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the Faith of God's Elect, and the acknowledging of the Truth,
which is after Godliness, in hope of eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie,
promised [in purpose] before the World began: But has in due time manifested
his Word [Promise] through preaching [the publication of his purpose] which is
committed unto me, etc. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Who has saved us, and called us with
an Holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose
and Grace, [gracious Purpose] which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
World began; but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality [an
Immortal Life] to Light through the Gospel.]

Q. You said, That God has thus promised to Believers, that they might be to
the praise of his Glory: What is your meaning here?

A. I mean this, That God in thus promising had for his principal end therein,
that the Glory of his Grace, Wisdom, and Power, might be shown forth on
Believers, and praised by them. Ephesians. 1.12. and 2.7.

Q. Now tell me, What is it for Men to be partakers of this Promise of God?

A. Men are then said to be partakers of this Promise, when they become Heirs
of Eternal Life, and do at length possess it. Gal. 3.29. Tit. 3.7. Heb. 6.17.
Jam. 2.5. 1 Pet. 3.7. Heb. 1.14. and 10.36.

Q. What is it to be partakers of this Promise by the Gospel?

A. Men are said to be Partakers of the Promise by the Gospel, Because Faith
comes by the Gospel, and because the Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation
to every one that believes. Romans 10.17. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 1.16.

Q. But what do you mean by the Gospel?

A. The Gospel is that Revelation of the Mystery concerning the Promise of
Eternal Life, which began to be spoken by the Lord Jesus.

[The word Gospel is used to express a word in Greek, which in general denotes
any good and joyful Message, or good and glad Tidings; and which in special,
and by way of eminency, signifies that good and glad Tidings brought into the
World by Jesus Christ: in which sense some would rather use the term Evangelie,
than Gospel, following therein most Nations, who retain in this sense the Greek
word, and that not unadvisedly.

That we call the Gospel, is that Revelation, or discovery of the Mystery
concerning the Promise of Eternal Life, which first began to be spoken by Jesus
Christ. See Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.3, etc. Joh. 1.17. Heb. 2.3. It is called the
Revelation of the Mystery concerning this Promise, because this Promise was
before the coming of Christ, contained in a Mystery, that is, in Types and
Figures, after an obscure way and manner. But Christ has expounded this
Promise, making known the substance of the shadow, and bringing forth clearly
the Spirit [that is, the meaning] of the Letter. Romans 4.13, etc. and 9.8, 9.
Heb. 6.13. Joh. 1.17. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Timothy 1.10.]

Q. Before we return, I have one Question yet to ask you; namely, Whether
nothing else but Eternal Life is in this Promise promised to Believers?

A. In the Promise of Eternal Life, all good things that must come from God,
and are necessary for obtaining it, are necessarily included in this Promise.

[1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the Promise of
the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Touching the matter of this Answer, see in that which follows.]

CHAP. VII. Of God's Work by Jesus Christ, for the saving of Sinners.
Q. YOu having thus spoken of the Promise of Eternal Life, which is the Promise
of the New Covenant, let us consider the Work of God for the saving of Men by
Jesus Christ, which you said is that Work of God, and that Work of Jesus, the
Christ of God, that Men may be saved: What have you learned in the general
concerning this Work?

A. Concerning God's Work for the saving of Men (or preparing them for
Salvation) by Jesus Christ, I have learned, that this Work does respect, first,
Those that are the Servants of Sin, and the Children of the Devil. Secondly,
Those that are the Servants of Obedience, and the Children of God.

Q. It being so, we will speak of this Work accordingly, beginning with that
part which respects the former sort of Persons you mentioned: But because it
will be needful to know who they are, I therefore ask you, Who are they that
are the Servants of Sin, and Children of the Devil?

A. All they who live in Sin, which is the transgression of the Law of God, are
the Servants of Sin, and Children of the Devil.

[The Law of God is a binding direction from God concerning Duty, forbidding
that which is Evil, and commanding that which is needful to be done. Now the
Transgression of this Law, either in doing what it forbids, or leaving undone
what it commands, is sin, 1 John 3.4. and 5.17. That man, whoever he be, that
lives in Sin, or commits Sin, by loving Sin, and walking in it, is a Servant
of Sin, and a Child of the Devil. Joh. 8.34. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
(says Christ) Whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin. Romans 6.2. Such
are said to live in Sin. 1 John 3.10. In this the Children of God are manifest,
and the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God,
neither he that loves not his Brother.

Q. But why are they that live in Sin thus called?

A. They that live in Sin are called the Servants of Sin, because they yield
their Members Servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, and may
expect the Wages of Sin, which is Death; and they are called the Children of
the Devil, because they do the Works of the Devil, and may expect to go into
everlasting Fire with the Devil and his Angels. [ Romans 6.16, 19, 21, 23. Joh.
8.41, 44. 1 John 3.8. Mat. 25.41.

Q. Now tell me, What is the Work of God by Jesus Christ for the saving of
Sinners?

A. The Work of God by Jesus Christ for the saving of Sinners, does respect
their Repentance, and upon Repentance the forgiveness of their Sins, and their
becoming the Children of God.

[This Work does respect the change of their Hearts by Repentance, whereby of
evil Men they become good, like unto good Trees, which are fit to bring forth
good Fruit, Mat. 12.33. This Work also respects the change of their State, in
that by Repentance they obtain that Justification and Adoption, which are here
attainable. Of these things see afterward.]

Q. It will be convenient to inquire after the Design of this Work, before we
speak of the Work it self; and therefore I shall first ask you this Question;
What is Repentance?

A. This Repentance we are speaking of, Is a turning to God with the whole
Heart, in order to the serving of him all the days of our Life.

[ Repentance is declared to be a turning to God, and as that which foregoes
our living in his Service. Act. 26.20. I [Paul] showed first to them of
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the Coasts of Judea, and then to
the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do Works meet for
Repentance. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and
true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven, etc. See Acts 15.19. This
turning must be with the whole Heart. 1 Samuel 12.3. Joel 2.12.]

Q. But wherein does this turning to God with the whole Heart consist?

A. Turning to God with the whole Heart, does consist in that exercise of the
Heart, whereby a Man, from a due apprehension of his Sins and Danger, also of
God's Will and Promise, and from a due consideration thereof, does suitably
thereunto confess or acknowledge his Sins unto God, and purpose or resolve to
serve God, and keep his Commandments.

[This turning to G^d, or this Repentance, does lie in a confession of Sin, and
in a resolution of serving God, that is, of forsaking Sin. The Parable of the
Prodigal, in Luke 15.17, etc. speaks forth this. Add Prove. 28.13. He that
covers his Sins shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have Mercy. See Hos. 14.1, 2, 3. Sometimes the whole is set forth by one
of these. Thus it is by this confession and acknowledgment of sins, 1 John 1.9.
Psalm. 32.5. and 5.3. Jer. 3.13. Thus also by this resolution of serving God.
Jer. 5.24. and 30.21. 2 Chronicles. 11.16.

This Repentance, or turning to God, arises from that apprehension and
consideration mentioned. See for this Prove. 1.23. 1 King. 8.37, 38. Ezekiel. 18
32. Matthew. 13.15. Act. 11.21. 1 King. 8.47. Luke 15.17. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm.
50.22. Ezekiel. 12.3. Hos. 7.2. Hag. 1.5, 7. Ezekiel. 18.14, 28. Prove. 2.5.]

Q. When is Confession in Repentance such as it ought to be?

A. This Confession is then such as it ought to be, when in confessing we are
humbled, abhorring and condemning our selves for our Sins, with shame and
sorrow; and when we make supplication to God with earnestness and hope for
Pardon and Acceptance.

[This Confession must be with humiliation and supplication. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. and
33.12. Repentance is sometimes set forth by Humiliation, 2 Chronicles. 33.19. Jam.
4.10. by a contrite, broken, and humble Heart, Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 57.15.

This Humiliation is an abhorring of our selves, and condemning of our selves
with shame and sorrow for our Sins. Job 42.6. Ezekiel. 20.43. and 36.31. 1 Cor.
11.31. Ezra 9.13. Luke 15.19, 21. Jer. 6.15. and 8.12. Romans 6.21. Isa. 44.9.
Ezekiel. 16.61, 63. and 43.10, 11. and 36.32. Psalm 38.18. 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. Jam.
4.9. ( Ezra 10.6.) Isa. 22.12. Mat. 5.4. Isa. 58.5. There must also be
supplication to God for Pardon and Acceptance, and it must be done with an
earnest desire and hope to attain the same. 1 King. 8.47, etc. Jer. 14.20, 21.
Hos. 5.15. and 14.2. 2 Chronicles. 11.14. and 33.12. Act. 9.11. Luke 15.19. Ephesians.
1.12.13. Isa. 55.13.]

Q. When is Resolution of Amendment such as it ought to be?

A. Resolution of Amendment, or of serving God, is then such as it ought to be,
when trusting in God we purpose to forsake all Sin, and to observe all God's
Commandments to the end of our Lives, and that with the utmost of Self-denial,
in all worldly Pleasure, Profit, Honor, and Safety.

[The Purpose of the Heart in Repentance, must be according to the true nature
of serving God: and therefore such as has been described. It must be a purpose
of leaving Sin in the General, and of known Sins in special, and of doing the
Will of God fully. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. Hos. 14.3. Isa. 1.16, etc. And this must be a
Purpose of serving God to the end, with the utmost of Self-denial. Mat. 16.24.
Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any Man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me. Read Luke 14.25, to the end of
the 33 verse.

And Men in this purposing, must hope and trust in God for help and assistance,
that they may do according to their Intent and Purpose. Isa. 51.5. Mat. 12.21.
Romans 15.12. Psalm. 37.3, 5. Isa. 57.13.]

Q. You having declared what Repentance is, I shall next enquire concerning the
Privileges which they have that repent, namely, the forgiveness of their Sins,
and their being the Children of God: Tell me, What is this forgiveness?

A. The forgiveness of Sin, which they that repent, obtain from God, is that
pardon of their Sins, whence they have peace with God, as one who by Promise
has delivered them from the Wrath to come. [ Romans 5.1. Heb. 9.12.]

Q. And what is it for these repenting Souls to become the Children of God?

A. They become the Children of God, in that they come to be as Children to
God, having access into a state of Grace or Favor, wherein they may boast in
hope of the Glory of God. Romans 5.2.

Q. But is Repentance necessary and sufficient for obtaining this good and
blessed condition?

A. It is so, as the Holy Scriptures plentifully teach us. See Luke 13.3. Romans
2.5. Mat. 11.20, etc. Act. 11.18. Mat. 13.15. James 3.20. Ezekiel. 18.30. Prove.
1.23.

Q. If so; How must we understand those Scriptures which show, that Faith or
Believing is necessary and sufficient for obtaining the forementioned
Benefits. See Romans 5.1, 2. Act. 13.39. and elsewhere.

A. In such Scriptures where only Faith, or only Repentance is mentioned, there
Faith and Repentance are the same: for there Repentance is implied in Faith, or
Faith in Repentance.

[These words, Faith and Repentance, or Believing and Repenting in the business
of our Salvation, are used in the Holy Scriptures, either alone or together.
When alone, they signity one and the same thing; but when together, as in Act.
20.21. Mark 1.15. Then Repentance has respect only to our Works, and Faith
has respect only to our Hope.

It will moreover be for much advantage to know and observe concerning the
forementioned terms, these two things among others.

First, That those Terms, as above-used, do sometimes only sight, That which
God requires for our admittance into a state of Grace. Thus the word Faith, and
to believe, is used, Romans 5.1, 2. Act. 15.9. Romans 10.10. And so the word
Repentance, and to repent, Mat. 3.8. Act. 26.20. Mat. 11.20. So also
Repentance, and Faith, or, The Foundation of Repentance and Faith, Heb. 6.1.

Secondly, That the same terms used alone or together, do oft-times signify the
whole that God requires for our admittance into a state of Glory. Thus the
words Faith, and to believe, are used, Acts 26.18. 1 Pet. 1.9. Joh. 3.16. Romans
10.11. Thus also Repentance, and to repent, are used, Luke 24.47. Act. 5.31. 1
Pet. 3.9. Mat. 4.17. Act. 17.30. And so also these terms Repentance and Faith,
also to repent, and to believe, when conjoined, Act. 20.21. Mar. 1.15.]

Q. Now let us return to consider the Work of God by Christ Jesus for the
faving of Sinners. What have you learned concerning this Work?

A. Concerning the Work of God by Jesus Christ for the saving of Sinners, I
have learned that it consists in God's making by Jesus Christ a way for
Sinners to come to Repentance, and thereby to the forgiveness of their Sins,
and acceptance with him, and in calling them to Repentance by Jesus Christ, for
the pardon of their Sins, and acceptance with him. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Luke 1.79.

Q. How has God made by Jesus Christ this way for Sinners?

A. God has made this way for Sinners; first, By the Death of his Son, who by
his Death is made a Propitiation for the Sins of the World, and has opened a
way for the coming of the Word of Reconciliation to them. Romans 5.8, 10. Ephesians.
2.13, etc. 1 John 4.10. and 2.2. Gal. 3.13. Mat. 26.28.

Q. Wherein does the Work of God appear in the Death of Christ for the saving
of Sinners?

A. The Work of God appears in the Death of Christ for the saving of Sinners,
in that for this end and purpose God willed that Christ should be obedient unto
Death, even the Death of the Cross, and in that he helped him therein. Heb.
10.5, etc. Psalm. 40.6. Isa. 49.8. and 50.5, etc. Act. 2.25. Heb. 5.7.

Q. Wherein does the Work of Christ appear in his own Death for the saving of
Sinners?

A. It appears in that he first willed to be thus obedient, and afterward
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, that Sinners might be
saved. Heb. 10.5, etc. Psalm. 40.6, etc. Isa. 50.5, etc. 1 Timothy 2.6. Phil. 2.8.

Q. You having showed, that God by the Death of Christ has made a way for the
saving of Sinners, Now tell me how else God has done it?

A. God has made for Sinners a way to Repentance and Forgiveness, not only by
the Death of Christ, but also by the sitting down of Christ at the right Hand
of God, in which estate he has power to give Repentance, and the forgiveness
of Sins. Act. 5.30, 31.

Q. Wherein does the Work of God for the saving of Sinners, appear in Christ's
sitting at his right hand?

A. It appears in that God raised him from the Dead, took him up into Heaven,
and set him at his right Hand. Act. 2.24, 32. Mark 16.19. Luke 24.51. Act. 1.9.
Ephesians. 1.20.

Q. Wherein does the Work of Christ appear in his sitting at God's right Hand?

A. It appears in that he obtained this estate by being obedient unto the
Death, even the Death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8, 9.

Q. You having declared the Work of God by Jesus Christ for the saving of
Sinners, by making a way for them to Repentance and Pardon, it remains that we
speak of God's Work for the saving of Sinners, by the calling them to
Repentance. What have you learnt concerning this?

A. Concerning God's calling of Sinners by Jesus Christ unto Repentance, I have
learned, That God by Jesus Christ through the Gospel, does command Sinners to
repent, and does promise upon Repentance the forgiveness of their Sins: and
that God and Christ thus call them with patience and long-suffering. Act. 2.38,
39. and 3.26. and 17.30. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Act. 10.43. 2 Pet. 3.9. Rev. 2.21. Romans
9.22. 1 Timothy 1.16.

Q. How may God be said to call Sinners by Jesus Christ unto Repentance?

A. God may be said so to do, in that he sent Jesus Christ to call Sinners to
Repentance. Act. 3.26.

Q. How may Jesus Christ be said to call Sinners to Repentance?

A. Jesus Christ may be said to call Sinners to Repentance, in that he comes in
the Name of God, and commands Sinners to Repent, and promises Pardon to them
upon their Repentance. Joh. 5.43. and 10.25.

Q. When did Christ come and call Sinners to Repentance?

A. Christ did first, in the days of his Flesh, call Sinners to Repentance, and
that in his own Person, and by his Disciples. Mat. 4.19. and 9.13. Mark 6.12.

Q. When else did Christ come and call to Repentance?

A. Christ after his Resurrection from the dead, came and called Sinners to
Repentance. Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.19.

Q. How did Christ after his Resurrection come and call Sinners to Repentance?

A. Christ came and called by his Apostles and others, who in Christ's stead do
teach and entreat Sinners to be reconciled unto God. Act. 13.46, 47. 2 Cor.
5.20. Luke 24.46, 47.

Q. How may these be said to be in Christ's stead in their preaching the Gospel?

A. These may be said to be in Christ's stead; first, in that they receive
their Commission from Jesus Christ to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.17. 1 Timothy
1.11, 12.

Q. What is the Commission Christ gave to his Apostles, after his Resurrection
from the Dead?

A. It is this: All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth: Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in [into] the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: and lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the World. Amen. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.

Q. How else are they in Christ's stead in preaching the Gospel?

A. Upon this account also they are such, Because Christ who enables them for
the Work, has appointed them to be his Ministers, and in his Name to preach
the Gospel. 1 Timothy 1.12. Luke 24.47. Act. 4.12. and 9.27. Romans 1.5. Act. 26.15,
etc. Romans 15.16. 1 Timothy 4.6. 1 Cor. 4.1.

Q. Are none but Ministers to endeavor the saving of Sinners, by bringing them
to Repentance?

A. All Christians are to endeavor, by their Words and Works, to save Sinners,
by bringing them to Repentance. Phil. 2.15, 16. James 5.20. 1 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet.
3.1.

CHAP. VIII. Of God's Work by Jesus Christ for the saving of Converts.
Q. Seeing we have spoken of God's Work for the saving of Sinners, let us now
speak of that which is for the saving of Converts, who by Repentance have their
Sins forgiven, and are become the Children of God. What is God's Work by Jesus
Christ for the saving of these?

A. The Work of God by Jesus Christ for the saving of his Children, is that
whereby God brings them unto Glory by Jesus Christ.

[Heb. 2.10. For it became him [God] for whom are all things, and by whom are
all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through Sufferings.]

Q. Wherein does this Work consist?

A. God's Work by Jesus Christ, of bringing his Children unto Glory, consists
in preparing them for Glory, and possessing them with it. Romans 9.23.

Q. How does God by Jesus Christ prepare them for Glory?

A. God does this, by creating them in Christ Jesus unto good Works, and by
confirming them therein unto the end.

[Ephes. 2.10. We are God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. 1 Cor. 1.8,
9. Who [God] shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful by whom ye were called unto
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. 1 These. 5.23, 24. And the very God of
Peace sanctify you wholly: And I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and
Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful
is be that calls you, who also will do it. Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of
Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in
every good Work to do his Will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.]

Q. But how does God thus sanctify Believers?

A. God does this by his Spirit, which he gives to Believers, and by which he
works in them for their Sanctification, and all this through Jesus Christ.

[1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledg of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.13. In whom [which Christ] also after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise. Tit. 3.5, etc. God our Savior
saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, etc. See Joh. 3.5.
Ezekiel. 36.25, etc.]

Q. What is that which God works in Believers by his Spirit, that they may be
confirmed unto the end?

A. God by his Spirit does enlighten them concerning his Will, and does
strengthen them that they may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, in all
patience and longsuffering with joyfulness. [ Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and 3.14, etc.
Col. 1.9, 10, 11.]

Q. Is there nothing by which God and Christ do through the Spirit sanctify
Believers?

A. Yes; for the Word of the Gospel is used for their Sanctification, and
sometimes Chastisement.

[For the Word of the Gospel, see Romans 1.16. Ephesians. 5.26. For Chastisement, see
Heb. 12.5, etc. Rev. 3.19.]

Q. Is there nothing that God by Jesus Christ works out of Believers for
their Sanctification?

A. Yes; And among other things, God will not suffer them to be tempted above
that they are able, but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape,
that they may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13.

Q. What in this Work of Sanctification is peculiar to Christ?

A. He gave himself for the Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of Water by the Word. And he ever lives to make intercession for
us. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Heb. 7.25.

Q. What must Believers do that they may be Holy, and confirmed unto the end?

A. They must cleanse themselves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.1.

Q. Can you set forth this more particularly?

A. Yes, after this manner; They building up themselves in their most Holy
Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, must keep themselves in the Love of God,
looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. Jud. 20, 21.

Q. I would hear something from you touching the particulars of your Answer:
Wherefore I ask you in the first place this Question; What is it for Believers
to build up themselves in their most Holy Faith?

A. Believers may be then said to build up themselves in their most Holy Faith,
when they rightly endeavor, by the means God vouchsafes them, both in private
and in public, to increase in the knowledge and belief of the Doctrine of
Christ. Col. 2.7. 2 Pet. 3.18. 2 Timothy 2.7. Ephesians. 4.11, etc. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

Q. What is it for Believers to pray in the Holy Ghost?

A. Believers may be then said to pray in the Holy Ghost, when according to the
Will of God, made known by the Holy Ghost, they make known their Requests unto
God by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, both in private and public,
as they have opportunity. Phil. 4.6. 1 John 5.14. Matthew. 6.5, etc. 1 Cor.
14.14, etc.

Q. What general Direction have Believers for Prayer and Thanksgiving?

A. That which our Savior gave to his Apostles, in Mat. 6.5, etc. add thereto
that of our Savior afterward, in Joh. 16.23, 24. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name: Ask and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be full. Add that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.20. Give thanks always for
all things unto God, and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. But what is it to pray and give thanks in the Name of Jesus Christ?

A. To pray and give thanks in the Name of Jesus Christ, is to draw nigh to God
therein with confidence, because Jesus Christ is our High Priest, that makes
intercession for us. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15.

Q. What have you learnt concerning that Cup of Blessing, or Thanksgiving,
which the Apostle speaks of in 1 Cor. 10.16?

A. I have learned, That the Apostle there speaks of the Lord's Supper, which
is to be used with Thanksgiving in the Churches of Christ.

Q. What mean you by the Lord's Supper?

A. I mean, A certain use of Bread and a Cup, which Christ our Lord has
appointed for a remembrance of him: For as often as we eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, we show the Lord's Death till he come. Mat. 26.26, etc. Mark
14.22, etc. Luke 22.19, etc. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.

Q. Now tell me; What is it for Believers to keep themselves in the Love of God?

A. Believers may be then said to keep themselves in the Love of God, when they
so use their Knowledge or Belief of the Gospel, and the Power they have received
from God, as to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World. Tit. 2.11, etc.

Q. What is it for Believers to look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ
unto Eternal Life?

A. It is nothing else but to continue to the end, in an expectation of that
Reward of sincere and constant Obedience which Christ our Lord will at his
coming give unto his faithful Servants. 1 Pet. 1.13, etc. Heb. 9.28. and 10.36,
etc. Tit. 2.13. Mat. 25.20, etc. 2 Timothy 1.12.

Q. You having now spoken of God's Work of preparing Believers for Glory, it
remains therefore that you speak of that Work of God, which is for the
possessing of Believers with this Glory by Jesus Christ. What say you of it?

A. This may more conveniently be spoken of in the consideration of that second
thing relating to God's Work of ruling among Men by Jesus Christ, which I said
is his Work of Judging the World by Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IX. Of God's Work of Government in Judging the World by Jesus Christ.
Q. WEll then, let us discourse of God's Work in judging the World by Jesus
Christ; What in the general have you learned concerning it?

A. This I have learned in general, That God has appointed a day in the which
he will judge the World in Righteousness by that Man Jesus Christ, whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised
him from the Dead. Act. 17.31. Romans 2.16.

Q. What are we to understand by the Day which God has appointed?

A. This Day is that time when Jesus shall come from Heaven in the Glory of his
Father, with his Angels. Acts 1.11. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Mat. 16.27. and 25.31, etc.

Q. But when shall this time be?

A. At the end of the World; but the day and hour, Jesus said, No Man knows,
no, not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only.
Mat. 24.36. Mark 13.32.

Q. What is it for God to judge the World by the Man Jesus Christ, whom he has
ordained?

A. The meaning is, That God although he be the Judge of all, yet will not
himself judge the World, but by Jesus Christ, to whom he has committed all
Judgment, giving him Authority to execute the same, having ordained him to be
the Judge of Quick and Dead. Heb. 12.2, 3. Joh. 5.22, etc. Romans 2.16. Act. 10.42.

Q. What did Jesus that God did thus exalt him?

A. He was obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8, 9, etc.
Romans 14.9.

Q. Whom will God judge by Jesus Christ?

A. God will by Jesus Christ judge the Angels that sinned, and all Men, both
Quick and Dead, at his Appearing and Kingdom. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6. 1 Cor. 6.3.
Jam. 2.19. Act. 10.42. 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.5. Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat.
10.15. and 11.22.

Q. What are we to understand by the Quick and Dead?

A. We are to understand by the Quick, or Living, all Men that shall be found
alive at the coming of Christ; and by the Dead, all both good and bad, that
died before his coming.

Q. But how shall these be brought unto Judgment?

A. Thus: all the Dead, both the Just and Unjust, shall be raised, and then all
Men shall by the Angels be gathered and brought before Christ, sitting on the
Throne of his Glory. Acts 24.15. John 5.28, 29. Mat. 25.31, 32.

Q. Is there any thing in special to be observed here concerning the Righteous?

A. Yes; for we are taught, That the Dead in Christ shall rise first; and that
they, together with those Believers that shall be alive at the coming of
Christ, shall be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air.

[1 Thessalonians. 4.13, etc. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, [that is, the Faithful which are Dead] that
ye sorrow not even as others which have no Hope. For if we believe that Jesus
died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring
with him. For this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, That we [Believers]
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent
[that is, shall not come before] them which are asleep. For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which
are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. See also 1
Cor. 15.22, 23, 52.]

Q. Now tell me, What is it for God to judge the World in Righteousness by Jesus
Christ?

A. God by Jesus Christ will judge the World in Righteousness, that is,
Righteously, by rewarding every Man according to his Practice or Works, whether
Good or Evil: for this Judgment is a Just or Righteous Judgment. Matthew. 16.27.
Romans 2.6. Rev. 2.23. 1 Cor. 3.8. 2 Cor. 5.10. and 11.15. Rev. 20.12, 13. and
22.12. Romans 2.5. Joh. 5.30.

Q. But what is it for God by Jesus Christ to judge every Man according to his
Works?

A. Here are two things to be considered.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first is; That God by Jesus Christ will judge every Man: for all must
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and give an account of themselves
unto God. Romans 14.10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.10. Jam. 2.12.

Q. What is the Second?

A. The Second is; That God by Jesus Christ will judge every Man according to
his Works; that is, without respect of Persons, and according to Truth and
Right. Romans 2.11. 1 Pet. 1.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 3.23. Romans 2.2.
Rev. 19.2. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 96.13. Genesis 18.25. Psalm. 9.4. Isa. 10.2. Job
34.23. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. 2 Timothy 4.8. Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 1.8.

Q. Can you explain this in a special Application to Men, whom God will justify
and condemn by Jesus Christ at the last Day?

A. I can.

Q. How do you set it forth in reference to those whom God by Jesus Christ will
justify at the last Day?

A. Thus it may be done: God will render to every Man Eternal Life; who
according to the Truth manifested to him, does, by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality; and that God will make
them to exceed those in Glory, whom they exceed in Righteousness. Romans 2.6, 7,
10. 1 Cor. 15.41. Matthew. 20.23. Dan. 12.3. 1 Cor. 3.8. Phil. 4.17.

Q. How do you set it forth in reference to them whom God by Jesus Christ will
condemn at the last Day?

A. God will render Indignation and Wrath unto every one that is Contentious,
and does not obey the Truth, as manifested either without the Law, or under the
Law, or under the Gospel; and that God will render the greatest Punishment to
the greatest Offenders. Romans 2.8, 9, 12, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Mat. 11.22, 24.
Luke 12.47, 48. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. 2 Cor. 9.6. Mat. 23.14.

Q. When you say, That God by Jesus Christ will render to Men this or that;
What mean you by that word?

A. I mean not only that God by Jesus Christ will judge them, to such or such a
Condition, but will also bring them into it. Mat. 25.31, to the end of the
Chapter.

Q. What will follow this Judgment?

A. First after this Judgment, all the Enemies of Christ being put under his
Feet, and all things subdued unto him, the Son shall deliver up the Kingdom to
God, even the Father, and shall himself also be subject to him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all. 1 Cor. 15.24, etc.

Q. What else will follow?

A. In respect of the Righteous this will follow: They being adjudged by Christ
to inherit the Kingdom prepared for them from the Foundation of the World; and
having their vile Body changed, that it may be fashioned like unto Christ's
glorious Body, shall enter into the Joy of their Lord, where they shall live,
rest, and rejoice, with fullness of joy for ever and ever. Matthew. 25.34. Phil.
3.21. 1 Cor. 15.50. Matthew. 25.21, 23. Luke 20.35, 36. Joh. 6.51. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
Heb. 4.9. 1 Pet. 1.6. and 4.13. Psalm. 16.11.

Q. But what shall follow in respect of the Wicked?

A. The Wicked being judged to depart from Christ into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, shall be cast Body and Soul into Hell
[Geenna] that Furnace of Fire, where shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth.
Mat. 25.41. and 10.28. and 13.42.

Q. What from the consideration hereof may Sinners now be exhorted and
persuaded to?

A. They may hence be exhorted and persuaded to repent and be converted, that
their Sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing come from the
presence of the Lord. Act. 3.19. and 17.30, 31.

Q. What from the consideration of the aforesaid Judgment, and that which
follows, may Converts, or Believers, be exhorted and persuaded to?

A. They may hence be exhorted and persuaded to be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.

CHAP. X. Some particular Duties which Believers ought to know and perform.
Q. HAving now a fit occasion, we may here, as in a place most convenient,
discourse of Good Works, or particular Duties, wherein Believers ought to be
exercised; but seeing we have already mentioned many of them which come under
the consideration of Godliness, I shall desire to hear from you something of
what you have learned, especially concerning Righteousness and Sobriety, of
which hitherto you have been almost silent. Now observe and answer my
Questions, of which the first shall be this:

What is the Duty of Believers toward Men as Men?

A. This in the general is expressed by our Savior thus: All things whatsoever
ye would that Men should do to you; do ye even so to them: for this is the Law
and the Prophets. Mat. 7.12.

Q. How can you express the same more particularly?

A. Thus: To render to all their Dues whatsoever they may justly challenge and
require of us as their right; and to do good to all.

[Rom. 13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Prove.
3.27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due, [Hebr. from the Owners
thereof] when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Gal. 6.10. As we have
opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, especially to them that are of the
Household of Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15. See that none render Evil for Evil unto any
Man; but ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all
Men. Romans 16.19. I would have you wise unto that which is Good, and simple unto
that which is Evil. 1 Pet. 3.13.]

Q. But what is it to render to every one his due.

A. To render to others their Due, is, To speak truly, (a) and deal justly with
them (b): and therefore not to abuse and wrong them by lying (c), flattery (d)
and evil speaking (e), as they do that are Revilers (f), Scoffers (g),
Whisperers (h), Backbiters (i), Slanderers (k), False-Accusers (l), False
Witness-bearers (m), unjust Judges, (n) and the like, and not to be any ways
injurious to them in their Life (o), Liberty (p), Estates (q), Relations (r),
and the like; nor hurtful to them, as to their everlasting Concerns, by
corrupting them in their Souls and Lives (s), or hindering them from or in that
Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus (t).

[ (a) John 4.18. Prove. 12.17. Zech. 8.16. Ephesians. 4.25. (b) Isa. 26.10. Mich.
6.8. 2 King. 12.15. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. Isa. 33.15. Psalm. 15.2. Tit. 2.11. (c) Lev.
19.11. Col. 3.9. Joh. 8.44. Rev. 21.27. 1 Timothy 4.2. (d) Psalm. 12.2, 3. 1 Thessalonians.
2.5. (e) Tit. 3.2. (f) 1 Cor. 6.10. 1 Pet. 2.23. (g) 2 Pet. 3.3. (h) Romans 1.29.
Prove. 16.28. 2 Cor. 12.20. (i) Romans 1.30. (k) 1 Timothy 3.11. Prove. 10.18. Psalm.
101.5. Jer. 9.4. (l) 2 Timothy 3.3. (m) Exodus 20.16. Mat. 15.19. (n) Luke 18.6.
Psalm. 82.6. (o) Exodus 20.13. (p) Jer. 34.15. Heb. 11.36. (q) Exodus 20.15.
Ephesians. 4.28. (r) Exodus 20.14. (s) Mat. 23.15. 2 Pet. 2. Chapt. (t) Mat. 23.13.
Act. 13.8.]

Q. And what is it to do good to all?

A. To do good to all, is in imitation of God, to be merciful and kind to them,
in respect both of their Bouls and Bodies. [ Psalm. 37.26. Mat. 5.7. Luke 6.36.
1 Cor. 13.4. Luke 6.35. Col. 3.12.]

Q. But what if they be Enemies to them, and persecute them?

A. Although they be so, yet must Believers be merciful and kind unto them.

[Mat. 5.44, etc. I say unto you, Love your Enemies; Bless them that curse you;
Do good to them that hate you; and pray for them that despitefully use you, and
persecute you, etc]

Q. What then, must Believers be a peaceable People?

A. Yes; They must follow Peace with all Men. And if it be possible, as much as
in them lies, live peaceably [or be at peace] with all Men. Heb. 12.14. Romans
12.18.

Q. But how should Believers endeavor to be at peace with all Men?

A. They should endeavor it, by not provoking others to Anger (a), in doing
them wrong (b), or in pleasing themselves, in that which is displeasing to
others, and wherein they may deny themselves for their Neighbors good (c);
also by not being easily provoked by others (d), as when they suffer, without
any Contention, such Offenses that may be easily born (e); also by abstaining
from all Revenge (f), and appearing appeasable (g), and ready to forgive, when
they meet with greater Injuries (h). Lastly, By being courteous to all (i), and
forward to do good to all, in that which they will acknowledge for good (k), as
by giving and lending to them (l), or being ready in any thing to help and
assist them in their need (m).

[ (a) Gal. 5.26. (b) 1 Samuel 1.6, 7. (c) Romans 15.1, 2, 3. (d) 1 Cor. 13.5. (e)
Mat. 5.38, 39, etc. (f) Romans 1.31. (g) Chap. 12.17, 19. Matthew. 6.12, 14, 15.
Mat. 18.21, etc. (h) Luke 17.3, 4. Matthew. 23.34. (i) 1 Pet. 3.8. (k) 1 Pet.
3.13. (l) Mat. 5.42. (m) Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work,
to speak evil of no Man, [ Gr. to blaspheme no Man]; to be no Brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness unto all Men. Jam. 3.17. The Wisdom that is from
Above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of
Mercy and good Fruits, without partiality, [or without wrangling] and without
hypocrisy. See Job 29.12, etc.]

Q. I would hear something which you have learned concerning the Duty of
Believers in their several Relations to others: and first, as being of the same
Kingdom or Commonwealth; Here tell me, What is their Duty who govern, as in a
Kingdom the King does, and they that are sent of him for the punishment of Evil
Doers, and for the praise of them that do well?

A. He that rules over Men, must be just, ruling in the Fear of God. 2 Samuel
23.3.

Q. What is their Duty toward their Governors?

A. They must submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man [ Gr. to every Humane
Creature, (that is) to every one whom Men set up to Rule and Govern] for the
Lord's sake, [that is, for Conscience-sake] whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of Evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

[1 Pet. 2.13, 14. See the thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. See
Tit. 3.1.]

Q. What is their Duty, being Husbands, toward their Wives?

A. An Husband ought to love his Wife as himself, nourishing and cherishing Her
as his own Body, rendering her due Benevolence, and giving honor to the Wife,
as to the weaker Vessel, and not being bitter unto her, and all this,
notwithstanding she be an Unbeliever, whom therefore he must not forsake, but
must endeavor her Conversion. Ephesians. 5.25, etc. 1 Cor. 7.3, etc. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Col. 3.19. 1 Cor. 7.11, 16.

Q. What is the Duty of Wives toward their Husbands?

A. A Wife ought to love her Husband, and to submit to him as to the Lord, by
reverencing and obeying him, and must render unto him due Benevolence, and all
this, though he be an Unbeliever. [ Tit. 2.4. Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24, 33. Col.
3.18. 1 Pet. 3.1, etc. 1 Cor. 7.3, etc. verse. 10, etc.]

Q. What is the Duty of Parents toward their Children?

A. It is the Duty of Parents not to provoke their Children to Wrath, lest they
be discouraged, but to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord,
and to provide for them. Ephesians. 6.4. Col. 3.21. Prove. 29.15. 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Timothy 5.8.

Q. What is the Duty of Children toward their Parents?

A. It is the Duty of Children to honor their Father and Mother. Ephesians. 6.2.
Exodus 20.12. Mal. 1.6.

Q. But what is it for Children to honor their Father and Mother?

A. First, Children that are under the Power of their Parents, ought to honor
them, by obeying them in the Lord.

[Ephes. 6.1, 2, 3. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, (which is the first Commandment with promise)
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the Earth.
Col. 3.20. Children, obey your Parents in all things, (which they as Parents
may command) for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord. See Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy
3.2.]

Secondly, Children under the Power of their Parents, ought to honor them, by
so regarding them when they justly correct, as to be ashamed, and amend, and
not to be provoked to Anger when so chastised. Heb. 12.9.

[Thus it is written in the Law of Moses; Deuteronomy. 21.18, etc. If a Man have a
stubborn and rebellious Son, which will not obey the Voice of his Father, or
the Voice of his Mother, and that when they have chastened him, will not
hearken unto them; then shall his Father and his Mother lay hold on him, and
bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and unto the Gate of his Place; and
they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our Voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all
the Men of his City shall stone him with Stones that he die: So shall thou put
Evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear.]

Thirdly, Children under or not under the Power of their Parents, ought to
honor them, by reverencing their Father and Mother.

[Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear [reverence] every Man his Mother and his Father.
Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or his Mother, and
all the People shall say, Amen. Prove. 30.17. The Eye that mocketh at his
Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valey shall pick it
out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.]

Fourthly, All Children ought to honor their Parents, by showing the natural
Affection of Children to them, in being a delight and glory to them, and useful
and profitable to them in what they can.

[Prov. 10.1. A wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the
heaviness of his Mother. Prove. 23.24. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly
rejoice, and he that begets a wise Child, shall have joy of him. Prove. 28.7.
Whosoever keeps the Law, is a wise Son, but he that is a Companion of riotous
Men, shameth his Father. Matthew. 15.4, etc. God commanded, saying, Honor thy
Father and Mother; and he that curses Father or Mother, let him die the Death.
But ye [Pharisees] say, Whosoever shall say to his Father or Mother, It is a
Gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, and honor not his Father
or Mother, he shall be free. Thus (says Christ) have ye made the Commandment
of God of none effect by your Tradition. Prove. 19.26. He that wastes his
Father, and chaseth away his Mother, is a Son that causes shame, and brings
reproach. Exodus 21.15. He that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be
surely put to death.]

Q. What is the Duty of Masters toward their Servants?

A. It Is the Duty of Masters to give unto their Servants that which is just and
equal, moderating Threatenings. Knowing that their Master also is in Heaven, and
that there is no respect of Persons with him. Col. 4.1. Ephesians. 6.9.

Q. What is the Duty of Servants toward their Masters?

A. It Is the Duty of Servants, to count their Masters worthy of all Honor [due
to Masters], and to be obedient to them with fear and trembling, [that is,
pleasing them well in all things, not answering again, or gain-saying] in
singleness of their Heart, as unto Christ: that is, not with Eye-Service, as
Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the
Heart; with good Will doing service as to the Lord, and not to Men: not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity. And all this not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward: for this is thankworthy, if a Man for
Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. But if they have
Believing Masters, they must not despise them because they are Brethren, but
rather do them Service because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the
Benefit. Ephesians. 6.5, etc. Col. 3.22, etc. Tit. 2.9, etc. 1 Pet. 2.18, etc. 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.

Q. What is the Duty of Believers toward Believers?

A. Believers ought to love one another with a pure heart fervently, and to
continue therein. 1 Pet. 1.22. Heb. 13.1.

Q. But how are they to show their love one to another?

A. First, They are to follow after the things that make for Peace, as
lowliness or humbleness, meekness, longsuffering, and the like. Romans 14.19.
Ephesians. 4.2, 3.

Q. What else?

A. They also are to follow after the things wherewith they may edify one
another, as by restoring them that are taken in a Fault; by confirming,
exhorting, and comforting one another. Romans 14.19. Gal. 6.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
Act. 15.32. Heb. 10.24, etc.

Q. Is there any thing else?

A. Yes; for Believers ought in an especial manner to be ready unto every good
Work toward their Brethren, and that with the hazard of their own Lives (if
need be) for the relief, succor, and safety of their Brethren, when they are
poor, sick, imprisoned, banished, or any otherwise in affliction and danger.

[Gal. 6.10. Heb. 13.16. 1 John 3.16. Joh. 13.34. Mat. 25.34, etc. Heb. 13.1,
2, 3. 1 John 3.15, etc. Romans 12.13. Phil. 2.30.]

Q. Have you any thing more to add?

A. I shall sum up all in this, That Believers ought to rejoice with them that
rejoice, and to weep with them that weep, to be of the same mind one toward
another, and to serve one another in love. Romans 12.15, 16. Gal. 5.13.

Q. What is the Duty of their Elders that Teach and Rule among them?

A. They ought to feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock. 1 Pet.
5.2, 3.

Q. What is the Duty of the Flock toward those that feed them?

A. Their Duty is, to know, obey and esteem them very highly in love for their
Works sake, and to communicate to them in all good things. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
Heb. 13.17. Gal. 6.6.

Q. I am now willing to hear what you have learned touching the Duty of
Believers, in reference to their temporal Life, and the good things belonging
thereto, as Pleasures, Riches, Honors, and in reference to the contrary;
wherefore I ask you, What is the Duty of Believers in reference to their
Temporal Life?

A. Their Duty in the general is, To love their Lives in seeking to save them,
when they may so do, and not lose them for ever; also to hate their Lives in
not seeking to save them, when by losing them they may save them for ever. 1
Pet. 3.10. Luke 14.26.

Q. When may a Man be said to lose his Life for ever, in seeking to save it for
a time?

A. Then when a Man cannot save his Life and serve God together.

Q. Well; What is the Duty of Believers for the saving of their temporal Lives?

A. They as Men trusting in God and obeying him, must seek to provide that
which may preserve their Lives, and to avoid that which may destroy them.

Q. How may they thus seek that which may preserve their Lives?

A. When with Prayer and thankfulness to God daily for their daily Bread, they
seek to get by diligence in some honest Imploiment, or, if need be, by Benefits
from others, that which is needful, and to keep necessary things, not wastfully
spending them, nor sinfully withholding them, when called to lend them unto
the Lord.

[ Mat. 6.11. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Mat. 6.25, etc. Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11, 12. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, etc. Prove. 6.6, etc. Luke 22.35. Act. 4.34. and 20.35. Eccles. 3.6.
Prove. 21.20. and 23.21. and 29.3. and 22.16. Prove. 11.24. and 28.27. and 19.17.]

Q. How must they seek to avoid that which may destroy their Lives?

A. Among other things, they must first keep themselves free from all sins, for
which God sometimes does, or Men justly may take away their Lives. Psalm.
55.23. 1 Cor. 11.30. Romans 13.4. 1 Pet. 4.15. Secondly, They must seek to keep
themselves safe from those that seek their Lives, and this either by Power,
when Right and Law arms them against their Enemies, or only by Prudence, when
Power is wanting, or may not be used lawfully. Esth. 8.11, etc. 1 King. 1.12.
Mat. 10.16, etc. Ephesians. 5.15, 16. Col. 4.5.

Q. When must Believers hate their Lives in not seeking to save them?

A. Then must they hate their Lives, when they cannot with the perservation of
their Lives, keep a good Conscience toward God. They must be always free to
hazard their Lives in the performance of their Duty to God. Rev. 12.11. Matthew.
16.24, etc. Luke 14.26, etc. Joh. 12.25. Romans 8.17. Act. 15.26. and 20.24.
Judge. 5.18.

Q. Now let us speak concerning Worldly Pleasures, and their Contrary: What
have you learned touching the Duty of Believers, in reference to worldly
Pleasures?

A. I have learned, That Believers, who may use lawful Pleasures, must be
moderate in the use of them, and avoid all sinful Pleasures and Delights; being
chaste and temperate in shunning Adultery, Fornication, Unnatural Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Surfeiting, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Rioting or Revelling,
Idleness, and the like.

[Eccles. 3.12. and 5.18, etc. and 9.7, etc. Phil. 4 5. 1 Cor. 7.29, etc. Prove.
21.17. Luk 8.14. 1 Timothy 5.6. 2 Timothy 3.4, 11. Heb. 11.25. Tit. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.2.
1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Gal. 5.23. 2 Pet. 1.6. 1 Cor. 9.25, etc. Tit. 1.8. and 2.2. Gal.
5.19. Ephesians. 5.3. Romans 1.24, etc. Deuteronomy. 23.17. 1 Cor. 6.9. 1 Timothy 1.10. Jude 7.
Exodus 12.19. Levit. 18.23. Mark 7.22. 1 Pet. 4.3. Luke 21.24. Prove. 23.21. Mat.
11.19 Romans 13.13. Gal. 5.21. Ezekiel. 10.49. 1 Timothy 5 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.]

Q. What is the Duty of Believers that are in sorrow by reason of Afflictions?

A. It is their Duty to be patient in all, to rejoice in the Lord always, and
to endeavor that all may be for profit and good unto them. Romans 12.12. Jam.
5.7, etc. Phil. 4.4. Jam. 1.2. Heb. 12.11.

Q. Let us now speak of Worldly Riches; What is the Duty of Believers that are
Rich?

A. Their Hearts must not be lifted up [in Pride] because of their Riches. They
must not despise the Poor, nor oppress them, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but
in the living God; and they ought to be rich in good Works. Ezekiel. 28.5. Ps.
49.6. Prove. 28.11. Jam. 2.6. Prove. 17.5. and 14.31. 1 Timothy 6.17.

Q. What is their Duty who are not Rich?

A. They must be content with the things that they have, not willing, resolving
and laboring to be rich, nor envying those that are. Heb. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.8,
etc. Prove. 23.4. 1 Cor. 13.4. Romans 13.13. Psalm. 73.2, etc.

Q. We are now to speak of Worldly Honor: Tell me, how must they that are in
Honor behave themselves?

A. They must be lowly, and walk worthy of the Honor they have. Prove. 11.2.
and 16.18, 19. Act. 24.2.

Q. Upon this occasion, tell me, What is the way of getting and keeping an
honorable Esteem and Reputation with others?

A. The right way to get and keep our selves in an honorable Esteem with
others; is, To abstain from all appearance of Evil; to excel in Wisdom and
Virtue, and to b^have our selves modestly and discreetly in all Converse with
others.

[1 Thessalonians. 5.22. 1 Cor. 14.12. 1 King 4.30 Phil. 2.29, 30. Prove. 31.10, etc.
and 15.33. Luke 14.8, etc. 1 Timothy 2.9, etc. 1 Cor. 11.13, etc. Psalm. 112.5.
Tit. 2 5. Prove. 11.22. and 12.16. and 19.11. and 18.13. Eccles. 10 1. Prove.
25.9, 10.]

Q. You have now spoken much of good Works, Have you any thing more to say of
this Matter?

A. There is much more to be spoken concerning good Works; but I am willing to
conclude this Discourse now with that of the Apostle Paul, in Phil. 4.8.
Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on
these things.

THE END.

