A LETTER Touching A College of Maids, OR, A VIRGIN-SOCIETY. Written Aug. 12.
1675.
Noble Sir,
YOU may expect I should give you some account of the Design mentioned
yesterday at our Venison (where we had half a dozen fair young Ladies, rich,
and virtuous) concerning the College of Maids, or the Virgin-Society, at least
so far as to free it from ridicule. Thus then,

First, The End (for that is first to be considered) is to improve ingenuous
Maids in such qualities as best become their Sex, and may fit them both for a
happy Life in this, and much more in the next World.

Secondly, The Means is first to separate them from the contagion of common
Conversation (which is seldom incorrupt) and to find them decent employments
and exercises, both Divine and Humane (with moderate Recreation) in a
convenient House, where they may have Lodging and Diet together, and be under
Government, somewhat like the Halls of Commoners at Oxford.

Thirdly, At entrance every one puts in Caution-money into the hands of the
Steward, an Aged, grave Gentleman, and of known integrity; five pounds, more or
less, according to the quality of the Persons. For,

Fourthly, There are two Tables, higher and lower Commonsals, and the chief
Governess at the head of the higher, the Pro-Governess of the lower Table.

Fifthly, They are served by Maids of meaner birth and estate, and some of
these have thereby maintenance from their friends (not enough) and they wait at
the higher Table, some other, and fewer, wait at the lower. And all these wait
also on the Ladies in their Chambers, being well rewarded for their service.

Sixthly, There belongs to this House an ancient Divine, of competent Gravity
and Learning (approved by the Lord Bishop of the Diocese) to attend at the
Chapel or Dining Room, once or twice a day for Prayers; and He also Preaches
once or twice a Week.

Seventhly, The Governesses, (which may be chosen yearly by consent) according
to the Advice of the Chaplain, appoint the Ladies and their maids a method of
private Reading and Devotion.

Eighthly, The Fathers of the Virgins (or two chosen men amongst them) are
Visitors of the College, and may, when they please, take their Daughters home
for a few days, and dispose of them in marriage when they please, taking a
fair Farewell of the Society.

Ninthly, A fair Garden belongs to the House, where they have pleasant Walks
and Arbors, and variety, not only of beautiful Flowers, but of wholesome Herbs,
and Physical Plants; whereof they learn the Use and Virtues.

Tenthly, Their Library, or closet of Books, in the Dining room, contains
choice Authors of History, Poetry, and especially of Practical Divinity and
Devotion: Not only English, but of Learned, as well as Modern Language. Wherein
diverse of the Society are skilled, and willing to teach the rest, as many as
are inclined and apt to learn.

Eleventhly, There are among themselves also not wanting, who teach Music and
Dancing, (besides Needle-works and Drawing) so far at least, (which is enough)
as concerns decent motion, and gesture of body, and may serve for recreation,
or for the service of God, I mean Music of Voice or Instrument.

Twelfthly, Some of them are capable and well-affected to studies of
Philosophy, especially Natural and Moral; and delighted with making some of the
easier Experiments in Natural things.

Thirteenthly, Their Chambers, and liberty of going abroad, and visiting of
Friends, may be easily ordered by the Counsels of their Parents, whom we have
named Visitors or Overseers, and by the Governesses.

Fourteenthly, Their Apparel is modest, suitable to their Minds. The upper
Garment a loose Gown girt about them, and a large Hood; the Gentlewomen wear
fine silk, of some sad color, their Maids of fine Serge. But when with their
Parents and Friends, they go in any becoming habit, not showing any part naked,
beside the face and hands.

Fifteenthly, On the Holy days they use to go orderly to the Parish Church
near their House, where they have a private Gallery fitted for them.

All this, (which you may add to, or alter) is submitted to your candid
censure, by

Aug. 12. 75. Your Humble Servant B. C.

POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
THe Abby-House, holden by Lease, will contain twenty Gentlewomen, and their
ten Maids: two for the Kitchen, two for the Buttery, and six for the Dining
Room. The Persons may be found within seven miles compass, as I suppose.

Ladies Calling, part. 2. page 3.
As for the Religious Orders of Virgins in the Roman Church, though some of
those very great abuses have crept in; yet I think 'twere to be wished, that
those who suppressed them in this Nation, had confined themselves within the
bounds of a Reformation, by choosing rather to rectify and regulate, than
abolish them.

FINIS.

