THE Cavaliers Litany.
FRom Shuttlecock Sh -- that to Nantz is inclined.,
From popular Fop, and the rest of the Kind;
Who all shall be Knights when the Devil is blind.
Libra Nos Domini
From P -- Spouse the Speaker of State,
From Creswells Gallant, and from Colledge's Fate;
From all that out Peace and Prosperity hate
Libera ande.
From Owens old Tub, and from Baxters Belief,
From Mobile's Majesty Reigning in chief;
From our Wives paying Parsonsby playing the Theif.
Libera etc
From a Popish black Cloak in a Protestant Cut,
From going to Bed with the Gripes in my Gutt;
From rising next Morning with all our Throats Cut.
Libera etc
From the Traitors Caball, and the fine Raree-show,
From Sir Thomas and Robert, that all the Town know;
From the Damnable Oaths of cursed T.0.
Libera etc.
From H -- d's pale Ghost, that frighted the Doctor,
From incest with B -- y, from him that late K -- t her;
From a Pockey young Lord, from a Pimp and a Procter
Libera etc.
From those that last voted an Act for Exclusion,
From those on Prerogative made an Intrusion
From such as would bring the whole world in confusion.
Libera etc.
From keeping the King from borrowing of Coin,
Though his Wants should be great as ever were mine;
From putting up Perkin to thwar't the right Line.
Libera etc.
From sucking Sediton from Anthonies Tap,
From a Hypocrites pray in a black and white Cap;
From raising our Honor by getting a Clap.
Libera etc.
From Dining with Bethel and Supping with C -- n,
From a lash with the quill of Satyricall Dryden;
From a high metl'd Whig that was kick'tat Low-Layton.
Libera etc.
From a sort that Associate on purpose to shame us,
From a Jury that brings in all Bills Ignoramus;
From the pittyful Rogues that do swear so G.Dam'us.
Libera etc.
From C -- sh and G -- d P -- n D -- s,
From crying no North and obstructing free choice
From Stealing Communion and making no Noise.
Libera etc.
From Sighing and Whining and Pining and Fears,
That the Pockey old Plot should last 99 years;
From half so much hazard as some Bodies Ears.
Libera etc.
From a Brumisham Saint and a serious Church Whig,
From a puritan Soul that abominates Pig;
From the 41 Rogues that would hum the old Gig.
Libera etc.
Fram a Presbiter-Pope from Turk and from Tarter,
From hanging ones self in a Rope or a Garter;
From Fools that defend an old forfeited Charter.
Libera etc.
From a pretty conceit that the way to be quiet,
Is raising Sedition Rebellion and Riot;
From clubbing to Feast, and be kept from our Diet.
Libera etc.
From a Rablbe and Rout with a Noise to attend on it,
From, the pains of the Gowt and never to mend on it;
From a gilded Jack-Chain with a R -- at the end on it.
Libera etc.
From all that do envy our Bells when they Ring,
And Organs and those that in Surplices sing;
From all that refuse a good Health to the King.
Libera Nos Domini.
FINS.
London, Printed for Charles Brom, 1682.


