THE Innocent Cleared AND THE Guilty Made Manifest Being a Reply to a Printed
Paper lately come to my Hand, titled, Apostasy of the People called Quakers
from the Faith once delivered to the Saints; subscribed by Francis Houlcroft
and Joseph Oddey, who call themselves Ministers of Christ, but upon true
Examination are made manifest by their Fruits to be otherwise.

That is to say, Ignorant of the True God and Jesus Christ, and Enemies to his
Appearance; and their Lies and Slanders that they cast upon the Innocent
concerning a Paper printed, in which we gave a true Account of the late Meeting
at Thriploe, turned back upon themselves, and their Folly made manifest.

Their Contradictions compared, and their Wresting and Perverting the Holy
Scriptures of Truth discovered, and their Rude and Unsavory Words, and Hard
and Ungodly Speeches, against God, his Truth and People, Reproved.

How they wrest our Words, and add to our Words that which we never said, and
then cry out against us, and endeavor to render us and our Principles thereby
Odious.

Also, A Testimony of the Universal Love of God in Jesus Christ, as it now
appears unto all men, witnessed by the Scriptures of Truth.

By a Servant of Truth, and one that desires the Good of all men, known by the
Name of SAMUEL CATER.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above bis Lord; it is
enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord:
If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more them of
his Household? Matthew 10.24, 25.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do Err, not knowing the Scriptures nor
the Power of God, Matthew 22.29.

THE INNOCENT CLEARED: AND THE GUILTY Made Manifest.
AND now all may see what Francis Houlcroft and Joseph Oddey have said and
given under their own Hands, and sent abroad in Print, which if I should have
reported of them, and not have had it under their own Hands, they would without
all question have denied their own words, as they have already done what they
spoke before many Witnesses at that Meeting at Thriploe, which will witness to
their Faces, that the Account which we have published in Print, concerning
their Words and Carriages is true: And now see their own Words, which I have
here faithfully set down, and collected out of their own Books, which is as
follows.

Page 1. says Francis Holcraft and Joseph Oddey, The forged Lies of a late
Pamphlet of theirs.

Reply, But F. H. and J. O. you had been wiser and honester if you had proved
it so to be, before you had published it so; for we still affirm the Truth of
it, and there are three of our Names to it, and you have not yet proved the
contrary; and we whose Names are here subscribed do promise, if the Lord permit
to give us Life and Health, To give you another Meeting at any Time or Place,
which may be equally agreed upon between us, to maintain and prove all that
Relation to be true, that we have before published in Print, before any People
that may come to hear it, which we desire may be before the time of these
Citations of J. O. in page 14. who would put us off unto the Day of Judgment.

Samuel Cater, John Web, Jacob Baker.
And now I shall take notice of your words, as you have set them down, and sent
them abroad in Print. And I do tell you, that I am glad that you have thus
appeared, whereby you are further made manifest. And as for your Railing
against me, and Miscalling of me and the rest of us, who believe in the true
Light, which God has made manifest to our Souls, for the leading and guiding
of us in the Way of Life; its little matter to us, only this, its an Evidence
of Salvation to us, and that of God; for it was ever the Portion of God's
Servants and Children to be Reviled and Evil spoken on by those that hate the
Light, and live in Darkness.

Page 3. Lin. 4. F. H. When I came near the Barn, where these People were met,
I heard one speaking, and I made a stay, without resolving that I would not go
in till he had teased his Service of his False Christ, the Light that is in all
men, a New God, which neither we nor our Fathers have known.

Rep. First, It Is to be taken notice of, how this man knew or understood what
it was that our Friend did declare to the People at that time, seeing he would
not come into the House until he had done speaking: But however, he is resolved
to give Judgment against him, contrary to that equal Law which judges no Man
until he is heard.

But further, Here thou art judged out of thy own Mouth to be in the Steps of
thy Forefathers the Pharisees, who said concerning Christ unto the Blind Man,
whom Christ had opened his Eyes, As for this Fellow we know not whence he is,
John 9.29. so say thou now concerning God and Jesus Christ, which the
Scripture fully declares to be the true Light, and which l^ghteth every man
that comes into the World; a God (say thou) which neither we nor our
Fathers have known; in this thou have spoken the Truth, which I believe
concerning thee, and all such as thou art, who hate the Light, and love
Darkness. O! blush and be ashamed, thou Vain Babbler and Unprofitable Talker,
who say, thou art O^e of the Ele^^, and callst thy self, a Minister of
Christ, and yet know neither the Father nor the Son, who is Light, and in
him is no Darkness at all. And now thou Blind Guide, that walk in Darkness,
and know not whither thou go, nor wher^of thou do affirm: Read the
Testimony of the True Ministers of Christ, whom thy Forefathers, the
Pharisees, commanded to preach no more in the Name of Jesus, 1 John 1.5. the
words are these, This is the Message which we have heard of him and declare
unto you, that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. Verse. 6. If we
say, we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the
Truth; but if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
Sin: which Scriptures already are sufficient to convict thee, and to manifest
thy gross Darkness and Ignorance of the true God and Jesus Christ, and all else
that are of thy Mind; but I do desire, thou may come to see thy self, and to
know the Darkness and Blindness that thou art in, and however I may be clear of
thy Blood, and thy Folly made manifest to all, I shall not spare my Pains to
endeavor to do thee good for the Evil thou have rendered unto me, and the rest
of my Friends, who from time to time have made it thy Business to Rail of us,
and to render us and the Truth that we profess Odious; and this thou know we
can prove to thy Face, and shall d^ it if the L^r^ give ^s an Opportunity. And
now read what is said in the Holy Scriptures of Christ, which thou nor all the
cunning Crafts-men that the old Serpent makes use of to with-stand the
Universal Appearance of God's Grace and Light to all men in this the Day of his
Love, can do. Joh. 1.4. In him is Life, and the Life was the Light of Men:
Verse. 9. Which was sent to bear witness of that Light, that was the True Light,
that lights every Man that comes into the World; which is spoken of Christ.
2 Cor. 4.6. God that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined
in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face of Jesus; and this is the True God and Christ, that we believe in, and
turn People unto, who has shined by the Power and Coming of his Heavenly and
Divine Light into our Hearts and Souls, whereby he has made us to inherit
Comfort; whereby we see the Scripture is fulfilled, The People that sat in
Darkness have seen a Great Light, and those that sat in the Regions and Shadow
of Death, unto them Light is sprung up, Mat. 4.16. whereby we see the
fulfilling of the Prophet Isaiah's Prophecy, Isa. 60.19. The Sun shall be no
more thy Light by Day, nor for Brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee,
but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory;
and this Light is the Way that the Holy Men of God travailed in, though thee
and thy Forefathers know it not, says Solomon, The Path of the Just is as the
shining Light, etc. Prove. chap. 4. ver. 18. Isa. chap. 2. ver. 5. O House of
Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the Light of the Lord; and Christ says, I am
the Way, and there is none comes to the Father but by me, who says also, I am
the Light of the World; and this is the Way that the true Ministers of Christ
turned People unto, and were made Ministers of, Acts 26.23. to open their Eyes,
and to turn them from Darkness to Light, etc. that by it they might see their
Way out of Sin and Evil, and to know their Feet guided in the Way of Peace,
Luke 1.79. which Light and Truth was that which the Prophets prayed for, Psalm.
43.3. O send out thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me, let them bring me
unto thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacle, Psalm. 36.19. For with thee is the
Foundation of Life, in thy Light shall we see Light: And now thou that make
it thy Business to cry out against the Quakers Light, whose Light is God, and
Christ, and the Truth, and Way to Life to so many as walk therein, and are
guided thereby; for this I can say, and my Conscience bears me witness that I
never preached nor declared any other Light to be the Way of Life then the true
God and Jesus Christ, which the Scriptures of Truth largely witness to be so,
as I have here proved; and thou that say, this God and Christ that lights
all Men, that the Quakers preach, is a God that neither you nor your Fathers
have known; whereby you have manifested your gross Darkness and Ignorance, both
of the true God and Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal; and if I should
say no more of this thy railing envious Piece of Confusion, which thou and thy
Brother Oddey have sent abroad, you are largely made manifest to be in that
State which you say the Quakers are in, who preach another God, another Jesus,
and are of another Spirit then what the Prophets and Apostles were of, who
said, God is Light, and Christ is the true Light that lights every Man that
comes into the World, and this the God that thou say neither you nor your
Fathers have known; and I do tell you that I do believe that you speak Truth in
that, and do judge you out of your own Mouths to be in their Steps that
crucified Christ, of whom he said, These Things they do because they know not
the Father nor me: And this I can truly say, notwithstanding all your railing
Words and unsavory Speeches concerning me, I desire that the Lord may give you
Repentance of your Abuses offered against Christ and his Appearance, that so
you may come to have the Benefit of his Request unto his Father, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do; for I hope your Envy manifested against
us and the Truth which we profess, is more out of Ignorance then Wilfulness,
which if so, I des^re the Lord may open your Eyes, that you may come to see
what you are doing of.

Page 3. thou say, That thou offeredst to prove that the Quakers preached
another Jesus, and had received another Spirit and another Gospel then what was
preached by the Apostles.

Rep. We acknowledge thou said so then, and now tellest us as much in thy
Book, but thou did not go about to prove it then, neither have thou done it
now, so that it is sooner said then proved; and thy pitiful Shift to eva^e the
proving of what thou have promised is already in Print, which was, to ask us
whether we owned the true Christ, yea or nay? to which then I did freely
confess, and have m^re largely now confessed my Faith and Belief and Hope of
Salvation to be in the true God and Jesus Christ, whereby it appears thy
Accusation against me and the rest of my Brethren is false, and that you are
the Men that preach another Gospel, and are out of the Faith that was once
delivered unto the Saints, whose Faith stood in the Light and Power of God,
which was and is the Author of the true Faith, and the Finisher in all those
that continue therein, which Faith gives Victory over the World, and gives
Power and Courage to follow the Lord as faithfully, and confess Christ as
openly in Times of Suffering and Persecution, as in Times of the greatest
Freedom and Liberty, which Faith has been made manifest by our Fruits to be in
and amongst us ever since we have been a People, whereby it appears that good
Daniel's Spirit is revealed in and amongst us, who would not so much as shut
his Windows to shun Persecution, but prayed as openly as he did at other Times.

Page 3. thou say, One of the Quakers said to a Friend of thine, that the
Body of Christ consumed in the Grave, as others do.

And Francis, why did not thou set down the Name of that One thou speak
of, whereby we might have known who it had been; for until thou do, I do
charge it upon thee as a false Accusation, as knowing it to be none of us that
said so, neither does it agree with our Principles; and thou know that I
have confessed otherwise in Print to thy Shame.

Again page 3. F. H. says, Although I have desired that some few might speak,
yet the Men and Women let loose their Tongues at their Pleasure, some railing
and gnashing on us with their Teeth.

Rep. But Francis, why have thou not set down the Names of those that did so;
Oh shameless Man! to publish such Lies in Print; do thou think to hide thy
self under this pitiful Covering? but Francis, I have not yet forgot thine and
thy Brother Odde's rude Speeches and unsavory Carriages, some of which are
already in Print, what he said at his coming in and going out of the Meeting,
calling us Dogs, Dogs, and Vipers too.

In page 4. Francis says, Know you Deceivers that many already see by the
Light of the Word of God, and many I hope more daily shall, that these are no
slanders, but a faithful witnessing given by us against you.

Reply, And to prove us Deceivers, he tells us of some of his Brethren, he
calls Ministers, have writ Books against us, which Books have been already
answered by us, and their dark Works detected; but Francis, if thou wast not
wholly in Darkness, thou would see thy Folly, in taking this Way to prove
the Matter; for if this be the only Way to prove thee and thy Brethren
Deceivers, then remember how many Books have been published in Print with our
Names to them, against you Hireling Priests and Envious Professors these twenty
Years, whereby you have been marked out by your Fruits and Doctrines to be
apostatized from the true Faith and Practice of the true Apostles and Ministers
of Christ, and are discovered thereby to be walking in the Steps of the false;
in whose Steps I number you, who appear to be Enemies to the true Light.

Page 5. F. H. says, He is falsely reported of to have said and affirm, that
every one is enlightened with the Light of Christ is cursed Idolatry; and again,
he is falsely reported to say, that every one is enlightened I grant, but not
with the Light of Christ.

Reply, But F. H. art not thou ashamed thus to tell Lies in Print, and to deny
that which thy Tongue spoke then in the hearing of many Witnesses, and which
thy Hand here has set down, whereby thou contradictest thy self; for say
thou at the very following Words, by which thou chargest us for wronging of
thee in saying, that the Light of Christ is cursed idolatry, say tho^. What
the Idolatry is you shall hear more largely, whereby thou have acknowledged the
Charge.

Again page 5. F. H. says, Thus I constantly affirm, that all Men are by
Christ, who is the true God and Eternal Life, enlightened with the Light of
Nature; of which you shall hear more hereafter, and what he says of this
Christ, which he says gives unto all Men a Natural Light.

Page 5. S. C. asks what is it then that they are enlightened with? F. H. A
Creature: S. C. What Kind of Creature, etc. passing by your absurd asking
whether it be a Man or a Beast? I answer, I said Deceivers, that the Light in
all Men is created, etc.

Rep. I shall place this to thy Account, which increases thy Lies and Slanders
of the Innocent; for thou did say that the Light was a Creature, and now thou
say that the Light in all Men is created; but what Advantage thou have
gotten by telling this Lie, and altering thy Word from a Creature to Created, I
cannot see, except it be to abuse us by thy Lies, whose Reward will be
according to thy Work, if thou repentest not. And whereas thou say, That we
rend thee, or rail on thee because thou will not blaspheme the true God with
the Quakers, and term the Light that is in all Men by Nature is the one
Jehovah: I say, this is a false Accusation, and to call the Light that lights
every Man that comes into the World Natural, is gross Darkness, and are thy
Words, and not ours, nor Scripture-Words; for we say and affirm, that Light
that shines in and unto every Man, and which gives him the Knowledge of what
is good, and what is evil, is pure and spiritual, and comes from God, who is a
Spirit.

Page 6. F. H. says, Col. 1.27. To whom God will make known what is the Riches
of the Glory of this Mystery amongst the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the
Hope of Glory; this (says he) they prophainly with daubing Flattery apply to
all men, and the Light that is in all men, this is Christ in them all, the Hope
of Glory.

Rep. Here thou have ignorantly or willingly belyed us; for we never did fo say
or affirm, that the Light of Christ, that shines and appears unto all Men, is
Salvation unto all, or the Hope of Glory in all; for many there be that are
condemned by it, because they hate it, and as Christ says, will not bring
their Deeds unto it, because their Deeds are Evil, Joh. 3.19, 20. So that the
Light of Christ is the Hope of Glory in them that believe in it, and obey it,
which is according to Simeon's Testimony, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the Glory of thy People Israel, Luke 2.32.

Page 6. F. H. says, Another Scripture they bring to set up their false God,
is Romans 10.8. The Word is nigh in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, that is the Word
of Faith which we preach; this they compare with John 1. and from these Words
here spoken of, is Christ the Word, who was in the Beginning, Christ the Light,
who is God, who is, they say, in the Heart of every man.

Rep. Now Francis if thou were not wholly in Darkness, thou would not thus
manifest thy own Shame, and give me so fair an Opportunity to lay open thy
Weakness unto all People, but the Day is come, in which the Secrets of all
Hearts are to be made manifest, and the hidden Things of Esau sought out, and
the Lord is uncovering the Skirts of the Whore, and stripping her of all her
various Dresses, and uncovering the Nakedness of her and her Merchants; and now
at the Light of this glorious Day the Heathens rage, and the People that live
in Darkness are angry; and now consider thy own Confusion, who art speaking
against us for accounting that to Christ, or the Appearance of Christ, which is
spoken of Romans 10. now read what the Scriptures say, and see if thou can make
any Thing else of it, without wresting of the Scriptures, but Christ and his
spiritual Appearance to the Heart and Soul of Man: B^^ the Righteousness which
is by Faith speaks on this wise, say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven, that is, to bring Christ from above, or who shall descend into the
Deep, that is, to bring Christ again from the Dead, but says it, the Word is
nigh thee, even in thy Heart, etc. And John 1. In the Beginning was the Word,
and that Word was with God, and that Word was God, etc. And so we declare it to
be, as we have received it, even as the Scriptures testify of it; and
whosoever receives this Word and Light into their Hearts, and continue therein,
it will bow their Hearts unto the true and living God, and keep them from
following or worshipping any false God, and they shall and do fear following
such Teachers, who cry, Lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, in Carnal
Ordinance, or in Outward Observation; but through waiting upon God in the
Exercise of their Hearts and Minds with this precious Light and Word of Faith,
they know it to be unto them as it was unto David, a Light unto their Feet, and
a Lamp unto their Paths.

As concerning G. F. the Younger and William Smith, whom I knew very well, and
have this Testimony to bear for them, that they were faithful Men in their Day,
and were well accomplished with Wisdom, Zeal and Courage, to declare God's
Truth, and to publish the blessed Gospel, as they had received of the Lord, and
were not ashamed nor afraid to confess Christ to be the true Light before Men,
whose Testimony we own.

Page the 7. Line 1. F. H. says, Be astonished O ye Heavens and be ye utterly
frighted! rend your Hearts, and not your Garments, that hear these and the like
Blasphemies, which fills the Books and Speeches of this Generation, who cloa^h
their false Christ and cursed Idol, the Light, which is in all men by Nature
with the secret Names and divine Attributes, etc.

Rep. Now mark this Man's Deceit and Baseness toward us and the precious Truth
of our God, which we profess, which is pure and spiritual, and comes from God
the Father of Spirits and Light, and is the same Yesterday, to Day and forever,
God blessed forever, which he calls a Natural Light, and a Cursed Idol (says
he) the Light in all Men; if this Man was not darkened with Envy and Malice, he
would never manifest so much Madness as he does; and to be revenged of us he
rails and blasphemes against the true God and Jesus Christ; for mark all that
read these Lines, which are his own Words, says he, Who cloth their false
Christ and cursed Idol, the Light, which is in all men: And now see what John s
Testimony is of Christ, John 1.9. the Words are these, That was the true Light
that lights every man that comes into the World, and again John 8.12. And
this is the God and Christ whom thou have cursed, which is a Light in all Men,
whereby thou have manifested by thy Words, that the Spirit of God does not
dwell in thee; For no man speaking by the Spirit of God calls Jesus accursed,
1 Cor. 12.3. Now if this Man thinks that he has not called Jesus accursed, let
him tell us, setting God and Christ aside, what it is that is Light in all Men,
or does give Light unto all Men; let us see what he says with his own Tongue,
and writes with his own Hand of Christ, page 5. Line 16. says he, I constantly
affirm, that all men are by Christ, who is the true God and Eternal Life,
enlightened with the Light of Nature, which says he in page 7. is a cursed
Idol: And thus his Confusion is made manifest, and he to be one of the
Merchants of Babylon.

Rep. He says in Page 5. of our Book, he pretended plainly to confess the
Christ; but he tells us, that he will not believe me; and then asks, Whether
the Virgin Mary 's Son be the Christ that we preach? he answers his own
Question, and says, No, like his Brother Thomas Hi^ks, who made a Dialogue,
feigning and pretending of A Discourse between a Christian and a Quaker, which
in Truth and Reality was no such matter, but himself stated what Question he
pleased, and answered them how he would: but this know, both Presbyterians and
Baptists, and all others which combine together against the Truth, and to
withstand the Appearance of God in this the Day of his Power; and although Hand
join in Hand, yet the Wicked shall not go unpunished: And I tell thee, Thou
have made an ungodly Answer for us; but however, I have in that and in this,
made a true Confession of my Faith in Christ, and have the Evidence of a Good
Conscience in what I have done, and whether thou ^r any other, who envieth me
for the Truth's sake, will believe me or not, that is little matter to me.

F. H. asks a Question, page 6. What say you of John 17.1. These words spoke
Jesus, and lift up his Eyes to Heaven?

Rep. I say, it was well in Christ, who was and is in Heaven, John 3.13. but
that is no Proof, that every Pharisee that imitates him does well, or is
accepted: Remember what Christ says of thy Brother Pharisee who justified
himself, and was condemned of Christ, but the poor Publican would not so much
as lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be
Merciful to me a Sinner; I tell you, says Christ, this Man went down to his
House rather justified.

Page 11. F. H. says, S. C. tells another notorious Lie, that these men had
declared, That some Children before they were born were in a State of
Damnation. And this makes way for another Abominable Lie, where he brings in
Mr. Oddey, All fell in Adam, and so Children before they are born are Vessels
of Wrath and for Destruction. We testify the Truth, that we never said that
any Children before they were born, or any else, were in a state of Damnation,
till with Dives they lift up their Eyes in Hell.

Rep. As to thy soul Mouth and bitter Speech, saying, I Lie, in those two
Passages that I have related of your words and Doctrine that you say and
preach, That some Children are in a state of Damnation, or guilty of
Condemnation before they are born; that I know, and am able to prove, if you
had denied it; but Joseph Oddey has confessed it, as I shall make it appear,
so that your Railing against me is manifest to be out of Envy, and to cover
your selves to the People: For you have preached that in the dark, which you
are ashamed should be brought to the Light; and thinking to cover thy self,
thou runnest into another Extreme, and say, We testify the Truth, that we
never said that any Children, before they were born, or any else; were in a
state of Damnation, till with Dives they lift up their Eyes in Hell. What Mad
Bedlam Stuff is this? Was ever the like heard of by one that would be called a
Minister of Christ, and does not know that the Vessels of Wrath are fitted for
Destruction, through Disobedience and Rebellion against God, before they be
cast into Hell? But Franc^^, remember thy self, Did thou never say, That none
were Damned, nor in a state of Damnation? How often have you pronounced that
Sentence, There remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation of the Lord against Henry
Bostock? And how much have thou said l^ss of the Quakers in general? Whereby it
appears, how thou contradictest thy self page 8. Thou pretendest Grief for thy
Countrymen, who, say thou, flee from the Antichrist, the Whore of Babylon,
and falls into the Pit of the Damnable Heresy of this Antichrist the Quakers.
Now, can any be led by a Damnable Principle, and they at the same time not in a
State of Condemnation? O gross Darkness! And does not Christ say, This is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness? And
does not the Scripture say, He that believes not is condemned already? But
says F. H. There is none in a state of Damnation, until with Dives they lift
up their Eyes in Hell. O great Confusion and Contradiction, and contrary to the
Scripture of Truth.

Page 13. F. H. says, He brings me in reading, the Grace of God, that brought
Salvation, has appeared unto Men; leaving out the word All, which I testify
in God's Sight to my best Knowledge is utterly Falsehood.

Rep. A pitiful Shift indeed to cover thy Deceit, but altogether too short to
do it: What do thou and thy Brother Oddey cry out against me for belying thee
in this Matter, in saying, thou readst it wrong, Tit. 2.11. and left out the
word All, and now bring no Witness to prove me a Liar? nay, far short of
that; for thou have not here affirmed it thy self, that thou read the Scripture
as it is, but say, To the best of thy Knowledge thou did; but yet, while
thou art giving an Account of the Matter, thou tellst us, That thou do not
use to read that Scripture as it is: But Francis, in the Light that that thou
hate art thou comprehended, and thy Subtilty seen, and thy Deceit made
manifest. And I tell thee again, I can prove it to thy Face, that to be true
which I have charged thee withal, in that Matter, although thou have willingly
forgotten it; and further, it appears by thy own words, which thou have here
published in Print, that what I have said of thee is true, whereby there needs
no further Witness then what I have from thee and thy Brother Oddey, under your
Own Hands.

Page 13. Read his own words which are these, whereby all may see what Cause
this man has to Rail at me for saying the Truth, that he left out the word
All, excepting this, they would not have their Hearers and others know what
wicked Perverters they are of the holy Scriptures; page 13. lin. 15. his words
are these, Now take All Men here for Every Particular, I have thought it not
agreeing to the Analogy and Rule of Faith to say, The Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared or shined on All Men.

Rep. But Francis, what Faith is thine, that does not allow thee to believe the
Scriptures of Truth to be true or sound, as they are declared by the Holy Ghost
that dwelt in them that spoke them, as it is written, 2 Pet. 1.21. For the
Prophecy came not in Old Time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. May not I and others that read thy words
justly judge thee out of thy own Mouth, that thou art the Man, and art in that
State that thou say of the Quakers, and can not prove it, neither by our
Words or Writings; but thou art apostatized from the true and living Faith,
that was once delivered to the Saints: For the Apostle says, Titus 2.11. For
the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men, and
further, it is said, 1 Timothy 2.4. where it is said, God would have all men to be
saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth. And thou say, that it does not
stand with thy Rule of Faith: whereby it appears that thou art not of the
Apostles Faith; for if thou wast in their Faith, thou would own and believe
their words to be more certain to be the Mind of God then thy Thoughts: But I
tell thee, thou Merchant of Babylon, Thy Corrupt Thoughts have deceived thee in
this weighty Matter, and the Enemy of thy Soul has blinded thee, as he has in
several other things concerning us: But how should we expect better from thee,
but Wresting and Perverting our Words, when thou art so much in the dark as to
tell us in print, That to read and take the Apostles words as they are spoken,
does not agree with thy Rule of Faith; whereby it plainly appears, thou have
not the Faith of God's Elect, for if thou had, thou would be of the same
Mind th^^ ^^ey were in.

Page 13. F. H. says these words, I say, in the Fear of Jehovah, all you that
believe or fear no New or Strange Gods, no False Christ, not this False Christ
of the Quakers, that Light that is in all men.

Rep. It was always the Way and Practice of Deceivers in all Ages, to labor
to keep the People in Darkness and Blindness, and ignorant of the Appearance of
the true and living God, as God is pleased to appear and manifest himself unto
the Sons and Daughters of men, for the saving of their Souls, and the Way by
which they carry on their Ungodly W^rks, was the Way that this our Adversary
and Enemy of the Appearance of the true God and Jesus Christ in our Day now
takes; whereby he is manife^ted by his Fruits to be in the Steps of his
Fore-father^, who envy d the lust, who said, that which was really True was
False, and that which was God was a Devil, and that which was of God, and came
from God, to be of the Devil, whereby they stirred up the People that followed
them and believed them to envy the Prophets, and in their Envy, ^age and Fury
the Priests had stirred them up unto, to persecute Christ, although the
Scriptures bear Testimony very plainly, that he was the true Messiah and
Savior of the World, yet they would call him a Deceiver, and those that were
Followers of him, and Believers in his Name deceived by him; and so said of
him, He deceived the People: And thus does F. H. now, who treads in the Steps
of his Fore Fathers, the High P^iests, who calls the True Christ a False
Christ; and those that believe in his Name, and are led and guided by his
Heavenly and Spiritual Light, which is the Way of Life, to be deceived and
Deceivers.

F. H. says, page 13. toward the latter-end of his Book, And know Deceivers,
though you tell us a Thousand Times over, that you own Jesus of Nazareth, till
you repent, and renounce you^ False Christ, the Light in all men, till you CAST
THAT YOUR IDOL TO THE BATS AND MOLES, WE WILL LOOK UPON YOU AS DECEIVERS.

Rep. Herein thou have manifested thy self to be of that Generation who said to
Christ, Come do^^ ^^^m the Cross, and we will believe thee; and commanded the
Apostles, that they should preach no more in the Name of Jesus: And thou say,
Till we cast away the Christ which is the Light in all men, thou will not
believe us; which Christ is the true Christ, that lights all men, and
witnessed so to be by the Scriptures of Truth, spoken by the Prophets, and
Jesus Christ himself, and the holy Apostles, which I have before largely
proved, and in whose Light the Church of Christ had Fellowship one with
another, 1 John 1.7. And its said by the Apostle, That they that say they have
Fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, they lie, and do not the Truth;
amongst whom I number thee, who have manifested so much Envy against the Light,
and the Servants of it, and tells us, until we cast that away, namely, Christ,
the Light, which is the Guide and Way to Heaven, as before I have proved, you
will look upon us as Deceivers; that we cannot help; but I say, the more is the
pity, that thou or any man should be so overcome, and led captive by the Power
of Darkness, that you will not own us nor our Testimony, unless we will deny
the true God and Jesus Christ: I tell thee, Francis, thou have set us too dear
a Price for us to give you, for your Approbation of us; nay, although you had
as much to proffer as your Master the power of Darkness proffered Christ, if he
would fall down and worship him: I hope neither I, nor any one amongst us; who
loves the Light, and believes therein, and has seen and felt how good the Lord
has been unto our Souls, thereby shall ever so deny the Lord that bought them,
as in casting away so precious a pearl as this Heavenly and Divine Light of
Christ, which has ever been and yet is to all them that believe in it, and no
man ever was nor can be truly happy without they believe in it and obey it,
which thou say we must cast away; but I tell thee, that if thou do expect
it, thou art mistaken; and thy Eyes will sink in their Holes, and thy carnal
Imaginations will rot in thy Head, before thou see that, That ever a People
should turn from the Light and Truth of God, made manifest in our Hearts and
Consciences, for the purifying of our Hearts and saving of our Souls, to turn
unto your dark Imaginations, who are such bitter Enemies unto the Light, which
gives the Knowledge of God, and r veals the Mysteries of Life unto all them
that believe therein, 2 Cor. 4.6. Now I testify, That Widdowhood and Loss of
Children must be the Portion of all you Professors, as it has been ever since
we have been a People, to bear Testimony unto the blessed and spiritual
Appearance of God in the Light of his dear Son. And I am not without Hope, that
some that are late turned from you and your dark Imaginations, are and will be
the more confirmed in this precious Truth, unto which their Minds are turned;
and that those that yet sit under your Dark and Confused Teaching, who hate the
Light, and are Reproachers and Railers against the Lovers of it, may thereby be
awakened to consider what they are a doing, in following such Teachers, who are
against the True Light and Universal Love of God held forth to all men thereby;
for there is but Light and Darkness, and they that hate the Light, must needs
be in Darkness: And the Apostle John says, They that walk in Darkness, they
lie, and do not the Truth.

Now, I would have all People take notice, that F. H. does not Rail against us
for Darkness, and express his Envy against us as being led by the power of
Darkness; for he intitles us that, and says, the Quakers God and Christ, as
you may see all along in his Book, the Light that is in All Men, which the
Scripture witnesses to be the True God and Jesus Christ, which I have before
proved by the Scriptures; only this I would have all People take notice of,
which I have hinted at before, which is the Practice of him and all such Blind
G^ides as he is, to call that which is True, False; and that which is really
True he calls False, and that which is the True Light he calls Darkness: For
there is nothing that gives Light to every Man, but the True God and Christ;
and thus he puts Light for Darkness? whereby it appears, according to the
Scriptures, he is under the Woe, Isa. 5.20.

And now I shall take a little Notice of what Joseph Oddey says, page 14. who
writes to one Samuel Cater, a Deceiver amongst the Quakers, who at that Meeting
at Thriploe: And for what he has said now in this Paper, he deserves just
Reproof for his rude and unsavory Words, which do not become a Man that
professes himself to be a Minister of Christ.

Rep. And now J. O. I do tell thee, that the Light of Christ that I, with many
more, have received, teaches us not to render Evil for Evil, nor Railing for
Railing; but contrariwise, to speak the Truth in Soberness, and with sound
Words to demonstrate and declare the Truth as it is in Jesus: And now thou have
called me a Deceiver, which is a false Accusation, and thou might better
have left it until thou had proved me so, which thou nor thy Brother could
not do, although promised to do it; and thou called'st us a Generation of
Vipers, and said, Thou would prove us so to be before you went away, and
did not then do it, so that it appears it is an easier Matter to cast
Reproaches and Slanders upon a People, then it is to prove it when you have
done: But Joseph, thou manifests by thy Fruit what Spirit rules thy Heart; for
says the Scripture, An Evil Man out of the Evil Treasure of his Heart brings
forth Evil Things, from that comes Railing, and Evil-speaking, and Backbiting.

Page 14. he pretends to examine me with what Face I could say that his Brother
Holdcraft did not read the Scripture right, Tit. 2.11. The Grace of God that
brings Salvation has appeared unto Men, and that he left out the Word ALL, and
impudently said, it was not in the Greek; can this be a bare mistake in thy
self and others.

Rep. I say no, it is no Mistake, we do still affirm the same to be true of
him, as we have published, and there are three of our Names to it, and many
more will witness it to your Faces to be true, if an Opportunity be afforded;
and further, there was a Man that at the same time when Francis said, that the
Word ALL was not in the Greek as it is in our Books, reproved him, and asked
him why he brought his Bible hither if it were wrong translated, a Man that
stood by as a Hearer, well known in the Country to be a Man of Estate and
Credit, who was not then, nor is now one with us in Principle or Practice.

Page 14. How J. O: proves that I have belyed his Brother Holdcraft, says he,
I stood next him on the one side, had my Hearing through God's Goodness, I
think I may say as well as you, could this be, and I not hear it? I forgot not
wholly the Contention with Mr. Holdcraft about the altering of the Reading of
it from what it is ordinarily in our English Bibles.

Rep. Here thou have granted that thou know that he did not read it as it is
in our Bibles, whereby thou have contradicted him, who says, he read it no
other Way then it is in our Bibles, and thus these two Brethren in Iniquity
contradict and confound one another.

But says J. O. I call God for a Record upon my Soul, that I know nothing of
this you say.

But Joseph, I must tell thee, I do greatly question whether thou now speak
Truth or no, but however I shall leave that to God and thy own Conscience.

But if this be true, thou do say that thou know nothing of it, have thou
done wisely to call me a Liar for saying that that I know to be true, and have
several Witnesses to prove it, and thou say, thou know nothing of it;
then I tell thee thou had been wiser and honester if thou had held thy
Tongue, and now tellest us, thou think thou had thy Hearing as well as I,
etc.

This is like thy Brother, who says in page 3. observing as I thought in some
of these People that Lightness, etc. and page 13. where F. H. speaks concerning
the Grace of God, Now take all men here for every particular man, I have
thought it not agreeing to the Rule of Faith; I tell you both that your
Thoughts have deceived you, and your Folly is made manifest; and whereas you
thought to have done proudly, in exalting your Names and dark Imaginations
above the Light and Truth of God, and to have insulted over them that believe
therein, and are led and guided thereby, your Weakness is thereby made
manifest, and your Deceit laid open.

Page 14. Joseph Oddey says, I appeal to all that were present whether any
such Thing was spoken, only I desire to know their Names.

According to his Desire here is a Testimony under the Hands of some of them
that were there, and many more remember the same, and are also ready to witness
it, if there were Need for it.

This we testify whose Names are here underwritten, who were Eye and
Ear-Witnesses to what was said at the Meeting at Thriploe, the 15th Day of the
2d Month, 76. that Francis Holdcraft, when he read Tit. 2.11. left out the
Word ALL, and said it was not in the Greek.

John Harvey, John Claydon, John Butcher, Giles Waklen, Samuel Reader, John
Salmon, Richard Web, Matthew Duy, Jonathan Johnson, Henry Bostock, John Cathen,
John Love, Thomas Miller, Robert Salmon.
And now concerning the Grace of God spoken of in Tit. 2.11. which these Men
are so angry with me for detecting their Folly therein; and now see what he
says, and has given under his Hand as his Thoughts and Judgment concerning
that Scripture, and compare his Words, and F. H. in page 13 in their own Book,
with what they spoke concerning the Grace of God and its Appearance that Day at
Thriploe, which we have given a true Account of in Print, whereby all may see
what Wrong we have done them in saying that of them which here they have spoken
as much themselves.

Page 14. J. O. says, Thus the Grace of God, though it brings Salvation to all
men where the Gospel comes, in Respect of the Proffer and Tender thereof, yet
it does not appear to all men in that Largeness you contend for.

And in page 13. F. H. says concerning the second of Titus 11. Now take all
men here for every particular man, I have thought it not agreeing to the
Analogy and Rule of Faith, to say, The Grace of God that brings Salvation has
appeared or shined on all men.

In the same page J.O. calls me a Liar, for saying that he said, that some
Children before they are born were guilty of Original Sin, and were Vessels of
Wrath, and for Destruction.

Rep. Which I am able to prove he did at that Time say, and has at other times
often declared the same, and further, has here declared as his Judgment, page
14. toward the latter End, Children while they are in the Womb, before they are
born, so soon as they have Life, and are a living Soul, are guilty of Original
Sin, I own this for Truth, etc. Now the same Scripture that proves them to be
guilty of Original Sin, proves them to be Children of Wrath, and under
Condemnation.

By this all may see that to be his Judgment that he calls me a Liar for
reporting of him, whereby his Envy and Folly is made manifest, and my Innocence
cleared, and out of his own Mouth that is proved which I have charged him with,
so that it is proved that this Man has cal^ed me a Liar out of Envy, and not
that I have wronged him, which Doctrine of theirs is false, and altogether
contrary to the Mind and Will of God declared in the Scriptur s of Truth, as I
told them before, that is to say, that Children are guilty of Sin before they
are born, and under Condemnation, and are Vessels of Wrath, which to say is a
Damnable Doctrine, and altoge her contrary to the Equal and Just VVayes of God,
who says, Are not my Ways Equal? and there is no Scripture that says
Children are guilty of Original Sin, and it is a dark Imagination for any to
believe or affirm it, and the Scripture proves the contrary, Ezekiel. 18.2. The
Soul that sins it shall dye, the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the
Father, etc. Jer. 31.29. They shall say no more, the Fathers have eaten sour
Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edge; but every Man shall dye for
his own Iniquity, he that eats, his Teeth shall be set on Edge.

S. C.

Page 15. line 27. Joseph Oddey bids me ask Henry Bostock, whom (says he)
knows our Doctrine, whom I think would have done us so much Right, as to have
told you what our Doctrine is concerning Children before they are born.

And now here follows a Testation under the Hand of Henry Bostock, concerning
the Doctrine of Francis Houlcraft and Joseph Oddey, which is, That some
Children before they are born, are in a State of Damnation. This I have known
to have been their Principle this Seven Years; and at that Meeting at Thriploe
Joseph Oddey did affirm the same.

Henry Bostock.

Now see these Men's CONFUSION, and how they CONTRADICT Themselves.
F. H. PAge 5. line 16. I Constantly affirm, that All Men are by Christ, who is
the true God and eternal Life, enlightened with the Light of Nature. F. H. page
7. lin. 4. Who clothes their False Christ and Cursed Idol, the Light which is
in All Men by Nature. F. H. page 7. toward the latter end, says, Christ, the
Word, made Flesh, enlightens Every Man with Natural Knowledge and Light. F. H.
page, 8. lin. 5. The Light which is in every man is Darkness. F. H. page 10.
lin. 5. I call to mind what one of you, one Henry Bostock, an Apostate, said to
me; God forbid that I should own such a God that has Hands and Feet. F. H.
says toward the latter end of this page, There is but one living and true
God, Everlasting, Without Body, Parts or Passions, etc. F. H. page 11. toward
the latter end, That we never said, that any Children before they were born, or
any else, were in a state of Damnation, till with Dives they lift up their Eyes
in Hell. J. O. page 16. lin. 3. I speak of Children before they be born, the
same Scripture that prove them to be guilty of Original Sin, proves them to be
Children of Wrath, and under Condemnation. F. H. page 13. lin. 13. My Friends
may know for some time my Reading that Word no other then what is in the
English Bible. J. O. page 14. lin. 14. I forgot not wholely the Contention with
Mr. Houldcraft, about the altering of the Reading from what it is ordinarily in
our English Bibles.

Their Controversy stated here,
is little else but Fictions,
Which we have plainly made appear;
behold their Contradictions.
The Truth of what is here declared
we will certainly Maintain,
And turn your Cursed Forgeries
upon your Backs again.
Shall Impudence with open Face
thus act, and not be blamed,
Who have thus with such foul Disgrace
God's Glorious Light defamed?
Shall Forgeries be counted Zeal,
or Lies upon us fall?
No, no, the Power of God we feel,
to Triumph over All,
Jacob Bake^.

Here follows a Testimony against the False Doctrines asserted by these Men,
who say, that Children before they are born are Vessels of Wrath, and under
Condemnation because of their Fathers Sin; which Judgment of theirs is here
detected by the Scriptures of Truth, and the contrary proved, and their
wresting the Scriptures discovered.
THis is the Testimony that God Almighty has put into my Heart to bear, with
many more Brethren; That God, who is rich in Mercy, and desires not that any
should perish, but that all might turn from the Evil of their Ways, and live;
that the Day of his Power is now in this our Day, Age and Generation, dawned
and broken forth, which John saw in the Vision of the Almighty, when he was in
the Spirit, by which the Things of God were revealed unto him, who said, Rev.
14.6. I saw an Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel
to preach unto them that dwell upon the Earth, and to every Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongue and People; which Time is now come, in which the Lord's
Power and Holy Spirit moves upon our Hearts to preach the Word of
Reconciliation unto all men, which is according to the ancient Testimony of the
Servants of God and Ministers of Christ, which went before us; whereby it
appears, according to the Scriptures of Truth, that the Gospel which we preach
is the same that was begun to be preached by the Lord Jesus, and was confirmed
by them that heard him. 1 Timothy 3.4. For this is acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior, who would have all men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of
the Truth. And this is the Gospel that the True Ministers now preach, which is
Glad-tidings unto all that are in their Sins, That there is Mercy with the Lord
for them all that they may be saved: For Christ is come a Light into the World,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish: And, The Grace of God that
brings Salvation appears unto all men, to teach them to deny Ungodliness; and
whosoever bows to the Teachings of it, shall be saved.

And as Christ stood up in the great Day of the Feast, saying, If any Man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink; whereby it appears that God's Love is
unto all Men; and blessed be the Lord, there is a Remnant whom God by the Light
of his dear Son, that shines in our Hearts, he has brought us to see the
same, and has enlarged our Hearts by Faith in his Power, to publish Peace by
Jesus Christ unto all Men; whereby the Words of Christ are fulfilled, Joh.
3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man
be lifted up; whereby the Folly of these Men is made manifest, and their false
Doctrines detected, who would tie up the Love of God in Jesus Christ to but a
few, a certain Number of People; now see Numb. 21.9. whether that Serpent of
Brass that Christ speaks of, that was set upon a Pole, was only for one or two
Tribes of Israel to be healed by, as these Men vainly imagine concerning the
Love of God now manifested in Christ, which they say is but for a few; if so,
that was not a true Figure of the Love of God in Christ, or there is a
Shortness in Christ, the Substance, of performing to and for Man that which
figured it out, if these Men's Doctrines be true; for it came to pass, that if a
Serpent had bit any Man, when he beheld the Serpent of Brass he lived: Now
these Men will readily grant, that all are bit or stung by the old Enemy of
Man, the Serpent that beguiled Eve in the Beginning; but they have not so much
Faith as to believe that there is Virtue enough in Christ to cure us all, or if
there be, it is not intended for all; let such Teachers hold their Tongues,
that are out of the Faith that was and is delivered unto the Saints and
Ministers of Christ; for they give an uncertain Sound, and are but like
sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals, who make a Din in Peoples Ears, but do not
reach to the VVitness of God in the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women,
who have not received that Commission that Christ gave unto his Disciples, Mark
16.15. who bad his Disciples go and preach the Gospel unto every Creature,
which Gospel was Glad Tidings to the poor, and the opening of the Prison Doors
to them that were bound, and Light to them that sat in Darkness; and in a
word, to give Knowledge of Salvation, and of a Physician that has Virtue in
him to cure all Diseases that come upon Man's Heart and Soul because of Sin; and
this is freely tendered unto all Men that will believe in him, and look unto
him. And now whereas these Men make a Noise about a State of Children being
under Condemnation, because of their Fathers Sins, which Saying of theirs is
altogether contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, Jer. 31.30. And concerning
Children Christ says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and further says,
Whosoever receives not the Kingdom as a little Child, he shall in no Wise
enter therein; which Words do plainly imply Children to be in an innocent
State, and free from Sin and Evil; for the Scripture says, Nothing that
defiles can enter into God's Kingdom: But J. O. having a Desire to prove
Children Sinners before they are born, he brings i^ Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also
we all had our Conversations in Times past, in the Lust of our Flesh, following
the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, and were by Nature the Children of
Wrath as well as others; now all may see how this man wrests the Scriptures to
prove their dark Imaginations concerning Children being in a State of
Condemnation before they are born; now see and consider whether Children before
they are born can commit such Things as this Scripture says that these
Ephesians were guilty of before they were converted unto God; he brings Romans
3.9. again 9.33. and Tit. 3.5, 6. where all may see whether these Scriptures
speak any Thing of Children before they are born being guilty of Sin, which he
has a Mind to strain them to; but it is plain to the contrary, and speaks of
the States of Men and Women, and not of Children, whereby his Folly is made
manifest: And this further I ask these men, which would have Children before
they are born to be Children of Wrath, because of their Fathers Sins, which
they are innocent of; where that Scripture is that says, that God ever
condemned the Righteous or innocent for the Wicked's sake, as they darkly say,
that God condemns the Innocent Children for their Fathers Sins; nay, the
contrary is easily to be proved, that God has and does many Times spare the
wicked for the sake of the Righteous, which is far from destroying the
guiltless for the guilty sake; so that the Judge of the whole Earth does right
Things, Genesis 18.25. So the Way of the Lord is equal, who shows Mercy without
Respect of Persons to all that fear his Name, and obey his Grace; and his
Judgments are just upon all that rebel against the Appearance of his Grace, and
hate the Light that manifestly shines upon all, so that Man's Destruction is of
himself, for want of receiving Christ, the Son of his Love into his Heart, who
is come a Light into the World, and is knocking at every Ones Do^r, for the
awakening of them out of their Sins, and that he might purge their Consciences
from Dead Works, and renew their Minds, and enlarge their Hearts to serve the
living and true God.

And as con^^rning Children before they are born, they are doubtless in a State
of Innocence; and after they are born, until they come to that Age as to
understand Good and Evil, then choosing the Evil, and refusing knowingly that
which is Good, that contracts the Guilt upon their Conscience, whereby they
come under the State of Reproof for it, and Condemnation if they continue in
that which is Evil, which is just upon them for their own Sins, and not for
their Fathers, which they never committed: which agrees with the Word of the
Lord spoken by his Prophet, Jer. 31.30. That every one shall dye for his own
Sins, he that eats, his Teeth shall be set on Edge; so as the Lord says, and
complains of a rebellious Generation, As the Children grew up, so they went
from me: So that it is plain that People bring forth Fruit according to the
Seed which they receive into their Hearts, and yield up the Strength of their
Desires unto; they that receive the good Seed that God has sown, and yield up
the Strength of their Desires unto it, they bring forth Fruits unto Holiness,
which Seed Christ says is sown in all Sorts of Grounds; but now who does not
watch unto this blessed Seed and Grace of God, the Appearance of which is unto
all without respect of Persons; but like the Sluggard, slumbers away the Time,
and does not watch unto the Light of Christ Jesus, to lead them, keep them and
preserve them out of the Wicked One's Snares, in them the Wicked One sows his
Seed, which grows up, and they in that bring forth Evil Fruits; and thus we see
the Scriptures fulfilled, according as it is written, Luke 6.45. A Good Man out
of the Good Treasure that is in his Heart brings forth Good Things, and the
Evil Man out of the Evil Treasure of his Heart brings forth Evil Things. And
therefore, let every one now examine themselves, and see what Root bares them:
for it is Fruits of Holiness that the Lord looks for, and requires ar the Hand
of every one which he has made, and given Life and Breath unto, and for that
End, that all may bring forth Fruit to his Glory; he has given unto every man
a Manifestation of his own Spirit to profit withal, as says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 12.7. and a Measure of his own Light to be a Guide unto them, which Spirit
and Light appears within Man and Woman, whereby that saying is fulfilled which
the Apostle spea^^ of, Romans chap. 1. verse. 19. That which may be known of God,
is manifest in them. And now, let none be discouraged by these Blind Guides,
who say, That the Grace of God did not appear unto All Men; and now say, That
it does not agree with their Rule of Faith to speak and to believe as the
Apostle believed and spoke, as you may see under their own Hands.

And thus God has cleared the Innocent from their Slanders, and I have
faithfully Detected their False Doctrines, and asserted the Truth as it is in
Jesus, who am a Servant to all in the Truth, S. Cater

THE END.

