THE CAUSES AND REMEDY OF THE DISTEMPERS OF THE TIMES.

In Certain DISCOURSES Of Obedience and Disobedience

Mark the Perfect man and behold the Upright, for the end of that man is peace,
Psalm. 37.37. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the three (...) in
^udgate-street, 1^75.

THE PREFACE.
IN this dissatisfied Age not to be concerned in the throng of complaints were
certainly very much different from the Mode. Which esteemed inconvenience many
shun with an overhasty pawn of their credits, taking up on trust any thing,
which the Vendi^^ of Novelties packeth on them. Whereas we may justly imagine
the quietest days to be the most blessed, we still see it to be the constant
humor of men to tire out Life in pursuit of those things, which are only
matter of disturbance, and by undervaluing carelessness to condemn the things,
which belong to their peace. And if any man judgeing this course prejudicial to
them, who take it, should with most inducing Arguments manifest their abuse, he
is commonly thought to be civily treated, if only scorned as a good natured
Fop, he be suffered to retire without farther injuries. Which sort of Rudeness
and Injustice has indeed much of the Hectoring Bravado, though little of
generous sobriety, which contrariwise with a dignifying condescension embraces
the man, whose well-meaning counsels intend the welfare of those, to whom they
are directed. Some few indeed there are, whose resolute folly abominateth
change, yet will patiently and honorably receive those, whose becalming
Virtues and persuasions urge a compliance with men of the finest temper. For
although they make their reason subordinate to their will; and in all things
yield to the guidance of fancy, yet they will permit Reason as a favored Slave
to speak in the behalf of its friends, and for its sake give them a protection
from insolence. Now where outrages on the one hand, and contempt on the other
are only mitigated by the inconsiderable kindnesses of a few courtly non
Observers, time spent in endeavors of reducing extravagant tongues into the
due order prescribed by discretion may be thought as much abused by
unreasonable reproof as unwarrantable clamours. For who will think him speaking
seasonably, who speaks to no purpose, and most men will conclude that spoken
to no purpose, which is not entertained. But when we consider duty obliging us
to a valiant resistance of impiety growing potent, we may also remember that
reasonable persuasions may draw many out of the danger of the over flowing
torrent, and confirm them in the observation of what is necessary for their
safety. Where we have little hope of winning ground, we may well think it meet
to defend what we have in possession. And although hard hap has frustrated
many noble attempts of regaining diverse, who have revolted; yet we may not
desist through opinion, that affections once alienated from the truth are
afterward neither malleable nor melting. Continued diligence may find some,
who, being surprised through weakness, would gladly kiss that hand, which shall
be stretched forth for their rescue, and devoutly thank that pitying
Providence, which vouchsafed them the mercy of a Deliverer. And if we hereto
add that men of the most unbridled passions accounting restraint their
debasement, are sometimes by their own stumblings cast down, and that the
wildest Beasts have been taken in a toil, we may not let sink our hopes of
retracting some of those, whose seemingly invincible obstinacy labors to
depress them. And of others, whose rejecting what we bring toward a conviction
is not out of malice and contempt, we have undoubtedly less cause to despair.
For the Fort is more than half won, where the Defendants think not the
Assailants injurious; and who can suspect but that reason must grow stronger by
time, when it has a faint or no opposition.

BUT whatsoever may be the probability of success, the public clamours and
deplorable distractions demand each man's assistance toward the prevention of
the threatened ruin, which is indeed justly to be feared, but that more from
the Complainers than the mischiefs complained of. The vulgarly noised dangers
are certainly least terrible; but the Magicians, who first raised these busy
Spirits, are the most dreaded evils, whose ill acquaintance with the most
horrid Authors of misery, gives the greatest suspicions of a subsequent
calamity, when their famed care is concerned in the discovery of any thing,
which may be called formidable. Nothing is more fatal than the symptoms they
give of a declining State; to which, when they pretend to prescribe health,
their very breath proves poisonous, and their tongues, set on fire from hell,
purify all they call corrupt by a sanctifying conflagration.

MANY not out of ignorance of their malicious nature, but for the furtherance
of some petty designs, do promote or at least countenance these as Men of rare
abilities, imagining they can at pleasure stifle the flames of their kindling
when ever their intended mischief is ready to break forth. But these must with
a continual vigilance observe them, and peradventure may (notwithstanding their
nimble glances and perseverance in watchfulness) have a cheat put upon them;
and although they may in the beginning espy the evil, yet may by the sly
Artists in destruction have either the buckets removed, or the water, wherewith
the fire should be quenched, diverted into contrary channels. So that for want
of prevention, the ensuing industry may be useless. And surely nothing is more
ridiculous then the application of remedies, which the head strong evil
disdaineth and the too late offers of help against an irrisistible fury,
especially from those in whose power it was either to bind or cut off the
hands, which first laid together the combustible Materials of which the
prodigious Devourer was once but the small and despised offspring. And if God
should permit a success to the merciless contrivances winked at through
confidence of suppression at will, the connivers infatuation, may be foreseen
to turn into frenzy, when they find themselves overreached, and mastered by
their instruments; whose punishment they must acknowledge to be merited by
clothing such wicked and dangerous persons in the garb of innocence and worth,
that good men may be bereaved of caution, while their whatsoever proposals may
be effected. They who can call that sweet, which is acquired by wicked men's
assistance, have commonly a time to gratify their servants labors by a forced
subjection to that Tyranny, which had its Original from their own degenerous
indulgence.

OTHERS of the greatest noise of tender Consciences have put on the soft
resolutions of believing, that all which bears that title, has really what
it pretends to, as if it were impossible for Satan to transform himself into
an Angel of light, or that inhumane and unchristian practices should take their
range under the reconciling names of tenderness and bowels of compassion. Yet
experience as well as the most blessed authority would otherwise instruct men
of indifferent capacities, if they would have recourse to either. And it would
certainly seem very strange did not the commonness abate the wonder. Were men
as scrupulous in worldly transactions as they labor to be thought in matters
of Religion, the most loud crying sins would not pass among them for spiritual
graces, nor crimes of the deepest stain be admitted without self examination,
How can we do this great wickedness and sin against God?

Confugit interdum templi violator ad aras; And Innocence, which delights in
being there prostrate, is apt to mistake the Crafty Hypocrite, for the Pious
Adorer. And this being so frequent, all, who have care that Religion be not
brought into contempt by these open affronts, which she daily susteineth, will
endeavor that these CAINS, who offer sacrifices as well as ABELL, may have
marks set upon them, that Simplicity be not ensnared. The griefs undergone by
the infiction of these men's tender mercies, and our being brought under the
wheel by the same subtleties at this day in use may well quicken our diligence;
but much more will the consideration of the spiritual captivity of multitudes
drawn thereinto by the impostume of Conscience. Which is of so high a concern,
that (although our manifesto's come from us almost as tartly as our vital
drops, yet) the love of our Brethren forbids us to spare the thoughts of
particular conveniences, when their so imminent danger requires our aid. But
we are not yet in danger that our resistance will be unto blood, (if an abused
lenity let not mischief grow past the power of contradiction) nor indeed is
there other fear than of some ill sented breathings proceeding from these
(surely not pure) souls, whose pretended inspirations are very unsavory upon
each apprehension of disgust. But if all the mildness, which men of the most
yielding dispositions have shown, could ever have sweetened them, we might think
it safest to decline the fury of their tongues by courting them into
expressions suiting with our demeanor. Which course has, alas! continually
proved ineffectual, and open truth, now by the necessity of the times forced
from us, cannot stir up more bitterness than that, wherewith they have always
repayed condescension and silence. This has in it nothing of tenderness or
conscience, which certainly should be cherished in all, who endeavor to give
it due satisfaction by appeals to its justice and observance of its candid
directions. And as against such there is no Law, so neither can they be
represented as enemies to the public weal; for their integrity desires the
good of all men, and especially does their exemplary obedience labor the
confirmation of that Authority, to which they are subjected. Men truly
revereing conscience are not known by impertinent cavils of every thing, which
bears not their new stamp, but are solicitous of being void of offense
toward God and toward man, andeavouring the conservation of Unity both in
Church and State, which alone conduces to the honor of God and profit of each
other. There are no tender consciencies, but such as fear God and his
displeasure, for his sake submitting to every Ordinance of Man, whether of the
King as Supreme, or Governors set by him to prescribe rules for the increase
of piety and suppression of sin.

NOW looking about us and seeing with what dangers we are encompassed arising
from other men's machinations and our own mistakes and distractions, a
seasonable provision against these we must judge necessary, could it be
obtained. For it seems herein lies all the difficulty, where to find the
Balm, that must heal our wounds, or that Samaritane, who will bind them up. He
must be a man of imcomparable judgment, who shall be able to effect this cure,
and restore to all the body that unsoundness and perfection, which the
sincerest Members wish for. But the Body is not in so desperate an estate by
reason of the deepness of the sores or their near approach to the vitals, as by
the several affected members envy to the untainted; and their refusing their
own health to to the ruin of the whole. This is a strange kind of sullenness
and ill nature, which is by some foreign Spectators pitied, by others
cherished; neither of which are observed with that due care, which our desired
prosperity requires. If Conscience were obeyed our evils would be soon over;
for there is nothing in them, but what an unfeigned tenderness does fully
remedy. This we may mention, but cannot give; the distempered Parts must herein
do their own work; and after faithful applications of what Conscience
prescribes God will undoubtedly give the unexpected blessing. But, alas! how
fruitless are our persuasions directed to the sense, en there is no respect
given to one speaking within, whose Art is infallible and Credit
unquestionable? The Physicians skill is as insignificant to them, who will not
be whole, as to those, who are blessed with the fullest enjoyment of health. We
have in this mad Age a Generation of Men, who glory in the loathsome punishment
of their debaucheries, as the grand-mark of their gentility. They are nothing
unlike, who delight in other intemperances seeing them always accompanied with
shame and misery, and account the due reproaches thereof distinguishing
honors. Now these would have others such as themselves, that in a general
corruption they might have the pre-eminence, who first taught their Brethren to
be dissolute, and were the famous Founders of impiety. Whereas it were more for
their ease and reputation by renouncing folly to become temperate and
religious, to live quietly and happily under a well established Government, yet
they reflect upon the time past, and considering how their gall has been still
moved by the just taxations of irreligion and injustice, they judge it better
to put themselves in a posture of bearing any deserved burden, than by an
acknowledgement and revocation of error to wipe off those foul blots, which
their ill employment contracted. A true sorrow satisfies for all injuries, and
the pardon it procures maketb men innocent. Here if the guilty take sanctuary,
they will be protected from infamy and danger, and their chief joy will proceed
from the satisfaction they will be able to give themselves, when their blessed
change has banished confounding imaginations, and introduced into their minds
a festival peace.

BUT the encouragements, of persisting in these exhortations, being few and
small, we must see whether there be not among our selves room large enough for
reproofs and admonitions. And peradventure much of the evil we complain of in
others may be occasioned by our selves, when being strictly bound to duty we
stretch the bands and give our selves unwarrantable relaxations. There are
found among those, who affect the honorable title of Loyalty, some whose
tongues are too active and hands too slow; as if it were more justifiable for
them then for the open enemy to do this dishonor, or for a friend and familiar
acquaintance to withdraw himself in time of need. I know not what reasons may
be urged for doing that, which so much contradicts their professions; but
sure I am that as there is little affection to duty shown in such demeanor, so
is it no contrivance of safety for the authors or any others. It looks so
like to treachery, that every eye cannot discern the difference; and although
(at least pretensively) it was not so designed, yet has not faild of its ill
consequences. Which they cannot but own to have experienced, if the shame of
dishonorable actions would permit an ingenuous confession. And more we are
like to sustain, it being probably conjectured to be past our power to overcome
some mischeifes, which late miscarriages have created; or if a future care and
managery do prevail over them, that it must be the great work of some
considerable time: So prejudicial to the public good are even small neglects
of duty or excesses in behavior.

AND certainly all disobedience is as much against Interest as duty; whence we
find it so perpetually miscarrying. If Subjects injure their Prince, they must
never think by so doing to benefit themselves. And when they run in division
staining their querulous notes to the highest key, what they seek and so
mournfully lament as lost is too too frequently not discerned although by them
possessed. Which thing nevertheless man's inclination to evil makes very usual,
and few men enjoy what they have, because all present goods are nicknamed with
reproachful terms, and are indeed wanting to the discontented. Whose
self-vexation is also others men's disease and real miseries attend their uneven
motions, in whom the blessing of ^rovidence make no composure. But if there be
a want of something necessary to the accomplishment of our welfare, the absence
of one or more goods is a lighter inconvenience, than to be deprived of all.
Our minds settled in Obedience, and our diligent service of God accompanied with
hope, have the way of supply of whatsoever our defects. God will sooner for us,
than we can for our selves order the course of worldly affairs. Our backs have
been long galled with the vexatious burdens of tyrannical imposition; and are
we not worse than mad men, if we think the reception of more such lading will
be our ease, or that their unmerciful Scourges are to our sores mollifying and
healing? Nay, even those who first move the Engines of Commotion, in hope of
being Perpetual Commanders of those Affections which they have so disingaged
from their Allegiance and stability, are but inconsiderate Politicians, who
cannot by the successes of other men, judge what will prove to themselves
security, but are rendered discerning only by their own miscarriages. All
Buildings must be answerable to their Foundations; if these be laid deceitfully
(let the Builders project what they please) the other will be certainly ruinous.

Negata est magnis sceleribus semper fides. What any one gets by
supplanting, of that another with as much subtilty (and sometimes less
injustice) beguileth him. One always snappeth the bit out of another mouth: And
nothing is more common than for some Vulpone Contriver to set on work
Ins^^uments meet for danger, and fit to sustain obloquy and envy, who by their
adventures may catch and adapt a Prey for his teeth. And to justify his
Usurpations, he condemns the former; he revengeth the blood of Naboth in the
portion of Jezreel, but makes no restoration; he cutteth off proud Jezebel,
and her tyrannical Offspring, and leaves of wicked Ahabs Race none that
pisseth against the wall, avenging also the blood of the Lords Prophets upon
the worshippers of Baal, yet is by their Golden Beauty induced to a Prostration
before the Calves at Dan and Bethel. For should the beguiled people be
undeceived, and sent up to Jerusalem to worship, he suspecteth the return of
the revolted Tribes to their proper subjection to their lawful Prince, who may
seek to purchase favor by the price of his head. Now besides these dreadful
and distracting evils paining the heart, and griping the Kingdoms Bowels, it is
left naked to Foreign, not barely contempt, but surprizal; and while
disagreeing Factions are decoying the people into Parties, the vigilant eye of
an ambitious Neighbor espieth his opportunity, and composeth the differences,
by making the captivated Opponents draw together under his Subjugating Power.

THE miseries of both kinds may be prevented by Christian Meekness, more
readily acting than disputing its duty. Let us then make a sober and diligent
enquiry how far, and where we went out of this way, that our quick return may
be the more beneficial to our selves, and we thereby made instrumental to the
general good: Which no man can be, whose Eccentrick motions draw besides the
lines of Obedience. That we may be the more certainly prosperous, we must not
too eagerly carry on Private Concerns, nor have our thoughts totally fixed on
our own advantage, because such overbyassed inclinations do most assuredly
bring us to a state much distant from that we aim at. And as they make us apt
to miscarry, so do they enable each disappointment to wound our hearts, and yet
blind us so, that we not seeing whence our miseries proceed, do ravingly vent
our passions, to the injury of the Innocent. We forge the weapons that will
destroy us, yet when they begin Execution, we see not the mark we set upon
them, but blame other hands and causes. I would have each man's virtuous
demeanor, and exemplary obedience, be his Fortune. None thrive better than
they who dare be Just; nor can any add to their own or the Kingdoms glory and
happiness, but such as abominate the founding them upon ill Principles. These
are the men who give Splendor and Stablishment to a Nation, who judiciously
serve their Great Master with a Zeal to God. Religious Obedience will confirm
us beyond all Arts, for it indeed furnishes us with those Sublime Arts which
are essential to a well-being. The truth whereof will appear by the practice,
and Glory will undoubtedly dwell in our Land, when we are perfectly taught to
fear God, and honor the King.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. REflections on the late times, showing the Benefit of Suffering in a
just Cause. Chap. 2. Reflections on the Mercies of Restoration. Chap. 3.
Reflections upon particular benefits obtained by his Majesty's happy return.
Chap. 4. The care of our King ought to be one of our greatest cares: How ill
then some vaunted of Merit, who pretend to have wrought his Return. Chap. 5. Of
the different Murmurings of all Parties. Chap. 6. Of the frequent desires of
breaking out into Rebellion, and the means by Instigators used, viz reproaches
upon the King and Church. Chap. 7. How little the minds of some men are wrought
upon by the continual examples of miscarrying Factions. Chap. 8. The Blessings
and Benefits of Obedience.
THE Causes and Remedy OF THE DISTEMPERS of the TIMES.
CHAP. I. Reflections on the late Times, showing the benefit of suffering in a
just cause.
THAT, which too often happens in humane friendship, and is a grand cause of
the dissolution of those sacred ties, is a misconstruction of each others
fidelity. Jealousy over ballanceth the truth when misapprehension holds the
scales; so cannot impartial Love have that reasonable liberty to speak it
self, nor manifest its value truly great in adhering to innocence and
Veracity. This furious Assaulter of United affections were the less unexcusable
did it only seek to separate souls and content with those impious breaches,
did not intermeddle with the Soul and its primitive Founder, the most holy and
just God. Those faithful leagues, which works of amity might contract, God's
goodness has been pleased on his own part always to make, and for himself to
keep in righteousness and truth. His Will is covenant, instrument, obligation,
and performance; neither is there in him any dificiency until that our either
obstinacy or distrust have changed the divine property, and made the flaming
sword sole regent in Paradise. Many, it is true, do think the discontinuance of
a former to be a stop of all future blessings, considering with Sense more than
Reason, and with both more than Faith, the excellency of divine Operations. To
me nothing seems more strange than that any Man should be so ignorant of Gods
love, as to presume he knows the ways thereof, which are so mysterious and
abstruse. We are capable of the knowledge of it no otherwise then by an
unbyassed Faith, and a constantly upright Hope; and if we may call this
knowledge, the perfection thereof consists in not knowing. But if we needs
will busy our selves with the causes, and become laborious in the search after
Reasons for that, which is above Reason, the Understanding (which by a devout
ignorance was kept flaming like a glorious Lamp,) then ends in an ignis
fatuus, and soon vanishes not leaving smoke or smoother to express what it
was, or where it is. That God is good, is undeniable; that he cannot alter, is
as true. What a confounding mistake is then that in us, which would persuade
us, that the divine Graces mutiny among themselves; whereas it is man's
seditious self only breaks squares, and forgets to be obedient? God never
desisted from works of Love and Mercy (the whole frame of nature upheld by his
wisdom and providence witnessing as much) but makes the smiles of prosperity
visible in the darkest shades of adversity. And although the fond Else,
Curiosity, upbraid my style, endeavoring from Natures homebred arguments to
invert it, yet do I promise to my self that felicity as the best, which I see
hovering over my head in the day, wherein I sit covered with dust and ashes. In
that surly billow, whose gaping jaws receive me with no other promises but of
destruction, surely I seem ( Jonas like) wrapped up and graciously hidden from
the rage of a more tempestuous evil. It is not always a miserable thing to be
under that which men call calamity. God knows it; and because man will not
know it, he converteth that to Evil, which God gives for good. In this it is,
that we so much mistake Gods Love and prejudice our selves by a wrong acception
of his most gracious deeds. If we confer with flesh and blood the Love may be
questionable, but how can flesh and blood discern it, the influences thereof
being supernatural? Yet while we will thus seem wise, we befool our selves of
the benefit of this Love, and cannot notwithstanding in the least manner quit
our selves of that, which we call a burden intolerable, and truly render so,
for want of a supporting faith. In this case is man too much burden to himself
without addition; but additions continually aggravating he shall not want, so
long as he continues in it. God indeed bestows affliction on those, whom he
intends for his highest favors, and makes them quickening provocations of a
responsible gratitude; and therefore does he accordingly own the receiver, as
the receiver the gift. Where the gift is welcome, the giver is received with
Joy. Go thy way then and as thou have believed so be unto thee. Rest confident
in his Love, and thy mourning shall be turned into dancing. Tears may be shed
in vain; an so are all those, which in their birth cannot anticipate joy. I
will always, if I weep, either weep for joy, or because I resolve not long to
grieve.

SURELY I think it better to laugh at sorrow, then to sorrow for laughter,
because I had rather have simplicity triumph, then late gained experience to
procure a laurel; although both are in their due places commendable. I speak it
to this purpose, that afflictions are given either for trial or punishment. In
trials afflictions are but pastimes, if truly used; in punishment the cause
somewhat alters the state at first, but the benefit is equivalent at last:
and although we call them in both respects miseries, yet our life here were but
a misery without them. Although we reserve our selves never so warily from the
Worlds illusions, we are apt to stray; but these heighten our ear, duplicate
our zeal, and add new fuel to the former stock. Through these chiefly have we
the benefit of approbation here; without which the Devil and his agents will
take their liberty to ask, Do ye indeed serve God for naught? has he not made
an hedge about you? In good truth, these hot trials of our Faith do most
excellently well order us in this life until we come to a better. Did this
transitory life consist of joys uninterrupted until its final accomplishment,
we should befool our selves of the joys of the Eternity, for that doting upon
these we should entertain but cold and remiss thoughts of any others. But
tribulations endue us with intirest purity, and when tried in these fires we
come forth a refined metal, which runs in the divine mould, and has
uniformity with God. And were it not that sufferings sent from God were for our
good, and do (not only preserve alive in us the sparks of virtue, but also)
blow up and increase that warmth, which has long been raked up in embers, and
is scarce durable without the billows of adversity, how comes it to pass that
so many of God's chosen servants have set upon them the value of the highest
favors? Indeed seeing how mightily these do work for the good, and how usually
they do rest upon the lot of the righteous, holy men do rather suspect
themselves, then applaud their condition for happy, if their life has at no
time any intermixture of sweet and bitter. Piety, united with a long
prosperity, is such a wonder in our earthly pilgrimage, that we may even thence
be brought to fear that we enjoy the less of God, the more we enjoy of his
temporal favors without intermission or disturbance. To joy in tribulations is
not the meanest of joys, but is the foundation of joys truly parmanent, or
rather the proper fountain of pleasure solid and eternal.

NEITHER need we fear the Worldlings reproaches when their scoffs rise up like
a cloud designed to darken our day, and which menaceth our security in the
blessed light of the Star of Jacob. If they disdainfully ask us, Where is now
our God in whom we trusted? Let us become more and more confident in him, that
he may be more and more visible in us. In our trials these must bear a part,
and are commonly reservs to be sent forth at last when other experiments fail.
And although these clamorous mischeifs seem afar off less formidable, yet upon
one and the other assault they make even strength it self sometimes to yield,
often to retire. We are apt then to break forth into unmanly passions and
frustrate our former labors for want of a discreet silence at last: Or else
when from smaller blasts, contumelious words increase to a general tempest, we
forget to steer our course with the more care, and cowardly faint for fear. How
perfectly have I seen some to act a Bedlam freak, because the honor of their
best actions is by fame obscured? And then do malevolent Tongues feed the fury
of this distemper by adding still new causes. Others, how (Alas!) do they pine
away, and, like men laid out for an eternal rest, wholly compose themselves to
their sleepy revenge? As if they repaid the adverse taunts with this silent
torture of themselves, they so languish into nothing, that indeed, rather then
like men prepared for the graves descent, you would think them some express
show of a too too hasty resurrection, when the bones start up, and leave their
covering of flesh and skin, as yet not acceptable. But a middle way there is
wherein he walks, who has somewhat of the courage of the former, somewhat of
the silence of the later. Both so well mixed and tempered, that being made up
of both, you would admire how a venerable discretion could be extracted from
the extremes of madness and folly. The appearance of discontent and sorrow in
the injured (whether it turbulently becomes its own proclamation, or fondly
represseth words the more to express grief) does but create new pleasures in
the Offender, and by continual aggravations of his adversaries cares he
heighteneth his own delights. A regardless enterment of such unwelcome guests
(as are Scoffs and Reproaches) soonest wearieth them. If you would force them
to depart, they stick closest; if you would fly from them, they follow after
and fly faster: only let them not confound, and they are suddenly confounded.
The best course is, fear them not, regard them not. Refrain words, they are
speechless; water them not with tears, they wither; spare anger, you punish
them; spare violence, you crush them. Where is the benefit of trial, if we will
be either outrageous or sullen? He, who (like as the rock outbraveth the
insolency of a tempest) has put on resolutions as unmovable and firm as
besitteth man endued with a Soul, illuminated from God, and replenished with
hope, dares already in this life account himself of the Church triumphant, as
having this new name written on his forehead, More then conqueror. Brave
Spirits have retired walks, can withdraw themselves from the tumults, which
without are frequent, and do compose themselves to that diffused bliss of
conscience, where there is nothing unruly, no Murmurs, no Ripining, no
Tormenting counsels how to repay, but always those more excellent faculties of
Mercy and Forgetfulness. And unto those black Instruments of Obliquy, mishappen
Tongues, to be able to return no other answer but that of an innocent life is a
bliss like that of the Saints in Heaven.

THUS we may and must do, because whatsoever is ill spoken of us, although it
look directly toward us, yet does it not concern us. But if reproaches soar
yet higher and invade Heaven, that more concerning us then our selves, how
shall we moderate our course and direct our steps? They, who injure us in our
bodies, estates and names, will not rest here, but will yet labor to strike
higher if possible. It is not strange, that they, who smite with the fist of
wickedness, should lash with the tongues of presumption and vanity; and because
they think no Lord can control them, they will not spare to the injury of God
and his, to lift them up against Heavens sacracy it self. If they cannot pierce
our Souls with steel, they will try what those lighter darts can effect, and
how deep these windy arrows will enter. They will rather then fail of all,
attempt the dishonor of him, who sits in the Heavens; to the preservation
of which only immaculate Beauty it is that we are so ready to devote our souls
and ^^^ld our bodies a sacrifice. If no damage or cross, as it has relation to
our selves, can trouble our well armed and fortified heart so as to make it
bleed, yet, after horror and amazement, death it self is frequently in the
entry, when we see Religions choice ornaments, and Devotions chief glory by
subject to the power of a sacriligeous tongue. Then if ever our hands hang down
helpless, our knees wax feeble; then are even wise and good men distracted with
faintheartedness and fear. And here I am at a stand, who, my self speaking of
an uninterrupted joy, do wonder how I once dared name it, or that I could
persuade my self that there were any such thing under Heaven. And indeed naming
it with a doleful lamentation for its absence would prove at the utmost all,
did I not foresee for making up my breaches that good Samaritanes approach with
healing in his wings. He plungeth mine almost slaughtered Soul in baths of wine
and rivers of oil, and reviveth me with cordial sweets, speaking better and
more consolatory language then the sword when it cries, It is enough. He
teaches me not to be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the destruction,
that wastes at noon day, because he, who is higher then the highest regards.
Indeed if we consider that reproaches cannot hurt us, we may thence learn that
they less hurt God. Those things, which we observe, are not done without his
permission. This he teaches us, and by this insinuates to our understandings,
that he can repress and punish when he will. If those vast bodies of the
liquid Dominions are bounded by his pleasure; if the floods and waves, though
they roar and make a tumult, have yet this curb, hitherto shall ye pass and no
farther: how much less shall man, who dwells in houses of clay, be able to
contradict him: He inhabiting a ruinated and tottering Fabric, the more he
advances the top of it, the sooner the bottom fails. If he sets his
brains on work to contrive engines to demolish what he would have preserved in
strength and beauty, if his tongue utters any thing proudly and
contemptuously against his honor, God, who for a little time suffers it,
will neither forget nor long delay the just punishment of such ire-provoking
villainies. Could it be that he were like the revolted Israelites dumb God,
Baal, fallen into a sleep, these loud crying offenses would soon awaken him, they
would rouse up that Majesty, which would not again lie down, until he had
emptied his revengeful quivers, and made his arrows drunk with the blood of the
slain. The just he will keep secretly in a Pavilion from the strife of tongues;
he will show them his secret determinations, and how even this tends to the
good of his Flect ones. For they like polished jewels shall then be discerned
from other adulterate stones slubbered over with deceit; than their most
apparent luster shall receive a multiplicity of unwonted glory, whose constancy
does more dignifie, than the most impious Sacrilege can deface, the excellency
of our Christian profession. But those whom practice has made Masters in the
Devil's Arts of mischief, whom an haughty presumption has carried on as it
were a deluge sweeping away, overturning and overwhelming all opposites, do
but overhastily run their destined course into the bottomless pit, where the
Devil and they share their purchased inheritance of endless damnation. And even
those, whom a true fear of God never sanctified, but only a supercilious
gravity, adorning the outside made the inside indiscernible to man, are not
unknown to God. He sees of how rotten a frame their hearts are made; and such
Imps of hell, as fear not to be openly rebellious, he suffers to sift the
verity of such as only profess it. So is he glorified both in the faithful and
unfaithful, in the devout Christian, and the hypocritical Professor. The one
inflamed with perfect love, casts away fear, not knowing how to be
distracted; the other, what he deceitfully entertained, is contented publicly
as well as privately to see abused; That which the one embraces, as being its
own best reward, the other with contrary aims courteth, and for the same
vilifieth and contemns; The one prefereth the contemplative joys of Heaven
before all things, the other delights in the surfeiting sweets proper only to
flesh and blood; the one is for the gain of godliness, the other for the
godliness of gain. And therefore this slippery Saint does not stick upon
occasion to creep into a religious dress, and to become constant to it so long
as constancy may be mistaken. But he withdraws himself, when he sees that
dress grow out of fashion, and with a tongue equal to the loudest, condemns
the needless observations of holiness. It consists not with his hopes or
wishes to maintain the Doctrines of Obedience with an empty belly, or run
barefoot to Heaven. He holds it far safer to curse God to his face and live,
than to sing Allelujah's to him with an heart torn upon a rack, and even
breathing its last. He cannot discern Religions glories among the tottered rags
of beggary, nor its beauty from its defaced Palaces. Thus while he deemeth
Religion superfluous (because forsooth not laden with superfluities) he is
driven down the same channel with the most violent disturbers of Christian
peace; perishing wretches with desperate souls?

TO FAITHFUL men (although suffering) here are Arguments of a reward, that God
regards and separateth them from the vessels of wrath. His Mercy and Justice
know no mean, but are applied in the eternity of either punishment or reward
without neglect. And those, whom God so owneth, he assuredly therefore
separateth, that in blessing he may bless them, and in multiplying may make
their seeds of glory to be multiplied as the Stars of Heaven, and as the sand,
which is upon the seashore; giving them this present assurance, that though
they suffer, yet a little while and the wicked shall no more be, although they
be oppressed by them for a while, yet at length they shall possess the gates of
their enemies. Let a fading beauty and decaying luster present fools with
admiration; men soundly wise, and discreetly politic, laugh at these Images of
content. If they at all mourn, it is not at their own seeming calamities, but
that any should by such happiness dream themselves into vengeance and woe
interminable. And as much do they wonder how such men can ever hope to effect
their designs. How little furious words, violence, and rage can weaken
Religions Nerves (although they sometimes force not only tears but blood) the
miraculous growth of the primitive Church under persecution may teach them. As
we have seen a fire for some time stifled, presently after flame up, and spread
it self into almost an incredible extent, waving its brandished head with the
ambition of reaching Heaven: So Religion threatened, confined and oppressed
commits violence on violence it self, and makes suppression become its
glory. They who would bereave the Church of her children, did but from each
wound of theirs shed that blood, which generated anew. In the greatest rage of
persecutions, that world was (in a sort) too narrow for the reception of
Faith's numerous Issue, and therefore Heaven became a colony for those many,
who so willingly left earth out of confidence of an inheritance above. We see
then that these adversaries of our temporal prosperity (which too too
frequently proves the Souls canker) are not altogether inconvenient
instruments. Their potions given us to drink, (though intended for mischief,)
become cordials and wholesome medicines; from Stygian in the gift, they become
Elysian in the receipt, and are properly said to make us glad, because once
tasted they encourage us and cherish in us a certain generous animosity, which
without such contentions languisheth and dies.

NOW that we may not mistake God's love, neither commit a rape upon our own
expectations, let us consider that that life is not the best, which is, but
which shall be free from trouble; that those joys are not the most sincere,
which touch the sense but the soul with delight. So then the only means to
remove the injuries of suspicious joys, is to make friendship with their
opposites. We must work our souls joy, not out of ease, which is but the gate
of corruption; not out of worldly favor, which is but deceitful; not out of
any settled affection upon other the like things, as doting upon wealth,
content in pleasure, an over-high value of our reputations among men. We may
not by these think to accumulate to our selves benefit or bliss; (they will
make us at last come short of our aim) but by a laborious care to fortify both
soul and body, by an earnest endeavor to have God's love; and all our trials
not to be found of another temper than we were before willing to have them
thought of, by dedicating the heart, which is the throne of love, to him alone,
and so making poverty, reproach, and such like (if he be pleased to appoint us
thereto) our favorites and familiars. And thus shall we also make to our
selves reparations for the loss of other things, which I account but the
injuries of mortality if courted and wooed.

TRIBULATION is frequently extended to all mankind, but is a beneficial
privilege only to the just. To them it becomes a benefit, because they know
how to prize it; but especially because they know how to use it: to others it
is not so, for the contrary reason. The effects of it are according to each
man's apprehension and esteem of it; as trials they are good, if we be pleased
to think so: as punishments also, opinion has the same power to make them
useful. Even in this respect there is in afflictions an artificial love
consonant to all God's favors. In them we cannot but acknowledge a divine
power, making us learn obedience from the things we have suffered. Thereby the
Holy Ghost does more effectually breath into us than by the Prophets and holy
Scriptures themselves. We too too frequently resist those sacred dictates of
the Spirit, and vilify the monitions of pious men: but afflictions render us
not only attentive to God speaking by them, but also yielding and obedient. To
which man can hardly do other than submit, they being true mollifiers of the
heart. They speak unto us so powerfully, that we are sure to answer in such
language as may witness an humiliation and change wrought in us. Indeed the
language of some differs from that of others. Therefore the repining
Reprobate is clamorous, crying out, My punishment is greater than I can bear;
but he, who has in him any thing savouring of piety, remembers these
punishments to be the chastisements of his peace, and imploreth the divine
mercy in laments and tears, the eruptions of a penitent heart. Punishments are
for the better, until by the offender they are turned to the worse. He, who
corrects every Son, whom he receives, corrects many that none may be lost.
Neither will his rod seem troublesome to any, whom the memory of their
transgressions does truly afflict. If sin cause sorrow, the rest has nothing
of sorrow, but is its remedy, which although it smells sour, its relish is
sweet. When any of us forgets to wash his polluted breast with a deluge of
repentant tears, to that cross (as we call it) or mishap, which forces him to
pour out what to his own damage he wretchedly detained, he ought especially to
give a ready welcome. In the possession of this very fortunate adversity mortal
man has so much cause to rejoice as incessantly to pray rather by misery thus
to be made happy, than to be in a possibility of mistaking God's love, through
a tedious worldly prosperity. Could we live in the world without sin, we needed
not by one misery to be wracked out of another. But seeing we cannot but sin,
it is meet we should bear the remedy; nay, because we know it to be a remedy,
rather invite it than refuse it. A tree driven by an adverse and violent wind,
is better preserved by a prop (although perhaps it rub off some of the bark, or
for due placing some small regardless branch be lopt off) than be turned up to
be destroyed root and branch: So if we could stand always in that innocent
posture and holy order, which beseems us, as there would be no need of it, so
there would be undoubtedly an immunity from tribulation. But seeing we either
cannot or will not but incline that way, which corruption drives us, let us
stand as we may; better it is that part be impaired than all lost. And if
naught but superfluities be impaired, such impairing ends in a blessed
reparation. Losing what we have commonly makes us find our selves. Find our
selves, I say: For it frequently happens that among our many stupendous
toys and glorious trifles, we ramble until we are at a loss. We commit sin and
make daily progresses in it; sin has its deluding enticements, which we listen
to and follow; we follow so far till we forget our selves, we listen till we
are lulled asleep. Thanks then and courtship for that friendly hand, which,
awakening and correcting us, points out the way of our return. This hand is
affliction, the merit (yet withal the purgation) of sin. We do not use to see
Colliers with white faces: Mortals, as sinners, have a smutty hue; and besides
that, the fruits of their works have a sooty taste. Ugliness, bitterness,
crosses and perplexities come of conformity with things of naught. But yet it
is for our good to have our ill dispositions thwarted, which cannot more
profitably be, than by God's hand afflicting; which, although seemingly
perplexing, is found consolatory; for after due observation it will appear,
that even the rod it holds and uses, is comfortable and delightsome. It
frequently happens that we have heard some of our ungoverned actions
rehearsed with addition by those, whom we might truly imagine meant us no good,
neither spoke for our bettering. But ought we nevertheless furiously to swell
against, or passionately to expostulate with God, who suffered our enemies thus
to triumph over us, when surprised by infirmity? No, It is but our bounden
Religion to thank that Fountain of pity for so unexpected and most beneficial
help in the time of our greatest necessity. His careful love wrought in him a
timely compassion toward us distressed, by whether natural or accidental
pollutions; and to the end that we might not, to our Creator's dishonor and
our own confounding shame, lie long in them, out of enmities high flown rage
did he find means to make a desired reconciliation. Those, whom we call friends
(and have reason peradventure in other things so to esteem them) will not so
readily cast these stones at us, either considering their own frailty, or
overweighing the displeasure many times proceeding from a just reprehension.
But our enemies will freely disperse them without either fear or weariness.
From whom our wise diligence ought quietly to take things of this nature, and
acquaint our selves therewith as from the better hand. Other times (probably)
we may be assaulted with violent shelves of accusations concerning those
things, wherein without blinding self flattery, we have judged our selves not
irreligiously innocent. But then laying into the same scale actions of
ancienter commission, of the knowledge whereof our adversaries have been
deprived, we shall find it best to put this bill with other accounts all upon
the same file. Seeing we have deserved as much otherwise, without complaining
then may we hear somewhat of injury, seeing we had not been for a long time
justly dealt with, nor so much as met with our own in a tedious discourse. Who
is there, that would exempt himself from the number of sufferers? Let him not
bring innocence for his bail. Although he be in the next degree to that self
nobilifying perfection, which might take the pliant wings of the dove to fly
away and be at rest, yet that little, be it (as I may say) but a part of
defect, so insupportably cloggeth man, that he cannot advance himself above the
injuries of mortality. Life upon earth is but a pawn deposited in sin-begotten
miseries griping hand. But if she be able so to squeeze and temper us, that our
outside and inside do at last become a lump all of good liking in the sight of
our good and gracious Father, we are neither foolishly to fear, nor currishly
to snap at, that hand, which new mouldeth us. The place of this our
reordination may indeed seem dreadful, yet is it none other but the house of
God, and the gate of heaven; it is the Sanctuary of devout piety, whereinto we
make our subtle, and take our ^ecure escape from sin. Which we discerning, are
to make have forward, rather than be of those, who draw back, in whom God says
his Soul shall have no pleasure. O let us then escape thither, and our souls
shall live. Seeing tribulation to be the reward of sin, let us by bearing it
wisely reach at the reward of Patience. In our adversity we must be possessed
with patience; for it is in our patience that we must possess our Souls. Iron
by fires duration makes armor sufficient to withstand deaths formidable
contrivances; and man often heat in the chimneys of affliction, and hammered
upon the anvils of worldly miseries is enabled for his victory, through the
Captain of his salvation, who was made perfect through sufferings. Thus all the
before-named seeming causes of trouble are but preparatives to our joy; they
are but mists, which cool and bedew one hour of our morning, that the rest of
our day may the more sensibly flourish, and our Sun victoriously break forth
into a continuing splendor. Let him (as he justly deserves it) be deprived of
joy, who deemeth deliverance from evil a plunge into misery, I in the mean time
praying, Thy will, O God, be my delight and prosperity.

WHICH so happening according to my wishes, I shall not now (as formerly) let
my thoughts creep low, nor shall I brook their defilement with what I my self
tread upon. Earth ought not to claim with Heaven a participation of us. It were
enough to destroy the hopes of our harvest, should we, notwithstanding the
husbandry diligently managed, and our field well manured, let tares spring up
among our wheat. Let us not suffer any thing, which was meant for our good, to
turn to our hurt. It is both pity that good seeds should unluckily be oppressed
in their growth, and evil ones permitted to flourish in contempt of art; which,
if it happens in man's heart, it is a sign of its being nigh to cursing. We
are rackt and torn, large furrows made on our backs, and the Ploughers go over
our heads, that evil and unprofitable seeds may be overlaid and perish. Here
the intent of the good husbandry is quite averse to a fond nourishing or
indiscreet fostering of them; but yet that is not all. The labor would be
reduced to the number of folly's impetuous vanities, if only to this purpose
undergone. But the consequence of overturning bad ones is a prudent disposition
of better in their places. And so does the heart receive only those seeds as
its own, which have their injection after so excellent an order; which, when
they have taken root, do thrive worthy the prosperous hand of the divine
husbandry. For indeed tribulation works in us thus much, that we love God
after a sincere sense of it, more than we did before in a corrupt sense of his
earthly gifts. For there is apparently in them more of his blessings, because
unquestionably more of his love. We, meeting with foreigners and strangers,
are commonly more addicted to liberality and outward tokens of courtesy, than
to reprove those vices, which we see in them; but wholesome reproofs we lay in
store for the homebred inheritours of our fortunes. Acts of indulgence to
suffer men peaceably to enjoy (as to the outward, man can do nothing to the
inward) Lands, riches, and estates may be extended to enemies; chastisements
men use to their beloved children. Wherefore the punishments of this life are
far better than the benefits of fortune. We then deservedly apprehending so
much, praise God for his unsearchable wisdom, and love him for his ineffable
goodness. God, who spared not his own First-begotten and Well-beloved, in not
sparing us, manifests his affection to us as well-beloved and heirs of his
promises; and we by being exercised in his love grow from grace to grace, from
strength to strength, until we appear perfect before God in Sion the
celestial. Tribulation in this life does not only try and correct us, but
makes our inward man more gloriously to advance his trophies over sin; it
makes us eminent in the practice of the better part, and richer to our selves,
because we treasure up in the Soul those jewels, which the dull pleasures of
the world bury all over in oblivion. I condemn not peaceable tranquillity, it
is to be the care of our hearts; I condemn not prosperity, God has frequently
given it to his great Favorites. But without reaching an offensive finger
toward the disturbance of any of its well-composed ornaments, I will presume
to say, that it becomes more glorious after a conflict with adversity, and is
not truly splendid till furnished with luster from afflictions store. Things of
the world even the best, although good, are yet imperfect when compared to
heavenly; of the number of which I judge afflictions to be according as God
sees meet to bestow them. And although in either estate it is not impossible
for a man to live piously, yet because adversity is an approved and more
certain way to Heaven, because prosperity, if it be not altogether remiss, is
commonly not so exact (as it ought) in performance of good, the one is
permitted to succeed the other by way of probation, and adversity still
carries the day. She is Religions more natural nurse, because freed from
pride, which is a close adherent to ambitious felicity, and has those goods to
which prosperity does unwillingly stoop, Obedience and Love. And adversity
possessing the soul of these two majestic, yet humble graces, what need I more
words to make my comment upon her more copious? Would we have peace,
tranquillity, joy and all inward happiness upon earth: Here are all these in
loves banners to be displayed? Would we have glory, joy, rest and felicity more
than earthly? Obedience reaches at them, and gives them unto us here in
assurance, hereafter in deed. And as these give us joy and peace, so are they
also their Guardians placing them above humane contingencies, and out of the
reach of cursed Fortunes malicious arrests. Our joy is in heaven, where also
our conversation is, and while there we may be sure it is fixed and immovable.
So we, impartially surveying the immensity of God's love, find afflictions of
the body to be the riches and welfare of the Soul, and the impairing thereof
the building up of our perfections. The consideration whereof does easily
induce us to profess that although God be pleased to exercise our patience in
hardships, we will not cast off our joy and hope, which have so great a
recompense of reward; neither will we cease with that worthy sufferer to say,
that although he slay us, yet will we trust in him. Of which sufferer yet more.
What was there in him but love toward God still carefully nourished, when he
takes all thus patiently, What shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil? And as he received them patiently, so assuredly
joyfully. For thanksgiving being the exuberance of joy and a fecundation of
Benefits, he gives thanks for the former afflictions, saying, Blessed be the
name of the Lord; which afflictions have soon after an addition. It was not
said of him, that he was that man of God, who was disobedient to the word of
the Lord, whom the Lord delivered to the roaring Lion, which tare him thus in
pieces, but that he was perfect and upright, that feared God and eschewed evil.
But all was done for his completing; for whereas we may think that nothing
could be added to uprightness and perfection, yet we must consider that the
very epithet of perfect does admit of a superlative, and that him, who was
perfect, Gods love would have yet more perfect, 'ere he come to that
perfection, which is above humane capacity. He who was perfect as to what he
had, was imperfect in an indigent bareness. I cannot say he wanted patience,
but he had been without the reward, as well as we without the example, if he
had not met with his trial. So by adversities friendly mediation he became
possessed with a crown, even the crown of patience, which before could not be due
unto him until he had overcome, and herein also manifested himself perfect and
upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil, not by fear but submission; he
submitted to the evil of fortune patiently, rather then to the evil of
corruption foolishly. He could not thoroughly effect his Victory over his enemy,
whom he encountered, with so many unnecessary clogs as before cumbred him,
therefore he would go forth against him casting off all help seemingly good in
the worlds eye. And thus was he made more sufficient for the overthrow of his
daily watchful and perniciously subtle Adversary. Being robbed of all outward
goods, his internal he the better preserved, which were thus efficacious and
subject to no damage. Had he not been maliciously impoverished by his plotting
enemy, he had not been so gloriously triumphant over him, nor taken the crafty
in his own devises. Here was the intention of Love, which was not unjust in
afflicting, but merciful in susteining. Hope was introduced by sufferings, and
Certainty sustained by losses, and he made almost greater then a Saint, because
reputed a worm and no man. God loves us too much, unless we loved him more and
valued his Love at an higher rate. He has voluntarily and even humbly obliged
himself to love, and would force us to become dear and precious in his eyes by
the continual royalties of his goodness oppignorated to us from the cradle to
the Sepulcher. He desires to benefit us by the kindnesses of prosperity and the
indulgencies of adversity. He created us to the one and redeemed us by the
other. Our Redemption then was Love, our Creation was power; although then he
can save us by his power, yet let us not desire it without his love. He valued
and purchased us by afflictions, labors, bloodshed and death, not because we
were of so much worth, but that we might be of more worth by his powerful
affection to us. Let us susteining, our own casualties and miserable condition
in this life, become powerful to an able and free return of love, to suffer a
little in love to him, who suffered (nay suffers) much more in compassion for
us. We have nothing immortal but our Souls, and even these are made liable to
deaths cruelty, unless that in life we die. If living by imitating Christ our
life we die, we may rest assured that our life is hid with Christ in God.

FRESH examples are seldom wanting to keep up the memory of antiquity. Time
wheeling about gives us the sam^^ Tragedies, only the persons changed and new
actours introduced. But (as it is the general abuse of things) time will not
lessen the narration, nor give us his accounts in contracted characters; so
that things formerly done, however seeming prodigiously large, fall strangely
short of what we have seen acted. The Devil, who might have been thought his
craft^-master in mischief heretofore; when he was able in such numerous troops
to derive his plagues upon that matchless piece of patience, innocent Job, has
been able (as millions of distressed persons have, by their tears shed for
themselves and others, witnessed) to send forth into our land calamities enough
to have tried thousands of Jobes; not overturning one particular man's fortunes,
and frustrating his secure repose, but sacrificing to his unsatiated rage and
hunger pined fury the long settled peace of three flourishing Kingdoms. Which
disturbance was much unlikely at the first to prove so incurable, because the
Devil could scarcely be discerned to have any action or motion in it. The
general pretense was that Truth did contend for her due liberty, unwilling to
be subservient to superstitions and ill contrived ceremonies, the guilt of
whose restraint deserved no other then an ablution, not with common water, but
blood. For Satan's agents (these pretended reformers) saying that Religion was
fallen into decay, would needs make her contradict her principles formerly so
constanty maintained, and that her defenders should rather commit injuries then
receive them. It seemed more advantageous to these her Counselors, that she
should be polluted in blood then dishonored in dust, and that preservation in
hopes of amendment, was no good course for her vindication. Surely it is most
strange that any should but once attempt to cover with Religions sacred attire
those things more especially divilish then other, works of the highest
rebellion. Well may obstinate Jews deride us, ignorant Barbarians contemn us,
voluptuous Turks and impudent Atheists Scommatize us, among whom the name of
truth (which ought to be reverently used and kept from between polluted lips)
has been rendered the key to all fallacious impiety. It has of late years been
made the watchword to the camps of whatsoever villainies have been either heard
or acted. To these pretensions add we continual Libels spreading themselves
like a general Plague leaving no place free from infection, whereby the fames
of innumerable innocents have been not barely rendered odious, but cast into a
bed of incureable sickness, whereof they at length expired. But expiring
(although on earth they found no acceptance) God, whose eyes are always open
upon the just, gave them approbation in his heavenly registry, among those,
whom he had found worthy the crowns of integrity and patience. That more then
earthly Man's insuperable meekness was traduced for tyranny, of whom indeed the
world was not worthy. Hatred to his people was objected to him, whom royal
concessions, in all ages unparalled, ought to have rendered his people's
nearest both care and joy. He was upbraided with inconstancy, who had rather
with a Kingly constancy suffer, than lie grovelling under the censure of
inglorious levity His Religion was said to be corrupt, whose most sincere
affections toward God in serving him truly were rendered perspicacious in a
patient resigning up his Soul to God, the author, judge and reward of zealous
and unfeigned devotion. The most governed wisdoms of those two his most
eminent Servants in the upright administration of Church and State were (for if
they have called the Master Beelzebub, how much more than those of his household
his servants and adherents?) slandered as noxious to the King, and bringing
unspeakable detriment to Gods honor, which these calumniatours would pretend
zealously to promote, although they expressed their care thereof after the
manner that Pagans contend for Christianity; by cruelty and endeavors of
extirpation. Against evil Counselors and self seeking persuasions were their
general exclamations, having learned that policy to conceal the intention, and
derive the envy of their own actions upon the most vigilant and grand opposers
of them. Miserable Artificers in the Devils Sciences, who think no more of a
day of account for these things, nor the wages, which their ever diligent
Master never fails to pay to his faithful faithless adherents! That they have
done these things audaciously what ought they not to fear? But still to run on
(in contempt of God and his eternal vengeance) with fire in one hand, the sword
in the other, and their very inwards burning with a lust to mischief, of it
self able to procure a Kingdom-ruining conflagration, savoureth (I almost
think) of wickedness more than the infernal store. Yet these actions usher in
their religious resolves of building a most glorious Church. But could we
imagine, that they who entered into a solemn League and Covenant with vows to
establish the Church in the best and most primitive order, would most impiously
turn her (as we say) topsy turvy, not leaving her one stone upon another
unthrown down? Could we think that they, who professed they knew it their duty
to wash their hands in innocence, and so compass the Altar of God, would with
hands imbrewed in innocent blood take hold of their humbled Mother, and tare
from her shoulders her robes, and the Crown from her head? Yet these things
have our hopeful Reformers done, whose religion at the first composure
consisted of these ingredients, Hypocrisy, Contumelies, direful Revenge,
Ambition, Contempt of God and his power, a Delight in the destruction and
misery of the guiltless, Thirst after blood, Sacrilege and exorbitant lust
after other men's fortunes. As to the two last I mentioned, it did smoothly pass
with the vulgar, and was currently believed, that they intended nothing more
than a reparation of all things; so much did their impudence bear before it the
show of sincerity, with which, and the name of Devotion, they for a season
gilded all their crimes. But when their beguiled helpers had given them the
Crown and Church Lands, and the prey was between their teeth, restitution was
found to come much slower than the promises. They found the revenues too
weighty, having turned them over to themselves, to return them to God or the
King. Neither was it probable (had they been able to descry it) that the
vulgar's blind hopes should ever have a clear issue, or that they who had made
an ill beginning to the whole Nation, should ever make a good end to God. But
the peoples eyes were at length opened, when after the ereption of some
particular Delinquents (as they called them) whole Estates, and other men's
compositions, near of kin to those total ereptions, the same hand at last
stretched over all in general began to gripe hard as well its Allies, as foes,
its Defenders and Offenders. So was the mist removed from their darkened eye,
when the candle it self began to be touched; when the pretended reformation was
known to be the bastard of unsatiable lust. O it is a religious thing to
receive. And their Idol-god Profit must be appeased with Prayers of lies and
humane Sacrifices, that so a propitious income might make amends for their
labor and industry, and cause their hopes to abound. But if their monthly and
annual Harvests were not store enough to fill their garner, they had always
ready some religious rogues of their crew (zealous defenders of their God's
privileges) who could craftily search Desks and Closets, yea and hearts too,
to find, make and swear out either old Delinquents escaped their clutches, or
new ones, so rendered by their consenting to plots, which they never heard of,
or making plots, of which they never thought. And then Justice (which with God
is made to come bearing up Mercy's train, even when incorrigible iniquity
deserves punishment) has her sacred name and authority injured, which she is
feigned to be present and active in the condemnation of the innocent. I am
forced to cry out, Sinner that I am, where shall I fly for mercy, if this were
justice? yet besides all this, God the Rewarder of just actions only, and the
Avenger of the unjust, must be thanked for these things as a well-willer and
approver of them. How do I here even doubt to affirm what I know, that such as
invocated the name of God, and spoke of the sincerity due to him, in religious
addresses, should so far provoke him as to commit sin boldly, and with
affection to it? But that they should withal glory in it, and to his face make
him the author of it, would seem utterly incredible where it had not been so
notoriously known. Having said this, I need not tell you that the wisdom of our
Forefathers, and of God in them directing and disposing their counsels to his
glory in constituting good and wholesome Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil for the
reward of virtue and punishment of vice must of necessity be trampled under
foot, where unruly and hellish passions exercise their liberty without bit or
bridle cast into their jaws. Vice getting the upper hand of its lash, knows
no restraint, no more than does the Author of it when his chains are broken,
and his fetters loosed* for where licentiousness bears sway Rule is an
unknown good. By the same power of pretended justice, as others, was the Hope
of the Kingdoms welfare sunk, the Sun of our day darkened, the Defender of our
lives and liberties Spiritual and Civil (who was worth ten thousands of us) in
an unhappy hour taken away. When then the Lawgiver was taken out of Israel, and
our Crown fallen to the ground, how could we expect moderation, there being
none to hold the reins? what discipline among the vile Patrons of confusion? or
what Church government, where there was left no visible face of a Church? But,
such as they were, we had governors many, although not good store; for
according to Moses his forespoken curse, assuredly to follow disobedience, The
stranger to the Commonwealth of our Israel, was made the head, and we the tail;
they were made governors, true governors, Subjects. They, who were to go in
and out before the people, whose lips should utter the messages of peace, did
breath nothing but flames of fire; and they, who should deliver the words of
judgment and understanding were (such as Jerohoam's priests) the off-scowring
and abjects of the People. Out of the Goal or Bridewell, from the Stall,
Kitchen or Buttery; and indeed the whole tribe of them, from this or that
contemptible course of life, assume to themselves the sacred Prerogative of a
pastoral charge, leading silly souls captive, as also themselves were led to
the pit of perdition. They rise from the dunghill, and handle the most holy
things with unwashen hands. And no Sectary, no broacher of hair-braind frothy
inventions, but was (not barely permitted, but) privileged with such
tolerations and immunities, as if their service could not be illustrated with
sufficient magnificence; the poor fools thus advanced, not considering that
undue exaltation, and an haughty spirit go before a fall. Assuredly they, who
are in such slippery places of height (the base quality of the persons
forbids me to say honor) and vulgar esteem suddenly raised thither, are set
there for others fore-arming caution, who shall see them as suddenly cast down
into destruction. For there must with every man's advancement go along in
embraces meekness of Spirit, self-humiliation and sincere devotion, if he would
have the acquired additions of honor really continuing. Otherwise promotion
proves but like an halter to a thief; it prefers him to destruction, and
without repentance lets him drop down into hell.

CALLING to mind some of our past days revolutions, I found these with
innumerable others, to present themselves to my view. I made use of the first
comers for my present occasion. Enough were these set down, nay, too too many,
had it so pleased God, who knows better than our selves, what is most meet to
be tolerated; whose wisdom as it transcendeth all humane reach, so its
disposals of us our selves ought not by us to be limited. If our Physician for
the health of our bodies tells us, that some blood must of necessity be taken
from us, in regard we acquiess in his skill and judgment, we patiently suffer
his will; neither at length may we say it is enough, when he knows that more
must be shed. Well may we then wholly resign up our selves into the hands of
the most wise and faithful Physician of our souls, and live for ever. We must
submit, and after submission consider the benefit, which does loudly speak it
self unto us such as the artifice of the insuperable love has wrought it.
Surely nothing has been in these intestine commotions lost by any one for
God's sake, but God did at present repay it with himself. The soul had liberty
to treasure up life, while the body was rackt nearest to death, and God was at
hand a ready help, when the need was of greatest extremity. What we have now,
Peace at home, Religion and liberty restored, a gracious King over us, lawful
Magistrates among us, and the former authority of our National Laws settled as
heretofore, we should not so much prize, if we had never known the loss of
them. Pride and fullness of bread caused too much inward disdain and outward
irreverence of God's blessings, which now we learn to look upon more seriously,
and use more thankfully. For my own part, my King (whom enjoying I truly esteem
my self to live, whose safety I do and ever shall ( God being my helper) to my
utmost endeavor, accounting it mine own welfare) might in much probability
have had less of my heart, more of disregard, fewer of my prayers, more of
ungrateful forgetfulness, if my souls freedom had never been curbed through his
enforced dereliction of his Crown and Royalties. So might I have been more
liable to a more imminent danger, that of disloyalty, and breach of God's
commands (who would have Kings honored as sacred, and their very names not to
proceed from our lips without especial reverence) which might suddenly have
depressed me into irrecoverable misery. How many there have been in former
times of this number of negligent subjects I know not. But of this I may rest
confident that multitudes have repented of their remissness, having been
thankful for that rod of their chastisement, which at last made them know their
Father and themselves. Some men in consideration only of their worldly
condition could liberally bemoan themselves as deceived by their own wisdom.
For while they warily kept themselves as neuters, thinking thereby to lie hid
from spiteful fortunes molestations, they lost both their honesty and their
hopes. Their Allegiance to the most pious of Princes (who thought nothing too
dear for his people) they willingly forgot out of a dastardly fear of losing
what indeed they could by no means keep. But their fears being past by the loss
of all, they could see their errors, and bethink themselves how much might
theirs with the like losses of men in their condition have advanced that just
cause of their lawful Sovereign, if they had made a timely resignation of
themselves and part of their possessions unto him; how much so many persons
hands and assistance might have strengthened him, if they would but have righted
themselves in defending him. An unprofitable infidelity did at last make these
loyal, when loyalty was become full of infirmity. But these being sensible of
the most despicable weakness of humane wisdom, or rather the fallacies of
worldly confidence have found out a better security by relying on the wisdom,
which is more than humane. Yet amidst all that could happen, no faithful
subject (a just value of all things considered) repineth at his losses, because
they were all in some measure deserved, and in whatsoever their present
fortunes suffered diminution, they were in the same or greater measure
recompensed. As we stood affected toward our King, so also toward our God.
Some men's wills both to the Spiritual and Temporal warfare were equally poysed;
Religion observed not so much out of sincerity as custom, witness that frozen
zeal in many, which gave occasion to the sly rebel to accuse all. But to those,
who were not altogether bankrupt of sincerity the ensuing alteration had but an
harsh relish, insomuch that they saw it high time to make lukewarm affections
exiles, when through the want of zeal to God's cause they enabled each
miscreant to climb to the height of what either his pride suggested or his
hopes pursued. To see the strange alterations of divine Worship, to see God's
holy Name made the amusing cover of all profaneness, the name of Justice the
pretense of Regicides and Parricides, was enough to awaken that drowsy Spirit
of indifferency, which could content it self with a remiss holiness, and a
piecemeal performance of duty. Those, whom pleasure had before bribed, sorrow
had now made to speak truth and acknowledge our Churches excellency in the
polite decency and graceful composure of its Lyturgy, and other Constitutions.
For as nothing makes men love virtue more than the beholding others odious in
their vicious behavior: So many men (besides the Hypocrisy and Instability of
the Components) considering the slight fopperies of a Directory, and the
whimsical deportment of men in their newly introduced worship, needed not
eloquence to speak the former Service high and majestic. It was commendation
enough of the former to see the later so meet an object of contempt. Ignorance
and Pride go as mates hand in hand. Pride walks along with a supercilious
gravity, and with an overweening disdain beholds other men and their actions;
but consulting with Ignorance at her right hand, now to tread each step with a
graceful deportment, and following her advice, those altitudes of speech and
gesture become not admired according to expectation, but instead of admiration
comes first neglect, afterward scorn and laughter. He, who makes outward
shows of grandeur, must have correspondent inward sufficiency to bear up the
outward frame. Understanding men will not be cheated by the transparent abuses
of Pride. Had some complaints in hatching before our intestine commotions
proceeded no farther, it had been more to the credit of the pretensively
virtuous Rebel in two respects: First, in regard of the punishment to come
looked upon as due unto him; Secondly, in regard (his pretenses and deeds being
so different) his face would not have appeared so ugly to the common view. For
thousands, who at first heard only their complaints, but saw not their
intentions, have extolled the complainants for religious and well meaning, bu^
have since found them highly abusive to what they seemed to aim at: and
perceiving this, have had just cause to glorify God for their own timely
deliverance. But they, who were always resolved where they had began to end,
were then enlivened one way, although sadly dejected another way. Although they
wept at the sight of their natural Mothers countenance transfigured with
inundations of tears and blood, and their spiritual Mothers choicest jewels
prostituted to contempt, yet were they revived with the remembrance, that when
they had lost all, they notwithstanding held fast their faith, and had so well
merchandized as to exchange their reputations and estates for the crown of
patience, to barter earth for an heavenly inheritance.

THERE was nothing in all this, but what might give advantage to the Christian
Combatant, and (as to himself) improve his joy, the Conquest being foreseen and
the Reward foreknown. For although without were fightings within fears of
pretenders and undermining Informers, yet what could they do more, who had left
nothing undone? They might lay a greedy hand upon our bodies, and all thereto
apperteining; but upon the riches of our souls (as the delight in
rack-contemning Obedience, and undaunted Loyalty) their violence wrought no
command. Although they encouraged themselves in our spoils and losses, yet they
miserably tormented themselves with the remembrance of our undisturbed
resolutions. There could no age be more fruitful in miseries than that; yet
none more miserable in their own and most men's esteem than the
misery-inflicting adversaries. If all the inventions, that the malice of
Devils, and men worse than Devils, could suggest, might entitle us to misery
there wanted nothing, which might make it complete, and this world an hell. And
yet even then did we triumph over calamities, having indeed sighs and tears to
spend for the authors thereof, whom we had learned to pity, because by fools
only esteemed happy. We did as we ought, rejoice; not according to the Epicures
vain prescriptions, who advise men to fortify themselves against the occurrent
miseries of life by the still entertainment of surfeiting pleasures; for these
pleasures were not then to be reached. But in us, as Christians, did this joy
take up its proper place. For notwithstanding that almost all places and men
were corrupted against a Loyallists peace, yet spiritual security and joy was
purposely entertained as the enemy of calamity and fear. They ignorantly
accomplish the good man's happiness, who most obstinately oppose it. So do they
labor for naught, not purchasing more for themselves than a sad accumulation
of bitterness, having most assuredly hell within them. Those devilish potions
extended for our bane, and to root us out of the land of the living, became to
us (seeing God's will and pleasure) precious conservatives, and life giving
sweets. Were it not that the fiery trials of our faith were of excellent
benefit, what meant the Royal Prophet, speaking to God in a thanksgiving
confidence, saying, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee? In fine then,
What shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Why, says one
holy Man, In all these things we are more than conquerors; Therefore we take
pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake: And another bids us Rejoice in these things,
inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings. And surely Virtue
does outshine the Sun, its glory being incapable of Eclipse; it is not only
such as cannot be obscured by mists and clouds, bu^ appears through them with
the more admired splendor, and this because it hat^ more especial
strengthening from heaven, where its conversation is. Thence our joy has its
beginning and increase, and withere find a blessed consummation, which as it
can have no being, so neither impeachment from the things of the world. A^
immortal tranquillity and joy we have the^ attained to, when we are by faith
made insensible of humane injuries, and have lef^ earth while upon it. If we
unfeignedly believe in him, we may be assured tha^ he will protect us with
blessings and bring us safely through this to eternity of glory. Amen.

O My God, who upholdest my life wit^ thy comforts, and set me always i^
safety, how apt am I to mistake thy lovin^ kindness, and in my heart to
conceive fr^wardness toward thee?

Give me therefore faith to see thee, my Redeemer, as well in the cloud of the
evening, (...) the sunshine of the morning; for I desire (...) fix my hope in
thee.

I said in my have, I am cast out of the sight; but even then was I made to see
mi^^ own infirmity, and thy strength was made perfect in weakness.

Therefore I now say, that although innumerable troubles should compass me
about, yet thou shall encompass me with songs of deliverance.

Although I am tossed with the waves of adversity, I find that thy left hand is
under my head, and that thy right hand embraces me.

Let me, O my God, be always able to rest confident in thee, that although I sow
in tears, I may reap in Joy.

When affliction lay upon me, I saw it to be thy good pleasure; I bare it and
was silent; wherefore indeed should I repine at mercies?

Because in thy light I am sure to see light, I shall walk on comfortably; yea,
although I walk through the valley and shadow of death, I will fear none evil;
for thou art with me always.

Whenever it is thy good will and friendly pleasure to try me, let patience
have her perfect work in me, that I may (through thy grace) be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing.

If thou do it by words against my self, little can be said, which I wretch
have not deserved. Peradventure thou have said to this or that Benjamite, Curse
him.

Yet be thou pleased to give me serious repentance, to look mine affliction,
and requite m^ with good at my latter end.

Let me never return with fury to them who backbite me, but with humility to
the^ who do correct me; so shall thou be please with the sin offerings and
oblations of m^ lips.

If I am tried by words or actions against thee, O Lord, I am unable to bear or
restrai^ them; Arise and maintain thine own caus^ remember how the foolish man
reproache^ thee daily.

If I have seen, O Lord, I have seen (...) that the enemy has done wickedly in
t^ Sanctuary.

A man was famous according as he lift^^ up axes upon the thick tree; but they
bra^^ down all with axes and hammers, and tho^^ otherwise hindered from the
execution of m^ chief, they yet speak swelling words, and the^ talking is
against the most High.

Thou know, O God, that many have f^^lowed their own pernicious ways, by
whom (...) way of truth has been evil spoken of.

We were (and indeed are yet made) a stri^^ to our neighbors, our enemies
laughed amo^^ themselves.

All this has come upon thy people, yet ha^^ they not forgotten thee, nor
stretched out their hands to a strange God. They would not turn away from thee
to fall down before sacrilegious Usurpers, neither give that honor to them,
which was due to thy sacred Vicegerent only.

I beseech thee establish the just; but with mine eyes let me behold and see
the reward of the wicked, and let not any wilful transgressor prosper in his
way.

Let me never desire to eat of their dainties mischievously gotten; but hide me
from both the infection and danger of their counsel, and all thine from further
insurrections of the workers of iniquity.

Let thy truth be always my shield and buckler, and do thou both defend and
guide me with thy free Spirit.

If it be thy friendly pleasure to try me, it may be also thy fatherly will to
chastise me; but, Oh, correct me in mercy, not in thine anger, lest thou bring
me to nothing.

I have sinned; What shall I do unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? I will
patiently bear thy rod, and the chastisement of my peace.

Thou art just, O Lord, and correctedst me for mine iniquities.

I have sinned and done foolishly; for which although thou have plagued me, yet
thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes.

Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now I say surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life.

Truly my soul waits upon thee, from whom comes my salvation, yea under the
shadow of thy wings will I take my refuge until the calamities of this be
over-past.

Surely thou art my Rock and my Salvation; I shall not be greatly moved. Amen,
Sweet Jesu, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. II. Reflections on the Mercies of Restoration.
NOW is our revenge thoroughly wrought; we desired not evil, and behold good
came. We were innocently (as we only ought) avenged of our adversaries by
deprecating their souls vengeance, by pitying them, whose self-created miseries
were the bitterest of our afflictions. And we assuredly find that love is a
pregnant passion having conceptions and productions beyond supposition. While
God considered the silent rhetoric of our hearts freely disposed to forgive,
and heard those louder cries of our sighs and tears for their amendment, he
answered them with such success as suited with our desires because with his
glory; but has moreover added such benefits as transcended both our desires
and hopes. Our desires if they did fly high, yet could not soar so high as God
can reach, nor could they dive so deep as the descents of his humble bounty. He
makes the out-going of the evening and morning to rejoice, and brings joy
unto us farther than the eyes of our mind can discern. Whether in our
Sunsetting or rising he is the same light still, and his day has no end And
although the shadow, as it were of an approaching night, minds us of our
natures declination somewhat darkening our understandings, yet, where God is,
the light of joy is still permanent, however it be for an additional delight
changeably represented. The substance is still the same, notwithstanding its
various dress (as I may say) does beguil the natural vision, and multiplieth
one into different pluralities. That invincible peace of mind, which although
still worried, is unalterable, after a long conflict with the treacherous world
becomes at last augmented; having sooner wearied all than it self, it is
rendered greater by its conquest, and more joyous through a continual disdain of
slavish sorrow. And God, who loves patience, loves also to have an end of it,
and to give it the same end and beginning, alacrity and the diffused bliss of a
calm security. Which end (when Patience has had her perfect work) he wisely
sets at his meetest time, sometimes making delays where he will give more
than an ordinary joy to the former stock treasured up in an extraordinary
trial. Otherwhiles he dispenses with time, himself (in a sort) thinking his
love absent, when it is not burdened with speedy dispatches of cessation and
rest. So he did by his good friend Job, whom he held not out the lingering
expectation of another life, but gave a rest and recompense on earth as the
short emblem of a recompense eternal. Patience after such a degree of service
is emerita; and the soul having been long enough exercised therewith, she is
exempted from farther labor, and resigneth her place to some other Virtue.
Neither, because a true joy may and ought to be retained in the fiery trials of
temptations, is it always necessary that we push those pikes. God will give
unto his servants more than a bare single cause of rejoicing; he loves to
multiply them, that so they may be known to be his gift, who gives not by
peice-meal, neither is scantingly liberal. The influences of his bounty are
proportionable to his unlimited love, descending as for diverse causes, so in
diverse manners. By variety and multiplicity of gifts his bounty is not
diminished, but is amplified and enriched by liberality, and by giving rendered
(as it were) more able to give. Now after we have a while patiently endured his
will, his benefits by course so run, that we no longer suffer but receive.
Either in heaven, or both earth and heaven, there is for us assurance of having
the former benefits of suffering completed by an immunity from suffering, and
even this immunity crowned with all accessory joys befitting a triumph. Come we
now to look back upon scoffs, reproaches, ignominies, contempts, and whatsoever
injuries; they could not harm us, because not lasting; and the very foresight
of their speedy end must needs excite our joy. A most divine expression is that
of his, who introduces that incomparable Pattern of patience in these words,
Jesus Christ the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy, that was
set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame; even for the joy, which
was the evident support of his souls so weighty burden, and unto which he was
to run throughout the race of finite misery. It is a cowardly part to fear that
enemy, whom we know we can out reach, and he is but pusillaminous, that is
disturbed with grief and fear for that calamity, which he is sure to out wear,
and (if he please) able to contemn. Things of little or no continuance have not
their name or value among durables: and how can we judge that evil, which
peradventure would prove so, if it could purchase life, but is extinct almost
so soon as it begins to be? Our life here for the very brevity of it may (we
sometimes think) scarce justly be termed life; yet affliction has not a lease
of that little, which is, but is put to its progresses and retirings; nay, each
hope crusheth it when it is most powerful and high. These things considered,
are enough to force up the fire of joy into a sacred flame, even while it is
dashed with the billows of affronts, and beshowered with the storms of
miseries; for after this storm is over, the day will prove fair, and our
present heat will be sufficient for the present occasion. And surely although
all God's works are instrumental to draw us toward him, and to six our whole
delight in him, and that with a love pure and unfeigned, which casts away
fear, and although adversity do this effectually, yet he at last gives
prosperity too. For the same thing is aimed at in both, and both relish well
enough with the pious Soul, but the later is more pleasing to the bodies gust,
and Gods love to us is such, that his soul will not always strive with man for
that he is flesh. We are f^ail, and too too subject to miscarriages, so that
that joy, which for a while did stoutly bear up, may at the last lack faith,
and sink, therefore shall it have a relief and change; but only when God sees
his time. As God intends at his constituted time to satisfy the longing soul
with himself in eternity, and with it the companion of its labors, advancing
the body to that glory to which (as supernatural) it can lay no claim without
the souls more privileged grace: So does he here sometimes as it were by
vision give an appearance of our entry into that glory, by converting the
exuberance of our sorrowful eyes into streams of pleasures, and floods of pious
rejoycings. And all this is for the manifestation of his own power, and
confirmation of our faith; that as we have seen him able to create good out of
evil, and light out of darkness, we may believe him able to stop the insolent
proceeding of the foot of pride, and after a preparation by temporal favors to
enlarge them into spiritual and boundless. God's glory is our life and
strength. This to him raised out of the two great opposites of good and evil,
becomes to us the united effect of joy. The sundry contrivances of it become
to us but one entire, because a perpetual joy; and we still through love having
our eyes sixed upward, continually behold it one and the same, though compacted
of a multiplicity of unexpected revolutions. He is glorified in the constancy
and prayers of his servants, in their fervency and resolution, in their
exaltation above the world, and in their humility in ascribing righteousness to
their Maker; and again, in his own mercy protecting, and goodness afterward
delivering them; in their faith and hope of future happiness through the
benefit of it here asserted, and by their thanksgivings unto him, who alone
works wonderously. And likewise he is glorified in putting an end to the
powers of darkness, and bringing the wheel over the ungodly; in frustrating
their violent and depraved counsels; in making manifest to the world that works
of wickedness are no fortifications, but only are as a broken wall, and a
tottering fence; that wicked men's security is danger, their wisdom madness and
folly; that their paths are either upon ice slippery and subject to sudden
dissolutions, or upon glass brittle and deceitful, no way able to bear those
ponderous weights to be passed and repassed upon the shoulders of armed
rebellion. Thus shall iniquity stop her mouth, and innocence prosper even in
these our days, the truth of that blessing being experimentally proved in our
present times, that the meek shall inherit the earth. Unto them God will here
give earnest, for what he means to give hereafter, and by the lesser makes
confirmation of the greater. God has triumphs for his Church militant, even
such as when it may lead its captivity captive. Earthly joy may sometimes prove
an obstacle to man's entry into the joys of heaven but never when it is thus
made the consequent of an endured Cross. Christ (whose disciples true patients
are) after his descent from the Cross, would glorify his passions by a
resurrection, and a time spent upon earth exempt from sufferings. To us also
will he (as he finds most expedient) allow a mitigation of tears, an
inversion of joys; that as we had before rejoiced as partakers of Christ's
sufferings, we should now rejoice as being partakers of his resurrection. He
does graciously permit us to arise out of the languishing bed of cares, and in
companies to enter Sion with the songs of triumphs in our lips, and our mouths
filled with laughter. Although we must through many tribulations enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, yet God does frequently (after the fury of tribulations
cooled) by a temporal prosperity use to bring his Elect to the border of his
Sanctuary.

IT adds very much vigor to our joy, that when the Devil (as he is apt)
rippeth up things past, and long since covered with the aged mantle of
oblivion, to put us into a slumbering dismay and contempt of hope, we erect our
Spirits to a contradiction, and solace our selves with the opposite indulgence
of whatsoever experiments knowledge can suggest. God's neglect of his people,
and leaving them to toil out their whole time of life (like slaves in Galleys)
witho^t any apparency of future happiness more than in uncertain promise, is a
firebal of Sat^n's compounding. But if he appears with such language, with
far fetched and tortured circumstances, we have our examples ready to confute
him. For such a thing as the direliction of a servant, there never was on God's
part. And yet we see and know that there are many more instances of gracious
returns of love and satisfaction in this life given, than of those, whose
rewards were referred to another life. All his alleged circumstances are but
continued calumnies. God's care is continually laborious in the production of
new supplies, and contenting goods appliable to man's (otherwise) destitute
condition. So that that creature is neither forgotten nor forsaken, whose
benefits are not bestowed once for all, but flow down like the Giver's love
daily and eternally. We have not that always at the beginning, which some of us
would have, but we have always all of us what we should have; and while need is
staved off, want proves a treasure. For when we have wisely learned to need
nothing, but what we may have, we have at last more than abundance given as a
supply to what we wanted, that is, what we had not, yet required not till God
would be pleased to give. To whose goodness and proper care, we being reserved,
are enfranchized members of his Court of audience, and have (not any thing,
but) all things at will. He is happily destitute, who is destitute of all but
God; for he soon finds to his great consolation and hearts-ease, that there
was no true good, which he ever intended for himself, which God (to make good
the devout man's position of a satisfying hope) has not in most ample manner
provided for him. Our high Patron of pleasure takes great content in satiating
the longing soul with those sweets, which are the manifest fruits of its long
contented (although still earnest) expectation. Commonness causes an
ungrateful undervalue of things, and assiduity of deeds. That we may truly
esteem works of greatness and goodness we have them artificially transposed one
before another. Our reason must not facilitate those favors, by which our hope
must be still strained to an higher key. Hope is made to depend on Providence,
and Providence keeps all in store for the time of Necessity. As Necessity
comes on by degrees Providence produces her Ossam Cerbero. So have we the
wide mouth of that devourer miraculously stopped, and God in his provident care
always reserveth the best until he knows it will be most welcome; and then
Come, buy without money and without price.

THAT Kingly Prophet, whose long confined Scepter bare a more awful sway over
Kingdoms and Nations, through and after a tedious persecution, knew not before
hand what he was afterward better schooled in, that Readiness blood thirsty
labors did chiefly make way to his crown, and that without them he had never
been King of Israel. That he was hunted like a partridge upon the mountains,
proved a fortunate chase to him, who by this means preyed upon the game
enclosed in the Pursuers nets; when he fled for his life, he hastened to a
Diadem. Saul with his followers were but so many Ministers of state to make the
way more ready and easy for this friend of God to ascend his Throne. Great is
that happiness to which Virtue climbeth by craggy passages. For as her labor
justly claims the reward she aims at; so neither does she catch at flies
seeking by a mean satisfaction to repair the loss of past time. It is felicity
in the fullest measures, which alone can counterpoise her grand performances.
Nothing less will serve the turn, neither this unless sought with an answerable
labor. Honor becomes not such to the magnanimous, unless he has passed
through vales of horror, and in pursuit of it overrun mountains of
contradicting perplexities; nor is Ease at last accounted a blessing to him in
the foresight, unless he can see it through multitudes of difficulties and
laudable attempts. But then comes Honor like it self, and Rest, which shall
not be attainted with reproach, when the Purchaser has his head adorned with
the beauteous flowers of his own well-husbanded Garden, and with a cheerful
countenance eats the savory fruits of that vine, which his own curious hand
has planted, dressed, and merely by labor nourished until it came to good
liking and Perfection. Our forefather Adam had in his punishment this much
hope, that he should not be eternally miserable because entitled to the benefit
of a laborious toleration, which always looks forward to felicity and a
reward. Although he deserved nothing of happiness in regard of his sin, yet he
could not but comfort himself in the hope thereof being thought worthy that
injunction to labor, which fails not of a recompense. For the good, which by
such a beginning and an answerable continuance should be pursued, must
undoubtedly be more then moderate. Our peace with God (which includes bliss
incomparable) is wrought by inevitable conflicts with the adversaries of it. A
Worldly peace is frequently acquired with effusion of blood, and is always to be
conserved with vigilance and laborious care. Nay each pettite delight
ambitiously publishes its worth by its difficult procuration; as if it were
impossible for that to give content, which never gave molestation. Every thing,
which has but the appearance of good gives man this demonstration, that his
choice part of life has its enjoyments either under or from durance. Holy
David would not sacrifice to God of that, which cost him nothing; for by that
Sacrifice religiously offered he expected the concession of a merciful
blessing; Therefore would he not have his offering an undervalue to his hopes.
Indeed all that we have or can is Gods, so cannot our best faculties merit any
thing at his hands. But if he be pleased with that satisfaction, why should we
not give him largely of his own (abilities of soul, body and temporals) that
the more we give the more we may receive and live happily by becoming (as I may
say) prodigal toward him out of his own bounty. Our faculties are his gifts,
so that what we bear is by his strength, (which we sometimes abusing cause our
own misery and his grief) but when he sends joy as the reward (although the
work be his own) we rejoice for our selves. To the faithful and good servant it
was not said, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, before that by due trial it
was found he deserved an Euge; but when that appears the servant shall become
a ruler. A little labor sometimes obtains an unproportionable and large
recompense. It is always so between us and our God, who for our feeble
endeavors, which he is forced to strengthen, gives not only more liberally
then we can deserve (for it is satisfaction enough to us that he mercifully
assisteth) but also more bountifully, then he has given us power to conceive.
But without some perturbations comes no good at all. Joy easily gotten is as
easily lost; it is over whelmed in a moment being but the treacherous
forerunner of some approaching misfortune. God gives very usually that, as
best which nature in the birth esteems as worst. A sorrowful beginning for
God's sake finds a Joyous conclusion, nay an endless Joy through God's love.

BUT they, who would have their life exempt from sufferings, are most sure to
suffer. Not seeking what they should, they unavoidable fall upon what they
strive to shun. The wisdom of worldlings in their generation is rather to
inflict then commiserate or be copartners with those, wholly under the rod of
the Oppressor. They defraud their understandings and will of true delight, by
hankering about meaner pleasures, for the reach of which they care not how they
get up above others trampling them down with the foot of insolency and scorn.
They are proud of their refined ignorance, that they can with a serpentine
winding avoid dangers and contrive paths of present safety to themselves. But
they weigh not aright the state of hereafter, forgetting whither those smooth
paths lead, and that their sweets will end in bitterness. God is not in all
their thoughts; therefore their ways must needs tend to misery and ruin. The
fear of God is the sole firm foundation of safety, God himself is the
superstructure. This alone proves the impregnable bulwark of well being; all
other works of defense are but hay, straw and stubble, which incendiary
misery's will undoubtedly consume and make waste of those treasures thereto
entrusted. So that they, whose labors and confident care in bearing all for
Gods sake, was by these derided, will be able to upbraid them with their hope
and laugh at their calamity. This is the end of corrupt pleasure; Lo! these are
the men, that made not God their strength.

HERE you see an end of their joy; a joy indeed having its beginning merely in
fancy, and which never offered it self as such without the lashes of a
correcting and prophetic spirit full of contradiction. And so do they bid
farewell to that sweetly delighting vanity, the issue of a beguiled mind
extinguished and condemned to the shades of perpetual forgetfulness. It is
first derided by its hope, afterward forgotten by its parent. How miserable
then is that mind which has had of these a numerous progeny? A great mischief
remediless to the evil. But the just have for the production of their joy the
midwifry of intelligent Discretion; which joy, though frequently at first it
behold the Sun (of righteousness) in showers does afterward mightily thrive
under the warm dispensation of his clearer beams. Neither is it such, that the
mind might require occasion of thankfulness for the prescriptions of an
oblivious discharge. For the Joy, is such as exceeds all other, and can alone
give cause and desire of perpetuity. This does refresh the memory and still
begets objects of its renovation, God is that Pleasure, which over-whelmeth
all others. And our Joy in him binds the memory to a willing discharge of its
office. For good cause have we to remember him, the thought of whom ceasing,
our Joys are in a moment captivated, our delights dissolved. Whom that we may
the better remember all things make a confluence of representments to mind us
how good, how gracious, how wise, how beauteous, how glorious, how immense (and
what not?) our God; our Joy is. And how earth can afford such representments
(if a thing questionable) is readily resolved. For it is true that we have here
but a rude and slight draught of an exquisite nnd unconceiveable Beauty.
However this he has given us that we might know him, that by this foretaste of
him we might be urged upon most eager and impetuous longings for his All. He
has made the world but the shadow or riddle of himself. But it is
nevertheless a shadow which pre-acquainteth us of a substance; And a riddle it
is which expounded, manifests, a superlative excellence, and (although in
darkened delineations) an incomparable glory. The Sun, while he measures out a
full day to the inhabitants of the opposite part of the Globe, by the Moon and
Stars, imparteth unto us some scatterings of his light, which present he
obscureth, both supplying and excelling them: So does God impart himself to us
by the ministry of his substitute creatures, that our understandings and
memories might be busied with him in this his Proxy-presents of glory. By this
consolatory way are we lead to Heaven; the Mind exercising it self with
Patience waits the change or these weak lamps for the more inflaming light of
the morning Sun. Which until its appearance we anticipate by the remembrance of
it promised, by the Love of the Giver and the consideration of his present
Gifts. By the remembrance of what is past, and the enjoyment of the present
Hope consummateth its victory over fear. We remember that what we suffered
portended the fruition of what is now in our Love embraces and Joy sonnets; and
both past and present give an insight of the impossibility of our hopes ending
in an annihilation.

IN the mean time it is one (and not the least) accession to our felicity to
have done what is worth the exercise of Memory. While we do well, we have
herein (as well as other respects) the upperhand of the rebel adversaries of
good, that our memories are no way troublesome in too too officiously
presenting us with passages unacceptable. For to them the pleasure is vanished,
the memory of evil adherent. It is to them a still reiterated rack, a continual
recidivation into misery, an always reinforced mischief, the torment of the
damned preexecuted. It must certainly be for them that the grand Architect of
pleasure Epicurus contrived ways to elude the memory. But the sense of
unfortunate sin will not be quelled with the recall of those more lucky, nor
will it admit of a mixture of delightful imaginations, by which it may confound
it self. Their pleasures interrupted (although indeed never real) cause a
gallish disrelish, which is never allayed until the place, which conceived
them, be washed with a deluge of penitent waters. But the good man, having no
cause to be afraid of himself, does lengthen the joy of toleration by daily
Meditation. He entertaineth no thoughts, but what are (not only serene and
calm, but) of highest delight. To him nothing concurreth, but what has a true
season of joy, nothing, but what strikes him into thankfulness and admiration
of the Divine goodness. He thinks of nothing, as to himself, without God,
whose multiplied benefits he now finds to have surrounded and advanced him to
what he is, in God's light seeing light; for God having been always good, has
to his former goodness added this to lift up the light of his goodness upon
him. God has run through his whole life with him, and prevented him with the
blessing of goodness; the remembrance whereof renews him, and makes him
greater in knowledge and contemplation. So does he make a resurrection of past
favors, and by the benefit of Multiplications Arithmetic increases and
enjoys them over and over. By this faculty of recollection he has the
benefit both of what is and what was; nay more truly of what is by remembering
what was. The consideration of God's miraculous mercy in his protection of him
under imminent dangers, and amidst daily emergent calamities, affords him
pleasures agreeable; reviewing labors past he admireth the inaccessible
magnitude of that str^ngth, which led him through them, and most gratefully
extolleth the Author. He remembers past troubles not with an afflicted but
gladsome mind, and is a patient, who never thinks of his recovery without
grateful acknowledgments of his Physician. Escapes from inconveniences possess
us most with delight. It is an excessive pleasure to us to run over the stori^s
of our Pilgrimages, and we are ravished with rehearsals of past dangers, even
those most terrible when present; old age exulteth in nothing more, nothing
more reviveth the aged or puts approaching death further back. We glory in
our lucky misfortunes, in our continuance unchangeable amidst continuing
vicissitudes, in all our preservations, but more abundantly in the Preserver.
Good deeds are his work, and cause neither fear nor shame, they leave no stench
behind them when they go out; nay they go not out at all, for memory retriveth
them. They are grateful both to our selves and others, and live still in both.
Whatever betideth us without, they preserve peace within, and at last restore
it without too. However in the mean time to their Authors they give vacation,
and make his life a continued Holy Day. Never was the remembrance of a good
action a grief to any, the most wicked man. It appears in a sinful person
like a gloworme in the way in a cold night; it shines, although it gives no
heat; the sight is pleasing, although it assord no light. But a truly practiced
piety makes it all day within, and enliveneth us with a celestial fire. It
frustrateth the malice of fortune, and out lives death; so that it neither
feels the one nor fears the other. It forestaleth misfortune by a
preoccupation of the memory, which it employeth in contenting representatives;
It wears out trouble, and conveyeth us past death whilst living, by an
assurance that we shall live beyond it. When we are in our Graves, that,
although unburied, goes with us still, it being the only peaceable possession
of both living and dead. So they, whose virtues have been approved by durance,
and have escaped through the surges of temptations unwracked, have the greatest
titles both to fame and felicity; and when they are pleased to reflect upon
them can redouble them, make them instead of a past misery a present benefit.

ALL this joy our memory works for us; and this in consideration of God's
mercy, But his justice shall do as much, and his Providence too in the
government of all things. When we call to mind the revolutions of things past
in the World, and the varieties, which go to the composure of it, we look up to
that Wisdom, which has contrived and directed them to their several ends with
a just admiration of his sage disposals, with as just a condemnation of those
feigned fopperies of Chance and Fate. We may then find and know that all things
happen by his sacred permission and will, which as it delighted us in the
sufferance, so much more now in freer dispensation of sweets resembling the
celestial. Of all changes we may in much measure see and recount the reasons
the books of divine Providence being open unto us. We may, among other things
innumerable, see there recorded the prosperity of the wicked and their
confusion, and admire God's wisdom, who sets them in slippery places to
cast them down headlong to destruction. The just are always under the tuition of
his fatherly eye, although in all worldly sense cast out of his favor: the
wicked even in his prosperity is but heaping up the incendiary coals of his own
destruction and ruin. Although he look like one of Pharoahs more proveable
herd fat and fair, it is but to fall into an unsatiable gulf. Providence is
best commended at last. Happy he, whose care for the present did never put stop
to the hope of his future well being: for the righteous shall see the vengeance
and rejoice, nay, he shall also delight himself in the abundance of peace. The
fore knowledge of God's providence proves Memories darling, and Hope not
frustrated, though dead by fruition, is revived by recollection.

WHO should relate this to the World but we, whose Hope have increased by
improbabilities and have outlived themselves? Our seed committed to the earth
and lying out their winter under variety of afflicting weather have met with
their spring, that after the confirmation of their roots the tops may have
their flourishing and ripening seasons. We, who have half an age lived under
the oppression of continued usurpations, may now at length, when our Sun is by
divine providence, mounted to an higher both degree and strength, shoot forth
into a timely viridity; and through his seasonable and powerful operations of
heat may be preserved and perfected for the divine husbandmans both glory and
delight. We have not only outlived our durance, but its imposers too; and
through God's blessing our confidence and deeds shall in future ages have a
pleasing and odoriferous acceptance, when their names shall stink in the
nostrils of all men, yea, even their own very instruments and adherents. Each
man shall eat the fruit of his own labor, and his deeds likewise shall follow
him. Of which harvest none can be bereaft, for every man's transacted life
pleads for him his merit, and claims his due in despite of whatsoever
obstructions. As God is not mocked, we are not deceived. But they, who in our
days so wilfully deceived themselves by endeavoring to mock God, which way
can they now (as they were wont) cry up the truth of their Religion, and the
reality of their intentions by the successeful event of their actions? their
own arguments heretofore framed in a self defense were all of them wont to
prove their self confutation, this only excepted. Time and Providence (those
near friends to truth-seeking Reason) have also divested them of this
fraudulent pall, and made naked to their shame the very secre^s of their
diabolical practices. God never ordered the course of worldly happiness so
directly toward the righteous man's habitation, as that it never deviated;
neither is wickedness in the acting always unfortunate. God does not always
sign his pleasure with his immediate finger, either suddenly advancing the
right or depressing the wrong. It was a commendable siction of Jupiter in the
distribution of his blessings commanding an equality to good and evil. Which
gave a semblance as if he should favor corruption and vic^ as much as virtue
and honesty. But h^ knew if Virtue should be able to engros^ to her self the
whole stone of the common blessings of wealth and worldly content, she would be
more courted and woo^ed for the train she bears after her, the^ for the
proper esteem due to her wort^ and beauty. We daily see that villainy may be
successeful. Theives may oppre^^ honest travelers, or an avaritio^s eye may by
power and deceit out-reach a well meaning neighbor. But God allows neither
of the theft of the one, or the rapine of the other. Observe therefore the end
of such; they shall be taken in the snare of Gods wrath, and fourfold
Restoration will not satisfy. And, besides the the end of the persons,
consider their purchases from the known truth of that vulgar observation, that
ill acquirements are no inheritance. We can now fight them with their own
weapons: Either they were mistaken in their cause, or else prosperity in this
life is not entailed to virtuous deeds. They, who so impudently or rather
blasphemously boasted that God attested their actions and the justice of their
cause by so many signal victories, and permitting them from time to time to
prosper in the world, are now silent as to this vaunt. Although they conspired
with Hell to throw their consciences into a lethargy, and then to attempt any
thing in God^s name, the success of their attempts was only to the advantage
of future misery. For when their Lucky hours had let down their last sands the
lethargy proves but a Charm, and receding gives quickness to their
verberating foe. The disturbers of the Kingdoms peace had for their cheat of
sanctity, by which they would appear white and innocent in the Vulgar eye,
chiefly this of success. But their fall from their aspired altitudes makes our
acclamations and triumphs to be heard at distance, inviting others to
participate of our joy. Their dejection, either headlong from the degrees
presumptuously ascended, or penitentially to a sincere obedience from a mock
devotion, could alone have been the means to raise our beloved Sion out of her
ashes. Though the first happened to be the means, the latter was more in our
wishes. For my sincere thoughts are that we ought not to glory or joy in their
punishments, so much as to pity their Obstinacy, whose hearts we find composed
of imitigable bitterness. Our long captivated Church retains that discipline
in her renewed prosperity so far to love her enemies, as to wish them, who have
been thorns in her sides, to become members of her body, and coheirs of her
felicity. Whatsoever joy she conceives from the memory of God's enabling her
to the victory of patience, when these persecuted her, she esteems not ample
enough so long as that godly sorrow of repentance prepares not them a meet
habitation for true joys reception. For although God (whose praise shall
therefore be always in my heart and tongue) has turned again the captivity of
his people as the streams of the South, and has built his Church as upon Mount
Sion, which cannot be removed; yet our joy is in a sort deficient by the want
of so many members torn away from her, and one part of her body become as it
were impotent; so many persons, the work of God s singers, for whom Christ's
most sacred body was pierced and his Blood shed, either perished or under
eminent danger of it. But then what was wanting was made up by the remembrance
that God's long offered mercy, being by these refused and his grace turned into
wantonness, they are deservedly punished in their obdurateness. We cannot but
rejoycingly contemplate his awful Justice in permitting those, who have had so
great a share, and hands so deeply stained with the innocent Blood of persons
of all qualities and conditions, with stupefied consciences to run on the
course they began, not li^ting to him, who recalleth. God s glory is
incessantly the just man's bliss. Which way so ever it pleases him to work it
becomes a smiling spectator. And his several ways he has to glorify himself
in bringing to pass these certainties, that the patient abiding of the Meek
shall not always be forgotten; that God will avenge his one Elect, which cry
unto him day and night, though he bear long with them, to the end that
prosperous Villainy may never cease to fear, nor calamitous Virtue to erect it
self to a just Hope.

AND now the time looked back upon seems not long, because at last our Seige
is raised, we releived, and our con^idence magnified. Hope is a sweet
companion, which with much validity conveyeth us out of the ruins of our times
and unawares thrusts us past fear of danger. We have as it were slept and
dreamed out the sadness of our past time; but our eyes are open to the
blessings of our present life, which by an evangelical liberty restored
becomes the gladsome vigil of that everlasting Holy Day in Heaven. Much may it
strengthen our Hope of Heaven that God has restored unto us the uncontrollable
use of his Courts and House, whether we may resort in companies and with notes
proper to our thanksgiving solemnities celebrate this festival the precedent of
our still hoped for pure, bright, glorious, and never ending day of rejoicing;
Much may we be enabled and inclined to pray for increase of pious Associates,
who may with us bless and magnify the Supreme and sole Ransom of our lives
and liberties; Much may our Mother rejoice in the recovery of such reduced
members as were before alienated from her tuition and powerful benedictions,
whether wilfully, ignorantly or cowardly; And for ever hereafter may Discord
receding consine it self to that Stygian rabble of ^^reconceiveable rebellion,
whose invention and successless issue it is most properly termed. So shall
graceful Virtue have flourishing pavilions in every heart, and (each man being
consecrated a new) Paradise be no more one, but a plurality.

NOW let us compare them and distinguish Joys. He who with Frmine curiosity
has preserved himself clean and innocent, though he thereby incurred the
hazards of life, having escaped all dangers, has a more through paced Joy then
he, who has run through any whatsoever dirty actions either to defer an empty
fright, and to entertain a cracked and unseemly happiness. The one now looks
upon his prosperity as the spoils of victory, and his own because he served for
it; the other laugheth but as it were for company with a fainty sense of
pleasure, and is either in his heart looking another way (as before) upon more
sensual pleasures, or bethinking himself how and where to pour out the tears of
his macerating and envious grief. Now he that does any thing to obtain his Ends
or secure his fears, proposes to himself a joy, yet does but,

-- Propter vitam vivendi pendere causas. BUT it is requisite that I vindicate
prosperity and extol it now, although I before condemned it. Yet neither did I
discommend this now in discourse, nor can I be induced to praise that before
condemned. As for that prosperity, which I before said to be the Souls canker,
it was such as fomented natures too too violent inclinations to vicious
contentments, and incited man to the unmanning himself. According as prosperity
gives joy, I either acquit or condemn it. If in our Joy of Restoration any
depresseth his Soul with mere temporals and debarreth it the privilege of
ascent into the presence of the compassionate Restorer, what does he but
reinthral himself and torment his joy? If the use of the gifts brought in with
peace be more frequent then of peace continuing gratitude, the man thus using
them does at the most (and that too not without checks) rejoice but to halves;
his diviner part is both hindered of her stight and blinded from her Joy. The
temptations of illuding vanities grow more and more importunate, and they,
circumventing the man, nurse him up (as if in true pleasures) in unseen
miseries and conjure him to an ignominious slavery. He embraces rotten
deformities, and uses means with expedition to unbind the contignations, and
let fall into irreparable ruin the plaistered piece of mortality. So does
prosperity become his Scourge, because he, in contempt or neglect of God's
glorious service, becomes the Worlds slave. Or again, if we have too able
memories to recollect the surreptions and losses sustained in the late
barbarous broiles, and because these breaches are not made up, to charge our
hearts with repinings intermixed with joy, what do we but make use of our
strongest faculties to cheat our selves? We are to look forward to what is to
come, nay, to consider what advantages we have in the happy Restoration of
King and Church. Many (it is true) are the insiduous baits laid for us every
where and way; but while God is our chief desire prosperity helps, nor
fails us. Therefore to those, who constantly behold Gods will as their most
desirable pleasure, the good wrought in such varieties makes wonderfully for
the heightening of their Joy. None but a distempered palate thinks bitter
sweet and sweet bitter, for a sound body has a distinguishing gust: So
sincerity of Religion gives sound judgment for the election of the most
savory delights, the Sum whereof is God, the particulars whatsoever
perseverance in Love promoteth to the understanding.

NOW that prosperity at all proves obnoxious to future ^^^contents by too too
indulgent supplies of luxurious appetites, is no fault of the times, but of the
persons, who cannot learn to behold the beauteous blessings of God with chaste
and temperate eyes. Neither is the subservient and ready good an excusive plea,
for immoderate either lust or use, nor given otherwise then for a punishment to
such unrestrained wills. It is true that there is more danger in an exalted
state of life, then in a depressed, because more privy temptations, more
public ones, but then care is the more commendable, and likewisere sistance is
the more glorious when the assault is feircest. They then, who were frighted
nearer God, and farther off a self-l^ve by the Sword, Persecution, Nakedness
and distress, have made adversity benefic^al to their Souls, if their care now
become not (like a watch not wound up) slack in time of greatest urgency.
Temptation is no necessity, neither store hurtful unless misapplied. The ^^u
use of prosperity is to be led amongs^, and, through the dilicacies, and charms
of pleasure, and leave them conquered and as often as we are so led to recede
with maiden appetites reserved for God alone. Thus only do we use these
benefits aright, and thus using them shall we duly remember the greatness of
the succor afforded by them, when time would wipe away the tract and
obliterate the legend. Thus using them do we enlarge our Joy in them, because
our Joy in the Author is thereby perpetuated. The greatest and sincerest of
pleasures (as directly in reference to things of this life) is to bear and
forbear. Temporal things coming suddenly to their height do suddenly decrease;
and the benefits of this life too greedily taken and used, cease to be benefits
after one full enjoyment of them: only moderation (with reference to God)
lengtheneth them and preserves the joy of them entire. They are so made to
reach from earth to heaven, and the joy of our span-long life is spun out into
a glorious thread of immortallity.

SEE now how far our confidence has carried us. The prayers of Faith have
wrestled and prevailed with God for this return of peace to his Church and this
Realm. A pious boldness in asking any thing of God, and resolution in denying
any thing to our selves for his sake, will procure a more prosperous
advancement for us than this, even an exaltation above temporal to eternal rest
and peace, Amen.

O Lord, thou have been favorable to this thy Land in Redeeming thy people
from captivity; thou have forgiven our iniquities, and covered our past sins;
thou have fallen away thy wrath and turned thy self from the fierceness of
thine anger.

Therefore our meditation of thee shall be sweet, because thy salvation is nigh
them that hope in thee, that glory may dwell in our land.

Thou have remembered thy mercy and truth toward thine Israel, and the ends of
the World have seen thy salvation, O righteous God.

Truly thou art good to such as are of a clean heart; but we had well nigh
committed folly against thee in being envious at the prosperity of the wicked,
when we saw the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and that they were encompassed
with Worldly happiness round about.

But at last when we drew near to the refuge of thy word, and considered the
Wisdom of thy disposals we were taught not to condemn our own lot, neither
envy theirs: For we understood destruction to be nigh their habitations, and
ready to receive them.

But thy Servants are always with these; thou upholdest them with thy Right Hand.

Thou shall guide us with thy counsel, and afterward receive its to Glory.

Thou shall increase our greatness, and comfort us on every side; so that our
lips shall greatly rejoice when we sing unto thee, and our souls also, which
thou have wonderfully redeemed.

Let this be written in our hearts, and likewise engraven in the rock for ever
for posterities sake, that the generations to come may know it, and the people,
which shall be created, may praise thy name, who lookedst down from the height
of thy Sanctuary to hear the groaning of the prisoners and preserve the
multitudes of the afflicted.

Surely the upright shall rejoice, for they have seen the vengeance, and shall
boastingly say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous.

Thou have proved us and tried us as silver is tried; Thou caused'st men to
ride over our heads; we went through fire and water: But thou have brought us
out into a wealthy place.

We long sat by the way side mourning for the Ark of God, catching at all
tidings, which might nourish Hope. At last we understood, and now confess thy
power, who have brought it out of the house of Dagon.

It is well for us that we have been afflicted. Yet assuredly, if thou had
not been on our side, when malicious men rose up in fury against us, they had
even swallowed us up quick.

But (praised be thy name, our favor and Defense) our foot is escaped out of
the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken and we are delivered.

What are we that thou have thus magnified us, and heard our prayers
continually, importuning these to arise and to have mercy upon Sion? How great
are thy loving Kindnesses and Mercies, who considered'st that the time to
favor her, even the set time was come.

And now thou have set thy Tabernacle in Salem, that Righteousness and Peace
might kiss each other.

Therefore unto thee do we give thanks, O Lord, unto thee do we give thanks,
for that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

Let our mouth be filled with thy praise and honor continually; and be thou
exalted, O God, above the Heavens, let thy glory be above all the earth.

And now, O Lord, I beseech thee remember me, thine unworthy Servant, with the
favor that thou bear unto thy people, and visit me with thy Salvation, that
I may see the good of thy Chosen all my days, and rejoice in the gladness of
thy people, that I may Glory with thine inheritance.

Make all thine glad according to the days wherein they have been afflicted,
and the years wherein they have suffered adversity, that the beauty of the Lord
God may rest upon us.

So shall we not go back from thy precepts, but devote our selves to fear thy
name, so shall we be established in the way that is right, and make known thy
faithfulness to the great Congregation.

Blessed be the Lord our God, who alone does wondrous work; and blessed be his
glorious name for ever and ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his
glory. Amen, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. III Reflections upon particular benefits obtained by his Majesty's happy
Return.
GOd is always a ready help; but more especially at time of need. Our own
industry is but a blunt stupidity (take it in the most refined abilities)
without his exhibited aid. Our necessities would be more urgent upon us then
our wills could be active for us, should our best subterfuge from danger be our
own mere contrivance. But God is ever present; yet more sensibly in the time of
greatest necessity, when he seemingly has absented himself. He seems not
present, when necessity is absent, because but remissly invocated. In time of
need prayers are our refuge, till our desired Supply comes, who sometimes
answers our expectations sooner, sometimes later, according as we either
pray, or he sees expedient. He does frequently delay until our pressures grow
almost too too weighty, and then he becomes a speedy and powerful Deliverer.
Indeed the sordid ingratitude of man takes notice of no deliverance, but such
as is miraculous, and seldom much of that, after the wonder and need are both
over: so far is God from our hearts, although always present in our enjoyments,
they being his liberallities. And in regard of our slight esteem of the more
common favors, God does suffer our dull acknowledgments to be sharpened by the
want of those his blessings sometimes undervalued, and that such want as may
make us sufficiently to remember even our days of forgetfulness. Then, when
our crooked dispositions are set straight and upright, we have leisure enough
to bemoan our selves and lament our past vileness, but scarce wisdom to
foresee our escape from the quicksands of those perplexities, which we have no
reason to deem other then inevitable. Nevertheless succor comes borne upon
the wings of Providence, and quasheth Tirannizing fear in the midst of its
surprizals. More then to a sentenced sufferer in the very nick o^ time a letter
of reprieve, or an hand of help to a sinking and soul expiring person, was our
deliverance gracious because more improbable, nay very miraculous. The
commonness of our calamity was before our general comfort; so near was the
fatal knife to the thread of our hopes. But it is never too late for God to put
a stop to the proceedure of malicious practices. He finds not any time past,
or any thing difficult. What to humane understanding may seem an impudent
neglect, becomes to him a well slighted occasion, and our best time is not
always his. Providence has its fullness of time, which (let man never so
impatiently labor to hasten it) will not be prevented nor deferred. Witness
this our former expectations, and our present acknowledgements, which praise
God for his wise and successeful delays. In due time God gave us a Moses, a
Princes, a Ruler, and a Lawgiver, under whose conduct we have been led out of
more then an Egyptian slavery. We have lost nothing by our hope being deferred,
the length of time being well supplied by the perfection of our Blessing; a
most gracious Prince, and we hope that what time was wanting to him and us, in
his desired reign over us, may in the felicity of many ensueing years be
returned to him as an additional Crown, to us an increase of joy.

AND of this his calm return gives us an extraordinary assurance. He affords
us by the serenity of his demeanor a large prospect of felicity, if our
wayward perverseness (like the never contented Israelites) change not the
blessings designed us by his ministry into plagues and curses. We have seen his
forgiving nature abhorring such crimson pleasures as are more sanguinary then
necessary for Gods glory. Innocence conducted him a nearer way home then to
swim through a sea of blood. He thought it not good to return the same way, by
which his enemies forced him to depart. God, who uses to win by forbearance,
and delights not so much as in the death of a Sinner, was his Pilot and
brought him home to the harbor of rest by peaceable desires. He would have
civil dissentions and fraternal jarres cease, and that we hear not hostile and
distracting Alarms, but only such harmless clashings as delight and recreate;
that by our exercise and union we may the better resist foreign contrivances
and attempts.

HOW truly Golden would our Age have been had this rare pattern found an
universal observation, had real peace and joy met with a free access into every
heart? But it does not a little interrupt our rejoicing that many harboring
unquiet thoughts do prepare War against themselves. A little gall marreth a
great quantity of delicate wine, and a few dead flies cause the Apothecaries
precious ointments to give a stinking sent: So does a little of the leaven of
disaffection in some few give frequent repulses to our copious and active joy,
while we are forced to mix supplications with thanksgivings, and commonly to
sigh for their miseries in the midst of our own triumphs over misery.

IT is strange that the Divine Providence, which illuminateth most, should
blind any. But if deformed and vicious Souls turn things sacred into sin, and
wholesome remedies into the nature of their own distempers, God's Grace is
nevertheless wonderful. If the wicked man poysoneth his antidotes, and makes
himself worse by the receipt of them, the fault is not in her Physician.
Although the Atheist forces his will to obstetricate to sensuality, conjuring
to silence all thoughts of a God, God recedeth not, neither is the more absent,
but fills the World with the brightness of his glory. The perverse fool may
term Providence, Chance, but yet advising with even his own reason, he may
confute himself. However we know who it is, that produces Sublime and
excellent things out of indisposed materials. We know that our present
promotion came neither from the East nor from the West, blown by accidentiary
winds, but it was God's finger; he is Judge, setting up the right and
depressing the wrong. Let whatsoever adversary read himself those loose
lectures, which his heart only superficially entertaineth; yet no Diabolical
Subtilty can withstand those quick lightnings, which God's powerful works do
dart upon his conscience. And know he must, that whereas he would bribe his
internal witness and judge, he does but the same as he, that would retrive
rivers back to their Fountains, and chain up the winds in an imperious Den or
Castle; so impossible it is to confound that habitation of equal Justice, where
nothing is perverted. Our Kings many and Miraculous deliverances from most
eminent dangers, and the thread of his life interwoven with durance and
protection, may in all reason silence the parlour Sermocinatours of rebellion.
They all know (and some confess) whose work both preservation and Restoration
is; yet they retain a certain inflexible stiffeness. God must be beholding to
them for a certificate of approbation, or the work shall be none of his. Nay,
if the preserved King and grateful people satisfy not their exorbitant lusts
before the will of the great Preserver, they will attempt the undoing of what
God has done, as if aiming at the annihilation of his power.

BUT their powers and wills are not in the same consistory, being as far
divided, so unequally active. And he, who now disableth, did formerly
disappoint. They, who formerly endeavored the frustrating of Providence, were
their own punishments in many fruitless attempts, but now they are, especially
by necessity of forbearance of acting that, which in will has been long since
peretuated.

HOWEVER let them do and think what they will, experience teaches the us truth
of this, That although hand join in hand the wicked shall not be unpunished;
but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. That the later is performed
is punishment for some only to behold, who are (besides their sin) more
miserable then any, as being the peevish Authors of their own sufferings. The
rack of envy in their food the juice of gall their Drink, seeing their Ambition
cannot Mount them on horseback, while Princes walk on foot. But while we enjoy
our innocent desires, may they long live and wish and hope, yet never obtain,
until their wishes cease to be malignant and fixed upon the bloody ruins of
Kings and Kingdoms. Such red lines are they desirous to draw in their
Calenders, as Holy day marks, that we may justly thank God who has set his
King upon his high places, and withal curbeth their virulent and fierce
inclinations, so that he has his enemies objects of derision, yet one entire
motive to compassion.

ABUNDANTLY and most deservedly may we thank God for this Sum of mercies, A
King. From each of God's mercies flow so many rivulets, as there are persons to
enjoy it, or that is hours to be enjoyed; But this is a Mercy containing
innumerable of the greatest. The free use of true Religion is one inexplicably.
Which that each person may apprehend, let him with calm and serene thoughts
quiet those tumultuous waves within him tossing his affections to and fro at
will. Then may he with an inquisitive devotion look into our sacred Mysteries,
and return to himself charmed out of all crooked prejudice by their noble
blandishments and pleasures. Add we to the ornament of this blessing the mercy
of uniteing Peace, which he that desires not, deserves to be subservient to
shame and misery, and justly meriteth our wishes, that his own peace only he
may sacrifice to his fury until his temper by suffering becomes pacificatory.
The magnanimous Christian, who minds the general good more then his own
particular interest, finds himself there safest, where none fear, and makes
his chief Mansion to be his House, who takes pleasure in seeing brethren dwell
together in unity. But this blessing without our King was not to be hoped for.
The Crown and Crown properties sit neither commendably nor quietly upon any
head and shoulders but the right. Besides (for God does extraordinarily assist
those, to whom he gives the sacred Prerogative) they are too weighty to sit
long on any wrong head or shoulders without a downfall or removal. Either of
which happening the ship of state falls in pieces, the composure of which
will never be effected by such crosse-byassed affections as (at such a time)
commonly approach to the management of the work. So while many contend for the
Master-ship, all is lost. And in such combustions, where some hope and most
fear, there is only laughing work for forriegn spectators. But this evil is
removed when the right hand holds the sword of Justice, when he, who only
ought, bears sway and justly requires Obedience in all.

WHAT happiness I here speak of in our enjoyment of him, our Sovereigns titles
forespeak unto us in these words, King and defender of the Faith. There needs
no more commendations of the first then a review of the past times, which were
most sad, dismal and utterly obscure for want of this radiant Luminary. The
Prince of darkness then keep his festivals, and (prompted thereto by him) every
man did that, which was right in his own eyes. The contrary goods hoped for and
to be effected by the power of the Regal presence, may justly multiply
suffrages in its election and esteem. Accordingly we have known the joy, and
heard the acclamations of the people at our Kings return; A voice grown much
louder in twenty years space. A Prince wisely eminent is the express image of
God upon earth. The loss of such an one therefore could be no less then an
unhappy dejection into Cymerian darkness, which tyranically usurped a
Sovereignty over our benighted souls. But violence in the extremes being least
durable, the glorious beams of Kingly splendor have victoriously dispersed
those thick mists and obscuring vapors; and our languishing spirits are
revived by the bright rays of his (so much longed for) presence. The happiness
to be found under regal government is amply manifested by the events of the
contrary. Our own memory may serve instead of reasons. But among some
commendations of it God's own words are express and highly observable, They
shall say, we have no Kng, because we feared not the Lord; where the cause of
deprivation was the Kingdoms sin, and a Kings absence the Nations plague. And
as to our selves we had long been sick of, and desperately groaning under the
miseries of a changed and still changing state, but remembering our selves
deservedly punished as privy to our own distempers, when sometimes we slighted
God's savours at such time as we were full of them, conveyed to us through this
Golden Conduit; we did bear it as we might, but do now mightily rejoice at our
recovery. As therefore health is truly so esteemed by those, who have felt the
bitter outrages of a perilous disease and have been rescued out of the very
jaws of death; whereas their careless thankfulness scarce owneth the Supreme
Preserver, who were never sensible of him as an angry Correct our: so we may be
taught to prize God's ineffable blessing, and to sin no more lest a worse thing
come unto us then our overpast misery. Humble supplication procures, and
gratitude prolongeth divine favors. As long as we know and are our selves God
will smile upon us and reign over us by his Word and Vicegerent.

TRUE greatness is always that, which keeps the road of virtue and goodness.
They were the prayers of an undoubted and blessed Martyr, a King for a King,
rather that he should be good then great; but withal hoping that God had
designed him to be both, that is, King and defender of the truly ancient and
Apostollick faith. That God has made him the one is to the performance of the
other, and that he will always prove both, he gives us to hope and believe.
Which Title if some (according as their several humors transport them) will not
acknowledge due, for their sakes do we chiefly rejoice to apply it. The want of
their concession makes no diminution of his honor. That he Labors by
example and power to restrain the madness of distempered brains in a general
good, even theirs over whom the power is exercised, would delusion suffer them
to see it. But that we have one to say to the fools, deal not foolishly, and to
the wicked, lift not up the horn, is an especial felicity; which God has given
to them, who are desirous to serve him in truth and uprightness, Whose prayer
it constantly is, That God would ever give him to the Church such a nursing
Father, under whom her Children may thrive and prosper, and devotion be
cherished and magnified, that glory may dwell in our land, and the beauty of
our God might rest upon us. Great men by their good examples do exceedingly
propagate piety, which is by so much rendered the more illustrious, by how much
it is admired and practiced by illustrious persons, who are to the people in
their religious growth as heaven it self to the tender plant.

GOD, in his love to us through our most blessed Savior, has in a great
measure provided for our souls and bodies. He has given his Church beauty and
ornament, and we hope that he will add strength too by a King, who cannot but
know how to rule his people, for whom and with whom he has been thoroughly
tried; he has learned to cherish them being himself always cherished in the
bosom of the Almighty to be returned to us a sure pledge of Gods love; he
knows how to rule them, who has manifested his moderation and power over
himself in scorning revenge and in silence passing over (and so expiatiating)
those numerous injuries and indignities, which might otherwise have injured the
Nation with the brand of perpetual infamy, And as we found in him a noble
acknowledgment, that his Subjects have not been all guilty (but many of them
partakers with him) of his miseries; so we reverently adore that admirable
temper of Majesty mixed with meekness, hands bountiously open to reward the
constant, and arms expansed to embrace the penitent; whereas sour aspests and
revengful hands had been less then the merit of those to whom his favor has
been beyond measure extended. Herein he has truly manifested to the world how
fitly the Scepter burtheneth his shoulders, how hopeful a Governor he may
justly seem in his Subjects eyes, who could so easily sway his own passions.
Where Reason as Sovereign is enthorned in the heart governing all mentual
suggestions, that man's actions are drawn by the true line of virtue, and keep
within the just lines of mediocrity. So did his most gracious Majesty moderate
his course being princely and undejected in his lowest condition, humble and
full of clemency in his exalted. No offers or temptations could deduce him from
his love, zeal to that Religion and Church, wherein he had been so carefully
educated. We may thence hope that he will in gratitute to God Omnipotent, who
has restored him to that, and that to him, labor to continnue a Trofphee or
fame, a Mirour of perfection, and pray, That God will (to use the words of his
Father of ever blessed memory) still dispose him to all princely endowments and
employments, which will most gain the love and intend the welfare of those*
over whom God has placed him; and think it his greatest title to be called,
and chief glory to be the defender of the Church both in its true faith and
just fruitions. Which that he may be the more signally, God grant him a long
and happy life among his subjects, his subjects integrity of heart, ardency of
kind affections, and perpetual loyalty, and after, all to both him and them,
that which surpasses all, Unity in Eternity of Bliss, Amen.

IT is of thy mercy, O Lord, that we are not consumed, because thy compassions
fail not. In the height of our calamities thou make a way for us to escape,
which we never imagined; so wonderful art thou in thy doings toward the
Children of men.

And now strengthen, we pray thee, that which thou have wrought for us: Let
thine hand be upon the man of thy right hand to conduct him out of dangers to
the mansions of safeguard.

Let him flourish among us by a long and joyful life; let him win and receive
the Congregations, and judge uprightly among the sons of Men, that his name may
endure to all generations.

Let divine peace flourish in his time, with plenty and prosperity in his days.

Make us truly to understand that thy Providence alone was wonderful in
returning him the head to us, his viduated members, and not to make sinful and
scornful recourses to the dotagss of humane wisdom, or worldly ^hance.

However if malignant Envy will needs break out into detestable repinings,
rather let them grieve, who acknowledge them not, then we, who now give thee
thanks for thy blessings.

But because we know that the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, we will
come into thine house in the multitudes of thy mercies, and in thy fear will we
worship toward thy holy Temple.

We will praise thee, who give deliverance unto Kings, and show mercy to
thine Anointed.

And now, O God, give the people peaceable and loyal hearts to behold, consider
and repent of their past folly; neither let the curse of Jotham or Hothams end
light upon any of us as the reward of revolting giddiness.

Behold, we beseech thee, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine
Anointed.

Deliver him from the counsel of the wicked, from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity.

Let not the enemy exact upon him, nor the wicked approach to hurt him; but
scatter them as the dust before the wind, consume them as the stubble by the
fire, who shall offer to send forth injurious words or stretch forth an
offensive arm to disturb his peace and discompose our joy.

As for all such as have formerly turned aside to their crooked ways, let them
be covered with their own confusion as with a mantle till they be ashamed of
their actions and repent of them, that thou may forgive and receive them.

Hear thou our prayers for him, and thy name, O God of Jacob, defend him.

Send him help from thy Sanctuary and pour down blessings upon him from heaven
granting his desires and fulfilling his counsel.

Thou have prevented him with the blessing, of Goodness and set a crown of pure
gold upon his head; let him therefore evermore trust in thee, that through the
mercy of the most High he may never miscarry.

So shall thy people gratefully draw nigh to thine holy Altar, and pay the
vows, which our souls powered out before thee in the day of our calamity and
fear; and then shall thou be pleased with us, when we draw near to thee with
the multitude, that keep Holy Day, to of-thee the calves of our lips, and to
sing thy praise with joy full lips, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. IV. The care of our King ought to be one of our greatest cares. How ill
the^ some have vaunted of merit, wh^ pretend to have wrought his return?
MAN is naturally a sociable creature, to whom a singularity o^ happiness is no
way acceptable who delights, as in a well being, so in communion of it. To
him it is no less glory to cause then to possess joy. The members in the body
are kindly dispose to each others prosperous subsistence, b^ cause the common
is the surest good but the laborous parts are more especialy regardful both of
the honor and d^fence of the Head, because of its directi^^ faculties,
wholesome administrations and S^premacy. For from the Head, as from Fountain,
issue those vital veins, where^^ the members (each in its proper plac^ are
enabled to act and move. So is the no safety, for either all or any of ther^
when this regal power is disturbed a^ weakened, whether by the frowardness of
the members disagreeing among themselves, or their rebellion against the Head,
or if through their ungrateful neglect it be betrayed to external violence. Now
there is, or ought to be, mutual giving and receiving between the head and
members; but yet the Members more need the Head, then the Head the Members, and
the Members, in contributing aid to the head, are rather grateful than
bountiful. Reason adds a Spur to that dutiful subservience, where the more is
given the more is received, as is the case of the body performing allegiance to
the Head. Herein the members are beneficial to themselves, and every part
whilst obedient is instrumental to the general good. So is the whole state of
the Body flourishing and happy, because the members are sociable, disciplined,
obedient and loyal. The same reasons of general convenience do dictate to
Subjects in a Realm the same rules. To wound our Head is unnatural rebellion,
not to preserve and honor him, is disingenuous ingratitude, considering what
sweet streams run throughout the whole body of the Kingdom, when the
Head-spring is undisturbed, he can be no good Subject, who shall dip his
corrupted parts in these waters to the general annoyance; nay more yet, who
shall not with a generous propensity to the common good interpose even to his
own ruin, when he apprehends any injury offered to the Head of Church and
State. In the Judgment of the Royal Prophet it was in Abner a desert of no less
then death to have only in curiously slept, and not to have kept the Lords
Anointed; and that Abner might have a through insight of the greatness of his
crime, David confirms his assertion with no less then an Oath. A thing of so
pernicious example and dangerous consequence is the least negligence in a
Subject when the Kingdoms Soul i^ committed to his keeping and charge The
Subject must be the Kings Armor to bear off blows from his sacred body, and
first to be hewn to shivers himself, tha^ the Sword may make no entry to tha^
divine mortality but through his very bowels; he must be his Fortress with the
bulk of his body to receive the shots o^ contemptuous murmurers, and his
Artillery, which may at distance wound an^ disperse all the malicious Crews often
reasonable accomplices; he must be his many-handded Servitour to execute his just
pleasure upon all essays, and his Argolick Watchman prying into all secrets
with a provident industry for his good, and Searching the Abysses of male
contented minds, being ever circumspect and waking, lest any of the people
while he sleep come in to destroy his Lord the King. Neither is this the part
of the meanest Subject more then the greatest, but of all in their proper
places respectively. It was one of David's Worthies, who succored him and
killed the Son of the Giant; but his people were all in general careful of him,
protecting that he should no more come in danger, lest the light of Israel
should be quenched. It is truly a most noble care and highly commendable,
which possesses that Subject, who resolutely performs this his duty; but it
is nothing more then what is required of all, who are to lay to stake their
lives, liberties, fortunes and whatsoever humanity esteems dear or precious,
rather then with a fainty baseness abandon the King to prevailing miseries.
Men, who see the Kings affairs in likelihood of declination and will not put to
their shoulders every man to bear his proportion and part, are a degree worse
then those, who mangle and weaken the bearers hoping for a booty in the general
ruin. For professed enemies may by a prudent prevention be stopped in the carreer
of their desperate designs, and the edge of their weapons turned upon
themselves; but those men's cold resolutions bring the King by expectation lower
than could the others combinations, they dishearten the well affected, and
(besides the base ends upon which they are intent) they do in effect but with
their own backs levigate a road for armed fury to march on the more speedily,
as if they feared destruction would come too late. I cannot but call him the
worst of rebels, who pretended readiness at all times, yet when his Lord
calls him in time of necessity, or when necessity bespeaketh him in his Lords
behalf, instead of procession makes an infamous retreat. It is true, that
Rebellion is as witchcraft, and therefore Rebels a cursed generation, but curse
ye Meroz (said the Angel) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because
they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the
mighty; there is an aggravation of bitterness to them who came not to help.
When God owneth the cause (as he does the Kings, who is his Anointed) it is a
cursed policy to save all and lose ones self, to suffer the wrack of honor and
forfeit the glorious birth right of an eternal Crown for a mess of slabbered
vanities. Religion teaches us to Love our neighbor as our self, and in that
respect to defend to the utmost of our power all, who stand in need of our
help, as in our own necessity, we would willingly be releived: Our Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy hold us to a defensive and offensive obedience; a bond
which no reason or consideration (as I conceive) may persuade us to juggle with
or cast off; a Knot, which neither conveniences of Hope or fear can safely or
justly unty. If conveniences of Hope might give a Bull of dispensation to an
unwarrantable action (as is certainly the breach of an Oath) what daring
malefactor might not exult and enlarge himself into brags of his boldest
perpetrations. Indeed Christianity were then come to the fatal period of its
time, and all manner of Law and Moral equity must in mourning attend it to the
grave, looking for their own sudden overthrow and next turn of sepulture. But
reward proposed for breach of Loyalty is a devilish temptation, to the charms
whereof no true Christian Subject will lend an ear; but contrariwise he
sticks to his Prince with closer constancy and greater resolution the more
pressingly this insinuating and painted snare offers it self. As not the most
promising hope, so not the most crabbed terror can work any thing, where the
weight of an Oath and the acceptable suggestions of conscience mind the
Disciple of Christ of his duty, and an answerable recompense. The Heathen could
say.

-- Phalaris licet imperet ut sis.
Falsus, and admoto dictet perjuria Tauro.
Summum creed nefas animam praeferre pudori,
Et Propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.
In English (with the Readers favor) thus.

Let Phalaris command the falsity.
And dictate perjuries with his Bull fast by.
Think what a prize life's saved with honor stained.
And do not lose life's comfort for life gained.
BUT a Christian has respect to more than his present honor, as knowing the
dues of unfeigned Obedience to be immortal. When his Prince is his grand
thought and care for God's sake and love, he assures himself of no less
recompense then God himself. The King is under God Religions great Guardian, in
whose face how do we read lines of care for us? Let astonished and Watchful
thoughts accompanied with prayers (which use to procure Angel Guards) be ever
employed for his concerns, that he may receive the fruit of his labors, our
pious and assistant cares returned for his perplexities. We by our Christian
sedulity mitigate the harshness of his cares, who is most perplexed for those,
who neither regard God's glory nor their own good, who will not be obedient
lest they should be too too happy. We should all amend, that he may be eased.
And truly if we be careful to our selves, we shall not be wanting to him, we
shall lighten both his cares and our own. If we account his enemies ours, the
care is divided; he bears but a part and we but part, although each one
bears all out of a noble affection to his and the general welfare; and at
last the success is good and certain, there being in all a religious unanimity.
This care proceeding from love becomes earnest in its labors, speedy in its
services, constant in its resolutions, and valiant in its executions. It will
not permit us to secure our selves first and serve the King afterward, nor to
break off our services in the midst by abrupt counsels, but with a deliberate
judgment to serve him in season, that we reap the harvest of his approbation,
and joy in his smiles. There is an absolute marriage between the King and his
Subjects, whereby there are interchangeably given assurance of Faithful
adherence to each other in adversity as well as prosperity; he cannot at all
leave, they cannot, unless lewdly and impiously, sorsake him. Let our
endeavors therefore be strong and serious, accompanied with prayer to God,
that he would cherish him his bosom, that (according to his promise to the
King) through the mercy of the most high he may not miscarry, that he may have
in all abundance of sincere Love, although little cause to put it to trial, and
this through the merits of Holy Jesus, our most blessed Savior.

WE cannot but see our selves strictly obliged by God's Laws and common
gratitude to see the Kings welfare both by us and from us. Now I come to
consider whether a Subject be any way capable of being accounted meritorious
according to the common vaunt, when he has done the utmost he can for the
heightning his Majesty's prosperity. Obedience to his call and command is a
duty toward God more than man. This obedience is doing that, which is right in
the sight of the Lord, (according to the Scripture phrase) and not in the sight
of man alone. It has God for the prime motive and ultimate Hope. If therefore
there be any, who vaunt of a meritorious service in any employment of this high
nature, they befool themselves out of the reward and commendations of
Obedience, for as much as they manifest that they have not yet learned to be
obedient. And some there are, who speak loudly of their being instrumental to
the reducement of our Sovereign, whom themselves had formerly forced to wander
as a bird from her nest. And these are a sort of men seemingly very religious,
but we may judge of them, whom the Psalmist had long before described from
their making a dogged noise about the City, and grudging that they are not
satisfied. These are abortive Children of the Church having the form of
godliness but not the power. These with a mercenary obedience expect a reward
for their service, and this the fairest and best jewel in their Masters
Cabinet. If they had come with that Benjaminite, who had cursed the King, to
meet him upon his return with, re-cognitions of sorrow, if they had put the
halter about their necks, confessing their former merit, they had done
something like Subjects, much like like converts and penitents, meet to be
forgiven and embraced; but then only when unlawful practices could not bring
about their foul designs to come and meet him (the instruments of whose long
calamnities had been forged by them and hammered upon their anvil) gives them
an evident mark of notorious insolence. I am ready to judge with the wisest of
Kings, that the the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; but how much
more when he brings it with a wicked heart? They, who had sometime torn in
pieces those robes, were at length set out in Loyalty's dress, that what they
had failed of by disloyalty, by the fucus of Loyalty they might at last obtain.

HOWEVER these men would be taken for Religious, they have highly abused and
worn bare their plea, so that through it pride and hypocrisy break forth and
become apparent. For there is neither humility in subjects giving laws to their
King, nor religion in perswadeing him contrary to his well grounded judgment,
and the received Principles of truth. Herein they also indiscreetly thwart
themselves, who, while they would not have violence offered, to their
consciences, are violent even without arguments and against reason in obtruding
a religion upon him. Their persuasions would be other, and they more
submissively meek if they truly considered what calamities their contentions
for Religion involved both King and Kingdom in; neither can any understanding
head give it self the hopes of any better fruits from any Religion which
subjecteth the King to the Churches censures. Certainly true Religion
commands us all subjection and in the most exact manner to Honor the King,
to depress our selves, and our best actions to cover with silence, whereby they
are enriched and made acceptable to God. He looks upon our simplicity in the
first place, and knows what is done for his sake and honor without our vain
glorious proclamations. It was surely vilany and not any thing to be drawn into
example, the act of the soldier who spit in the face of him, whom he had
before saluted as King; or if there be in subjects an ill gotten power, they
should (methinks) abhor that pattern and copy of him, who said to his Prince,
All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. Men of true
piety use not to boast of their pulling down and setting up Kings; nor will
they usurp God's power under pretense of being eminent in his Church. I am very
loath (especially in these times) to bring an invective against my fellow
servants, and those claiming the name of Protestants; But I am much more loath,
that that Name should be aspersed by the practices of those who bear it, while
they recede from primitive purity entangling themselves in the tents of those,
against whom they declaim, as if their intentions were to return to Rome,
although their face is as if they would go to Jerusalem. I know both how much
displeasing it is to rehearsals, and what censures he must undergo, who lays
open to public view errors, which the unfortunate Author would have
concealed. But the displeasure and blame will be injuriously placed upon him,
who really aims at what others only pretend to, the glory of God and the
general good. And if the necessity of the times did not open the lips of men of
the most known modesty, by these kinds of discourses, informing me of the
justice of these complaints, I might peradventure suspect my self either guilty
of a misapplication, or at least too severe in my indication. In truth I
heartily wish there were place for such a suspicion, and that the public
knowledge would not bear me the witness of innocence. A triumph over mine own
errors would administer unto me ample contentment, and in this case the joy of
the public welfare would overwhelme my sorrow; seeing my self, and not them
mistaken.

BUT the felicity is too great to be obtained. Could we see them begin to keep
within the prescript rules of modesty we might from those sparks blow up and
kindle our hopes. But their both words and deeds, declaring their own shame,
increases our sorrow. They speak themselves sometimes great friends, whom we
know to be reconciled enemies, (and would to God they were reconciled in
sincerity or were of a reconcilable nature) of whom all cautionary advises bid
men beware. In the midst of those benefits, which should strongly bind the
knot of reconcilement, they are most apt to show their dissimulation, being
never more ungratefully dangerous then under accumulations of kindnesses. All
that ever has been granted, has been debt and merit, and their demands do
clamourously out reach all bounty. If we should suppose their deserts great,
yet we find it an usual admonition of one to another, that if any perform an
act of courtesy to his ordinary friend, he may not stretch the skin of his
eyebrows in a bravado, neither make his tongue, an instrument of vanity, the
trumpet to sound an^ publish what he has done; but that b^ lay his hand upon
his mouth, that he be silent, and then his deeds will praise him whereas a
benefit accompanied with insolence is an odious evil. This is the rul^ between
private friends. But the high^ any man act, and the greater the person for whom
he acts, the more does reason a^vise him to stifle words; and if none man
upbraid a benefit to a friend, much less man he make (his duty) obedience to
his Prin^^ an occasion of boasting. It is every man bounden duty; none can
without sin and vengeance neglect it. And therefore every good Christian
subject has his action sprouting up to maturity for his only Enlogies. If God
and the King see his obedience he cares not whether any blasts of commendation
publish it. But these are not so in love with Virtue, who have aimed at praise
from contrary actions both against and for the same Cause; we have (and that
even since the Restoration and daily) heard them equally loud and vaunting of
far differing services. But speak they never so loud, they have no Echo of
praise returning from either the reverberating hills or alarmed valleys; men
both of high and low condition seeing them ready to burst with envious and
ambitious thoughts, will not add any breath to endanger the cracking of a
stinking Bladder. The boldness of these men is strange and demands our both
pity and prayers. Poor souls! God give them repentance and (what they
erroneously seek) true happiness and joy.

THESE are my worst wishes for those of whom I have had this discourse, that
being repentant and paineful in good by their silence and integrity of heart
they may be a blessing to themselves. Neither (although I have encircled some
within a list of accusations) am I ignorant that diverse of this party (which I
leave nameless) both disown all plea of merit and give testimony to the world
of sorrow for their former countenancing harsh and illegal practices. To these
(if I may escape the envy) I would become admonitory, that seeing they can most
powerfully persuade men of their own judgment (except in this of compunction)
both to forbear and lament their contempt of Princes, and prostituting their
precious souls to the lust of pride, they would endeavor that reformation
among themselves, which they laudably desire in all. They should be advised and
acquainted that some good actions, but those deformed in the production for
want of a good intention, and every day bespotted with vauntes and brags, are
insufficient to wipe off many very unjust ones, and most notoriously heinous.
There is nothing but repentant tears falling down, which o^^ erect a debased
sinner, and make a way for l^ ascent and escape from the calamities, which by
his sins have circumvented, and are ready to devour him. These are silent an
humble; they are neither seen nor heat by men, but speak loud to God, who^ the
penitent entreats to hear the voy, of his tears. These we all need, these a^
the quicknening and cordials of the be man's soul, much more of him, who wit the
Prodigal Sone comes to his Father and on his knees confessing them does
implicitly beg pardon for his past delinquences. They, who have been most
plentiful in these should show their sweetness and efficacy to such as have
eyes too dry, and smile out their sinful days. They who have been most nearly
touched at the heart with the sharpness of their guilt, and have removed the
anguish by these Medicinal drops, may most properly persuade, because to them
the remedy has proved experimentally sure.

BUT who can tell how often he offends? We have all committed, if not the same,
yet multitudes of transgressions. Let us then shed for our selves tears of
compunction, for others tears of compassion. It is a work worthy the Disciples
of Christ as often to weep for themselves, so with tears to water the
barrenness of such hearts, as know not the curse to which they are condemned,
and (if God so please) thereby to make them fruitful to repentance not to be
repented of, that sorrow, which is the assured Page to felicity. Amen.

REturn, O Lord, unto the many thousands of thine Israel, thou and the Ark of
thy strength; return we pray thee and have mercy upon thy people.

Preserve the Head and members of this Realm, even all the people of the land
from the highest to the lowest, and unite us in Christ Jesus.

Distractions have crept in among us, so that by the pretensive honor of thy
name, thy worship is made even the reproach of the multitude.

It is time for thee, O Lord, to work; for they have by the name of religion
made void thy Law, that high Injunction, Fear God and honor the King.

Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? how long
shall they utter hard things, and the very workers of iniquity boast themselves?

Should not all, who name thy name depart from iniquity? yet there is a sort of
men, in whose mouth thou art near, but far from their hearts.

O God, the God of thy people, and their portion for ever, we pray that all,
who are called by thy name may have no aims but thy sole honor; neither suffer
thou thy religion to be in our mouths to cover the deceitfulness of our hearts,
running after i^ ^trange God.

If any of us should be willing to believe. if we should have any reason to
think we had deserved more then ordinary, yet let the greater truth overcome
this reason, assuring us that we can never do more then duty requires for God,
our King and country.

But as we hope (by thy especial grace preventing us) we shall never do a good
work to a bad end; so not attempt to pull down thy Church by performing any
part of our Allegiance.

But it was thou (not man) who did set thine Anointed upon high for thy
Churches establishment. Rebuke therefore those tumultuous Zealots, who being
enemies to Christian felicity, while they pretend to divine peace, have no
other method for it than by making war upon his and their own Souls.

Let not the rebellious Children exalt themselves, neither their devices
prosper, for they have imagined evil against thee.

When they speak great swelling words of vanity fill their faces with shame and
confusion, and their mouths with the fruit of their own lips.

Yet rather (if it be thy will) let thy mercies overtake them then thy
judgments, that knowing the errors of their lives they may hereafter take
pleasure in sincere obedience rejoicing in thy testimonies as in hid treasure.

Reduce all, who have erred from thy commandment and put into their hearts a
desire to follow the prescriptions of Religion, Reason and Convenience, which
are the best Counselors of both Prince and people.

And forasmuch as our help stands in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven
and Earth, not to our selves be the praise of Restoration given, but to thy
glorious Name.

Do thou, whose countenance does uphold the upright, rejoice the hearts of such
as have therein served thee, disdaining the petty triumphs of vain glory and
seeking of no recompense but thy favor, which indeed exceeds all, that we
can desire.

O that our ways were made so direct, that we might keep thy laws for thy
sake, and Love thee because by thy mercies in thy best Beloved thou leadest us
to good actions, stirring up in us a burning zeal to the immortal honor of thy
most sublime and infinite Majesty.

Whom have we in Heaven but thee? What can we desire on Earth without thee? O
how wonderfully blessed are they, whose light and defense thou art, first
guiding them to good, and afterward fortifying them against the strong
temptations of self-admiration.

We are then best when least ourselves, then strongest when desparing of help
in our selves, we put all our confidence in thy wonder working arm, and having
our desires fulfilled, do submissively and faithfully acknowledge thee, the
good Author of success.

Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory. To thee therefore alone we
recommend the tuition of him, whom thou have given to be a Prince and a Ruler
over us. Remove from him as lying lips, so the deceitful tongue, and also far
out of his sight the sinner that goes two ways.

Let his right hand find out, break in pieces and scatter all those, who hate
him, let his enemies lick the dust before him.

Give him knowledge to Crush out the malignant humors, which in some are
predominant to their ruin. Let the humors be dispelled, but the men preserved,
that all his people may be of one mind endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

Adorn us, who profess a Faith in thee outwardly with the fair fruits of good
works and beautify our Souls (as meet for thine approbation and love) with
reality of pious intentions.

Then will our obedience please thee as the best of offerings; then will thou
be our glory, and the lifter up of our Head for ever. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. V. Of the different murmurings of all Parties.
IT is not so much to be admired, that men, ever looked upon as high mindded
and insincere, should by the ill breath of their own commendations blast and
raise a scab upon the graceful countenance of a good deed, as that amid such
variety of Blessings as God has, by his Majesty's happy return, shoured down
upon this whole nation, the shrill voices of complainers have and do drown the
most acceptable acclamations of thankfulness. Being full of the celestial
Manna, we become wanton, and will not want words to reproach the Giver. Every
condition is fairer and more contenting then the present so much do our
thoughts run division, and we abhor the touch of the same string twice
together. We desire, yet frustrate our selves of the enjoyment of our desires
obtained by giving nourishment to new desires. We droop under one want, which
is scarce removed, but we beg others and more intolerable, When we roar for
very disquietness of heart being born down by some weighty calamity, it
commonly happens, that deliverance was never so acceptable, that we were
never so weary of the burden, as we quickly become weary of ease. The man in
the Gospel, who had the Devil cast out, and the possession of his own home
wholly to himself, could not in his heart enjoy a colitary blessing, nor retain
a profitable guest; but after sweeping and garnishing his house readmitteth his
plague, and with him seven more worse than himself. That which of a place of
misery had begun to be a Paradise, how soon does he convert it into a real
Hell? what greater misery than to be still jerked with our restless fancy, and
tossed by our own fluctuating will? What more despicable infatuation then to
permit our selves to a continual labor in quest of that, which having we
utterly disown? God no sooner in his wisdom for our good diminishes our
store, but we presumptuously add to our sins either illegal practices to
increase it, or distrustful complaints, more (perhaps) for fear of a future,
then indeed because of any present necessity: On the other side, when our low
condition moves him to pity, he no sooner ripeneth our small hopes into a
speedy harvest, but we fault both the manner and matter of his liberality. But
the cheerful man always feasting himself with his blessing of content, is as
wary as he is happy. Have he more or less of either prosperity or adversity, he
blesses God above all and for all, and blames none but himself. It is truly a
wretched life, which we pass in this world. But whence have the miseries
thereof their growth but from our selves? They are of our own planting? and by
our sins we as well nourish them as we gave them a being. And if at any time
the hot sunshine of prosperity scortch them, even when we should rejoice, we
usually (not knowing when we are well) with querulous waters of our streaming
eyes refresh and quicken them. We our selves are many times apt to languish in
mind that they may prosper, not being able to discern Gods blessings, even when
we are by them too full and too fat. If (with the Iraelites) we have flocks and
herds, we want bread; if we have bread, we want drink; if we have flocks and
herds to kill, bread and drink answerable, yet there must be variety of flesh
for lusts sake, yea and that quickly too, or else heaven shall be alarmed and
upbraided with the plenty of past days under other governments. And then
chiefly when there is no want of any of these, but an excessive variety, when
moreover we are upon the confines (as it were one foot entered into the
possession) of our Canaan, the noise of a Lion in the way, and the height of
the sons of Anak make us desire a return into Egypt to engage our selves in
slavery, no more to expect a ransom. Now if we do but consider in what an
unnecessary trouble we involve our selves, when our licentious desires go
roving up and down not attending the divine pleasure, nor liking the method of
his disposals; how we still seek and either find not, or find to no purpose, by
reason we still antiquate the last invention or hope; how our insufficient
fancy worrieth and baiteth it self, and all we do or say tends not to
confirmation but ruin of body and soul, we should contentedly fix our sole hope
in him, who loves us better then do we our selves. There is no evil befalls
him, who is contented; no good, him, who is discontented with any thing but
himself, especially him, whose discontents no good (although in accumulations)
silenceth or calmeth. What mischievous inconveniences does man suffer in
himself, when he does not correct and deaden the bitter passions of his heart
which the sweetning rellishes of the saving fruit of the tree of life! What a
disdainful thing is it for a Beggar to refuse his alms, and expect to be a
chooser, to be his own carver, when at the last (poor fool!) seeing a large
table furnished with much variety, he knows not what choice to make, what
delicates to prefer? It is far more grievous and abominable to trample upon
Gods munificence, because when he has royally and abundantly given, he does
not humor us with a Please your selves. Those are most barren souls, whose
longing the celestial bounty cannot satisfy, which are not more pacified with
plenty then scarcity, but rather sharpened and increased. This evil is the
curse, and fortune of the wretchedly self pleasing murmurer. He is even his own
curse, and through himself alone perpetually restless.

HOW do I here find my self obliged to pity those, whom I cannot but censure
and condemn? Pity I needs must the weakness of those men, who (as it were
artificially) contrive their own downfall; whereas by being an happiness to
themselves, they would be accessory to the building up of other men's joys. The
world, which we commonly (and not injuriously) term a vale of misery, is so
more truly from the evil we do than the evil which we suffer in it, the evil
we suffer being the consequence of what we do. It is not strange that sorrow
sprout up round about him, who has the very root of perverseness spreading it
self within him. Such is he, who when he should make his heart the nursery of
virtue, suffers the Father of discord to plant their jealousies and
discontents, which bring forth sundary vices. How gloriously bright did that
day of Gods favorable visitation appear, when he reduced (after he was pleased
to throw down the fictitious ressemblances of Highness, which in subjects we
could not bear) true Majesty to sit upon the Throne, and sway the Scepter of
this British Isle? How religiously and fervently did we for a time seem to joy
in that goodness, which so miraculously conjoined the separated Head and
divulsed Members? But how long? The splendor of that day continues nay
increases, yet some think it to be now in its setting, because they
maliciously close their eyes, and what they will not see, cannot behold. The
causes of this joy the first fundamental Goodness conserveth; great is their
blindness, who are incapable of it, greater their wickedness, who by denial of
it, would obstruct it. If it has its full influences, why do so many scatter
abroad doubtful rumors and seditious complaints? If it does not continue, how
does the Cause abide and multitudes of sober men deceive themselves with the
contentments of the Effects? The fullness of our joy was wont to be expressed in
this, The King is restored, and long may he live. Was this joy too violent to
last long, and we, through long abstinence and desire, apt to catch a surfeit
of so great a pleasure? This could not be. For there is nothing, wherein God
truly is, which is surfeiting, or that can be immoderately enjoyed. Therefore
the reason of this great distemper must needs be, that the general gladness was
intermixed with particular hopes, which either would not endure time, or were
discouraged from proceeding, or are yet erected, and by this means prepare for
innovation.

Vox diversa sonat* populoru^ est vox tamen una; Their complaints are
different, but are nevertheless complaints, and speak the Authors ill governed
affections. Though all are not alike offensive, yet none of them are
inoffensive, none innocent. They are all sour rehearsals of that garbidge of
discontent, which they have unadvisedly swallowed.

OF the first there are two sorts; the one is displeased that he receives too
little, the other that he pays too much.

1. HE has indeed the most forcible arguments of any to plead his excuse, if
his tongue has strayed somewhat out of the way, who brings Necessity to
speak for him, who has adventured far, hazarded his life, made a voluntary and
free expense of his blood, suffered ruin of estate, bear reproaches,
imprisonments, sequestration, (of the remainder, if any thing were left of a
broken fortune) hunger, nakedness, and even utmost of calamities; that could
willingly have lain in the grave bitten and gnawed by those foul and insatible
vermins, which surrounded him, so long as these miseries were common; and now
only desires to be revived by his Lords resurrection. But necessity is no
excuse; for no man is necessitated to evil. Let not (I say) their words pierce
his sacred heart, whom he loves as his life, nor let the Heroic excellencies
of past days be summed up and disparaged by this final of that good subjects
who have suffered with him and for him, should any way endeavor releif, rather
than desire that he should now suffer for them. For so many are the daily and
unexpected exigences of state, that the great boon they expected (if his
Majesty were resolved upon it) would no sooner be beneficial to some, but it
will would prove destructive to all. Some make this answer; We desire not,
neither have at all desired the exhausting of his majesty's treasures for our
satisfaction, but still to have served his Majesty; to serve him in peace and
war now, as well as formerly in war; to manifest our continued fidelity by the
honest discharge of some offices, wherein are men employed, who have been of
the chief conspiratours and merciless spectatours of our long urgent dis^^^^es.
Granting all this (for reasons where^ (...) not perplex our selves, nor (...)
mysteries of State) yet here (...) ^plain. Time may recruit (...) ^t not
spiritual. Impa^ (...) ^arm then an armed e^ (...) ^continuance in it fre^
(...) losses irreparable A (...) ^ged and commanded, (...) ^at earnestly, and
still exhibit tokens of present as well as past desert. Let prayers be offered
up daily that the King may be able, and we may be assured of his willingness to
do his servants good. Let him provide for himself first, that he may be the
more royally liberal at last. If there be any, who think they have cause to
complain, let them more wisely bethink themselves, that complaint is no
satisfaction, although it may be cause of delay. The patient man soon ripeneth
his hopes, when the cold air of impatient speeches keeps back the comfortable
seasons. Seeing they know their Lord to be of an incomparably sweet
disposition, but know not his reasons for what he does, nor (most probably) he
their either desert or need, let them not through their own bodies wound him,
for whose sake they once thought their blood vile, and (...) selves regardless.
Let their (...) beg, but let not their (...) grieve him, who has
irrit(...)nities thrown upon h(...) insupportable, were r(...) assistant. Let
not (I sa(...) his sacred heart, who(...) nor let the Heroic ex^ (...) be
summed up and (...) of a causeless disgust. We may consider our own condition
and so judge of his. Although some men have scarce so much as a will to do what
they can for those, who have well deserved of them; yet on the other side
others are entangled with infirmity, and cannot stretch out their hands so far
as their good will reaches. And Kings are but men, who have the wings of their
power many times so clipped, that it cannot soar so high nor extend it self so
far as it desires. The vastest and most unlimited power on earth meeting with
a magnanimous goodness is too little and scant for the good, which it would do.
As we cannot but be satisfied of the immensity of the goodness, have we but
patience until things grow (as near as may be) proportionable to it, we shall
marvellously applaud the kindness, and peradventure for nothing more then its
delays, by which it will become most magnificent and perfect. There was a time
when the cruellest of Tyrants made these persons of desert and fame in a sort
subservient to a beggarly race of men of the vilest birth and condition. Those
days through Gods infinite mercies have an end, which is more then any could
by the rules of humane reasons have expected. He, who has begun this good
work, will also finish it in his time. Wherefore as a long expectation has
found a large recompense, let the one be continued and the other will be
completed. It is a great mercy to have ingenuous persons no longer cloystered
nor miserable upon every wicked wretches lashes of conscience and merited
fears; to have alienated patrimonies return to the true proprietors; to have
many damages repaid with the bountiful favors of a most compassionate Prince.
But all things cannot presently, nor as we will be effected. God gives to man
to will and to do, and makes the will preparative to the act. When he is
pleased to give way, other things which are wanting shall have their
accomplishment, whereas yet (perhaps) though the will be pregnant, there is not
strength to bring forth.

2. LEVITY is the bane of prosperity, although prosperity is the cause of
Levity. In adversity we can (peradventure) see aright; but too much prosperity
following so dazleth us, that we are seldom able to look directly forward upon
that, which is most excellent, and had formerly the signa^ distinction of our
Sounder approbation But quite otherwise, what we oblickly glance upon, we hotly
contend for and maintain although ordinary reason consulted with, affirms it
to be the present dotage of our weakened apprehension. Here as prosperity
perverteth the judgment and introduces Levity, so Levity soon puts us out
of those joyous postures we are set in. In the times of bitterness and hardship
when an arbitrary power made us sensible of the misery of our deprivation of
regal mildness, when the just indignation of a remediless tyranny stirred up
and cleared our intellectuals, nothing was more desirable then the moderation
of Princely demands, which, the juster they are, be the more compassionate and
sparing. Then we hard the lamentable groanings of an oppressed people, who
notwithstanding professed that their sorrow was greater for that their
contributions added nothing to the greaness of true Majesty, then that they
exchanged fullness and plenty for the pinches of poverty. It was more grief,
that he received not, who ought to impose, then was any imposition a grievance.
Those complaints might deservedly have been commended as the brave commotions
of noble dispositions, but that those spirits are evaporated and quite lost.
What before seemed a gallant temper appears to be but a peevish invective
proceeding from a disrellish of the griping carriage of the usurping Potentato,
whose title (it seems) did not so much displease, as the way of maintaining
it. Blessed is he, who condemns not himself in that which he approves. The
same persons now cry out, What a King and yet taxes? We hoped to have been
delivered from such pressures and burdens. What difference between this or
that Government, if the subjects purses must still be open to the frequent
demands of State-Collectours? These and the like (or worse) seditious
murmurings grate those ears, which had sometime been delighted with more
pleasing language. So does the humourous changling (who prefers himself
before all the world, yet has not the wit to love himself aright,) show the
deceitfulness of his heart, that although he sometimes speaks well, there is
not a greater stranger to well-meaning. There is no time or thing, which comes
a miss to him, who is resolved to let loose his tongue into any manner of
language; and of all other the Father of mischeifes has, for these his
industrious Sons in the first place, instructions to obloquy, as the most plain
and easy. Biting is suitable to a malicious nature and envy takes occasion to
spit venom at any thing, which thriveth. These evils, although in some respect
we call them natural, are yet but the distempers of nature and the depraver
Satan, who, undermining our reason and taking advantage of our fluctuating
opinions, by certain diabolical injections, sometimes utterly disolveth
whatsoever in the whole man is noble and Divine, and too too commonly brings
it almost to despair. From him come causeless jealousies, fears and
discontents, they are his work and contrived for man's overthrow. But God the
Author of peace and lover of Concord religiously invocated, soon clears
these mists, which the Deceiver casts before our wronged judgment. While we
adhere to the dictates of his sacred Spirit, pride and self love, the causes of
discontens are removed. With which whosoever is filled is apt to be strict in
examination of other men's actions, and to procure to himself trouble from
conceits of disrespect, want of love, forgetfulness of worth and the like. But
meekness and pure devotion will work for us better satisfaction and give every
one to understand it to be his duty to be thankful to him, who gives
abilities, rather then to be impatiently disloyal in the love of bewitching
discontent, and producing its broods of impieties. I call it without injury
bewitching, it being that Harlot, which calls passengers going right in their
way, saying, whosoever is simple, let him turn aside hither. It enticeth none but
the ignorant, them it bewitcheth to its counsels and ways. Men, who cannot
hold a steadfast progress in that good, which they have opportunely fallen
into, cannot but, together with their folly, manifest a base incontinence
delighting in painted harlots, and evils disguised under the color of good.
They, who with their tongues sometime so much magnified the royal cause, and
seemed exceedingly zealous of the glory of God, had even then (as is most
evident) some other ends, which they would more willingly pursue, some castles,
which they were building in the air, some upon the sands, but (although
discoursing of it) they were forgetful of the Rock, whence they were hewn, and
the Heaven to which they should aspire. It is an ill token of Love in those,
who pretending a longing for the Kings return, which they could be content to
purchase at any rate (O the pity that so noble a passion should be so short
lived and happen to meet with a floating habitation!) whether of life, liberty
or estate, all temporalities and present blessings together, that these should
as much as others let loose their tongues to all manner of repining complaints
and seditious murmurings; that these should by the impurity of their words soil
that glorious garment of Loyalty, and break the well accepted bands of sacred
allegiance. Oh? that they would but discreetly and to their assured safety
consider from how blessed an estate they have run, in how bad a condition they
at present are, to what danger, what misery they post away. Having that upon
easy terms, which they wished for upon any, whence comes the dislike, or what
occasioneth the grief? The blessing too cheaply obtained is slighted, yet the
complaint speaks greivvances and burdens intolerable. These ways, however
they seem right in some eyes, yet surely the end thereof is the way of death.
Undoubtedly the bac^slider in heart will be filled with his own ways; and he,
who will not be constant to the entertainment of his prosperity, shall by
inconstancy weary it and make it forsake him. The forementioned wishes, and the
joys of the ensuing success, had perseverance crowned them, could not have
been sufficiently extolled. But how are the desires extinguished? how is the
joy abated? how has darkness seized upon those temples of piety, which were
sometime bright with the lust of a celestial fire? To see a bad beginning have
a good end is very much desirable; but to have the former part of life
bedecked with ornaments of dignity, and the later disfigured with the strange
contrariety of base and sorded rags is such an odious evil as makes the eye,
which behold'st it almost hate the light, by means whereof it had so unwelcome
a spectacle. Such are these who are either sluggish or false in the best time,
who upon victory obtained forsake the field and relieve the vanquished enemy.
For so it is; The murmurings of those, who deny the King due aid, does give
heart and impious succor to the rebel, who seeks nothing but an opportunity
to act over his old villainous commissions. And thereby do these men punish
themselves, and the backslider comes to be filled with his own ways. By their
clamours they when the appetites of some, who were always too sharply set upon
innovation. The murmurers corrupt the circumbient air, and still the plague
spreads further and further, whereby his Majesty has more foes and
consequentry more need. For besides homebred conspiracies hereby strengthened,
foreigners make it their pleasure to affront him, so that the speedy supplies
given their King is each Subjects Profit and Honor, because the Kings injuries
is the Peoples both damage and shame. If I account the labourer worthy of his
hire, and him, who reapeth and inneth my harvest to merit a recompense; shall I
not much more to him, who by his labor, care and arms secureth it in the
field, and garner, return a free will offering, the purchase (as I may in a
so^^ speak) of my continuing fecundity? My reason dictateth no less to me but
that it befitteth me. Which when some pious assertors of the Peoples true
liberties and happiness had well apprehended, and desired a general compliance
in a matter of such public benefit and importance, how have others, who would
speak boldly against the Kingdoms welfare in performance of his duty, been
extolled for their wisdom and care, by those who would seem most affectionate
to his Majesty's just cause and person, and also to the Peoples tranquillity. No
man is his own or another friend, who advisedly multiplieth, or in the least
utters words in commedations of busy and seditious disturbers of other men's
good intentions, or speaks language, which is sour with inward disrelishes.
It was a very religious expression of that wise Senator who said Vniversos
affligit, Cassiod. l. 1^ ^pist. 19.
qui Regi aliquid necessarium subtrahit; quia du^ laetus optatur ab omnibus,
cunctos contristat, si probetur offensus. The wit of men of this humor; who are
apt to be distasted upon so slight an account, and to give distaste, where Men
of sound judgment do always think it a glory to be liberal, is to be observed
from his judicious scorn of such base providence. Who said, Bark. d^. Arg. lib^
4.
Egregia Scilicet cura timemus, ne non hostis cum saeviet plenas domos and
opulentas inveniat. Repetamus memoria vastitates, peculatus, exitia, etc.
Should God, armed with his incited Vengeance, prosecute our ingratitude and
over-whelm our black deeds (which although our late miseries should make us
detest, yet our language seems to desire) with the crimson ruins of each
others slaughtered bodies, making each others sword to revenge the wrongs
offered unto heaven, it were less then the desert of so ungratful underweighing
and inconsiderate contemning of his blessings. Absalom had better have been
close shaven, and have been without that extraordinary beauty of his long hair,
then to have kept it to be the fatal accomplishment of his days, and his
hastened death: And every subject upon second thoughts, will acknowledge that
there is nothing more commendable in a subject than a frugal care of himself,
and a liberal loyally; that to give much and want something is far more
profitable than, expend highly, and keep little, or to endanger all by
endeavoring the keeping of all. The Apostle S. Paul makes tribute, custom,
fear and honor to be the parts of obedience; the respect to our duty and a
true cheerfulness do perfect obedience. It is too too fresh in our memories
that among other things the people clamouring concerning a ship money tax, and
some other inconsiderable grievances became proditor sui, and proditionis
merces. Assuredly they, who Love to have the Head dishonored and kept bare may
not prudently comfort themselves with the blind Hope of a long safety. And
indeed (to speak plainly) none wrong themselves more then these, especially if
the ground of their complaints be well considered, That what is required for
the public good they cannot spare from their own too public vices, Want of
moderation in the disposing their lives and affairs begets other wants,
which proceeding from ill government multiply into disorders, and then the
blame (forsooth) must be laid upon other causes and the true forgotten. It is a
strange kind of imaginary happiness, wherewith some men please themselves, to
maintain their own by impoverishing other men's honors, and to delight in
transferring the name of that crime upon others, whereof themselves only must
keep the guilt. The contrary is the more thriving way, to impute all greivances
to the right causes and remove them, to consider the mischeifes to which men
are exposed by extravagancies, and for the future so to live within the
prescribed limits of reason as to be able to do the public good service
without the least sense of a domestique injury. If a giddy and seduced faction
in an ignorant zeal could upon a crew (matchless as in its most execrable
villainies so in a most ravenous appetite) as it were force an unusual
liberality, it is impossible that to pious subjects moderate demands (and those
necessary) can prove offensive pressures. A small thing indeed proves a burden
to the neck, which loves no manner of yoke, and unwillingness striving
(although in a in a most smooth and easy yoke) that neck is soon galled, which
with cheerfulness could have borne a more considerable weight. Improvident
impatience always overturneth that happyness, whereof our prudent Architect
lays the foundation, and only meekness will see that prosperity
accomplished, which it did peradventure rather hope for than foresee.

2. BUT some men's hopes, having flourished some time upon the rocks top, are
scorched with the beams of other men's prosperous virtues. Therefore where they
have unprofitably sown, they will no longer l^bour, but turn themselves to some
other exercise. And what after a discouraged hope offers it self to exercise
the thoughts sooner then discontent, the friend of vicious minds, and betrayer
of innocence; an evil, which may peradventure glance upon a mind fraught with
virtues, but never there inhabit or fructify? A wise man considers that no
hope fixed upon things temporal is certainly successful, and a good man knows
that evil hopes ought not to aspire to fruitions, but to be forthwith destroyed
that there may be no more of the viperous offspring. Enjoyment is dangerous,
discontent upon the miss mischievous. Yet is it better to have some wicked men
sad because of their uneffected designs, than all good men weep by reason of
the calamities proceeding from evil men's unfortunate triumphs. And discontent
could not have made its entry into a sort of persons who knew more
advantagiously to execute revenge by the common poisonous way of contumely then
certain men, who long hoping for satisfaction of some illigitimate desires, but
having their hopes frustrated, are more known by their murmurs against, then
their prayers for the Government established. And although religion must seem
to adorn and sanctify their whole life, yet he, who truly knew as the
comfortable blessing, so the assured way, of an holy life, exhorted those, whom
he would have thrive under Christian discipline to do all things without
murmurings and disputing, that they might be blameless and harmless, the Sons
of Gods, Phil^ 2. And S. Jude an unblameable servant of Christ, makes it the
mark that ungodly men are known by, These are murmurers, complainers, etc.
Which because most undoubtedly true, we must take off the sheep-skin and see
underneath the biting Wolf; the man, who would seem innocent, yet loves
nothing more than a wounded reputation, and an afflicted mind. But let such men
seem once Loyal and still holy; we know what they were, and by underlooking
their paliating pretenses, may perceive that they are in both respects still
what they were. They have put their new wine into their old bottles, and do but
dress up their aged falsehood with a gay and new fashioned hypocrisy. They
have their old devises, and the continuance of their grudging perverseness
shows it to be inherent to their temper and made natural. No music gives
them such delight as the reproach of a superior, the recitalls of whose honor
and worthy deeds (although elevating good men's minds to an exceeding gladness)
sounds in their ears with a jarring discordancy; Nothing does more discompose
and distort their countenance then such unwelcome relations, but the contrary
does introduce a smiling festivity* And if any of them want ears, he will make
amends with his pregnant invention, an^ make a supply for the defect by the
doub^ diligence of his tongue. Now where it reconcilable Enmity failing of the
great abilities is content with the weaker mi^chiefes, of a murmur and
complaint, the mo^^ upright administrations are not without the cause of a
disgust. Even virtue which keeps the middle way, shall be lad^^ with the
infamy of that vice, whi^^ is in the nearest extreme; and althoug^ any eminent
Virtue has shined so bright as to overpower distraction, yet it is ha^^
contriving in that lovely splendor, and no^ be much darkened by the sly
imputations o^ some (though most falsely) objected failing.

SOME content themselves with the mischiefs, to have vented their spleen in
those vollies of murmurings and calamities without any further design then to
divert the eyes of the unwary from the view of their miscarriages, by
considering whether other men's walks are in integrity and sobriety. Others
there are whose artifice storeth them with disingenious invectives out of those
basest hopes, that the multitude will first dislike, then prepare to shake of
an unprofitable and offensive yoke. Such (if possible) they will make it seem
by the most subtle detractions and asperations, being confident that if they
can thus far prevail, the people will readily blow the trumpet an^ demand, What
portion have we in David? But do ye indeed speak righteousness, ye pretended
informers of the peoples judgments? or do ye go a religious way to work thus to
disquiet not only your selves, but those, who, desirous of rest, have
withdrawn themselves from your turbulent counsels into the tuitions of peace? It
was a rule with the Wise Man, that a good Man should be satisfied from himself*
And indeed the plenty of peace within storeth every good man with much
satisfaction, for a further enlargement whereof he looks not unto men, but
God. Tertullians description of Patience was taken from him; Vultus illi
tranquillus and placidus, frons pura nulla maeroris aut irae rugositate
contracta, etc. If he suspect the course of the world to be somewhat perverse,
he does not (as the cou se is too frequent in these days) himself ^uo out of
the way to reform it, but being cheerfully vigilant over himself prays most
fervently that God would be pleased to show to them, Col. 3. Sun af East.
who be in error the light of his truth, to the intent that they may return
into the way of righteousness. Alas! upon what desperate designs does the
precipice of evil cast men of this vilest temper, who rather then they will not
disquiet others, discompose themselves? If any thing be out of order, what
remedy can impatience bring? what end but more disorder? what fruit but
continued vexation? Impatience was never good reformer, and murmuring does
always make things worse and worse. But what profit it brings to those, who
for nothing, or at best but for the trif^^ of an upstart guord make their
murmurs testify that they are displeased with Gods ordinance, and deem his
most sacred pleasure unjust and cruel, let them judge, who can. I can descry no
pleasure, unless mischief be such, and that neither acceptable nor gratifying
unless it begin at home.

LET the World go how it will, the administration of a general satisfaction is
a difficult task. We see the divine bounty rendered insufficient, how then shall
humane abilities be strengthened or extended to contentment? The evil of
murmuring is certainly of the same nature with other vicious inclinations; it
is still spreading, and the more it is humoured, the more insolent it is in
demands. So do we see the misery of our times to be chiefly uph^ld and
nourished by a phanatique perve^seness of m^n, who may be pleased but will not,
whose hate to any thing is occasioned by other men's approbation. It seems
they cannot cordially affect that which has nothing of them or their counsels.
They would be Counselors and Favorites, that they might (as they say) better
regul^te ^^^airs, and both give us the blessings desired and make them more
accomplished and entire. We may hear them speak, but with all question whether
they could then be peaceable upon admission. The snake kept at distance can do
no more then hiss, but taken into the bosom will be sure to b te. His counsel
cannot be good, who commends none but his own; nay, it cannot be other then
bad and dangerous proceeding from an envenomed breast never but possessed with
prejudice. How can he be mistaken for a wholesome adviser, who at distance
endeavors with a pestilent breath to corrupt that pleasant tranquillity,
which yet it had rather with a nearer malice bite into pieces and utterly
dissolve? They who removed a far off and kept under the rod can dare with an
audacious confidence to reject the authority, and (as it were) convene Princes
before their tribunal, what zealous impieties would they not perpetuate, if
abused favor and unwary credulity should license them to the nearest
approaches?

IT is indeed too too true that our calamities have given us a large field of
complaints; but we are surely out in the method. We all know what augmentations
we have given them adding both to their number and quality, partly by
inconsiderate Levity, partly by presumption and contempt of the best monitions.
These have accumulated and exasperated our griefs; yet some men think
themselves ingenuous in putting far from them the guilt, and pleading innocence
from amidst the throngs of the most horrid defilements. Nay they proceed so far
as first to consecrate and then adore impieties, and afterward to boast of
this religion and zeal. Being afflicted (as not only the clamours but our sad
experience speaks why do men make their faces harder then the rock and refuse
to return? Why do men impoverished by the strangest excesses and vilest
intemperances blame the government and the times? or why do other men wonder at
the tottering condition of the Kingdom which themselves have enfeabled even to
despair of a recovery to its former strength and vigor? When mischief
practices all its acts and contrivances, confusion and distraction must needs
be the unhappy product; and why do the Authors seem to stand amazed at it? We
alas! find diverse sorts of complaints, and each murmurer (not without violence
to reason) persuades himself that he has some reason, some ligitimate motive
to what he says, when the contrary is most true. Let the affections be cleared
up and the influences of regal administrations have their due work, men's
tongues would be more reserved, their distempers would be qualified, their
passions calmed. There is nothing can cause trouble in us, if our own wills be
discreetly and religiously governed. It is too too much yielding to Satan's or
his Humane Advocates seducing Arguments, which breaks the peace of our mind:
For otherwise were the causes (to which are imputed our murmurings and
troubles) real, yet would nothing incident be harbored in the mind, nor
repinings, both unnecessary and evil, proceed from our lips, because it is
commanded that we revile not the King so much as in thought. Regine in
cogitatione tua detrahat. Eccles 10.20.
If injuries were sufficient excuse for any man to break the Commandment, where
would be the blessed Triumph of Patient Fortitude, and Meek Obedience? But (God
be thanked) none can justly in this case plead injury for the cause. Justice it
self rules him who sits at Stern, who cannot but have learned to deal
Justice to all men from the abundance of wrong which himself has suffered. It
should be each man's wise care to be just to every man, for the unjust man is
the first troubler of himself: Therefore should there be put a Bridle in our
Mouths to curb the eager motions of our lips, and take away the liberty we too
too much permit to our unruly tongues. Discontent ought not to seize upon us
from any conceit that we are forgotten, or not regarded, that we are pinched or
depressed. Also our very ears must be closed to keep out the whisperings of
Malcontents, lest their words entering, engenger in us the Worm of Giddiness:
Where there is wariness, assuredly there is most safety. There are at no time
wanting Troublers of the Weal public, whose words eat as does a Canker, being
as skilful, so o^ficious in spreading abroad the evil of their minds. But let
him who hears any thing of this nature take heed of entertaining it, and let
him not so much as give the satisfaction of a Reply, otherwise than by contempt
of the baseness. He who said, I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgres^
had learned that way which should keep him from the paths of the Destroyer.
That the mouth may not transgress, it is much requisite to keep the ear at
which many times have insensibly crept those mad evils which have corrupted the
heart, distracted the mind, and set upon violent courses, not only the tongue,
but also the hands, which have suddenly brought to ruin both the Actors and
Innocent Spectators. If we hear that which we may have reason to suspect, let
us valiantly reprove, rather than sinfully reply; and by Argumentizing, at
length be drawn to a Partnership with such as are better skilled in Diabolical
Subversion, than Christian Edification: Keep we therefore our ears and tongues,
if we love life, and would see good days. As we desire others to be merciful to
our Reputations, and not with hot words (they being the most tender good which
belongs to any man) to torment and scorch them; so does it especially concern
us, not to kindle the combustible Trash of Vulgar Affections, by the flames
whereof the Excellence of that Name which is sacred might be diminished, and
lose that esteem, in the glory whereof conserved, our chief felicity
consists. Let that Name be Magnified, the full commendations whereof will
prove Gods great blessing upon us Subjects. The glory of a Kings Name is a
Prophecy of assured happiness to light upon, and rest round the secure people;
it is Armor of defense at home, of offense abroad, being commonly successful
above Policy and Power. Where the people willingly contribute to the
augmentation of Fame, observing the Princes good deeds, and applauding them,
but smothering the hellish brands of suspicion and jealousy, that Nation
needs not fear suffering under the stroke of unfortunate calamity: For
obsequious Charity being Gods work, carries with it his blessing, and immuzeth
all people who delight in it with invincible safety. But Murmuring is none of
his work, it is nothing of Kind to any thing which he owneth, and therefore
cannot make any man happy. Peaceable words and actions only nourish Prosperity,
giving the glory of the Divine Presence here (wherein is fullness of joy,
according to our capacity) and the hope of its Eternal Fruition in our Glorious
Exaltation above Mortality. Amen.

REbuke, O Lord, the tempestuous troubles of our souls, calm our unquiet minds,
pacify our unruly affections and subdue our more unruly tongues. Leave us not
in the troublesome anguish of erroneous darkness, but make us clearly to see
thy will, and joyously to prosecute it both in word and deed.

Give us thy saving grace, which when we want we cannot but be a trouble to our
selves; we then trouble our selves, and the tumults of souls arise against
thee, whom, in thine Anointed, we are then apt to reproach, passing the bounds
and breaking the ties of religion and Loyalty.

Bless us with the knowledge of the vanity of this world, which passes away
and deludeth us; teach us to commune with our hearts and be still, and
(although there be a seeming cause of discontent) to offer the Sacrifice of
righteousness, and put our trust always in thee.

There be many, who say, Who can show us any good or benefit by the present
establishment of affairs? But (alas blind and heavy souls!) why walk they in so
vain a show, and are disquieted in vain, wilfully contemning thy greatest
favors, and their own assured peace?

Surely thy servants do readily and heartily confess that thou thereby have put
gladness in our hearts, having lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. O
that we could all devoutly wait upon thee, and behold thee in the multitudes of
thy mercies.

We are apt to err in the shadows of imaginary injuries, unless by thy
especial grace preventing us we are kept from turning aside into those
deceitful paths.

Send out, we pray thee, thy light and thy truth, let them lead us, let them
bring us to thy holy hill and to thy tabernacles, where we shall forget
complaint, and sing a new song, which thou shall put into our mouths, even
Praise unto our God.

O thou most gracious Savior, who have brought us up out of the horrible pit,
out of the miry clay, and set our feet above danger, establish our goings and
prevent our backslidings.

Let us not forsake our harbor, nor make the vanity of our words the purchase
of a new calamity.

But what have we wretches already done? how far have we transgressed? what
have we, nay, what have we unrighteously spoken? Pardon our unthankful
murmurings, and for the time to come set a watch upon our words, and keep thou
the door of our lips.

Let not the mischief of our own tongues overtake us, but thy goodness mightily
prevent us, that we may be converted and healed.

It is in thy power to set up and to destroy, to enthral and enlarge, and them
that seek thee, thou never forsakest. Give thy people perseverance in prayer to
thee, the God of their help; then will thou, who have given courage to
continue, give grace also to obtain; and their desires accomplished will joy
and refresh them.

Our wants thou know and alone can relieve; though we are poor and needy,
thou think upon us. Why then are our souls cast down? why are they
disquieted within us? If we rely upon thee, thou will enliven us, and no good
thing will thou withhold from us, if we walk uprightly before thee.

Thou have set before us the examples of those murmurers, who lifted up their
voices against the Leaders of thy people, destroyed in the wilderness, to the
intent we should not lust as they lusted: Thou have also given encouragement to
our faith, promising that when we patiently wait for thee, thou will incline
thine ear unto us, and hear our cries.

Therefore will we refrain our tongues from evil, and, accustoming them to
prayer, will draw nigh to thee in an acceptable time when thou may be found,
that thy loving kindness and truth may preserve us at such time as evils do
encompass us and the punishments of our iniquities takes hold upon us.

Send, O Lord, thine holy Ghost and pour into our hearts, that most excellent
gift of charity, the very Bond of Peace, and of all Virtues, which neither does
nor speaks ill, but acquiesceth in the sweet enjoyment of thee.

This will make thy great Ministers government acceptable to the people, and
the peoples obedience exemplary to the world, so that glory shall dwell in our
Land, and those, who know not the might of thy Majesty, will be con^^rted unto
thee, who art the only blessed and ^ll-glorious Potentate, King of Kings and
Lord ^f Lords, World without end, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. VI. Of the frequent desires of breaking out into Rebellion, and the
means by the Instigators used; viz. Reproaches upon the King and Church.
MURMURING is a Spark forced out of an ill-disposed breast inflamed with
Disloyalty, and is a great sin when it is least; but is excessive in it^ call
for Vengeance, when (as now) it (...) let loose against a good and gracious
Prince And surely (however by some me^ applauded) they are souly mistaken in
the Commonwealth, who steep all their humor in gall, and yet would entitle
thems^lve Patrons of Unity, and have not long (...) (when there was no
dissension but their own desired) been pretended Peti^^^ners for Peace: For
such (as that glorious Martyr judiciously observes) themselves know not of
what Spirit they are, ^
although al^ ^ther men see it to be fire they call for. Rebellion has its
beginnings in such whisperings, discontented and doubtful words being cast
forth as a Lure to draw some, not yet fully fitted, to such devilish designs,
and also to bring together the bloody beakt-birds of Prey. We cannot (God
forbid it) judge so uncharitably of some men, that their inclinations are so
propense to slaughter, and the Public Ruin, because their words make them
somewhat forgetful of their Duty, and the Reverence they should bear to
Anointed and Consecrated Majesty, and also to Truth it self; which they torture
to make their relations credible: But the subtle resolved Rebel, by this kind
of words, makes proof of such, as he hops, by several pretensions, to bring
to a cursed Complication; and having (as he accounts it) luckily proceeded in
this beginning, he is no longer for dallying by privy Murmurs, but
disburtheneth his foul stomach by strong Contumelies, and loathsome Reproaches;
as if his passion before wanted vent, his words fly out like blustering winds,
which unsettle and make rough the calm tides of the peoples affections; or as
if with them he were resolved suddenly to put in practice the dictates of his
rage, he intends by Storm to become Master of whatsoever good his envious
Soul wishes ill to another. Therefore having long acted Absolom's part in
humbling himself, and shaking the head as if somewhat or other in the Supreme
were out of order, he will not at length stick to tell the people, that there
is none appointed to do Justice, or that knows Judgment. He thinks it no
evil to dishonor the King in his Ministers, reiterating the Old Cries against
Evil Counselors; in his Judgment, forasmuch as he has chosen, and makes use
of such; in his Faith, as if his word were not kept; in his Disposition, as if
naturally unkind, and unnecessarily exacting of his People heavy Taxes; in his
Religion, being a favourer of Popery: And indeed all those things, which others
(knowing they therein glorify God, and do his Majesty right) think meet to
have published with the highest commendations of desert, he will needs seem to
serve God and the World in misconstruing and depraving: But to men sober and
judicious, he discovers his Religion and Life to be but a gilded lie. And
these pretensions (methinks) cannot but be too well known to pass even the
Ignorant without suspicion: For (to answer no farther to their base objections)
look back whosoever pleases upon those of time past, who because they would
(forsooth) seem modest at first; and therefore not directly to level at their
King, rendered their modesty so much the more execrable, by how much the more we
yet feel the smart of their blows, who would make their King most glorious, and
only knock down Evil Counselors. It was never known that Rebels wanted a
pretense; he that imployeth them, leaves them not destitute of his helps and
shifts, which are not the coursest and worst contrived. Among all his devices,
they find most advantageous to their designs the justification of their own
proceedings by the contempt of other men's, either integrity or sufficiency. And
so violently are they addicted to this plausible sin of Defamation, that they
are almost able to deceive the very Elect, persuading them (were it possible)
to the dread of those Commissions whereof they were never guilty, to make the
most Innocent suspect themselves. With the (...) then this violence for a while
passes current for Pious Zeal, and they seem no less than the Messengers of
Light sent down from the Habitation of Holiness to reform the corrupt manners
of the present Age, and to reduce into a Primitive Order the Affairs of Church
and State, through negligence and time run into a deplorable confusion. It is
not indeed a thing strange, that what they so hotly and yet so constantly
obtruded upon the vulgar peoples abused credulity, was so readily accepted, and
so long retained. The same way being once prosperous, they reenter, and Good
they now call Evil, (wherein they publish to the world what Judges and
Reformers they would prove, whose very beginning is with subverting the cause
of the Upright, and cannot thrive without the Devils Patronage and counsel)
that the filly may be reduced, and unstable souls drawn into the grievous and
fatal punishment of their promised enlargement and felicity: A sad felicity
indeed, which must have such instruments, and so horrid an entrance and
passage, which must begin in Cruelty, and swim on in Rivers of Tears and Blood!
For their malice, who by undue aspersions and unjust reproaches privily murder
the Innocent, is not there confined: Experience has assured us of the truth of
the Wise Man's Rule, that the words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood.
The Envious and Malicious are never satisfied with the triumph of downcast and
torn Fames, but build their hopes upon Piles of slaughtered bodies, and seek to
raise themselves Fortunes out of the Rubbish of a ruined Commonwealth. Here
has been an old grudge, nay, an inveterate hate in an Enemy, sometime
pretending to Reconciliation, but indeed to desires of new practices so
strongly wedded, that it may well from them be made a general admonition, that
every man do warily trust the sincerity of reconciled Enemies. It is well
observed by one, that the greatest disease of distrust, Dalin^^ lib. 3. A^
(...).
and most incurable, is in him who has wronged his Prince, whose guilty
Conscience feeds on fearful distrust (...) just occasion be offered. These
un^ (...) ^rits, although they have promised (...) sworn Allegiance, yet sound
Reason (...) bids any too confidently to trust them whose refuge is Medea's
Absolution, Quae scelere pacta est scelere rumpetur fides, What they
perfidiously swear, they will as deceitfully break: Peace they love no longer
than necessity compels them to it, debarring them the opportunities of
Commotions, which they most artificially court, and diligently solicit. Rather
than not commit their beloved sin, they will tempt all occasions till they find
a way to advance both it and its interest. Therefore they violate truth,
obligations, duty and conscience, lest any of these should by the help of
inquisitive fear make them see and pursue better things. They who adore impiety
making the successes thereof their Paradise, must rear their conscience, and do
abominate scrupulous niceties, only using the name of good for the greater
confusion of such as embrace the substance.

TO know whether their devises tend we must guess by the rules of contrariety,
their meanings having ever contradicted their professions. They pretend to
reformation; but let such as have had the most aged experience of their
performances speak plainly, and acquit others of the dangers of fallacies. We
might well think the subversion of a Kingdom to be no good Physic for the
Church therein, neither that civil wars, which do license misdeameanour, can
introduce good manners. Their words had heretofore instead of more soundness
infused madness into the people, and too much action heightened the distempers
of the Nation, which convenient rest will qualify. Until they prescribe this,
they will never be good Physicians. Give it this, and each part of the body
will thereupon be reduced to its order and duty. When temperance guides those,
who now trouble themselves and others, we may have just cause to Hope for the
so much discoursed Reformation. But no encouragement is there for us to suppose
that they can ever do others good, who do themselves so much harm in being the
professed factours of disobedience; men, who make it their sole employment to
bring up an evil report upon God's inheritance, and to stir up the peoples
malignity against the King and Church. They, who taught the Israelites the
scurrilous lessons of reproachful taunts against the Prince and the
Archbishop, Moses and Aaron, brought a plague upon themselves and the
misadvised tribes; yet did they pretend a remedy against some (I know not what)
evils. There can no plague prove so destructive as this spreading one brought
in by sedition, which (to our great sorrow and shame) has been known to search
and sweep each corner and part of these miserable Kingdoms, and when after its
long rage, by discontinuance we hoped for respite, by these poisonous blasts it
threatens anew its return and triumphs. But God (we trust) will make these
menaces to be but the regardless puffes of angry vanity. For these Hopes we
have ground from the rich authority of God's word, which testifies that He,
who hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a slander is a fool;
And then we are sure that he answers the fool according to his folly. God can
do what he pleases, and is most gracious and merciful, whom we ought earnestly
to beseech that he would not use these men as the scourge of our
transgressions, neither make us a rebuke unto the foolish. But certainly such
as have seen the event of those former dishonorable reports raised, and kept on
flight by the complicies of rebellion, cannot otherwise judge of the same
things again practiced, but that the intents are the same, and would produce
the like effects, did not God's mercy prevent and frustrate. He, who rebuked
the winds and the Sea roaring against the Church, both in Christ the Head, and
the Disciples the Members, who with with a Peace be still, quieted the loud
voice of the disobedient winds, and laid the rude tumult of the rebellious
waves, can soon subdue these pestilent tongues; and he, who does Let them from
proceeding further in mischief* will (we need not doubt) still let until they
be taken out of the way.

BUT to see of what a various and partly-coloured substance Hypocrisy is
composed, would make any one much to marvel how such antipathies could be
combined in one body to make a public cheat.

Nil mortalibus arduum est,
Caelum ipsum petimus stultitia.
Men alarm Heaven it self, as if they would (O wretched Age!) pull God's
Children out of his bosom* and all pretensively for his sake, who abhors
the cruelty as much as he disowneth the service. The Church being reproached,
and the King the Head thereof aspersed with calumnies, they say, it is all for
Religions sake and Gods glory, of vain are some to shake hands (as that
glorious Martyr observed) with their allegiance, K. Char. I.
and obedience under pretense to lay faster hold on their religion. These
filthy dreamers how regardless they are of so grant a crime as the despising
Dominions and speaking evil of Dignities, nay, of fathering the same upon God
as if he took not vengeance of villainies but countenanced and rewarded them.
They cast out the name of religion to beguile some silly souls, pleading God's
Ordinance and will for what they sacrilegiously attempt against his Anointed
ones; as if that spotless Purity, and purely perfect Unity were too liberally
divided into contradictions of its own writ and pattern. But he is the same ever
constant and good God, who so far detesteth such wickedness, that, by the
decree of his dreadful justice, is ordained for such reprobates a place of
endless bitterness and torment with the Devil and his Angels (company and
reward suitable to such galiish spirits, which triumph intortured reputations
and bloody delights) into which the weight of their sins will most deeply
repress and over-whelm them. Sin is a weighty evil, and sins against Authority
are excessive; but the largest term is too narrow for this, which capaciously
compriseth a design against the Powers celestial and terrene. Into the
inferior parts of the bottomliless pit, where the dregs of treasured fury, must
this soaring ambition unrepented of irrecoverably fall. O let us humbly
Solicit Heaven begging for them the rescue of repentance and the expiatory
blood of that Innocent Lamb, whom they Religiously revile and persecute. Let
not their reproachful words sound louder than our importunate prayers. God is
gracious; who knows but that he may turn, and have mercy upon them, although
their provocations have never so impetuously resisted his Clemency.

BUT although many whom they injure (doubtless) forget not this holy Office,
this Divine Charge given by him, who did vouchsafe to be a General
Satisfaction, and the Savior of all, yet these would (if possible) discourage
all good; and by their continuance, or rather their farther engagement in evil,
endeavor to dull the sharpest appetites of the most Noble Benefactors. Nothing
serves their turn, but the destruction of such as by their daily tears, and
continual prayers, desire to pacify Gods Wrath justly kindled against such
unconscionable and merciless men, who bear an immortal hate to all, who will
not against Reason and Conscience subscribe to the violation of Religion. Some
men think other men's obedience and good Government of life to be their sins, as
if it were impossible for one man to be righteous without another
condemnation. Indeed their Consciences might have been enlightened, and their
paths adorned with true Beauty, had they but Grace to observe some men's strict
Piety, and exactness of obedience, upon whom yet their chief industry has been
employed to raise a scandal and public odium. Ambitious and evil Neighbors
know that their counterfeit blaze loses its admiration in the presence of
true brightness, and when the Heavenly Glories afford an unveiled luster:
Therefore they will have them first beclouded and darkened, and after (as their
power serves) removed nearer Heaven, lest their Propinquity should overpower
obscuring vapors, and Truth discovered only become admired. So strange it is
to consider, that men, to whom God gave one only Original, should, in buildings
of the same nature and composure, have such different furniture, in like frames
of body have unlike minds; some bright, beautiful, and glorious; some dark,
ugly, and vile affections. Go too, impudent Zealots, and disband your base low
thoughts which triumph in destruction, and count it fit matter of applause to
overthrow multitudes for your dislike to some; some whose eminency in good
tortureth your envious hearts. Cease to be your own Plague, and make a
profitable exchange of Pride for Humility, and Self-denial, of Envy for
contenting Charity. Only from Pride comes contention; thence comes
stubbornness, disloyalty, and disobedience; thence come vain hopes, by which
you behold your Self-promised Canaan, toward which you will needs walk through
a Red Sea. It is this that will not allow other men their deserved
commendations or rewards: Because you think your selves diminished by another
Greatness, do you well to endeavor to deject and trample upon him, that from
off his bulk you may proclaim your own advancement? That Emulation is
blameless, nay laudable, which puts men upon desires of becoming equal to
the best, not to the greatest; which seeks not a solitary happiness, but
wishes to all a Partnership, nay a fullness of that content which is truly
worthy Man's seeking, and above the reach of Fortune, excellent and durable. But
that which best befitteth Man is not always in his desires, nor is the honestest
way in request and traversed. Wicked men will not part with the Airy
imagination of some near felicity, for the promise of a future joy: They will
not judiciously weigh the peril and uncertainties of their ungrounded hopes
with the benefit of inward peace, and the certainty of the Celestial Kingdom
promised to them who seek it, and its righteousness. They destroy themselves
for lack of knowledge, turning Religion into ungodliness, and a lie; while they
would deceive others, they chiefly deceive themselves: They find their
long-entertained hope to become frustrate; and that which sweetened their evil
travel, does in the end turn to bitterness, and disrelish.

THIS is certain; yet cannot Experience or Monition guide them into more
wholesome ways: Custom to do evil persuades them to go on, although the events
of others counsel a retreat; and when their Conscience (notwithstanding their
Arts of suppression) lets fly into their faces any just accusation (as she
is most incorrupt) then sudden counsel deludeth them with the persuasion, that
the Commission of a second (although greater) Villainy, expiateth the former. So
Cain unnaturally murdered his Brother, as if this had been the meetest
Sacrifice of Atonement which he could offer to his injured God. Our lavish
Reprovers, some time past, committed many execrable and bloody sins; they would
now silence them, by laying upon them the heavy Foundation of a second
Rebellion: Neither is the Foundation different, but the same with the former.
And that they intend to react the former, we may know by their retaining, and
in this manner exhibiting to public view the Ensigns of their Holy War, Pride,
Malice, and Envy.

NOW unless they find a Cause to dilate upon, the Plot falls: It is chiefly
then for the Churches sake that in their querulous relations they give any
oblique glances upon his Majesty. They dislike the present establishment of
Church Affairs, and all (whether high or low) who favorably incline to the
furtherance of her Peace. For (if we may call the selling Souls for a
transitory price profit) they found it merry Angling in Religions troubled
waters, and with a Renovation of the pleasures. Thence are they displeased,
that such as love Jerusalem, and pray for her Peace, should prosper. Such
Opposites cannot both at once thrive, but the fall of the one is the rising of
the other. Now it is manifest, that they who have heretofore given molestation
to the Church and State, must either obstinately pursue their first course, or
else openly accuse themselves of Rebellion, or at least of Error. They cannot
digest the latter, and the former having proved more advantageous, more
forcibly persuades and argues a self-defence to be Legitimate, as authorized
by the Law of Nature: And although themselves only disturb the Public Peace,
yet their own dissension must be termed only a Guardant Vigilance: And when
they calumniate their Father, and revile theit Mother, the better to
countenance their unnatural Riots, this must be esteemed but a forced discovery
of approaching mischiefs. Indeed it was ever seen, that unreasonable men, who
make no Conscience of any actions, plead, for Justification, necessity, which
urges them forward to the vindication of public wrongs, and the reducing the
lost Order of Religion. For the common people's easily overswayed affections,
being drawn aside with such weighty imputations as these men confidently
allege, will not be counterballanced and drawn aright by the considerations,
that Rebellion is no fit Coersive for any Superiors inordinate carriage; that
an Inferior may not be disobedient, because a Superior may sometimes happen
in some things to be misadvised: And therefore it is necessary to their
purposes, audaecter calumniari; and then some things will be sure to stick
close, whereby they will pass the abused Vulgar (their best Instruments) with
the slighter examination. If then there appears any thing good, that shall be
either somewhat barbed of its Honor, or altogether slandered with a bad
intention, and evil end; if any action prove ambiguous, it shall be no less
than intollerably evil; and if there do happen a small failing (as, God help,
the wisest cannot always prevent) that shall be so dexterously managed, so
craftily augmented, that every circumstance shall appear a sin; and one poor
fault, which rather denotes Humanity than Impiety, shall be termed a
disposition to, nay, a common practice of ^ickedness. Then having told their
tale smoothly, the close of all is Ense reciden^^m; the Sword must instate all
in order.

THUS although they seem to breath nothing but Celestial Sweets, and with the
strength thereof to drive away the toxious vapors of impurity; though God and
Religion be their whole discourse, which should be a token of their near
relation to Heaven, yet to the meekness of a Christian persuasion, and the
Divinity of Concord, they are not inclined, for the way of peace have they not
known. Gods Kingdom was never propagated by the Sword, much less does he
Authorize Rebellious Wars for the Reformation of the Church: So that instead of
an inflamed Devotion, there is nothing but a burning Hatred lying hid under arch
Hypocrisy; instead of public good, avarice and particular self ends: God then
forbids such service, and no man can foresee any good to follow. Now to tell
us of sincere Religion in the contempt of the Divine Law, or to demonstrate the
Vtility accrewing to the Commonwealth by a Civil War, must be by such mad
persuasions, that none but men destitute of Wit and Grace can give or receive
them. It is very strange, that men of any Natural Faculties should abandon
themselves to the curse of a fruitless Study, renouncing Reason to extol
Whimsies and Vanity: For if this behavior, with the most artificial gloss, can
be any other, who can determine of the hope of Sincerity, and the Crown of
Incorruption? Surely the people could not thus imagine a vain thing, but that
like Fools they have said in their hearts, there is no God; or that the Lord
does not see, neither does the Almighty regard it: but let the^ not be
deceived, for God is not mocked. He, who from the Throne of Grace beholds the
Innocent, with an impartial eye sees the wickedness of the ungodly; and that
to the intent that he may bring down proud looks, and the mouth that speaks
great things.

HOW dearly some men love Commotions, and will not have reason to persuade, but
violence to obtrude upon men's Consciences, not what is indeed fitting, but what
themselves desire! Let them take heed, lest troubles and commotions,
unavoidably seizing upon them, scorch their bowels with endless flames, even
more piercing and intolerable than their Administrations of Terrors, whereby
they would seem to purify the Kingdom. But were these great clamours, these
outcryes upon the Government and Establisher, upon the Clergy and their
Protector, such Truths as the Reporters speak them, yet Piety resolves men
into compassion; and according to Christ's and the Churches, both direction and
practice, prayers for them, who make unwarrantable breaches upon the holy
Commandment, are the most usual Weapons of their Reforming, and meek Revenge.
The gentle coersive of prayer for Kings, and those who are in Authority, does
undoubtedly move Heaven, and bring Earth to a sacred compliance with its
Majestic Founder, sooner than any whatsoever compulsive Arts of wrathful
contrivance. Prayer and tears are of an excellent power, making the heavy minds
of the most disobedient and wicked to ascend Heavenward, contemplating that
compassionate Goodness which reveals it self to them, who were long ignorant
of it. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, said
a most curious pattern of Holiness, who thought this remedy more prevalent than
any within the reach of his Temporal (though Regal) power. Much greater reason
(doubtless) has a Subject to bear with his Superior: But if the Royal Dignity
think not scorn to lay aside the Sword, and turn Execution into mournful
Intercession, how much more willingly should every Subject put on devout
Humility, the glorious Badge of his Christian Profession, which brings down
the Divine Grace as fructifying showers upon the barren hills? If these open
mouths speak truth, yet should they know when to speak, and when to conceal it,
all truths being not to be uttered. Neither indeed would any but a brood of
cursed Chans immodestly utter to the world, and with an obscene finger point
out their Fathers nakedness. Truly their Fathers open infirmity diminishes not
the baseness of their impudence and scoffs, nor freeth them from the danger of
the approaching doom, which is stiffly dragged forward in the Chains of such
unnatural villainy. But prayer (which publishes nothing speaking to him alone,
who knows all things) makes a speedy alteration of hearts, not so much
covering the shame of some past miscarriages, as transforming all-giving Grace
to a sometime spotted and disfigured mind. They then who contemn this way of
Reformation, do in vain pretend to zeal and uprightness: For God having joined
his Fear, and the Kings Honor together, it is a strange fallacy in their
course of life, who dishonor the King and his nearest Ministers, to give the
clearer demonstrations of their fear of the King of Kings.

AGAIN, were there so much truth in their words as might make the condition of
those on whom they seek to fasten their imputations, to need or deserve their
pity, and were these Correctors of others really inclined to act only within
the lines of public benefit, yet sober persons would (before they enter upon
any such actions) consider whether good may be obtained as a blessing; whether
one good may be introduced without displacing a greater good, or introducing as
great an evil to counterbalance it. That most Pious and Judicious King very
pertinently asked this question, What good man had not rather want what he most
desired for the peoples good, than obtain it by unlawful and irreligious means?
It is the glory of every good man to hear the applause, but withal by worth to
entitle himself to the name of a Public Benefactor. No man is so prodigal of
his Soul, as to instate others in Paradise with his own Damnation; to procure
enlargement of Religiou^ Freedom to a people by such foul means as the Purity
of Religion abhors: But no man can expect the Divine Blessing, who to his
actions has not the Seal of the Divine Approbation; much less can he sincerely
love God, or study Popular Redemption, who loves not himself, but has
delivered himself over a Captive to the Enemy of all goodness, and sincere
felicity. For a man boldly to stand up, and bravely to acquit himself in the
defense of God's and his Countries Cause, is deservedly reputed a most worthy
service; a service, as every where commendable, so by Christians generally to
be undertaken: But then there must be no by interest twisted together with his,
(for that is the way to weaken the help that comes down from the Almighty)
neither any ways attempted but commendable and honest, lest the honor of the
Good Cause be buried in the infamy of the needless and bad succors, and God
give success according to the ways wherein they, who pretend for him, do walk
and act. He who enters upon a Religious War must be Gods Commissioner, and no
way abuse his credit, by exceeding his Commission, or diverting into private
Cisterns the course of those streams which God appointed for a general
satisfaction. If he transgress, he is not what he would be in Opinion, either
Gods Servant, or the peoples Benefactor; he is but the outward Representative
of that good which he preaches, stuffed up with baseness, and pestilent
mischiefs. Now thou who abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? This was
the Apostles question, int^mating it as a strange thing, that Vice should
correct Vice, and Satan's Kingdom be divided. God, who needs not any help for
the support of Truths ever bright shineing Taper, much less needs a dirty and
mouldring frame, wherein to fix it, which with its unclean fickleness would
foul and obscure it. Men, who make no conscience of their ways, yet would seem
eminent in the promotion of good, are not differing from a smutty collier with
his foul fingers taking hold of a most purely white garment, whose very
handling it rendered it quite contrary to what it was, changing its pleasing
beauty into an hew not only unpleasant but odious. He, who intends any Man
any great good, but for the effecting thereof treads indirect and evil paths,
makes that good he intends no good. Sin deformeth the Agent with an ugly
leprosy, and the contagion cleaves to all, that passes through his hands; so
that he, who receives the benefit, cannot but much loath, it seeing how and
whence it came. If many good things are not good, being immoderately desired,
certainly they must needs be bad being viol ntly and illegally obtained.

THIS generation of men, whose restless spirits seek continually matter of new
mischeifes, whose privy slanders and too too public complaints are no less
then the alarms of war, cannot be mistaken or defamed, if termed turbulent and
prone to rebellion; for the seeds of discord are sown in them, and the forward
sprouts show they have taken deep root. Dissension is all they speak, all they
act; for indeed they are wholly at variance with themselves. With the same
Tongue they speak different language, with the same hands they act contrary
things, and with the same feet they walk both forward and backward, and are so
altogether contrariety, that we may think Nature in framing them had been
forgetful of her usual course, and taking the Poets particulam undique
dissectam had so composed them of far different materials. Of them is the
Sinner (which holy Writ mentions) that goes two ways, and the same crew they
out of whose mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. Their words, while
sometimes they, seem so inoffensive that they discover nothing in the mind, but
what is of divine inspiration, shall (as the winds from contrary points) be
soon changed from a cherishing mildness into the extremes of a scortching heat,
or a nipping chilness. He, that thinks they either speak as they mean, or
will act according to their public professions and protestations, does neither
know them, nor can himself be known for a man of peircing judgment. His
innocent and simple credulity will excuse him, however his discretion cannot
commend him. He, who after so many experiments of their sincerity daily given
to the World, will credit rather their words then their deeds, his counsels
shall not (through God's blessing) be the Ground work of my security. I bear in
mind that sacred Kings acknowledgement of what observations of them he had
taken, when he tells us that his repulse at Hull had made him see clearly
through all the pious disguises, and soft palliations of those many, whose
words were smoother then oil, yet were they drawn Swords. None seem more joyous
at the Kings prosperity, no wishes in show more hearty then theirs, that
whatsoever he takes in hand may prosper, that God would give him his hearts
desire, and prevent him with the blessings of goodness. But all this
notwithstanding they do but bless with their mouths and curse inwardly. For if
a real victory crown the heads of his brave spirited Captains, and become an
additional splendour to his scepter, doubts are presently raised whether there
be more truth or policy in the relations. And commonly with these scruples are
intermixed assertions of events contrary to authorized publications, and most
easily do they infuse such spirits into the vanquished as make them immediately
become conquerers. Their reports show their desires. Their unwillingness to
hear of the Kingdoms prosperity, their readiness to sound forth the enemies
triumphs speak the discord of their affections and Tongues and withal this
certain truth, that although peace be in their mouths, there is war in their
hearts. And the desires thereof they attempting to cover with zeal their
religion is like the unlucky Bird near the Altar, which being in the place of
worship by its ominous notes terrifieth the adorers, filling them with the sad
expectation of calaimtous events. They seem frequent in prayer for Israel and
the peace of Jerusalem, when they are running greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward. like whom they in public bless, but in secret give the
murderous counsels of sin, that they may bring a plague upon the whole
congregation.

THESE are a generation that set not their hearts aright neither mind the
welfare of any. However they take upon them the care of others, they are the
corruption of the age. Looking back upon the thriving prosperity of the
precedeing peaceable age, and the sudden alterations upon the appearance of
this turbulent crew, we find that from them comes the cause of this just
complaint, that ever since -- Macies and nova febrium.
Terris incubuit cohors;
And that from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, is scarce any
thing left sincere. Now if the Physician heal not himself, it will be thought a
breach of wisdom for any to commit himself as a Patient to him, whose want of
skill appears too too visibly in open sores, and an infirm body. The
instructors of others should be more excellent in purity of Life, and abilities
of Learning, than other men are. He is, in this case, the best Physician, who
has been longest a Practitioner upon himself. The best men may best reprove.
Men who are Eloquent in other men's errors, and plead their own Cause with much
partial artifice, work no good in a Commonwealth; for the Parties reproved
retort upon them their own crimes, and think themselves well justified by their
busy Tutors discovered shame.

WERE then their Observations certain, and their Reports no way in the least
varying from the straight line of Truth, yet for such as have been heretofore
(not barely privily seditious, but) openly rebellious, and deservedly still
sulpected, to pry into the defects of other men's integrity, and shamelesly to
publish their Conceptions, does not so much diminish the good repute of the
Accused, as increase the infamy of the Accusers. What may be said of the
manners of some, I know not: Some small humors may arise in the healthiest
body; and where only such appear, there is no necessity of attempting a Cure by
desperate Remedies. It must be acknowledged, that there never was Church so
beautifully flourishing: which had not some Moles and blemishes, but I am
confident, that for Doctrine and Discipline, our Church is (to say no more)
equal to the best; and that few Ages of Christianity could, more than can this
present (I speak with respect only to the Kings Dominions) boast of Pious and
Learned Church Governors and Pastors. Yet so loud an outcry raised by
tumultuous Zealots has been heard, as if Religion were stifled in the Nests of
Impurity, and her blessed Light extinguished by those appointed to keep it
still flaming. But this (as I observed) not by any whose remarked and imitable
Piety has proved a light and guide to other men's feet, but such as have always
taught the people the utility of Error; such as are what the Philosopher
described the ungoverned Youth of his times, Seneca.
Expugnatores aliena pudicitia, negligentes sua; such as have cast off the
Cords of Religion, and burst asunder the Bonds of Loyalty, upbraiding Christ's
Vicegerent with a Crucifix, for no other reason that I know, but because he
has taken off from them the Cross which their Rebellion so much merited. So
that although his charitable meekness has looked upon their sin as venial,
their implacable malice will not permit them to commend or own this Goodness
and Charity, but provokes them to deprave that and slander him and his. And
seeing how at the same time, when they reproach the Church, they calumniate the
King, I cannot but applaud that most judicious observation of that most
venerable Martyr Land, Ser in Psalm ^4.22
That those men, who are sacrilegious against God and his Church, are for the
neighborhood of the sin, the likeliest men to offer violence to the honor of
Princes and their persons afterward. They, who will not spare a Princes honor,
will dare any thing against his sacred person, seeing it is certain that a
disesteemed Prince is more than half debarred of his regal power, which none
attempt, but such as would, if possible, utterly dethrone him, that themselves
may step up, and turn just Regiment into execrable Tyranny, and the Beauty of
Holiness into a Mass of confusion.

FOR these blessings do the people yield themselves, to be reduced and hearken
to their insinuations so eagerly. They have, it is true, better things promised;
but it is strange that men, whom no performances have justified, should yet
find a ready belief, and that the people court their abuses, as if woeful
experience had given them no caution. Each man may at pleasure see the reward
wherewith such masters gratify their followers, even the same that Lucifer
conferreth upon his beguiled instruments, who draws them by the false
representations of liberty, to the tortures of the cruellest thraldom. What
between fear and hope (the deceitful causes whereof they industriously scatter)
many are fitted for commotion, as their language intimates, they speak so
expertly after their teachers. Matters of Hope are not entertained, unless some
fearful suggestions intervene. Therefore when we use either preventives or
remedies, the fear of an evil induces us to use such means, as we Hope, will
remove the incumbent, or preserve us from ensuing matter of dread. But
frequently as men are possessed with empty Hopes, so are they (as it were)
dispossessed of themselves by causeless fears. Such are the Fears and Hopes
fomented by seditious murmurers. What fear of innovation in Religion* or
Government have the royal counsels or actions justly caused? Where we see
irresistible Constancy and the Defender of the Faith standing up in the defense
of it, why should we groan under suspicions, and like timorous har^s start when
there is no danger, deserting the wood for the winds rustling among the dry
leaves? Those valiant soulders were justly derided, quos pulvis motus fuga
pecorum exuit castris. When we either break our peace or run from our just
defense upon noises we know not whence coming or where arising, such ridiculous
things do we become. So is it also when vain Hopes seduce us, and we fall to
planting Paradises in the Ocean. Can men, unstable as water, who cannot brook a
just prosperity under a pious Prince, ever enlarge our happiness? They dread
nothing more then rest, and security; as they know it not, so neither do they
desire it. Would they then give the same measure of felicity to their
followers, which they Hope for themselves? We see the utmost of it, it is at
best but an insecure and changeable estate. Yet of this minute and treacherous
bliss seldom has the blind votary any more then his leaders promises.
Ambition loves to ascend and then cause the dejected ladder to be burnt,
because there shall be no climbing for others by the same ascent, nor any
pattern remain to instruct others in the ways of advancement. Without teaching
the people Rebellion these men's designs never take effect. If the ringleaders
thereby obtain their ends, it is no prudence in them to acknowledge the meaner
help, or obligations of gratitude to inferiors; but these, as well as the
opposers of their towering motions, must equally submit to the same scourge and
flame. Only the first assisters may possibly have the favor (like the
Inventer of the Brazen Bull) to have the first taste of their merciless power.
The unfortunate Hothams (not to recount any more) are a notable example of the
kind remunerations of such services under such Lords. Thus may the people see
who is more fit to sway the Scepter, our King, the undoubted Heir of the Crown,
who when upon just ground he might have required it, is tender and sparing of
blood; or those who care not what effusions they make, so that their wills may
be effected. And surely such as is their road toward what they covet, such are
their walks when in possession, terribly colored and polluted with blood and
slaughter. For every ambitious man (be h^s Words never so oily and seemingly
sanctified) tantum ut noceat cupit esse potens.

AND now that these are their aims is more then probable. Men should not be
charged with the highest crimes upon slight suspicion; for then would not the
purest innocence escape the foulest stains, whilst aggravated mistakes should
be unpardonable sins. But I could wish my self in this case mistaken and rash,
being unwilling to foster a defaming prejudice. If the seeing men of this age
would censure me, I should gladly condemn my self, and with more joy publicly
retract then now accuse, which I certainly do compulsively, not with delight.
But being by their light informed, I may rather be said to speak their opinions
then mine own private sentiments or discoveries. And I farther wish that the
contrivances of these men were so privately agitated, that they came within the
veiw of the sharpest judgments only, and were not by themselves proclaimed
upon the house tops, that men even of the inferior ranks might behold them and
be surprised with previous consternations before they give the blow. They vaunt
as if prevention were too late and that their formidable powers must be
restrained more by submission then resistance. A commotion may well be thought
contrived, when abetted, and too too near execution, when justified, and these
copious indulgences they have received, said to be given them rather through
fear and favor. I indeed think them deceived in all respects (as it is no
marvel that deceit should be part of the deceivers judgment) and do believe
that neither fear nor favor, but some compassionate thoughts of trying all
ways of amendment might wrest from so kind a Prince a consent for freedom,
which allowed does frequently make men who are not altogether past Hopes,
ashamed of their former actions and desires, and soonest works a reformation.
In like manner am I persuaded that notwithstanding their boasted numbers a
timely industry may put a stop to the growth of their potent insolence. The
swellings whereof if neither prayers nor tears, no lenitives or balsames can
assuage, to let the whole be seized upon and corrupted is not only an
unseasonable but a merciless pity. Indeed the hardest hearts when they come to
use the harshest means for the patients recovery, cannot but have strong
conflicts between commiseration and judgment; which later nevertheless
speaks the other useless, and with men of a well-ballanced temper condemns
it, not because it has used many of the mildest correctives, but because after
a long ineffectual application necessity it self has not been argument enough
prevailing for an alteration. When we see the same courses followed by which we
before ran into destruction; when we hear the Authors thereof fearlesly
justifying their former actions, and find them both actively strengthening
their parts with daily supplies, and with all more then imaginable and too
successful Arts, discouraging and weakening the Loyal hands; when they proudly
object Power, Wealth and Multitudes, to rebate the sharpest and most sincere
affections; when they insinuate the danger in which his Followers are; when the
Leader is apprehensive of their rich and supernumerary abilities; nay, when
they plainly speak the contradiction of them in any of their ways to be
necessarily an involving the Kingdom in another Civil War: Whether does this
tend, but to make up this conclusion, They affect Superiority, and if we will
not be ensnared, we must be beaten into Subjection?

SOME not so fully debauched with horrid intemperances as others, I may urge to
a consideration of their own language requiring of them satisfaction, how they
can justify themselves, whence they can plead a necessity of arms, who have
indeed all the fairest motives that reasonable men and Christians are capable
of to induce them to submission and quietness? Now it is said that that war is
just, which is necessary, and that is necessary, quod haec habet tria justa,
Lip. pol. l. 5.
authorem causam and finem. But in these over busied men appear none of these:
the Authors in no respect just, whose proceedings nothing can justify* a Cause
utterly wanting; and (as experience has schooled us) the End is nothing but a
desire of inflicting upon others the plagues of misery and confusion, it is
tantum ut noceant. Moreover if there were all these three, yet were it not
barely unchristian but inhumane to endeavor to raise such tumults as cannot,
once raised, be again stilled without shedding innocent blood, where the matter
might be composed by milder means. War should be our last worldly refuge, when
our adversaries will be satisfied with no reason, nor suffer us to enjoy our
rights whether spiritual or temporal unless we out reach them with the longer
sword. In such causes a warlike weapon may become a Christian hand, and
Religion will not think it a shame to lodge under an helmet. God does himself
sometimes teach men's hands to war and their fingers to fight. But it is when he
shows them no other way or remedy, when himself has put the sword into their
hands. A subject then is at no time thus supplied; neither if he take up arms
against the lawful Powers can those arms be pious but nefarious. All matters
which may seem so to concur as to justify the cause, cannot here frame the
least plea, because God has expressly forbidden war against the King, as in
word and deed so also in thought. What therefore he has prohibited, none will
presume to act, who knows his Lords will and revereth his authority. Neither
let any be persuaded to the least entertainment of such arguments of
justification, whereby evil men seek to make their spurious thoughts
legitimate; For that which God's infinite Wisdom calls not so, man's art can
never make a necessity.

WAR is begun in words; the tongue strikes before the hands. That seeks
first to wound, and is always ready to defend. He, who cannot with his tongue
maintain the uprightness of his Cause, will scarce be thought sufficient to
defend it with his hands; Thence it is that the world is filled with so many
seditious invectives. Thus Treachery makes its own guard, and with these it
annoyeth those against whom it acts But as all actual War against Superiors
is by God forbidden, so is it his Indispensible Command, Thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy People; no evil, although he deserves it, much less
injuriously: Yet this they do, accounting it their excellency, and pretend by
so doing to practice the means of security. They bind unto them the multitude
with these Bands of falsehood; and although they are active to their Princes
dishonor, and their own ruin, flatter them with hopes of being more
prosperous and happy.

BUT it is not much that they endeavor by reproaches to stir up the Subject
against his King; when they pretend that even Heaven it self is in their
complicacy: or rather it is no wonder that they mind Rebellion against an
Earthly Prince, that they bespatter him and his, when they spare not the most
sublime Glories of the Celestial Hierarchy, telling the world that these
Motives come from God, and that the Angels rejoice in these undertakings. Yet
notwithstanding their vaunts, I must be still uncharitable in believing the
contrary: For he who runs may see enough to satisfy him, that the Lord is
not in this Whirlwind. Hope of assistance from Heaven they can have none, who
indeed seek it not, but stand in defiance against it. Such as trust in Gods
Power are led by his Spirit; and Peace with Innocence is the way into which the
holy Spirit leads those who submit to his meek rules and guidance: Pure lips,
and an undefiled heart, he expects as the Pledges of his Favors. Being
presented with these, he brings the Authors, by the forementioned paths, to
the secure possession of his Tabernacle pitched without hands, to stand upon
his holy Hill, and be made unmovable Pillars in his holy Temple. But how do
many, who study not the great benefits of being found (like the beauteous and
wise Virgins with their trimmed Lamps) readily prepared with these graces,
deceive themselves with the glimmerings of success, even while they hear God
denouncing the Thunders of his wrath against such Prostitutes of sin? Much more
do I wonder, how God, or the World to come, can be in their thoughts and lips,
and they not presently fall into an ecstasy of horror. The meditation of our
approaching end, is the most necessary thought to take up both the beginning
and continuance of our life. Our chief study should be to die well, which is a
long Art, and (considering the violent distempers of our nature) none of the
easiest. It moreover requires a peaceable time; but in War, the Sword
devoureth one as well as another. How much Christian then can he be, who is
resolutely contriving an entrance into the Field without the Divine Guidance,
and looks death in the face, practicing Rebellion, not knowing but that in a
moment he must give an account to his injured and angry Judge? Or how much is
his zeal to be accounted of, who prodigally wastes his treasure of Reason,
wherewith God has been pleased to bless him, to the corruption of other men's
judgments, not considering that he who lent that misimployed breath, may
suddenly remand it from those debased uses, and commit the Speaker bound over
to his self-contrived miseries? The consideration of life's brevity and
uncertainty, should (methinks) make every man busied not in a foreign search,
but an home-enquiry after guilt: The time which is so spent upon others, is
clearly lost; what upon our selves, is truly gained. Most men, when they speak
of other men's faults, increase their own; but they who speak to God of their
own, by the example undoubtedly make many to be sooner cleansed. Then also has
the self-examiner this advantage of others, that he dismayeth not at Deaths
Menaces, having pacified his Judge: Whereas the backbiting murmurers hellish
life here is all his Heaven: He, who exercises himself with the lashes of
pious reproof, lives comfortably and peaceably, nay joyfully here, but is
assured of a superabundant joy after the frail body is clothed with Honor and
Perfection, by an happy Resurrection and desired Union with its glorified
Redeemer. Amen.

HAve mercy upon us, O Lord, for the dark places of the Earth are full of the
habitations of cruelty.

Lo the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string,
that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

If we had done this evil, which they mention, or those iniquities were in our
hands, wherewith they asperse us, then were we out of thy protection and the
enemy persecuting our souls, could not but take and destroy us.

But thy peircing Knowledge sees that they travail with iniquity, that they
have conceived mischief and brought forth falsehood.

Surely false witnesses have risen up against us laying to our charge things,
which we knew not: O take thou the matter into thine own hand, and be thou the
defense of the humble, for the wicked have purposed to overthrow their goings.

They, who have known thee, will put put their trust in thee, and call upon
thee in the day of trouble, for thou will hear them.

We will not trust in our bow, our Sword shall not save us, but thou shall save
us from our enemies and put them to shame, who hate us.

Although the blood thirsty lay snares and they who seek to do hurt, speak
mischeivous things imagining deceit all the day long, yet thou maintainest the
right; thou sit in the throne judging right, and thine Eyelids try the
children of men.

Thou, who alone know it, do good unto those, who are good and upright in
heart.

But as for such as turn aside to their crooked ways teach them that their end
will be to be led forth with the workers of wickedness.

O Gracious Father and Merciful Redeemer, consider the trouble, which we suffer
of them, who hate us, and of thy great compassion deliver us; and in ransoming
deliver us, we pray thee, from all our offenses, that we may not deservedly be
the rebuke of the foolish.

Thou hear and from the seat of thy Majesty, beholdest all our miseries.
Arise for our help and Redeem us for thy mercies sake, that the mouths of them,
who speak lies may be stopped.

Remember the reproach of thy servants, how we do bear in our bosoms the
reproach of many people; wherewith thine enemies have reproached thee, O Lord.

And for the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips consume them, that
they may not be, that by thy judgments they may make it known, that not cursed
policy, but thy good power rules unto the ends of the earth.

Instead of the desired effects of mischief prolong thou the Kings life and his
years as many generations. O prepare mercy and truth which may preserve him.

Because he will not yield to the dishonor of thy Church, they burden him with
these indignities; but do thou repay him seven fold into his bosom, and let
his honor be great in thy salvation.

This is thine own cause; Arise then and plead it; remember how the foolish man
reproacheth thee daily, the tumult of those, who rise up against thee,
increases continually.

In thee we trust, we cry unto thee to save us; For, Lo, they breath out
cruelty against us.

Deliver us, who desire to serve and worship thee in spirit and truth, from
lying lips and from these deceitful tongues, which speak lies in hypocrisy:

And let our adversaries be clothed with shame; let them cover themselves with
their own confusion as with a mantle.

Let them curse, but bless thou; let them be ashamed but let thy servant
rejoice.

O Lord God of Hosts, who judge righteously, if they will not return, let us
see thy vengeance upon all perverse promoters of bewitching sedition.

Let their conspiracies, be as the dust before the wind, and themselves as the
stubble before the fire, that the World may see that this is thine hand, that
thou, Lord, do establish the just by casting down the wicked.

So shall the Congregations of the people compass thee about; for their sakes
therefore lift up thy self on high.

And to thy servants give patience to bear their calamities, and together with
a religious boldness to withstand and rebuke their wickedness, grant such an
innocent and meek deameanour as befitteth the sincere Disciples of a most
humble Master.

By shunning backbiting and the reproach of our neighbor, and endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace fit us for our dissolution,
that we may in peace go down into the bed of silence, and joyfully rise again
to the possession of invincible tranquillity through Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. VII. How little the minds of some men are wrought upon: The continual
examples of miscarrying Factions.
SOLOMON thought the desire accomplished to be sweet to the Soul: But it was
also his observation, taken from the humor of men over-eager in pursuit of
their desires, that it is an abomination to Fools to depart from evil. The
sweetness of an accomplished desire is soon turned into bitterness, when we
think it well obtained by any means. He would allow of a self-satisfaction, of
a moderate pursuit of pleasures, which enjoyed, might level and fill up those
furrows, which every where insulting Fortune makes in the passages and ways of
life. But while foolish men inconsiderately view something which they take to
be good, being over persuaded by the outward appearance, and carried on with a
violent appetite, let reasonable demonstrations, or either certain or probable
danger labor never so much in the disabusing them, yet is it to them an
abomination to relinquish their beloved evil: Nay, although they have been
never so often thwarted in the entrances into the possession of their
destructive delights, yet no warning will teach these foolish ones, whose
passions shut the door against all manner of reason: Then do they encourage
themselves in an evil matter, and without fear rush on upon those things which
present themselves dangerous and dreadful. The Divine Vengence frequently
begins its work with confounding the Counsels, and infatuating the judgments
of impenitent offenders, making them run forward upon new practices, and
desperate attempts, to their utter ruin and calamity, suffering them (although
in improbable ways) by the hope of success, to delude and befool themselves.
And men who are carried away with uncertainties, do so gaze upon and admire
their hoped-for felicity, that follow it they will, without staying to consult
the unerring Oracle, or to be led so much as by prudence or common sobriety,
God justly depriving them of the benefit of the latter, that have despised the
former. Foolish men, who are wholly in love with their own ways, and like the
deaf Adder in the presence of the wise Charmer, can be no where in safety,
their own counsels leading them into mischiefs, and God, whom they have
forgotten, altogether forsaking them. Nothing is more treacherous than man's
will, being never Loyal, unless restrained from evil, and constrained to good:
It conspireth against all Sovereign Powers, and unless they most immoveably sit
fast in their Capitol, she debaseth them to most infamous contempt and slavery.
The Fools will is his Lawgiver and Law, and he is never obedient but to it,
when it sounds the Marches of Disobedience. Then, though Gods Commands and
Religious Equity dissuade him from his folly, yet he makes a mock of sin, and
presses forward into the Battle, being victorious in desire, although Reason
shows him the Sword by which he must inevitably fall.

TOO too commonly do we see Judgment thrust down, and subordinate to the Will,
and then, alas! are the whole treasures of safety and felicity put into the
custody of a wild Keeper, who never stays at home, or of an ignorant Pilot
that knows not his Compass. In this case Fortune has the opportunity to be
courteous, to show what she can do in bringing them, who cannot steer their own
Course, into that Port they seek. And indeed none else are obliged to her;
these are forced to trust her, but wise men scorn her offers, and for their
guidance have not Fortune, but God. Chance makes such only happy who know not
Providence, whom an ungoverned will having driven into an Ocean of dangerous
affairs, so that neither the means of return nor place of refuge are known,
contrary to expectation she thrusts into her Antium. Where when arrived, they
frequent her Temple, extolling the Graces of their newfound Goddess, and
thinking that her first kindnesses oblige her to a continuance of them; whereas
her levity is such, that she waits a time to laugh at their vanity, and
triumph in their misery. Fortunes favors are commonly the foolish sinners
glory: But they who neglect the governance of Gods Spirit, and give Lust the
Mastery of Reason, presuming to find Fortune attending their course, must know
it rare to find her, or being found, to have her constant. Success in evil
draws many upon the same, or greater attempts; but changes being common,
should give us caution. All times assure us, how wickedness in the beginning
plausible, has had Tragical and most shameful conclusions: Men's foolish
fancies never feast them so high at Noon, but that they undoubtedly make the
Supper of as course Fare as the Dinner was fine. They who trust that the future
events will answer the beginnings, will be undeceived when they find themselves
cheated, and their glory turned into disgrace. The hope of a gaining day,
because at the beginning he won, makes the Country strangers Purse empty, and
the Cheater laugh at his confidence: So he who reckons up his fortunate sins,
shall be sure of a losing Cast, which will mar all his boasting. Some men think
themselves certainly espoused to Fortune, because she has sung them some
Love-sonnets, and embraced them with flattering kindnesses: But the same, who
have known her once unchaste, must know her always unconstant. It is an assured
truth delivered us by God himself, that the prosperity of Fools shall destroy
them: So is it with the Thief, whose lucky dishonesty incourageth him to go on
till he come to an infamous death, yet his merited reward, the Gallows. And the
Traitor (kind to none, worst to himself) having tasted the forbidden fruits of
a prosperous Rebellion, by promising himself Fortunes constancy, and that she
will yet add to his Trophies such glories as will fill his aspiring mind,
proceeds till he be taken in his own snare, and falls the Executioners
Victim and Prey.

OUR unfortunate Age (fruitful in the production of men, who were the Curse and
Plague of their time) as it saw it self miserable in those it nourished, so in
much measure avenged of the injuries it suffered, when the Heads of the
Rebellious multitude came to be judged by him whom they had offended, and most
of the rest came each submitting himself with pieces of silver. Those who
suffered not by the Sword of Justice, but enjoyed the benefit of an unparalled
Pardon ( Christ's only excepted) cannot without impudence speak for themselves,
or frame an excuse. Rebellion had infected them, and made them ugly; where
might they think to appear? Yet were they not so ugly, but that the Eye of
mercy could behold them. In which gracious condescension his Majesty manifested
the exceeding goodness of his Nature, and the Gallantry of his Mind, that could
humble it self to the receiving such into favor. Many who have not been
wanting in the work of Patience, have in this of Remission: And in a King,
toward Offenders of this nature, the work of forgiveness is far more glorious,
because the offenses most heinous. But Pardon properly belonging to them who
repent, I not knowing what to term that Royal Act, speak what I know in
another words: Nil negat, and sese vel non poscentibus offert.
Claud. Pan. Prob.

Truly magnanimous was the saying of his most Pious Father, I still thought my
self undiminished by my largest Concessions, if by them I might gain and
confirm the love of my people. So our most gracious King, as the Son of so good
a Father, studieth the winning of all, and by the invitations of Mercy
endeavors the recovery of the lost Sheep. Now the more favor is conferred
upon reasonable people, the more the Favorites become humbly grateful, that
the Favourer may be highly joyous. In his Merciful Pardon he gave himself,
resolving upon the largest Concession, that he might gain and confirm the love
of his People. It is but fit that the people return themselves as a part of
satisfaction, that he might find in their best endeavors at least somewhat of
that he gave, the fruits of unfeigned Love. I hope God has so much mercy in
store for him, as to give him many of the Hearts he sought: yet many are such
as they were before, who urged that blessed Prince, King Charles the First, to
this character of them, that they were men who thought to satisfy all
obligations to duty by their Corban of Religion; and could less endure to see,
than to sin against their Benefactor, as well as their Sovereign. I know not
what aileth these men, who being forgiven before they repented, will not be
persuaded yet to repent, but seek by obstinacy to invalidate the Power of
Mercy, and by adding sin to sin, to cut themselves off in an untimely hour. If
by the success of former times they assume hopes of the like prosperity, let
them look upon those examples of Divine Vengeance, the most odious Regicides,
and confess ingenuously. -- Non unquam tulit
Documenta fors majora, quam fragili loco
Starent superbi. Sen. Troad.
Let them also consider the deservedly unfortunate Assertors of the Peoples
Liberties; men, who under that Title sought to kindle anew the flames of
Rebellion, whether they were English or Scotch, openly rebellious, and
privately promoting it. Let them not so much favor their designs with the
remembrance of their best events, as give themselves the disheartening Lectures
of the cross Events and ill Fortunes of their Accomplices and Brethren. And
because (as the Historian has it) Pauci prudentia honesta a deterioribus,
Tacit. l. 3. Aur.
utilia a noxiis discernunt; plures aliorum eventis docentur: Surely directions
cannot be wanting amidst so fresh examples, which speak this to the world, that
such as think they plot against others, chiefly design their own ruin. They
forcibly thrusting themselves into Treasonable actions, even against their own
Reason, the further they proceed, the more dangerously are they lost in the
Labyrinth of their own errors; and while they are framing deceitful
contrivances for the feet of others, their own standing proves slippery, and
their pernicious wit takes no effect, but their downfall becomes admonitory.
Which to wise men is so; only the obsequious Followers of Fancy (who think
themselves sufficient to overtop all difficulties, till by them circumvented,
and utterly lost) take no notice of the miseries attending Traitors, by reason
of humane hatred, and the appointment of Divine Vengeance. They look so upon
the outward Pomp, wherein some of them overtaken by Justice once flourished,
that the admiration and desire thereof makes them unmindful of the
accompanying evils, and ensuing calamities. Who so nearly examineth them in
their best estate, when most happy by Victories, when the Innocent is slain,
and they in possession of the Vineyard, shall find the King of Terrors
dwelling in their Tabernacles, and that because they are none of their own; he
shall find them foreboding terrible things, the confounding consequences of
their notorious falsity: And following them farther, may observe them (who in
other respects were unacquainted with truth) most unerring Prophets of their
own shame, and certain destruction. He shall see the steps of their strength by
degrees straightened, and their own counsel to cast them down; that they are cast
into a Net by their own feet, that they always walk upon the snare. The
Complication of Rebels becomes not unto them a Wreath of Lasting Honor, but
rather an unfortunate Cord of Execution, or one of the most brittle of the
black Threads of Destiny, made of the outcast and very despicable matter of her
labors, which will scarce brook time to be spun to any length, and then cut
off, but suddenly snappeth asunder of it self. For besides that the very nature
of it rendereth it apt to sudden ruptures, many things intervene to prevent
that natural one by a more speedy end: For the time that they are in the height
of their Glory, while the veiled Bonnet, and bended knee, with whatsoever
admirations of the silly Vulgar, who with their vain breath swell things beyond
their nature, while (I say) these seem to afford them pleasure, and they are
much advanced, they are but like Promotheus, seated indeed on high, but
miserably vexed at the heart, and inwardly gnawed with a devouring plague: And
yet it is seen, that as the multitude in an extravagant sit speaks things
agreeing with the humor of ambitious men, having once extolled them, they
glory as much in their reproach and shame. This then is the best of their time;
upon this empty Air is the whole dependence of their joy: And how apt this wind
is to turn, who does not perceive? Nay, who knows not that it cannot long
blow from that Point? And as the sporting Dolphins, dancing in their liquid
Field, possess with grateful delights men unacquainted with the certainty of an
approaching Tempest; so do the Gratulatory Songs of the peoples affections,
when Rebels come to the Stern, and sail in the Seas of Dominion, much please
these Novices in Government; but presently follow the rough Storms of Obloquy,
heightened with loud threats, and clamorous complaints; which make that place,
which at first seemed the most pleasing, to appear the most dangerous and
horrid of all that worldly misery ever possessed. So does this preceding glory
become no other than the nearest way to assured infamy, and the contempt is the
greater, when it falls upon men sometime overladen with undue honors. And
what ridiculous Toys, what odious things Fortune makes such her once admired
ones, is lately shown, when those, to whom it gave the most Honorable Titles
of the Supreme Head, and the Supreme Authority, the people transformed after
the strangest manner, thinking the name of the most unsightly and unclean part
of the body most suitable to them, no taunt, or scoff, being thought sufficient
for their demerits. Their affairs, when they hope for the best, presently turn
to the worst, all still happening otherwise than they hope; and then; with the
Devil, they think themselves tormented before their time. Indeed their own
Consciences will not give them leave to sleep in the Beds of security, but Gods
Justice lets them not be long in safety. They always expect the stroke
thereof; and although they may by forsaking their sins prevent it, yet will
they not, but rather provoke and hasten it. God likewise seeing their obdurate
continuance in wickedness, is the more speedy in performance of his word,
whereby he has made his servants to hope, which is, that bloody and deceitful
men shall not live out half their days: He remembers and succoureth his
Children, breaking the Rod of their Oppressor, and bringing those to confusion
who hate them. Thus while they behold to days prosperity, not forecasting
future accidents and changes, and putting as far from them as possibly they can
the thoughts of account to be given to him, who is, as in Glory, so in Power
exalted above them: They are as a Ship swallowed up by the Quicksands, with
only a Masts top appearing useful to all that pass by, although it self utterly
perishing. It warns them to avoid that dangerous Road, where is nothing to be
expected but merciless destruction, and to provide for their welfare by a
better Course.

-- Ante, Genitor, quum fulmina torques
Nequicquam horremus?
Good God, how little is thy Wrath feared? How regardless are miserable men of
thy displeasure, when no examples of severity will admonish them? God is angry
with the wicked every day; yet others will not understand, or be wise. How many
Conspiracies have our late days seen discovered, and (by the blessing of God)
confounded? We cannot boast of a righteousness in his sight deserving it, but
God was angry with the wicked. Rebellion and Stubbornness are before him such
abominable sins, that if we consider the multitude of miscarriages, the
sufferings of many, and the impenitency of others pardoned, we might be much of
the fear (did we not know God infinitely gracious, and protesting, that he
wills not the death of a sinner) that they exclude Mercy. Many who have been
active, and since pardoned, have been encouraging themselves, and their
language, tending to the disheartening of his Majesty's Friends, and
encouragement of Foreign Enemies: And these would not learn, from other men
their Leaders, what must be their merited portion. Those Enemies to Peace, and
themselves, who will not accept a small reproof mixed with abundant favors, are
deservedly brought under the Wheel; for what does more suit with the contempt
of Mercy, than severity and vengeance?

SOME there are who would seem admirably well affected to the Royal Cause,
whilst frequent in rehearsals of their acquitted Crimes. Who so glories in
his sin, does so often react it as he boastingly mentions it: which is a
thing too too common among multitudes concerned in the Act of Pardon. Surely it
testifies the absence of all holy sorrow conceived for former Disloyalties,
and (if I may inoffensively speak my thoughts) argues a readiness, upon
occasion, to act over again what they love to repeat. God calls for mourning
and sorrow, that pious tears may wash away the stains of Innocent and Loyal
Blood; without which, a good man forgiving, the most just Judge will by no
means acquit or indemnifie. For want of these, Gods provoked anger may (if his
mercies prevent not) render the whole Land a confused Mass of Calamity
overwhelmed with a just overthrow. Blood it defiles the Land: The defilement
has not been ordinary, but superabundant; the Streets of most Towns and
Cities, the Fields and Highways complain even yet of the injurious burden, and
cry for vengeance unto him, who will undoubtedly Judge in Truth and Equity.
Pure and unfeigned Repentance will (and nothing else) remove the burden, and
stop the cry. If his distinguishing compassion spare others, yet the guilty and
obstinate must by their punishment purge away the defilement: For before either
Sorrow or Judgment purge the Land, we cannot well expect that our God can be
favorable and gracious unto Sion. Consider we the overthrow of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar. God, by the Prophet Jeremy, threatened the destruction of Judah
and Jerusalem for the Innocent Blood which Manasseh shed: Manasseh had shed
much, but was repentant: yet we find the wrath of God pronounced against Judah,
even after Manasseh's death, for that Blood which he had shed. But God does not
punish a Nation for one man's sins, and he penitent; he is just, and makes
every one bear his own burden; neither will he judge them, who impartially
judge and condemn themselves: But Manasseh (doubtless) had many Instruments in
such Tyrannous Facts, who repented not. His Repentance might procure his own
deliverance, but was no way beneficial to others, who being guilty of blood
(and peradventure not barely Instruments, but Promoters of cruelty) sought not
by Contrition to pacify the incensed Avenger. There is no other refuge
appointed for sinners, especially those stained with blood: And if the Avenger
overtake him that shed it before he escape thither, there is no favor, no
mercy to be shown. The Innocent Blood which some have shed (all that ever bare
Arms against their King) must either be washed away with tears by all the
Offenders and Instruments, or will be by their blood. I ought to think that
some of these have by their happy sorrows quitted themselves of their Crimson
miseries, and have obtained those propitiatory drops which make
Blood-guiltiness disappear as if it had never been. But yet we see how
impenitency drives many upon presumptuous attempts, which must unsheath the
Sword of Justice, drawing blood from them, from whom tendered mercy could draw
no tears; and how others mock at their own calamity by vainglorious boastings,
of what temperate men would account their greatest shame, and blush at the
rehearsal. These men, although not the Manasseh's who marched in the Heads of
the blood-thirsty Regiments, are equally culpable with their Leaders, by the
barbarous execution of their lawless and merciless Commands: And if Vengeance
strike the Head, making it bear its shame, the members are partakers with it,
and cannot but undergo the infamy. See we how man's iniquity wearieth him in the
search after Justice, and the pursuit of its reward. When God by his
Vicegerents remission of past offenses required submissive Loyalty, and sincere
Obedience, as if unable to bear the burden, the offenders fly from it, and
either put the Cord about their own Neck, or else by owning their sin, proclaim
it their just desert. His Gracious Majesty, as one most excellently well
skilled in the Divine Faculty of compassion, would not see these men's injuries
in the height of malice. Hoping them to be found rather ignorant than
malicious, he was ready to forgive, upon this account, that they knew not what
they did. But Villainy labors to be known, it hates to be mistaken, and
discovers it self. The Authors desire secrecy, and to act in private; but
the sin, which has an obscure Birth, soon walks abroad of it self, or else
is carried on the Wings of Fame. There is no containing it within Lock or
Fence, no depressing it by the multiplicity of Arts industrious subtilties,
because although the Enemy of all, it would be unknown to none. It disdaineth a
curb, and he who would stifle it, gives it the advantage to be made more
apparent; he that would conceal it, makes it better known. The sinner is a
blind Sentinel, he stands much upon his Guards; but while he would not have
such as he has made his Adversaries to observe his defects, his ill postures
of body directed the contrary way, summon all to a nearer approach, and to take
their fill of both revenge and scorn. Rebellion not repented of thus, brings
to confusion and shame the wretched Actors. If not at first known, it soon
betrayeth it self; if known, and not pun shed, it moves all its own Engines to
its own overthrow: Ruin is the end it aspireth to a d it is indefatigable
until that is obtained. ^lind hopes may lead the Authors Opinion to other
thoughts, and prevail to a surp izall of it by confidence, but the nature of
sin enclineth the man's motions toward a violent fate, and desires to hurl him
down an irrecoverable precipice.

THIS being the nature of the sin, the general miscarriages of Rebellious
undertakings cannot be thought strange. Such as the counsels are, such must be
the fortune; from whence they had a being they return in the end. The
stratagems of the most subtle and cruel enemy of man are undiscerned by both
the ambitious and malicious. He smootheth over his bait with a delicate gloss
and fair appearance but his cruelty at last makes even for all. The uncertain
appearance of the promised good was never so pleasing as the certain evil
proves terribly distracting. But some men how far are they from shame or
compassion upon themselves, not remembering that the counsels of the infernal
foe, though they raise the hopes to promotion, never miss of bringing the
abused Clients to destruction! Examples being the surest way of instruction,
let us look abroad, and after search of antiquity see how many of its upstart
prodigies of honor died in peaceable possession of it, and came to their graves
Sicca morte. But examples of our homebred conspirators being more useful
(especially such as are fresh in our memories) we may observe that such
wickedness cannot be long prosperous. The undertakings of this nature are
weighty, one counsel still depressing another when all things seem to have
attained perfection. And this, that God may show himself just and wise, who
takes the wise in their craftiness and disappointeth the inventions of the
wicked. I have already spoken of the most execrable Regicides, whose sufferings
I gladly mention, although it greiveth me to remember the cause. But
considering Sir John Hotham the first professed rebel, whose treason at Hull
found a suitable reward, I think that no faithless subject was ever more
exactly fitted by kind Masters verifying my words in the former Chapter, That
the first assistance in Treasonable Actions, have many times the Fortune to be
the first tasters of the merciless power of such as employed them. We may see
in the actions of traitors what they think to be the just recompense of their
falsehood, and accordingly judge of their misery, who by their own opinion
pre-condemn themselves. And easily may we discern what kind of happiness these
men have, who are not safe one among another. If judgment fails to come upon
them from elsewhere, it is usual to have fire come out from Abimelech and
devour the men of Sechem and the house of Millo, and to come out from the men
of Sechem and the house of Millo to devour Abimelech. Such was the miserable
end of that treacherous Knight his accomplices in iniquity being (it is uncertain
whether) as just toward him, as he, and they unjust and ungrateful toward
their most kind and liberal Master. Enmity it self could not have invented a
more proper revenge for such a crime; nor of all examples can there (in my
judgment) be found one more expressly teaching us the evil consequences of
infidelity. Hear we that blessed King, whom he had so impudently affronted,
compassionately delivering his thoughts of it; Poor Gentleman (says he) he is
now become a notable monument of unprosperous disloyalty, teaching the World by
so sad and unfortunate a spectacle, that the rude carriage of a subject toward
his Sovereign carries always its own vengeance with it as an inseparable
shadow. He truly knew how to pity and showed by him what others might best
expect. He would have had warning so taken by him, as that posterity might see
no more such examples, nor have occasion to relate the mournful passages of men
forsaken by grace and fortune. For such must needs be calamitous appropriating
and engrossing to themselves the threatened curse, that because they regard not
the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them and
not build them up. As one hunting a poor fugitive hare rides after the chase
through a deceitful land undermined and by reason of many pits very perilous;
so is he who unlawfully pursues honor and dominion; the prey taken cannot
compensate the danger or make recompense for his fears; But there is an
uncertainty of taking what he seeks accompanied with a certainty of perishing
whether it be obtained or lost. The worst things dearest bought are the
contentments of fools: Religion, reputation, liberty and peace, nay even all
the goods of body and soul do they pass away in exchange for an unseen glory
and a projected prosperity, and will not be guided by Wisdom, nor in the least
own her, until she laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear is come.

IT is a most excellent decree of Providence, that sin should either not be
prosperous, or prosper to its own ruin. As Nature instructs us in things
Monstrous, that they never generate, or things of a Viperous kind, which
although they generate, yet bring forth at once their Fruit and Death; so
observation in passages of Providence will teach us, that wickedness either
has no procedure, or an unfortunate one. Evil counsels commonly vanish into
nothing, and the Authors vex at their hopes, proving fruitless Dreams: But if
(as it sometimes happens) they raise the Authors to a Throne of Sublimity,
yet have they no enjoyment of these successes; for the very successes are the
most certain and killing mischiefs. More than the the Viperous Race do such
prosperities not only destroy them of whom they had a being, but hinder
Generation in those minds, which being otherwise apt, are by fear disabled.
Rebellion (too too common notwithstanding) would more abundantly multiply its
cursed Off spring, did not the hasty dispatches of the Divine Wrath overthrow
those Mountains of Felicity, which proud men having raised to themselves, do
conceive immovable. Some whose inclinations are not averse to base
undertakings, do somewhat forbear, because (being not so wholly void of Reason
as others) they see the danger, and will not engage. But where the want of
judgment takes away fear, men are active to their hurt; for so it always
proves, there being no solid hopes of an happy end without a good beginning.
Would any one, who knew the danger, plunge himself all over head and body in a
boiling Furnace? or leap down a steep Rock into a devouring Gulf? Neither can
any man of a sober mind cast himself off from the secure Rock of Loyalty, into
the Whirlpool of Disobedience. He sees no cause, no profit, no honor, not the
least, either convenience or necessity, to persuade him to any such thing. He
well esteems it the abjection of himself, and in the best state of Fortunate
Disloyalty, sees nothing tempting him to the experiment of the worst. And
some, who in contempt of God would even dare to sin, are restrained by the
continual miscarriages, either early or later, of such as Humane Vengeance, by
the appointment of the Divine, has taken away from the midst of the Earth at
times, when they least expected evil, and most presumed upon the goodness of
their Fortune. These (although scarce other than blind) discern how short a
blessing Fortune conferreth upon such undeserving servants; and that she flies
from them with more speed than the Sun, from his Rising to his Setting: From
such she commonly makes an unusual have, making her Morning come late, and her
Evening soon; then leaving them to the darkness of their guilty minds, but the
open punishment of their odious acts. The miseries and just sufferings of these
are useful to others, I wish I could say to all: But God, who makes other men's
evils to become his Childrens good, has not been pleased to grant them so full
a favor, as to bring into their Sacred Society all those who have forsaken the
Paths of Life, to tread the Ways of Darkness, whom he has yet spared, that
they may repent, and not post forward to Judgment by a perverse obstinacy in
what he abhors, and will sorely punish with present and eternal Plagues.

THEY who have had such Motives to Humility, should advisedly repair to their
Offices and Duties of Allegiance, certifying themselves of the rigor of
provoked patience, when turned into fury. Why will they multiply those
transgressions, whereof the least is in Gods sight monstrous? Can they esteem
that light, which God so remarakably punishes above other sins? The Crowns and
Dignities of Kings are among the chief of Consecrated Treasures. In them, as
the Depositories of of the most precious things of his Church, God lays the
concerns of her glory and safety: So that destroy them, and we know not where
to find Aarons budding Rod, neither the Golden Pot that has Manna; the Church
goes to ruin, the Pillars of it are dissolved, the Foundations removed, and
both Decency and Order, nay all Religion is then utterly subverted. When Kings,
who are her Nursing Fathers, are spurned at, and insulted over by the foot of
Pride, there can be no Peace in Jerusalem, no Prosperity within her Palaces.
And it is indeed too well known, that Rebels spare no part of the Body, when
they can give Law to the Head; and that they never seek to injure the Guardian,
unless their Lust covet the Churches defilement. But although they attempt
much, setting themselves to the study and restless practices of whatsoever they
imagine conducing to their aims, they shall never be able to prosper; and
through the tender mercies of the Highest, our Chieftain and Head shall not
miscarry. The formidable Powers of the Churches prayers are always fighting
against them, as well as their own sins, against which their subtilty can never
prevail. Although they strive, and with continued labors endeavor to get some
advantage, the profit of their labors will be summed up in a Cipher, but their
losses must needs rise to an infinite account. In all their ways -- Incedunt
per ignes
Suppositos cineri doloso;
And their miserable end frequently happens to be unawares and sudden, but
undoubtedly certain. So many Loyal Subjects faithful Arms dedicated to their
Princes safety, fail not of Victory, because they implore, and even provoke by
an holy violence, Omnipotency to be a concerned Opposite. Peradventure some
inconsiderable success may heighten their lofty spirits, and make them trust to
the indulgences of a Stepmother: But then says God unto them, Lift not up
your Horn on high; speak not with a stiff neck. He makes them then to know,
that he is Judge, that in his hand there is a Cup, and the Wine red; that it is
full of mixture, and he pours out the same; but the dregs thereof all these
wicked of the Earth shall wring them out, and drink them. When Fortune
bestows on them a favor, let them manage it to the utmost of their industry
and power, it will prove but a feeble insufficiency. Could they work even many
things in the Neighborhood of what is supernatural, yet much more easily God
can and will give Victory unto, and establish in his just fruitions him, for
whom we incessantly pray, thinking our selves never safer, than when so
contending for his preservation. Were there nothing but his Innocence and
undoubted Propriety, these are sufficient to immure him from their base
purposes, and give him a glut of revenge upon audacious Conspirators. These
are, through Gods pleased approbation, every where triumphant, in despite of
Fortune, Policy, and all the machinations and devises of ungodly Wit; insomuch
that an Heathen Poet could declare the success of Integrity, eminent over all
other succeedings.

Extruite immanes scopulos, attollite turres,
Cingite vos fluviis, vastas opponite silvas,
Garganum Alpinis, Appeninumque nivalem
Permistis sociate jugis, and rupibus Haemum
Addite Caucaseis, involvite Pelion Osiae.
Non dabitis murum sceleri: qui vindicat, ibit.
Omnia subsident meliori pervia causae.
Claud. Pan. de 4o Cons. Honor. Which may be thus Englished: Heap up huge
Rocks, to Heaven raise Towers, enclose
Your selves with Rivers, Deserts vast oppose:
Gargan to the Alps, and Snowy Appenine
With mingled ridges wed, Haemus conjoyn
To the Caucasean Rocks, Mount Pelion
On Ossa. Hence for Treason ye'l find none;
The Avenger will find way, all things will yield
To the better Cause an easy pass and Field.


The protection of the Innocent is Gods Glory; he rejoices in nothing more,
than to be called their Deliverance, and Deliverer. He takes mavelous
delight in their Songs of Triumph; and therefore shows himself ready to plead
their Cause, and work their Peace. When they complain of the injurious dealings
of men, he preserves them, by delivering the wicked over to their own
mischief. When the Rod is cast into the fire, the Children are secure, and have
then more cause and liberty to contemplate, and magnify that infinite Goodness
by which they are saved, and their strongest Enemies confounded.

AND of this Goodness and Justice he gives clear and continual testimonies,
which that they may be the more frequent, peradventure is the cause why he did
not bring such as deserved punishment for their unnatural Rebellion all at once
to their merited ends, but suffered many of them to proceed, from contempt of
former mercies, to more and more insolent perpetrations.

Sic inconsumptum Titii semperque renascens
Non perit ut possit saepe perire jecur.
Had they all presently suffered, the memory of their sufferings had been less
durable; whereas disregarding all favor, and laboring to fill up the measures
of those who went before, they fall into the snare by degrees, and are the
continual Victims offered up for the common peace. The Psalmist praying against
a mischievous Crew of his time, although he desired God not to be merciful to
any wicked transgressor, yet soon after entreats of God as a favor, that he
would not slay them, least (says he) my people forget. Some remaining after
the rest, when the Instruments of Vengeance seem dull, will by incessant and
abusive provocations, be still whetting and sharpning them, and always jesting
with them, until they receive the fatal stroke: And latter Executions revive
and renew the remembrance of former Acts of Justice. Which good men consider
with compassionate affections, bemoaning their wilfulness, whose hearts nothing
could mollify, but by devout joy expressing their gratitude to their Redeemer,
who exalts Innocence to a Throne, and dejecteth Iniquity to a Dunghill. Gods
Patience indeed is admirable; he waits long expecting man's change, and the
Renovation of his mind: But without satisfaction, Patience must at length give
up its place to Wrath. Sin moves Heaven it self to compassion, but Impenitency
rejects it, as the Rock does the Showers, which elsewhere are entertained,
and softning. Continuance in Rebellion must needs repeal the greatest offers of
Grace; and obdurate hearts, delighting in cruelty only, shall assuredly have
their fill of implacable severity.

WHEN it comes to this, useless repentance is cheap and common: Then men wish
that they had been provident, when they cannot regain their losses. He, who
before his entry upon his desperate attempts, should have proposed this to
himself; How dare thou adventure to cross these Seas without fear, wherein so
many have perished, nay, wherein is certainty of being wracked? never
considers the peril, till he finds his bottom split, and the Floods opening
to receive him. Action before consultation, is faithfully attended with
crosses: It has no Guide, neither seeks to avoid them; in which respect it
cannot but fall into misfortunes. Not to be willing to foresee, is to resolve
to suffer, and to manage affairs unadvisedly, is to determine their
miscarriage: But when the certainty of the danger presents it self e're he
begin, that person tempts mischief and ruin, who will presumptuously go on.
And truly such an ones condition is deservedly not pitied when he complains,
who when faithfully forewarned, would dare what wise men dread, who was
acquainted with the consequences, and so betrayed himself, becoming his Enemies
Slave by his own base surrender of himself. Man may not think to make his will
his protection. By following the Counsel and Will of God, he may be sure to
prosper; for that Will is the only Rule of Safety. To go contrariwise, and be
surprised by unhappy events is but what is common and unavoidable. Yet as if it
were some unexpected novelity which happened unto them, men overtaken by their
own desert then begin to consider and bewail their overseeming folly, when it is
altogether too late. When the thoughts of their disgraceful undertakings
perplex their minds, and the evil of adversity pincheth and tormenth their
body, then they confess what the world before knew, that folly directed them
and madness carries them on headlong to the unlucky state, at which they are
arrived. Temporal calamities make them confess their indiscretion; under them
they are sorrowful, but most commonly it is rather because they suffer what
they desired to inflict on others, then out of a pious grief for their
offenses. That they are disappointed of their beloved mischief is the matter of
their grief. Their aspiring thoughts and lofty aims brought down to shame,
cause them bitterly to mourn; when alas! they ought first to have weighed the
lawfulness of their desires, and then the probability of success. But of the
misery of the soul which they long lay under, they were altogether insensible.
Those stupifying burdens of disobedience they willingly bare, and the Asses
backs being broken, are only sorry they can bear no longer. Surely, the
afflictions of a stained conscience are the most intolerable; It is strange
that he who can patiently abide them, cannot contentedly endure the
disappointments and falsities of Fortune. Her injuries are nothing in
comparison of the insulting Tyrannies of sin. Neither would any know what the
miseries of body meant, if the cruelty of sin had not first overladen them with
its yoke. All things which afflict us are sin contracted maladies, from which
the best cannot glory in an immunity. But the difference between religious and
disorderly men is, that those with all their might and diligence shun the evil
of sin out of an holy hatred thereof, these as furiously fly from virtue, and
with equal violence pursue what the others fear. In whom miseries must have the
more perfect increase, because sin the greater growth. Miseries indeed are not
in them presently accomplished, partly because their great sins do not
presently gather into a body, and partly because the greatest evils, have the
longest time e're they are formed and come to the birth. As many (and those
most incurable) diseases do not show themselves till by a long confluxion of
peccant humors they have gotten strength enough to destroy that body in which
they reside: so many calamities, which are the just judgments of God, and are
daily nourished by sinful acts and desires, have not a being as soon as the
sins, (for the birth must be younger then the parent) but after a certain time
break, forth as being then mature and able for their designed employment. But
now if a delight in sin arm them not with a wounding and killing power, the
harms of temporal crosses are not matter of dread, nor other then such as men
barely imagine to be harms. Where the guilt and horrors of a polluted mind make
them not hurtful, adversities are but stingless serpents, which will not hurt
us, if we fear not the name, but we may safely converse and play with them. To
such as have wilfully broken the commandment, God sends them as offensive
tokens of displeasure to thwart the unjust men in their ways. He will not
suffer them to reap the joys of the seed they have sown; but as he sends
sometimes showers and unseasonable floods upon the Husbandmans labors,
presently after he has entrusted the prepared Soil with the pledges of his
hopes; or at other times with continual droppings, and overflowings at Harvest,
makes his supposed rich return, to be changed into an impoverishing dearth: So
sometimes in the Bud, sometimes in the full Ear, when almost ripened, he
destroys the Rebels confidence, by the secret distillations of his anger, or
the open floods of a sweeping Vengeance. Man's condition here will not allow him
an always undisturbed felicity; but Rebellion permits not that little time of
repose, which they were otherwise capable of, to fall into the Authors Lot. And
then by the benefit of a quieted Conscience, the casualties of life are to good
men void of trouble, but to ungodly men they are irksome, and intolerable;
they groan and repine under them: Which restlesness is not given by outward
trouble, but by inward guilt, Conscience aggravating, nay making it grief. That
therefore men may the better bear common ones, and not incur extraordinary
troubles; or if they should happen, that they may not make them miserable, let
them free themselves from guilt, and by obedience put themselves under the
defense of the Almighty. Res magna est habere imbecillitatem hominis, Sen. ep.
53.
securitatem Dei, said a wise man. I cannot say he was a Christian, but
assuredly the words do well become Christian lips. For indeed, look every
where, and search the world over, there is no where any help for our despicable
frailty, but the Divine Security. If we shun the examples of proud and disloyal
men, walking in the paths made plain for us by Christ, and his devout
Followers, this security, as an impenetrable Bulwark, will keep off evils from
us; this will surround us, and Gods Eye, pleased with our walks, will always be
over for us our good. His blissful Countenance will enlighten and enliven us,
and nothing shall eclipse our joy, which taking its beginning from his service,
shall be perfected in endless Glory. Amen.

O That mine head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the impenitency of those to whom my Soul wishes peace,
but they delight in mischief and contention.

Many, O Lord, there are, who forsaking thee, walk in the ways of darkness, who
will not open their eyes, lest they should see, nor their ears, lest they
should hear, and should be converted, and thou should heal them.

They have rejected thy Law, and made void thy Covenant, making among
themselves the Covenant of falsehood, and the League of Iniquity, to the intent
that the Name of Israel should be no more in remembrance.

And although thou have cut off Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, yet the residue of
the rebellious Children do exalt themselves, and behave themselves frowardly in
thy sight.

They regard not thee, O ever blessed King, neither thine Image, whom thou have
set up; they worship neither thee, nor thy Gods.

They add Rebellion unto Rebellion, and sin unto sin, not knowing the power of
thy wrath, nor how much thou art to be feared, and that none may stand in thy
sight when once thou art angry; but as if thine Arm could not avenge the injury
of thine Honor, they multiply reproaches against thee, and thine Anointed.

Whom as thou have hitherto so defended, that the Sons of Violence could not
hurt him: As thou have hitherto made their faces, who hated him, to be ashamed;
so we beseech thee to put them to a perpetual rebuke, who shall yet presume to
rise up to offend him.

As thou have given him an heart to endeavor to serve thee in thine own way of
mercy and forgiveness, so make him happy in his People, whose gratitude may
contend for superiority with his great love.

But upon all such to whom his Clemency seems vile, whose traitorous pride
disdaineth the mild mixture of Authority and Compassion, pour out thine
Indignation; for certainly they seek to devour Jacob, and lay wast his dwelling
place.

Had they good will to Sion, they would strive for peace, and intercede unto
thee by prayers, that thou would be pleased to heal up the breaches of thy
torn and divided Church. O scatter those who seek her hurt, so shall she be
exalted in thine Honor, and make her boast in thy glory for ever and ever.

How foolish and ignorant are they who seek Honor by offending thee, and
Prosperity without thee! Should not a people seek to their God, and make the
observance of thy Statutes their glory and delight!

But their delight is in rapine and mischief, and to shed Innocent blood. And
although by many examples thou have admonished them, yet they regard not thy
works, nor the operations of thy hands; they despise thy loving kindness, and
thy Judgments they will not observe.

O thou Comforter of the righteous, and Judge of all, how wonderful art thou in
thy mercies, who being angry with the wicked every day, do first give him
warning before thou smitest?

If he turn not, then thou whettest thy Sword, bendest thy Bow, and make it
ready; thou preparest for him the Instruments of Death, and ordainest thine
Arrows against him, that thy threatenings may make him wise, and thy gentle
correction may make him great, whom evil practices had depressed, and covered
with shame.

These are thy Fatherly and compassionate Premonitions e're thou will destroy.
And as we praise thee, for that unto thee belong Mercies, so also for that thou
art just, and rewardest the obstinate according to his works.

O consider our trouble that will suffer of them that hate us; give them
humility and repentance, but let the wilful and disobedient perish in their
iniquity.

Let not disloyalty thrive, nor disobedience prosper, lest the seeming glory
thereof tempt the ignorant to reach out their hands to this forbidden fruit.

But as thou have dealt graciously with us hitherto, by making the wicked plot
against themselves, and run into their own snare; so let their own devices
continue to be their shame, and bring them down continually, O Lord, our
strength.

Then shall the righteous rejoice when he sees the vengeance, when he sees
Judgment finding out those false ones, who trusted in the abundance of their
riches, and thought themselves encircled with power beyond opposition.

Thou make us know that thou forgettest not the prayers of thy people, who
call upon thee faithfully; for when the wicked drew their Sword, and bent their
Bow to slay such as be of upright Conversation, thou causedst their Sword to
enter into their own heart, and their Bow to be broken.

O that our hearts were made so direct, that we might keep thy Statutes, and
always sincerely love thee for that thou have done.

Thou have magnified us exceedingly, and brought us to great honor: O let our
lips be evermore filled with thy praise, for it becomes thy servants to be
incessantly thankful.

And by this which thou have wrought for us, teach us to rest in thee, and wait
patiently for thee; but not to fret at those who for a time prosper in their
way, nor because of the men who bring wicked devices to pass.

For we see, that according to thy word, evil doers shall be cut off; that in a
little while they shall not be, neither their places to be found.

Continue thy loving kindness toward us; preserve thy Church, increasing her
Beauty and Honor; make every Member thereof, through Christ our Savior,
plentifully to bring forth the fruits of Holiness; so shall we be assured of
present and Eternal Joys: For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with thy
favor will thou encompass him as with a Shield. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
CHAP. VIII. The Blessings and Benefits of Obedience.
SUCH is the turbulency and unsettledness of Humane Dispositions, that men are
commonly displeased with what their Fathers prized, and not well affected to
their own former pleasures. Men's minds are seldom at rest but in alteration and
change: Which although it please the Fancy, yet I see not where it leaves
place for Content; without which, I wonder at those who can imagine themselves
happy, and well. Men's false sight loves not what is best, but what is new, in
the seeking whereof is all the pleasure: For while its novelty persuades, and
the search takes up time, it becomes stale as soon as obtained, and the
thoughts are taken off from the joy of possession, by the renewed desires of
some other Upstart, and untryed good. In such varying motions men love to pass
their time, and are no otherwise easy than in this continual unquietness. The
reason of this the Tragedian has: Quisquis secundis rebus exultat nimis,
Fluitque luxu, semper insolita appetit.
Sen. Hip. Prosperity makes many men mad. Such as have more than they can
wisely manage, despise what they enjoy, and make their Pleasures abortive by
unseasonable longings. Continuance of what is good surfeiteth the minds of many
who might have been long happy, if they had known contentment. But, alas! it is
a Disease which creeps in with Peace and Plenty, to corrupt and destroy them;
that contentment is least known, where there is greatest abundance of what
Mortals account the chief Ingredients, and Compounds of Felicity. Where there
is more than enough, there is commonly least satisfaction, and most inordinate
desires. But herein would not be so much cause of dislike, if men did not so
distaste their present happiness, as to undervalue it, by making it the purchase
of some certain grief. The favor of the Greatest, heaps of Wealth,
multiplicity of Honors, and whatever else is most prized by the admirers of
terrene flourishes, and fading Beauties, have by many (who once thought these
the only things desirable) been judged things so inconsiderable, that these,
together with their lives, they have adventured for some conceited good, which
few others could view with approbation, but most with amazement at the Seekers
dotage: Of which I truly am one confessing, that I never thought any so mad as
those whom I have seen raised very high by Prosperity, who (as if unable to
brook that height) have with brainsick counsels hurled themselves down. It is
usual with men lifted up beyond what their condition will bear, by endeavors
to leap higher for more safety, to fall past recovery. Neither is it news to
any, but those who are distracted with the manifold blandishments of a
bewitching Fortune. For indeed it is no new thing to see men adventure to climb
so far, that when they must come down, there is no descent but by a Precipice.
With examples of this nature the world is stored; and if fresh ones speak not
more than can my Pen, I might be induced to enlarge upon this Subject. What I
have seen makes me sad, and many to complain; and both the past and present
damages which we have and do sustain by the madness of such as might be at
ease, but would not, make me fear further evil, and cry out.

Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Hor. Car. l. 3. If men sought, or truly prized Happiness, or well weighed the
miseries of those intestine Commotions, which they love to cherish to their own
hurt, this fear were causless. The inconstancies of the Elder would not
encourage the Younger to be dissolute, if Constancy were thought either a
Virtue, or useful. But men instead of constancy and gratitude for received
favors, by receiving grow more and more ungrateful, and oblivious of the
Benefactor. If they mention his Name in time of necessity, they forget it when
relieved, and never think themselves more injured, than when too full and
prosperous. Many are not so repining in extremity, as discontented in overmuch
plenty. God pleases them on neither hand; either want, or wantonness, makes
them always troublesome, and they (when their wants are over) wickedly make
Worldly Happiness what Divines thence call it, The worst of Evils. Some have
not been so much ashamed of a needy misery, as they have since gloried in the
scorn of their undeserved favors. One instance may give satisfaction of this
always dissatisfied humor of the generality, that is the benefit of Peace,
after the miseries of War. Those unjust and unnatural Wars, which as a violent
disease in the bowels plagued the whole Kingdom, were not so much condemned,
as the peaceable times and Government since the most excellent blessing of
Restoration The Israelites had rather have the Onions and Scourge under
Pharaoh, than Manna and Quails under that meekest man Moses. They seemed angry
at a temporal deliverance, and would not be happy under it, but engaged
themselves under a spiritual bondage. It has been no otherwise among us.
Forgetting the sighs and groans, whilst under the Rod of the Oppressor, they
have been impleaded as guilty of the peoples calamity, who were Gods chief
Instruments of their Ransom, and desire not more their own, than the peoples
undisturbed joy; which that they have not, is their own folly. They will
without judgment pry into the Royal Counsels, and while they are only diffident
of the intentions, do openly calumniate the actions of their compassionate and
tender Father, with his great and wise Ministers of State. Peace and rest
discomposeth them, and they are never more querulous, than when they have least
cause: Contradicting all reason, and desirous to destroy their present
tranquillity, the Oliverian days are recalled, and they had rather make brick
with stubble, than live merrily at their own pleasure without fear, and
plentifully, as well as easily, by a continuance of fructifying gratitude. Thus
was Peace disesteemed, although no worldly blessing more desirable; whose glory
and beauty are the more ravishing, because she is so like and near of Kin to
that gladding Union, which for ever makes happy the Royal Subjects of the King
of Kings. Nevertheless, her Graces and Endowments prevail not with the greater
number of men, for either welcome, or respect. And what between her Relation to
Heaven, and the public scorns whereby she suffers, she is rather desired by
good men, than known to many. Where she sometimes shows her fair countenance,
she is so absolutely persecuted with the foul provocations of wicked men, that
she soon begins to mourn; and covering those radiant looks with a fable
vail, to withdraw her self from humane habitations. Although she be a rare
Guest, and come but seldom, she is assured of injuries. She seeks to make
glad all among whom she is; and whether to her true or adopted Children no
Mother equalleth her Benedictions, she surpasses them all in Munificence: Her
kindness is incomparable, and those who receive her, she gladly enricheth: Yet
they, to whom she has been most liberal, are usually the first who repay her
favors with indignities. For whereas the mercies of Peace require a sanctified
life, and the increase of devout thankfulness, there is nothing more common
than to make use of the blessings of Peace, in such a manner as shall soonest
cause her departure and banishment. Our Land had not long known what it was to
be at rest, e're the wanton Inhabitants, by undue and irreligious murmurings,
sought to cast out the Mother, and the true Children; Peace, and such as were
constantly hers, whose daily practice it was to praise God for her presence,
and humbly entreat him for her stay among us. The disrespect of the benefit
makes God again remove it. Foreign Enemies take occasion to discover their
enmity, and make a breach with us, hoping to make a prosperous War by our
divisions at home Our own inconstancy then fought against us, and our folly
armed those who sought our ruin. But Gods mercies were not answerable to the
multitudes vanity. Although the unquietness of our raving minds pleaded against
us he had pity upon us; and not suffering our Foes to rejoice over us, has
remitted that graceful and amiable Preservatrix of the Kingdoms Honor and
Fortunes, whereby we with it may always flourish; and may men of all estates
labor her preservation, wherein all men's good consists. Nothing but
ingratitude can make us vile, with which a Nation abounding, falls into the
lowest degree of contempt, and is buried in scorn and infamy.

THE disrespective murmurings of the present times begin to affright such as
are in love with Peace, and cannot contentedly brook a separation from her. We
hear language contrary to what we pray for, and God expects, as if a surfeit
of happiness, upon so short an enjoyment, had made the Speakers belch out these
unwholesome Airs. But surely they, who would amend their condition by thus
loathing the Present, do mar those undeserved blessings wherewith sacred Bounty
has stored them. They, who have been always wont to vex at their present
estate, must have a great change of disposition to bring them to felicity.
Continual complaints make nothing better. The unruliness of a people is its own
Scourge. And as disquieted minds are wont to be followed with outward troubles,
so are there none more miserable then they, who know not when to rejoice, who,
when a just cause exciteth them to it, cannot discern it. The trouble of their
inconstancy and ignorant contempt of what is good and desirable makes them
wretched; even when nothing is wanting to the completing their happiness. But
the evils, which discompose prosperity, making good bad, do still go on to make
bad worse, that such as reproach mercy may deservedly never be exempt from the
crosses of either their own opinion or fortune. If so be nevertheless the
blessings are not so absolutely full of what I judge necessary for the work of
my joy, before I find fault I must consider whether I judge aright, or whether
that which is wanting to my joy, be not more abundantly supplied by a greater
good to others, or else, if I should undervalue the present blessing, whether I
am sure of a better, and by repining to amend not impair my present condition
and fortune. No man is the more happy in being self-willed, envious or rash.
Most men, who show themselves publicly vexed at the miscarriages of the times,
are either envious, or ambitious, or blind followers of such dark-sighted
guides. They are either disquieted with their own foolish hopes and fears, or
other men's troublesome counsels, and not judgeing a right whether they have a
cause to be troubled, madly act to the overthrow of peace, whereby they afflict
all, and better not, but rather involve themselves in the greatest calamities.
For surely no benefit can a crew to the unconstant and wavering man, who would
be happy but hates the means. Except we be at unity among our selves, we
cannot be prosperous. This Unity is Ointment which covering the Head and
running down to the skirts makes the Prince glorious and the Subject happy;
for where it is there the Lord has commanded the blessing. It is an Oracle
from the most Holy One, In returning and rest shall ye be saved, Isa. 30.15.
in quietness and confidence shall be your strength. Let him, who desires
felicity not wander in search after it, but, abiding at home by a diligent
obedience and holy confidence in God, force it to be his inmate and companion.
Variety of perplexing thoughts and contrary motions never find it. He, who
seeks it every where, shall find it no where, for indeed a restless life has
no agreement with it. Although it wholly spend it self in pursuing it, yet it
continually affrighteth that fortune, which it so laboriously courteth. When
the froward man is nearest to it, he is furthest from enjoyment of it, because
happiness is only the humble, the peaceable, and (to say all) the obedient
man's portion. It is true that the disobedient turbulent man may seem to enjoy
it. And if you ask the ignorant and deluded multitude, they shall assure you,
that although it be ill procured, the happiness of many such is not to be
disputed. But thou whosoever, that boastest of thy self according to their
measures or noise, art but an equivocating fool, and most indulgent to thine
own adversity. Let me not learn thy condition from other men's opinion, but
thine own knowledge. I am most certain that thou least art what thou seem;
for Felicity and turbulency always dwell apart. When therefore thou forsakest
thy present restless humors and betakest thy self to quietness and the
beforementioned confidence, I shall be able to say to thee as Seneca to his
Lucilius, Bonam spem de te concipio, Epist. 2.
non mutationibus inquietaris etc. But yet it is very seldom that disobedience
is so fortunate as to purchase an esteem of happiness. True happiness it never
has, rarely so much as a supposed one. It runs into distress continually,
and has no motion but downward. It is in the condition of many languishing
persons, who think by raising themselves out of their sick bed the sooner to
recover strength, but indeed cast themselves down past hopes of recovery. Such
is the unquiet subject; he is pained at the heart and cast down by the
multitude of his vain imaginations; these having cast him down urge the raising
himself up and providing better for the future. But what he surmiseth will be
for his advancement and confirmation fails not of proving his destruction.
Now where there is in a Commonwealth somewhat out of that excellent order,
which good men desire to be diligently and always kept, disorderly motion does
much hurt in introducing confusion to cure a small oversight The hunting after
and using variety of medicines does commonly more distemper the body than the
disease it self. When it happens that good order is in some things wanting,
we can find no certain remedy obvious but patience. How much more then does it
not concern us to run after desperate remedies for the curing distempers, which
are only imaginary? If suspicions upon probable grounds should present
themselves, they are to be rejected; neither may we, if truth should manifest a
miscarriage, contend for a removal otherwise then by prayer and submissive
holiness. But I may say that observing the complaints of late days concerning
certain public administrations in the Kingdom, that fear and opinion are our
greatest mischeifes. The times of darkness have had so long and potent dominion
over some, that although it be now clear day, they cannot see the right path,
but run out of the way and stumble at every thing. But happiness offers it
self to such as will embrace it. If religious whisperings are frequent and
active for the begetting jealousies and fears, a sober and religious man
troubles not his thoughts with the consideration of other men's duties, but
labors not to be found forgetful of his own. And always does such a man
discover the most assured way to a blessed and happy estate by obedience for
conscience sake. He remembers Solomon's asseveration and delights in the hope
it gives; In the way of righteousness (says he) is life, Pro. 12 28.
and in the path way thereof there is no death. Into that way then will he
direct his foot steps, where he is sure the Viper lurketh not to bite his heel,
nor is the net privily spread to take his inoffensive foot, neither can
misfortunes lie near in ambush to surprise his secure soul. Herein if we would
all walk, we should presently obtain what with fruitless labors we are long
seeking and wonder that we find not. Saint James his reason, to such as did ask
yet did not receive, is mine to those, who seek felicity with great
earnestness, yet could never come within view of it, Ye have not because ye ask
and seek amiss. Chapter 4 3.
Endeavors directing us the right and proper way come to a blessed end. I know
not, neither can I ever be persuaded that subjects can have any other rule
leading them to prosperity but religious obedience. That it is the only way to
eternal Felicity is agreed upon and acknowledged by them, who act the contrary.
And I must needs follow them so close as to affirm, that then by consequence it
is that only which can conduce to the present well being of a Nation. For as
no good can come elsewhere then from God, so no blessing can descend upon those
actions which have not his warrant. Obedience has too motives urging us to its
practice; the first, that it is a most plain and easy walk; the second, that
it has most large promises and the best assurances, the very knowledge whereof
does (doubtless) make it more easy. It is the first, nay the only Commandment
with promise, which we find in the Decalogue, and is in none observed by God
without very high esteem and acceptance. And consider with common reason, that
as nothing can be easier then humility and submission, so nothing sooner
prevails for satisfaction in what it sueth for. The most haughty spirits and
furious Tyrants have been wont. -- Cinere exceptos super alta locare. And as
for the mild man, who sweetneth all his actions with clemency, nothing can be
more offensive to his compassionate nature then to see humility pass along
irreverenced, much more to see it scorned and injured. But neither is this all;
for it being that virtue, wherewith he is chiefly conversant, he will
undoubtedly soon receive into his bosom such as a constant exercise in the
same virtue has commended to him. Likewise if affections plead a reward (and
that no mean one) to be their due, and he cannot suffer them by neglect to be
discouraged. It must then be a vanity and folly to travel far about after an
uncertainty, and slight an undoubted good within reach, which without care or
fear is to be possessed. Such are the rewards of Religious Loyalty; it with
great facility thriveth and prospers, and being exempt from fear does easily
keep its well gotten store. Honor and Riches are insensibly multiplied upon a
Nation, that seeks its glory by a dutiful submission to its Lawful Prince.
While it looks upon Union as the best accommodation and choicest treasure,
the Heavens and Earth conspire to make it plentiful and abounding in all manner
of Riches. The neighboring Nations with admiration gaze upon her ornaments and
flourishing spring, and at once envy and wish for her unspeakable fruitions and
delights. When our whole care (next to God) is, that our King be as much as
possibly we can without care, we make him the Arbitrator of other Princes
fortunes, and set him as upon the top of the grand Orb to dispose unto them
their potions of either prosperity or adversity. His smiles will (as it were)
enliven them, and his frowns pierce their hearts with dismaying terrors.
Subjects are never strong but in their Kings strength; and the Kings great
strength is the Subjects Love. Join we prayers and hands and our utmost labors
to fortify him, and what we do of this nature for him, redoundeth to our own
advantage. It was rightly observed by that wise Senator, that Armarium Regis
fortuna cunctorum est, Cassiodil. 12. ep. ^1
and merito refugium omnium dicitur, ubi universorum securitas invenitur. The
mad counsels the Kingdom has frequently given was to depress Royalty for the
public good. But (to say nothing of present inconveniences, which we hope a
timely care will remove) look we back upon our late times, looking further back
into the Annals and Records of past times, and after just perusal and due
examination tell me whosoever can, whether ever was known a great calamity lighting
upon the King, and the Kingdom not forced to partake of the misery. And how
can it be otherwise? When the foundation shakes, how can the superstructure
abide stable? No man can truly Love and seek his own welfare, but he must
desire and to the utmost labor the Kings prosperity, which is the foundation
of the Kingdoms tranquillity. Royalty has God's favor given unto the land,
through which for many generations it gloriously flourished. And although in
some Kings raigns the splendour of the English glory appeared less bright then
at other times, yet was it never extinguished till Kingly power seemed
offensive and Majesty dethroned. Never was this Realm so truly acquainted with
misery, when wantonness made it so exceedingly disobedient as to spurn at and
disown that most excellent Regiment, through which God had so long conveyed
his blessings, and without which it must never have hoped to be fortunate or
find a return out of Egypt. Blessings never multiply where disobedience
abounds Disorderly Subjects, when they have injured their Head must at length
submit to his government for their own good, for as much as without it
dissolution only reigns attended by distraction and confusion. -- Non aliter
durare queant.
Nisi converso rursus amore
Refluant causae, quae dedit esse.
Beot. de Consol. l. 4. Then only are these calamities removed when the Crown
dignifieth him, whose Lawful inheritance it is; and the beholding it there
placed where it ought, strikes into a just and awful reverence the Loving and
rejoicing Subjects. Then when Union joyneth with an inseparable bond the
Members to the Head, when Love that an equal power over the affections of
Prince and People, we seem no more inhabitants of an earthly Kingdom, but as
if has up into the possession of Heaven. I may very well say so; for so vast
is the difference between the condition of men, who living under the same
climate have their affections opposite as Pole to Pole, and those, who being
thought diverse persons yet seem in many bodies to have but one heart and Soul,
that the same place is by sacred love converted into a Paradise, which by
unnatural and contemptuous hatred is rendered a most vexations Purgatory. In
which respect men, who have signed up their hearts to God, that they might be
the more assuredly and plentifully stored with Love, have either Heaven
descending unto them, or are themselves translated and made partakers of
supernatural joys.

NOW in that many men think to prevent great dangers by active disloyalty they
too too manifestly lay open their ignorance. What they judge the prevention is
the begetting of dangers. The wise Man says that A good Man shall be satisfied
from himself; Prove. 14.14.
whereby we are to understand that his works shall be prosperous. But he says
in the foregoing words that the back-slider in heart shall be filled with his
own ways; whereby he shows that they, who fall off from the observation of
the Commandment (upon the observance whereof the promise of blessedness was
given) fortune and success shall in like manner desert them. Generous
principles have an answerable issue; but the contrary is most true of evil
deeds, which are always pursued with evil. Solomon shows upon what hopes
obedience and disobedience have their dependence; The path of the Just (says
he) is as the shining light which shines more and more unto the perfect day.
Prove. 4.18, 19.
The way of the wicked is as darkness; they know not at what they stumble.
Obedience grows continually more and more happy, and its tapor burns always
more and more clearly, until in heaven it be extinguished by that most glorious
splendour, which gives and comprehends all light. But the disloyal and
seditious walk in obscurity and through mists, stumbling blocks and rocks of
offense surround them, traps and snares every where lie prepared for them, they
pass their time in invincible troubles, and suddenly fall into the pit of
destruction. Let unquiet Spirits seek to remove their conceited troubles and
prevent those mischeifs, which their wild fancy presents unto them; yet while
they labor to remove imaginary evils they are circumvented with real ones.
Their toil also is very ridiculous, if more probably successful, seeing easier
means prevail for the greatest goods. And whereas (rather then not humor their
rebellious inclinations) unsettled minds have for justification recourse to the
pretended dread of some imminent calamity, if timely dare be not used religion
and daily experience teach us that sin averteth no judgment, which is hovering
over a Nation. But rather sins (especially of rebellion) hasten that revenge,
which God takes of such as slight his admonitory threatenings. Where we all
men, who did fear sin more then sorrow, sufferings for sin would not so often
excite our griefs, and make our eyes so plentiful in showers. Certainly as
seditious commotions contract many future plagues, so do they never bring any
present benefit; empty hopes are the recompense of a tedious travel.

LET us at the last rather then never begin to consult what course of life God
has appointed as that wherein Subjects may live most secure. Surely great are
the blessings, which his care keeps in store for, and his bounty conferreth
upon those, who seek to him as their sole directour. And in the plain way he
leads them, which also proves the richest way. Instead of vexatious labors
he appoints them, as the greatest pacificatory and obligation, the easy task
of the offering of Obedience, the best of sacrifices, which he every where in
his Holy Book commends, and always even in this life rewards. No incense
ascending with an odoriferous cloud, no oblations, whose sweet savor and
excellency was wont to testify the offerers generosity and riches, did ever so
procure from the throne of grace the beatifique smiles of the most bountiful
Majesty, as the cheap offering of Obedience, which commends not it self by
the vanity of worldly ostentation, but the glory of a great and consecrated
heart. They who gave their bodies to be burnt, by the benefit hereof made their
sufferings those harmless (though fiery) Chariots, that transported them to
joy. This sharpened the faith of the general assembly of the first born,
enabling them to see their names written in heaven. Holy men, knowing how much
this was the ornament and felicity of the Christian Church, sound Temples and
Oratories, where joint prayers should be offered up for Kings and such as were
in authority, that under them we might be godly and quietly governed. And the
unwearied exercise and profession hereof wrought upon the hearts of the
cruellest Tyrants, and introduced a festival peace into the world, making some
of the most violent gainsayers submit to men of so exalted spirits, and
cherish such as they before persecuted. And certainly God spaketh how much he
is pleased with it by the evident returns of acceptance, those frequent
collations of temporal honors and riches, wherewith he graceth such as desire
to increase by his Love only. And this purchase of liberty, wealth and
greatness is the cheapest, easiest and surest that Heaven and Earth afford.
Others cost much labor, and deficiency is at length their accomplishment.
Hence therefore is the excellence of Obedience commended, that it ascends
without rub, let, or molestation; it becomes great and glorious without noise,
and without either the Authors or any ones injury. It finds joy at hand, and
without the wearying examination of the diversity of opinions and manifold
directions, where to seek man's Summum bonum, lodges it most safety at home.
The Obedient man's well fortified heart has joy therein immoveably fixed and and
knows the worth of its own possession, which by the Love of God it has
obtained and confirmed. Now if we distract the mind with the inquiry after such
goods as like the Rainbow look afar off rich and promising, our delusions will
end in a shower, and our hopes washed away into discontent and sorrow. Or e^^^
our joy, which we foolishly sought, and after much trouble unluckily obtained,
will prove like to a small tree, which we have sometime seen miserably torn
with the weight of its untimely fruit. They who, by civil distractions rise to
wealth and power, are so persecuted with innumerable mischeifs that they have
only this comfort left that they may say their desired happiness has
destroyed them. The obtaining such desires bebarreth them the fruition, they
being more happy in hope then possession. Riches and honors procured by the
vile subtilties of a disobedient industry, must be conserved with more baseness
then they were acquired, and bring more dangers to the purchasers then the
purchase cost. What between their own fears, the envy and emulation of their
followers, and the general hatred (not only of good, but) all men, it must
needs be that instead of their proposed exaltation they find themselves
grievously depressed, and that the pit has opened her mouth and swallowed them
up. But while the ascending Furies, or rather the descending vengeance takes
this prepossession of them, Obedient men are in a Pavilion securely resting,
and wrapped up in the sweet folds of the celestial mercies. And this their
felicity is not a matter of chance or the disposal of the propitious Stars
concurring at their birth, as it were in consultation, how to make them the
Sons of Fortune; but it is the work of true Wisdom making all those happy, who
ask counsel at her Oracle, and make it their constant delight to be conversant
in her sacred Schools. There they are instructed in those unerring rules, by
which they arrive at undoubted prosperity. And among many most profitable
rudiments, with which they are furnished as necessary for their safe conduct
thither, these are some of the chief; That (seeing without holiness no man can
see God, (and therefore never be happy) which holiness must not be falacious,
because such will not pass the examination of his dijudicative eye) it is a
mere abjection of themselves and hopes to attempt the raising themselves high
upon foundations of hypocrisy; That it is far better to live in esteem by
giving due honor to those, whom God has set over them, than to become infamous
by seeking to invest themselves with those Robes, which adorning the Superior
render the inferior the ridiculous object of contempt; That to assist the
distressed and comfort them by timely supports is proper to a brave and noble
Spirit, but to distress such, whose welfare standing in opposition to the
accomplishment of their exorbitant lusts, is degenerous and brutish; That the
approbation of the Supreme Judge, and the real commendations of innocence among
men (although the blessed Authors sit low) has an excellency transcending the
feigned title of the either deceived or unwilling multitude; That by the
benefit of an unspotted mind not to shun the examinations or fear the
countenance of the inquisitive Judge bring them home a plentiful harvest of
joy, when only horrors and confusion multiply within those breasts, whose
disloyal practices have rendered the faithful and wise Judge their justly
provoked enemy; that to live frugally upon their own (that is bountifully
without riot) and to purchase blessings upon it by the prayers of needy souls
thereby refreshed and made glad, has a more plausible triumph then to sit on
high in possession of other men dignities and estates, which always bear to the
wretched invaders the briars and thorns of misfortunes by reason of the
complaints and curses of the oppressed, and are made barren by being watered
with the brinish tears of the injured mourners; That to sail quietly and keep a
safe course under that judicious Master, whom God has set over them has
benefit and content, whereas nothing but inevitable destruction attends those
desperate Lovers of mischief, who labor contrary to the Masters guidance to
drive the bottom they sail in upon rocks and shelves thereby to discredit and
ruin him, who sits at helm; Or else (and indeed that more properly) they
esteem their fare and prosperity to be good and large enough, nay mightily to
abound while they sit at home in the most secure harbor of Obedience, from
whence they daily see the wracks of such as lanch out into the troublesome
waters of Disloyalty. And were there no more, yet to see such men's misfortunes,
while themselves live in ease and safety, must needs give a vast increase to
the pleasure of their mind. But how much more assuredly when they know that
Christ their prime pattern beholds them with exceeding delight, preparing for
them an additional, a superaboundant joy? He does indeed from his Throne behold
them, intending no less then the deifying those, who for his sake do carefully
obey his glorious (though mortal) God's This honor have all his Saints. He more
then great Xerxes at the Salaminian battle uses all diligence that every act
of Christian Obedience, either defending the Royal Prerogative, or stoutly
resisting the seducing temptations of its Opposers, be richly rewarded, and
both inviteth and helps us to a laurel. Thus with greater ease may we be
happy then miserable, and at cheaper rates gain not only earthly but
supernatural treasures then many procure to themselves present and eternal
confusion. Without overturning Order, diverting the course of Nature, searching
the abysses of the earth, and ripping up its bowels, overthrowing walls and
bulwarks, or defacing the glory of flourishing Cities and Kingdoms, thou, O
Christian Subject, may find and embrace happiness. Fear God, and Honor the
King, thy work is done. This is the inchoation, and will be the undoubted
consummation of Felicity. Amen.

O Thou ever blessed Fountain of Goodness, give us moderation and thankfulness,
that we neither abuse nor flight thy favors, but cheisty delight in thee, who
give us all things richly to enjoy.

Let prosperity make us joyous, not mad and sinful; for so should we destroy
our happiness by forsaking thee the Author.

Great benefits have thou conferred upon us by the renewed and singular
blessings of peace; O let not unconstancy with calumnies and injurious
complaints break down this pillar of our welfare, but make us with an holy
thankfulness evermore to preserve it entire.

Grant that we may always be standing upon our watch hearkening what thou, O
Lord of life, do command, and especially observing those thy sacred
injunctions of giving honor where honor is due, and following peace with all
men.

They, who otherwise seek prosperity, do but trouble themselves, for this is
the way of life; hold thou our goings in this way, and keep us that our
footstept slip not, that there be no falling into decay by our treading aside
this path.

Help us with true meekness to receive thy word, and with perfect humility to
obey thy commands, lest evil get dominion over us and the great transgressions
surprise us.

Then when our ear is ready to hear, and our will to obey, glory shall dwell in
our land, the earth shall yield her increase, and thou, O God, shall give us
thy blessings.

Great peace have they, who Love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them; let
the spirit of Love replenish us with holy desires, that offenses may cease, and
thy true religion flourish.

Happy are they, whom thou causest to approach unto thee, whom Love and
Obedience have made one with thee; they shall always be praising thee with
joyful lips.

Thou shall keep them safely from the foot of pride, and in a pavilion from the
strife of tongues, thou shall make them great through thy favor, and after a
large portion of Joy in this life shall give them Joys, that pass man's
understanding.

Thou from thy Throne beholding and encouraging their labors of Love, for thy
Names sake, shall abundantly recompense them in this life, and wilt also
continue thy Loving kindness toward them and bring them to life eternal.

And, most gracious God, we desiring the joys incommunicable to flesh and
blood, cannot be satisfied with these earthly blessings, though large and
manifold. The enjoyment of thy fullness only can put an end to our impetuous
longings.

Therefore make have, O Beloved, O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
FINIS
Books Printed for and sold by Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate
street.
Christian Ethics, or divine Morallity, opening the way to Blessedness by the
Rules of Virtue and Reason, by Thomas Trahern. B. D. In Octa. Roman Forgeries,
or a true account of false Records, Discovering the Impostures and Counterfeit
Antiquities of the Church of Rome by the same Author. In Octa. Daily Devotions
Consisting of Thansgivings, Confessions and Prayers in two parts. By an humble
Penitent. In Twelves. The Comparison of Plato and Aristotle with the opinions
of the Fathers on their Doctrines, and some Christian Reflections. Together
with judgment on Alexander and Caesar, as also on Seneca, Plutarch, and
Petronius. In Octa. Observations on the Poems of Homer and Virgil: A discourse
representing the excellencies of those works; and the perfections in all
general of Heroic Action. In Octa. Fifty one Sermons preached by the Reverend
Dr. Mark Frank Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge Archdeacon of St. Albons,
Prebend and Treasurer of St. Paul's, etc. Being a course of Sermons, beginning
at Advent and so continued through the Festivals to which is added a Sermon
preached at St. Paul's Cross in the year 1641 and then Commanded to be Printed
by King Charles the first in Fol. The Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia; written by
Sir Phillip Sidney Knight the Thirteenth Edition with his Life and Death, a
Brief Table of the principle Heads and some other New Additions in Fol. Songs
and Poems by Mr. Thomas Flatman Gent. -- in Octa.
There is now in the Press and Ready to be published.
Bacons Henry the Seventh. And Godwins Annals in Fol.
FINIS
The Causes and Remedy of the Distempers of the Times.


