EPITAPHIUM.
WIthin this Marble does Intombed Lie,
Not One, but All a Noble Family:
A Pearl of such a Price, that soon about
Possession of it, Heaven, and Earth fell out;
Both could not have Him, So they did Devise
This Fatal Salvo, to divide the Prize:
Heaven Share's the Soul, and Earth his Body take's,
Thus We lose all, whilst Heaven, and Earth part stakes:
But Heaven, not Brooking that the Earth should share
In the least Attome, of a Piece so Rare,
Intends to Sue Out, by a new Revize
His Habeas Corpus, at the Grand Assize.
JOHN^ FLOWER.

A (...) ^^COUNT OF THE ^IFE and DEATH OF ^^pe ALEXANDER the VII.

^ith a Description of his Funeral Machin, (...) Elegies erected in St. Peter's
Church: Rome.

Together with Exact Relation of the particular ^eremonies performed at the
Creation and Coronation of this present POPE CLEMENT the IX.

With A CATALOGUE of all the CARDINALS.

Translated out of the Italian Copies printed at Rome: By P. A. Gent.

London, Printed for Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain. 1667.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IN this small Piece, thou will see a true, plain, and lively draught of the
Pomp and Grandeur of the Pope; and of his great Council the Conclave of
Cardinals: And also meet with a number of the Formalities and Ceremonies of the
Romish Church; Some of which I was once in a mind not to have inserted, but
that would not well be done without spoiling the Narrative, and falsifying the
Translation, which I have closely followed in all, but the Relation of Pope
Alexander the Seventh, his last Sickness and Death; and in regard, that it was
stuffed up with so much Complement and Flattery, I chose rather to extract the
most material passages and substance of it, and omit the rest: for which, I beg
the Reader's Pardon, and favorable Construction of my Intent to serve him,
hoping that he will excuse those errors which my have in finishing has made me
commit; also such literal faults as have escaped the Press.

A short Account of the Death of Pope ALEXANDER the VII.
HAving out of some Italian Papers undertaken to draw a Succinct Account of the
last Sickness and Death of the late Pope Alexander the Seventh, I was afraid
that the work would seem but maimed and imperfect, if I should not insert some
Passages relating to his first Rise and Advancement to the Papal Dignity. I
have therefore given this following Hint to that effect, for satisfaction of
such as being unacquainted with his History, desire to have some knowledge of
his Beginning, before I come to speak of his Latter end, which is the principal
Scope of this short Narrative.

Pope Alexander the Seventh was Native of the City of Sienna in Tuscany, and
descended of the ancient Family of Ghisi, who in his younger years, growing
eminent for his great parts and Learning, was promoted at his riper age to the
Bishopric of Imola in the Territories of the Church, and therein behaved
himself with so much Prudence and Policy, giving manifest Proofs, upon all
occasions, of his great Capacity for public Employments, that he was made
Vice-Legat of Ferara; then Inquisitor of Malta; and afterward sent Nuncio to
Cullen and Munster, at the Treaty held there for a General Peace.

And having undergone all these Offices, and in them acquired much honor and
reputation, he received as a reward of his great merits, a Cardinal's Cap, in
the Year 1652, in the Month of February, from Pope Innocent the Tenth, and was
admitted into the number of the Purpurati: After which, as a greater Testimony
of the Pope's favor to him, he was constituted Secretary of State, and in that
Employment continued till the Death of the said Pope, and his own Election to
the Papacy, unto which he the rather attained, as was supposed, to cross the
Designs of the Faction of the Barbarini.

At his first Creation, that he might gain the hearts of the Common People, he
used all means to express his Charity to the Poor, amongst whom he distributed
great Sums of money; the like he did for the Deliverance of Prisoners, and for
beautifying and building many Churches, and other public Structures, not only
in Rome, but also in several places in the Estate of the Church; wherein he
exhausted most part of his treasure, and politickly refused all Presents, which
were made him by such as intended thereby to insinuate themselves into his
favor; as in particular, three rich Coaches, with six Horses apiece, from the
Cardinal de Medici, the Cardinal Arach, and the Prince de Pamphilio. And
amongst the rest, a Damask Bed embroidered with Gold, from that grand She
Statist See her Life Printed at London. 1667.
Donna Olympia, the Bosom Favorite of his Predecessor Innocent the X.

He filled all the vacant and most considerable Offices (so soon as he was
established in his Throne) with very eminent and deserving Persons; and amongst
others, he conferred on the present Pope, Clement the Ninth, the Place of
Secretary of State. To be brief, during his whole reign, which was almost
Thirteen years, he gave evident testimony of his Zeal for advancement of the
Interest of the Sea of Rome, showing great moderation and indifferency toward
the several Factions, always shunning as much as he could, the adhereing to any
one of them, in prejudice of another.

But that I may not go beyond the limits of my intended brevity, which was only
to give you this small Account, for the better understanding of what follows,
and that I might not be thought abruptly to begin the subsequent Discourse of
his last Sickness and Death; I do therefore now wave further particulars of his
Life, and proceed to the intended Relation.

The Pope being seized with his old Distemper in the beginning of the last
Lent, and foreseeing the Danger which threatened him, without expecting any
other advice of his Physicians, was willing to prepare himself for the great
passage which he foresaw, that in a short time he was to make, from this Life
to another; and intending in thefirst place to dissintangle himself from all
external business, that he might be able, with less distraction, to apply
himself to the internal Concernments of his Soul; on the 13 day of March, of
this present Year 1667 new style, he called a Consistory, whether, being
apparelled in the accustomed habit he went in Person, although much cast down
by his Infirmity, yet recollecting all the Spirits and Vigor which were left
him, he constrained himself to perform that great Function. Wherein he promoted
to the Cardinalship eight of those select persons, whom he supposed, for their
great worth and labors, bestowed for the good of the Papal See, had merited
the advancement to so high Dignity.

But his Disease increasing, four days after, he was Assaulted by a grievous
fit, from which he concluded that his Sickness was mortal, and notwithstanding,
it grew more and more violent daily, yet for all this, he had thoughts of
performing the long Ceremonies of Holy Thursday, to prepare himself for Death,
as he said, by meditating on the sacred Mysteries of the Passion of Jesus
Christ, and would have executed his intentions in despite of his pains, if his
Physicians and Chyrurgeons, together with his Confessor had not persuaded him
to the contrary; remonstrating to him the Inconveniences which might arise,
from the hard Labors which are inseparable from such prolixe Ceremonies. And
although he was persuaded by them all that time, yet was he resolved with that
little strength he had left him (though much broken and extenuated by his
Disease) on Easter Day upon the Gallery of Monte Cavallo, where this Function
is used to be performed, with a solemn Benediction in Pontificalibus, to bless
the People, which there flocked in exceeding great multitudes, being driven
thereunto not only out of Devotion, but also by a desire of seeing their
Pastor yet whole and alive. He blessed them, having raised himself up twice
according to the Custom, without the help of the Pontifical Seat; and this was
the last time that he saw his flock, or they him.

But it was not Gods will that he should long enjoy this apparent prosperity,
for three days after he was assaulted by mortal pains, and such ones, that the
former in comparison of these seemed but light Flea-bitings; which that he
might gain vigor to resist with Patience, he ordained the most Holy Saerament
to be exposed in all the principal Churches of Rome. But the Disease growing
desperate, and he being assured by the Physicians that he was to dye, he
received the tidings of Death, not only with a total resignation to God, as he
said, but also with rejoicing and cheerfulness, as a message of eternal
felicity, which he hoped to enjoy: then called for the Viaticum, which after
his confession he received with great Devotion. After this he caused all the
Sacred College of Cardinals to be called to him; and though he was by the
sharpness of his Disease brought very low and almost reduced to extremity, yet
he addressed himself with a steady voice to them, in a most excellent and
Eligant Exhortation in the Latin Tongue, which he said, he purposely chose,
because he could better express his conceptions in that than in the Italian. In
this amongst other things he put them in remembrance of his Election, and their
compelling him to accept that high Dignity, which was far from his thoughts,
wherein he affirmed that they had made him Sacrafise the Sweetness of his Rest,
to their resolutions: he begged their pardon for his frailty, which he might,
through his passion, have committed, makes an Appology for expending great sums
for promoting the Church Interest. Entreats them to use the sincerity and
cleerness in the next Election, which was shortly to be, as they had done in
his. Exhortes them against Covetousness, wherein he uses this expression,
Consider that from the Church you have received the most honorable part of
what you possess; that if you were constrained to leave that which you received
from the Church, to the offerings of others, how much more contentedly,
(without any other appetite) should you then enjoy that which you do now
possess, etc? Lastly, he recommends to their care and protection, his Cardinal
Nephew, his Aged Brother, and the rest of his Kindred, and himself to their
prayers. This being spoken, he lifted up his hands and Blessed them, and then
their Eminencies having made some reflections upon his discourse, approached
to the Bed side with tears in their Eyes, and after they had taken pains to
comfort him, with great tenderness they Kissed his hand, and departed.

At last, they being all departed, and only his familiar Friends and Ghostly
Fathers continuing in the room with him, he altogether applied himself to his
Devotion, often repeating these words, Cupio disolvi and esse cum Christo. And
those which assisted him he caused continually to read Spiritual Books, and
diverse Prayers, and Psalms, especially the Penetential Psalms, etc.

Now, if his Disease was long and painful in the highest degree, his Patience
was then very admirable, and incredible, which he showed in his suffering of
those cruel and most grievous torments, as without doubt, those were which he
endured, in regard of the many parts of his body, which after his Death, were
discovered to be offended; yet was he never observed during all his sickness to
have a discomposed countenance.

A certain Priest presented him with a Picture, where there were very well
drawn some Hearts, behind every one of which was represented one of the
Mysteries of the most holy Passion, and he sent him word, that it was not for
any pretense he had, that he presented him with that Picture, but only that at
the sight of that, he might call to mind, the torments suffered by Jesus
Christ, and thereby arm himself with Patience, when his pains were most
violent. It is impossible to tell how acceptable this gift was to him, which
although it was but simple indeed, he required the Doner of it with much
Liberality, and caused it to be put behind the Pillow, in that place exactly
where he used to lay his Head, when he was most Tormented with pains, and from
time to time he commanded it to be removed to the feet of the Bed, that he
might with the more ease and sitting up behold it.

After he had received both the Eucharist and the Extreme Unction; he disposed
himself for his Transit, with a mavelous undantedness: and had already even
lost his Speech, when one of his Religious men standing by exhorted him to do
an act of Contrition, and to ask God pardon of his Sins, he collecting his
Breath, which was flying away, with a most lanquishing voice, which could
hardly be understood, answered Ita. The same added that he should hope in the
Mercies of God, who is always ready to shower down his Mercies upon a penitent
heart; The Pope answered with the same weakness of Speech, Certe. Which were
the last words which proceeded out of his mouth. Although his Agony had lasted
long, and above measure painful, nevertheless the great Pontife did not the
show least sign of Impatience: and when he perceived himself to decay, he said,
Ones Life should decay before ones Death. He desired to have his Indulgence in
Articulo Mortis, from the hand and voice of one of the Religiosi that assisted
him.

He was often visited by the Cardinals, contrary to the former customs, who
were willing to be round about his Bed till his End. And on Sunday the 22. of
May, about 22. of the Clock, he quietly rendered his Spirits to his Creator, in
the 60 Year of his Age, and 13 of his Pontificate; and the same Evening, the
usual Ceremony being performed by the Cardinal Lord Chamberlain, the Corpse were
arrayed in the accustomed Vestments, put into a Litter of Crimson Velvet open
on all sides, compassed round about by the Penitentiary Fathers, with lighted
Torches in their hands, accompanied by the Guards and Light Horses, followed by
the Artillery, and with the Rere Guard of Curiassiers, being carried to the
Vatican, and there the next morning opened, there was found on one part of the
Lungs, fastened to one of his sides, a Touch of a black Spot; one of his Kidneys
wasted, and some Carnosities or fleshy Kyrnels instead of it, from whence the
passage of the Urine was hindered; and an Ulcer of the Reins, which of all his
other Diseases was the worst: From thence, being Embalmed and Pontifically
Apparelled, he was carried the next day to the Cathedral of St. Peter, and
placed in the Chapel of the most Holy Sacrament, where was a Concourse of an
infinite number of people, to kiss his feet, and take from him whatsoever they
could lay hands on, to preserve to themselves as Holy Relics.

FINIS.
A Brief Description of the great Funeral Machine builded within the Cathedral
of St. Peter in ROME, for the Obsequies of his Holiness Pope ALEXANDER the VII.
With a Copy of all the Inscriptions and Elegies put up there in praise of his
Holiness.
VEry considerable is the Fabric of the Great Mausoleum erected in the
Basilica of the Prince of the Apostles, opposite to the Chapel of the most
Holy Sacrament, for the Death of of his Holiness Pope ALEXANDER the VII. It
consisted of a most high Urn supported by a Pedestal, having a Triple Crown
over it, with four Spires, which much exceeded the height of the aforesaid Urn,
with four steps or degrees between the four Obeliskes, which were all round
about full of Coats of Arms, and Impresses born up by very high Pedestals: on
the fronts of which were seen the Arms of his Holiness, and some most elegant
Inscriptions, which shall be here presented for the satisfaction of such as are
curious.

On the first Spire from the side of the Epistle over against the Chapel of
the most Holy Sacrament were the two following Inscriptions: Vaticani Templi
Sanctitatem
Maximus Alexander,
Ut generi Humano augustiorem redderet
Circumduxit admirandam Porticum,
Quam Theatrum dixeris.
Ubi gestum facit cum majestate Religio.


And because the abovesaid Inscription alludeth to the building of the great
Porch of St. Peter's Church, therefore over it was a Medal, wherein was painted
to the life the fabric of that Church.

On the other side of that Column was the following Inscription, alluding to
the Temple of Sta. Maria in Portico caused to be builded as above after the
Contagion, with its Medal likewise over it. Extincta pestilenti Lue
Optimus Alexander
Ex Romani Populi Voto
A fundamentis extruxit grande Templum
Sanctae Mariae in Porticu.
Quasi Romanae Portum securitatis.


Over against the Chapel of the Canons, called of the Pieta, on the lower part
was engraven upon one of the fronts of the Pedestal of the Spire the following
words, alluding to the Cathedral of St. Peter, with its Medal over it. Ferream
tempestatem timente
Sapiens Alexander,
Cathedram Petri Arbitram temporum
Opere aureo magnifice ornavit;
Sic docuit non nisi per Petri sedem
Vigere auream aetatem.


In the same Spire, on the other side, alluding to the building of the Church,
and the Gate Del Popolo, with its Medal painted over it, were these following
Characters: Totam ornaturus Romam
Beneficus Alexander;
Primam Populi Portam, mox Templum
Amplum, ac luculentum exornavit;
Sic tantum fausto ingressui tribuit,
Quantum studuit, ut Romam faeliciter coleretur.


Upon the other front of the Pedestal of the Spire, opposite to the Chapel of
Pieta, were these following Verses, alluding to the building of the Sapientia
and of the Library there erected with its Medal above. Romanam Academiam
Sapientiae Sacram
Prudens Alexander
Amabiliorem reddidit, ac opportuniorem;
Pulcra aedificatione insigni Bibliotheca:
Roma potentius regitur
Amore sapientiae, quam potentiae metu.


On the other side of it alluded an Inscription to the building of the Church
Santa Maria Della Pace. Apertum tot annis Jani Templum
Pacificus Alexander
Ingenios a pietate tandem clausit;
Nobilitato Templo,
Quod Virgini, ac Paci dicatum est:
Sola Deipara Bellonam fugat.


Upon the front of the Obelisk, over against the Chapel of the Sacrament, on
the uppermost part, were the following words with their Medal over them
alluding to the Restoration and Building made in the Port of Civita Vecciha.
Centum Cellas adversum Barbaros
Vetus Ecclesiae Romanae propugnaculum
Bellico Armamentario instruxit:
Tunc vere arcentur hosts
Cum parantur vires, quibus arcantur.


On the other side of this Spire alluded to the Restoration and Beautifying of
the Church and Piazza or Marketplace of Santa Maria della Rotonda. Aedem
Agrippe superstitioni superstitionem
Pius Alexander,
Depressa Platea, repositis Columnis
Pristino splendori restituit.
Ne in hoc olim Ethnicae impietatis Regno
Christiana pietas indecore triumpharet.


On the two other fronts of the four Spires there was for each of them another
Medal without any Inscription underneath: Other buildings were painted there,
made in the life time, and by order, of the memory of the deceased Pope. The
Urn was likewise adorned with the Histories of the glorious actions done by his
Holiness the Pope: In the lower front was represented the Immaculate
Conception, for the which his Holiness some years since had been so much
concerned. In another was figured the Coronization of St. Thomas of Villa nova
the Augustinian. In the third front was that of St. Francesca di Sales, Bishop
of Geneva. And in the fourth, the Beatification of St. Peter de Arbues, the
Aragonian Martyr. And near to that were two Pictures of the deceased Pope.

All the great Medals, Pictures and Impresses were beautifully adorned with
gold, with the Compartments equal and uniform, which gave no little admiration
to the great concourse of people, who flocked to behold the symetrie of a
Fabric which amidst sadness breathed out so mavelous beauty.

And principally was the wonder of the Beholders increased on Monday morning,
and the other two days following (wherein the Lords Cardinals performed the
last Funeral offices round this Mausoleum) when it appeared lighted by near six
hundred Waxlights, besides a number of great Candles and Torches; and the
splendor of the gold triumphing over the black color with that of the burning
Luminaries, it was not to be discerned whether or no the Lights gave a more
pleasing variety to the Gildings, or that the Gildings borrowing from them,
made the greatest luster.

At this fair and mournful spectacle remained speechless with admiration, four
great silvered Statues, representing the four Virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude and Temperance, who sat by the sides of the Urn; silent, not only
out of admiration, being the Beholders of so fair and vast a Mole, but also for
sadness, as having lost so dear a cherisher of theirs, that had known so well
how to learn happily their Doctrine.

It was admirable in the morning to see the Luminaries burn, with which the
whole Machin was ordinarily filled, whilst it flamed round about the four
great Spires, by certain windows whereof they were full, and in them did
marvellously ascend within-side artificially by certain degrees, which were
guided commodiously almost from the extremity of the Obilisk, the work of the
Mole remaining so admirable and undefaced until this present, to the end that
each curious Eye may be sufficiently satisfied with beholding it.

FINIS.
A true Relation of the Ceremonies performed within and without the Conclave
for the Creation of CLEMENT the IX. Elected the 20th. of June, 1667.
With an Account of the Ioys of ROME.
AMongst the fair and curious functions which are usually performed in the
Roman Court, one, is that of the Creation of the Sovereign Bishop (or Pope)
whereof the relation of one Ceremony ought not to be omitted; and which is so
much the more admirable, by how much it happens but seldom, and that not all
those, who being curious, desire to see the like novelty, can feed their Eye in
beholding it.

The Spirit of Pope Alexander the Seventh being flown up into heaven the two
and twentieth of the Month of May of this present Year 1667, and his Obsequies
performed by the holy College of St. Peter, the nine following days the Lords
Cardinals, to the number of Sixty two, entered into the Conclave on Thursday
Evening the second day of June, there being absent from the Court four Lords
Cardinals, Aragona, Viscounti, and Moncada in Spain: and Tun in Germany; and
four more of their Eminencies lying sick at their Palaces in Rome, two of which
after some days entered into the Conclave (to wit) Ludovisio, and Santa Croce,
and the other two Pallavicino and Bandinello past a small time after to a
better life.

The Lords Cardinals were then in the Conclave, to the number of Sixty four,
and the first morning, the Third of June, his Eminency the Lord Cardinal
Barbarino the Deacon, having in the Chapel celebrated the Low Mass of the Holy
Ghost, he himself admininistred the Communion to the rest of their Eminencies,
to whom he afterward made a Succinct Oration, exhorting them to be prepared
for the receiving into their hearts the Divine Fire of the Holy Ghost, to the
end that being filled with that Celestial heat, they might zealously bring
forth the Election of a Pope, which might be an excellent Shepherd to govern
the Christian Flock.

In the following Days, when they had with mature consideration, made many
Scrutinies and Accesses for diverse Subjects, finally after the Supreme Papal
Sea had been vacant for the space of Twenty eight days, was the most Eminent
Lord Cardinal Giulio Rospigliosi created, with sufficient Votes for Supreme
Pastor; who noble bud and ancient Stock, was produced in the pleasant Garden
of one of the famous Cities of our Great Tuscany. Pistoia it was that has had
the fortune to bring forth him, who with his experienced Prudence, maturity of
Council, and Sanctity of Life, has always made himself remarkable, and will
render himself more so in his high Throne, even to the people most remote and
barbarous.

My Pen is not a fit Pencil in the least to rough-draw the great Jubily with
which the hearts of the people of Rome were filled, when on Monday morning the
Twentieth of June it began to be whispered about the City, that so Deserving a
Prelate had been created the Sacred Monarch of Christendom, and every one
desiring by manifest Signs to be certified of it, left their own houses,
running hither and thither, and like distracted people find no quiet
whethersoever they range, all congratulating with their friends their being
favored by heaven with so Holy a Pastor.

In the mean time, the last Scrutiny and Access being finished in the Chapel
called Di Sisto, wherein the Supreme Bishop was created, and the Door of it set
open, there were seen to appear the Illustrious Lord Sexton, the Masters of the
Ceremonies, and the Secretary; and after the Schedules were burned, as it is
the Custom to do every day, the Lords Cardinals Francesco Barbarino as Deacon
of the Holy College, and Arach as first Priest made the accustomed entreaty to
his Eminency the Lord Giulio Rospigliosi, that he would accept the Popedom, to
the which by agreeing Votes he had been elected by the Lords Cardinals; and his
Eminency having accepted that sublime Charge, chose to himself the Name of
Clement the Ninth, and it is hoped that the Acts of his Clemency shall not
prove, but correspond to his Name.

The Masters of the Ceremonies were called at that Act, and he being then
conducted by some of their Eminencies behind the Altar of the said Chapel, was
by the Assistance of the Lord Sexton, and the Masters of the Ceremonies,
disrobed of his Cardinal Vestments, and Clothed Pontifically, that is, with a
White Cassack, a Rochet, a Mozet, and a Red Sattin-Cap, also with a Pair of
Shoes embroidered with the the Sign of the Cross.

Being Clothed in this manner, he was set down in the Pontifical Chair before
the Altar of the said Chapel, where all their Eminencies, the Cardinals, came
one by one to worship him on their bended Knees, for the first time,
acknowledging him the chief Pastor. At which Adoration, first appeared the Lord
Cardinal Barbarino the Deacon, who (with his knees on the ground) kissed his
foot and his right hand, and was suddenly caused to rise upon his feet by his
Holiness, who kissed him on either Cheek.

At this instant was heard to resound with sweet Echoes by the harmonious
Voices of the Musicians of the Chapel the Ecce Sacerdos magnus, and amidst
this loud reverberation, his Eminency the Lord Cardinal D'Este, one of the
Masters of the Ceremonies, bearing along the Cross, accompanying him, was
conducted to the accustomed Tower of the Benediction, over the great Portch of
the Church of St. Peter, and there they had but just opened, when his Eminency,
and the said Master of the Ceremonies, with the Cross, could scarcely crowd in;
they showed this most holy Banner to the people, who stayed in the Piazza eager
to behold it, esteeming it a certain Sign that afterward by the said Lord
Cardinal would be proclaimed those words which clearly were heard to be
pronounced, that is to say, Annuncio vobis gaudium magnum; habemus Pontificem,
Eminentissimum, and Reverendissimum Dominum Cardinalem Iulium, Rospiliosum, qui
sibi nomen imposuit Clementem nonum.

Unexpressible was the Content which the people showed when these words were
published; and no less was the Desire of the Nobility, who without the Bridge
(which was shut up with Portcullesses) stayed with a multitude of Coaches,
wherewith all the neighboring ways were crowded: neither was the eagerness of
the numerous people inferior, every one expecting with extreme impatience that
they should open to them those grates which hindered them from being able to
run into the Piazza of St. Peter, to hear the Election of the Pope published,
and to see the other Functions.

It had already stroke three and twenty of the clock, when after the
publication abovesaid was finished, there sounded unexpectedly in every ones
ears the thundrings of the loud Artillery, an inanimate Instrument to rouse up
in the hearts of Mortals, Jubily and Mirth; the Shot went alternately from the
Muskets, Cannons, and Mortar-pieces for half an hours space. The grates were
set open, the chains thrown down, the Coaches ran about, the people flew;
nothing was heard but Voices of Acclamation and noises of Mirth, every one
desiring to get into the Cathedral of St. Peter, where it was hoped that they
might behold the new Pastor; all the Bells rang, neither was there a corner in
Rome wherein was not discerned an excessive Joy and unexpressible Contentment
in all men's countenances; nor stood the Drums and Trumpets idle, whose hollow
Metals sweetly invited the Squadrons of Soldiers, which ordinarily stayed in
the Piazza of St. Peter, to answer them with a Doubled Salve of Musket Shot,
who betwixt mirth and Jubily had already appropriated to themselves the
Cardinal Coach, with the Horses of the Sovereign Pastor, from whose Coachman
they had also taken away his Cloak, and these are the accustomed Spoils
belonging to the said Soldiers.

In this interim many Masons un-walled the Conclave, their Eminencies the
Cardinals being already brought to the second Adoration in the said Chapel,
the most eminent Barbarino the Deacon beginning as above, and the other
Cardinals following all in order with purple Coats, and this Function being
ended the Musicians of the Chapel preceding, who sang certain Mottets; the
Cross, and their Eminencies the Lords Cardnials following, his Holiness was
carried in a Pontifical Seat into the Basilica, where he was by all the sacred
College adored the third time: the aforesaid Musicians singing at the same
instant the Te Deum Laudamus* etc. the adoration being finished, and the Te
Deum, the Lord Cardinal Deacon was conducted to the side of the Epistle, where
some Prayers and Verses were said over the new Pope, who was set down upon the
Altar, from which when he had descended, the Mitre being first reached to him
by one of the Assistant Deacons, and having the Cross standing before him, he
turned to the people, and gave them his Benediction; and after his Mitre was
again put on by one of the Deacons, he ascended with the said most Eminent
Cardinals the Steps of the Altar, and gave his Benediction to the sacred
College, on both sides of him where he stood; then being disrobed of his holy
Pontifical Embroidered Mantle, and his Mitre carried to him, he was put in a
close Seat, and carried to the Pope's Lodgings in the Vatican Palace, with a
great Train of Followers; St. Peter's Church, and the Portches of it,
resounding with the continual Voices, Long live Pope Clement the Ninth, his
Holiness imparting his Pontifical Blessing unto the numerous people, at his
ascending into the Palace. Every one was satisfied to see the Supreme Pastor,
who with his Majestical gravity (by which he forced all hearts to reverent
veneration, and to prostrate themselves on their Knees) was observed to
discover a pleasing affability.

Rome celebrating these Festivals, was seen that same night, and the other two
following, all light, by a number of Bonfires in the public ways, and by many
Torches and other Luminaries, at the Windows of Palaces, and particular Houses;
and each of these nights, this Castle of St. Angelo has with multiplied
Vollies of Shot rouzed the courage of every one to renew the Joy for the
Election of Pope Clement the Ninth, registered from Eternity with the Pen of the
uncreated Providence, in the Leaves of Immortality, by the Sovereign Mover, who
has granted to us this holy Shepherd, to the end he may rightly guide his
Flock, and rescue them from the Teeth of the infernal Wolf, with an holy
Pattern, and an exemplary Life, that may serve as a Mirror or Looking-glass to
all the World, and a Spur to every one to drive them to the way of perfection,
and to enrich them with some of those many Virtues which are marvellously
resplendent in his Holiness.

FINIS.
At the Election of the Supreme Bishop Clement the IX. were present Sixty four
Lords Cardinals; that is to say,
Barberino Ginetti Antonio Barberino Pallotto Brancaccio Carpegna Harach
Durazzo Gabrielle Orsino Facchinetti Grimaldi Rossetti Ludouisio Cibo Sforza
Odescalco Raggi De Retz Homodei Ottobono Imperiale Borromeo Santacroce Spada
Albici Acquauiua Chigi Elci Farnese ROSPIGLIOSI Bonuisio Bichi Vidone Barbarigo
Boncompagno Litta Corsino Donelli Piccolomini Caraffa Paluzzi Rasponi Conti
Nini Roberto Spinola Caraccioli Delfino Este Donghi Rondanino Maildachino
Hassia Carlo Barberino Pio Gualtieri Azzolino Vecchiarelli Franzone Mancino
Celsi Sauelli Vandomo.
A true Relation of the Ceremonies performed at the Solemn Coronation of his
Holiness Pope CLEMENT the IX. Dedicated to the Illustrious and Reverend Father
Fr. Giacinto Libelli, Master of the sacred Apostolical Palace.
Reverend and Illustrious Father,
THE Functions of public demonstrations which are wont to be made, either at
the Promotions of Princes, or at other happy successes, deserve not the title
of Festival, if the applauses of the People disagree from the inward
resentments of their minds; but those wherein the joys of the heart, and
acclamations of the tongue are united with excellent harmony, are rendered more
worthy than others of being by means of the Press transmitted to the knowledge
of Posterity. Such was the Coronation of Clement the IX. lately Cardinal
Rospigliosi; and for this reason I took the courage to write it, and dedicate
it to the name of your most Reverend Fatherhood: I doubt not of its acceptance,
because that you sustaining under Him (with so much praise) one of the most
principal Charges of the Pontifical Palace, never conferred but on Subjects of
eminent merit, cannot reject a labor which is diffused into the Glory of those
who fill the precinct of this holy place above any other part of Christendom,
it even comes to (point out) itself, amongst the very same persons.

Betimes on Sunday morning the 28. of June, were made ready the things
necessary for the person of his Holiness, in the Chamber of the Vatican Palace,
called of the Paramenti, whither the Pope at the appointed hour was carried
from his own Lodgings.

There by the most eminent Cardinals Deacons, Este and Rondinino, and other
Ministers designed to that office, he was clothed with an Amicte, a Surplice,
a Girdle, a Stole or long Vesture, a Rochet and a precious Mitre; the sacred
College of their Eminencies clothed also in their accustomed Purple Clokes,
making a Majestical Crown round about him. In their appointed places stood the
other Prelates, every one with his Cope over his Surplice, and the Officers
wearing their Cloaks.

The Pope prepared as in the like solemnity is usual, the Procession began
toward St. Peter's Church. The Cross-bearer going first with a Crucifix,
between two assistant Ministers; then the other Prelates and Officers; and in
their places, according to the order of precedence, went their Eminencies, the
Cardinals, two by two: His Holiness followed clothed as abovesaid, under a
Canopy of state, carried in a Pontifical Seat by his Stable Grooms wearing long
red Gowns, and the Staves of the Canopy of State were carried up by Knights of
St. Peter.

The new Pope being arrived at the Portch of St. Peter, sat down in a
Pontifical Chair, set there on a Throne, raised but little from the Floor, and
under a Cloth of State, and then the Lord Cardinal Barbarino (Archpriest of
that Cathedral) did beseech his Holiness, that he would admit the most
Reverend, the Canons of the Chapter House, to the kissing of his Foot; when
which Function was ended he entered by the middle gate into the Church, carried
as aforesaid, and making his adoration to the most Holy Sacrament, he went
toward the Clementine Chapel all ready prepared for this purpose, and
received the most eminent Cardinals to the kiss of his knee, and the other
Prelates to that of his Foot. This Ceremony finished, and the Mitre being laid
aside, the Pope rose up, and standing as the Custom is, blessed the People:
And whilst the Subdeacon who was to sing the Epistle, clothed himself in his
accustomed Vestments, his Holiness tuned the Deus in Auditiorium, etc. of the
Prime.

Whilst the Prime was singing by one of the Assistant Lord Bishops, another of
the Assistant Lord Bishops stood forward with a Book, wherein the new Pope read
the Preparatory to the Mass. By this time, the Apostolical Subdeacon had
dressed himself in his accustomed Garments, and the Sandals were taken up by
the hand of the Lord Sexton, who by the help of one of the Chamberlains put
them upon the feet of his Holiness, who at the end of the Prime, laying down
his Mitre, and standing upon his Feet, sang the Corrent Oration, the most
Eminent Cardinal Barbarino the Deacon holding the Book before him. The Prayer
ended, and the Benedicamus, etc. said by the Singers, the most Eminent Cardinal
Barbarino returned to his place, and his Holiness was clothed in his wonted
Robes for the solemn celebration of the Mass, and after they were quite
dressed, the Procession began toward the Altar of the Holy Apostles St. Peter
and St. Paul, in this order.

First went the Household Servants of his Holiness, and his Chamberlains. Next
followed the Barons, the Conservators, and the Orators of Princes, the
Secretaries and Consistorial Advocates, confusedly one amongst another, and
without order, but two being the most ancient of each order led in the
worthyest place; Then the Assistants, the Clerks of the Chamber, the Auditors
of the Rola, the Accolito Turiferario, with the Candlestick-Bearers, the
Subdeacon with the Papal-Cross, and with him the other Subdeacons; the
Subdeacons, the one Greek, and the other Latin, each of them with his Book;
then the Abbots, the Bishops, and the Archbishops followed after the Bishops
that were Assistant to the Pope, and according to the order of precedence the
most eminent Cardinals; betwixt two Assistant Deacons, who were the Lords
Cardinals Este and Rondinino, went his Eminency the Lord Cardinal Maldachino,
that was to sing the Gospel in the Papal Mass. Lastly, followed the Pope as
aforesaid.

Afterward between the two priory Chamberlains, came the Lord Cerri Deacon of
the Rola, with the Mitre, and the Prothonotaries and Overseers of the Pope's
Court not dressed. Immediately before his Holiness the Seign. Fulvio Servantio
Master of the Ceremonies, carrying in his hand two Canes, in the top of one of
which was a little Flax, and in the other a lighted Candle, and at the Pope's
going out of the Chapel of St. Gregorio, the Master of the Ceremonies turning,
gave fire to the Flax and kneeling before the Pope, said with a loud Voice,
Sancte Pater, sic transit Gloria Mundi. And so it was done two other times
before he came to the Altar of the Holy Apostles.

The People being come into the Chancel of the Chapel, the last three Cardinal
Priests presented themselves before him, and kissed him on the Breast and Face.
Then standing at the Altar, the Mitre being laid aside, and the accustomed
Prayers made at the Desk, the Mass began, and immediately after the Confession
was made, he went mitred into the Throne, and there sat down, and was accosted
by the most eminent Cardinal Antonio Barbarino, as youngest Deacon, who
standing betwixt the other two Bishops sang the first Prayer; and the most
eminent Cardinal Ginetti, the second Bishop, sang the second; and his Eminency
Cardinal Barbarino as first Bishop the third, each of whom when he sang,
standing between the other two. When these Prayers were ended, his Holiness
without the Mitre, went up to the Altar, and his Eminency the first Deacon, by
the help of his Eminency Rondinino the second Deacon, taking the Mantle from
the Altar, put it upon his Holiness, saying the accustomed words at the doing
such a Function; coming from the Altar, it being perfumed with Incense as the
use is, he withdrew to the throne of the Epistola, and standing up with his
Mitre on was Incensed by the most Eminent Cardinal Maldachino the Deacon,
without admitting him to kiss his hand, as it was the Custom at other times;
but immediately returning to his throne, he received him to his wonted
reverence, and the other Prelates.

After the Prayers were said, the usual Letanies sung, and the Mass ended, so
prepared as he was, the Pope went up unto the Throne that was prepared upon the
broad place on the top of the Stairs, before the entrance of the Cathedral of
St. Peter's, where sitting down, he gave time to all the People to go out of the
Church to see the Act of his Coronation.

Then the most eminent Cardinal Rondinino the second Deacon, took off from his
head the Mitre, and his Eminency the first Deacon standing on his right side,
pu(...) the head of the Pope the Triple Crown, saying, Recipe Tyaram tribus
coronis ornatam, and sci(...) te esse Patrem, Principum, and Regum: Rectorem
orbis: in terra vicarium salvatoris nostri, Cui est Honor, and Gloria, etc.

At this time was the Artillery of the Castle of St. Angelo shot off, the
people, with Voices of mirth and contentment, accompanying the loud noise of
the Cannons. The insolent clamours of the Multitude being some what assuaged,
the Indulgencies as the custom is were published.

The Crowned Pope after he had blessed the People, was carried without a Canopy
of State, to the said Dressing Chamber, or Camera de Paramenti, where being
disrobed, the said Cardinal, Deacon in few words congratulated with him, in the
name of all the sacred College. From hence he was conducted to his Lo^^^^gs*
amidst the applauses of the People, who seeing in the person of so worthy a
Pope, to triumph, both merit, bounty, and piety, promised to themselves a
Golden Age.

For three whole nights, all the City, and the Lords Ambassadors, Cardinals,
Princes, and Barrons, gave Signs of their Contentedness with Luminaries,
Artificial fires, and burning great quantities of Pitched Barrels: but it was
then most pleasant to behold the Castle of St. Angelo, all surrounded with fire
in a most exquisite order, distinguished with the Girandola, and a number of
Chambers and other Fireworks.

Your Reverend, and most Illustrious Fatherhoods Servant STEPHANO CAVALLI.

FINIS.

