A true and exact RELATION OF THE Proceedings of His Majesty's ARMY IN
Cheshire, Shropshire and Worstershire,

Together With what has happened to the late Lord Strange now Earl of Derby,
before MANCHESTER.

WITH The Resolution of the Town to oppose him; and the number of Men which
were slain.

LONDON, Printed for M. Batt. October. 5 1642.

Bridgenorth, October. 1. 1642.
OUr Country is in a most miserable condition, there is nothing can be
expected but a total ruin thereof, except God do miraculously help us with
assistance from the Parliament. The Kings Soldiers are altogether bent on
mischief, taking, wasting, and spoiling those things we should live by: they do
take our Corn unthresht to litter their horses, spoiling that which many a poor
creature wants; if any one speak, be it man or woman, either a Pistol or a
Sword is straight set to the party, with many grievous oaths; They know what
they do, they are the Kings servants, and will not be limited of their will:
you may judge by this what a case we are in; and for any thing we can perceive,
like to be worse; for as long as these outrages are permitted, no question but
the Kings Army will increase: What with Papists, Atheists, and all desperate
Russians, they have made Shrewsbury strong, as it is reported to us; many
Pieces of Ordnance, 300 C^rts laden with Ammunition; and our County of
Shropshire is very much a wed, many well-affected people withdraw themselves;
The Sheriff here has lately seized certain thousands of pounds at our Town of
Bridgenorth, intended to be sent down Severn lately to Bristoll, by M. Charlton
of Aylcy, M. Baker of Hamond, and others: We have many brags here of the
Cavaliers, ^ what victories they have had at Worcester, though we know for
certain they are notorious lies; yet we dare not contradict them; it grieves
the soul of every good Christian, to see how His Majesty is misled. We are
glad to hear of your constancy to the King and Parliament; our affections are
the same, though we dare not show it * for all the reports you have heard, you
may perhaps understand by the next, that Shropshire is not altogether so
malignant as it is reported; fear makes us yield to many things. I am in haste.

Yours, T. C.

Chester; October. 1. 1642.
WE are here in great fears; 260 horse loads of Arms are come hither out of the
North, and they tell us of 5000 men that will come out of Lancashire, and the
parts adjacent, besides what Cheshire and these parts of Wales will afford: The
Lord Cholmley sets out 200 Foot, and 20 Horse. The Lord Grandison, with 200
Horse, has possessed himself of (...) for the King, and has billetted his
Troops in the Town; who have since their entrance, plundered diverse houses of
well-affected men in the Town and Country, which has put the people round
about into such a fear, that many fly from the country to the city, and take
houses, and carry their best goods thither; I my self am come this last week to
live in Chester, and have left my servants to look to business in the Country.
Since my coming hither, there were 200 soldiers billetted in our little
village, and 13 of them appointed to my house, who, I thank God, departed
without doing any more hurt, then what victuals they eat, which they took in
an orderly manner: His Majesty departed Chester on Tuesday, and went hence by
Wregham to Shrewsbury, whence he came: At his departure from us, he put 100 men
for a Garrison into the Castle, and commanded Sir Thomas Delves, Sir Richard
Wilbraham, M. Philip Manwaring of Badely, and M. Berkind the Pronotary, and his
son, to wait upon His Majesty, and to be confined to Court. The same day the
King went, Captain Salisbury and his men did burn Sir William Bruertons Decoy;
and the Kings Soldiers in all places where they come, grow very insolent, and
do much spoil and mischief; the Commissioners of Array by the Kings coming
hither are much strengthened in these parts, for the aforesaid men which the
King has taken away with him; were the chief of those that attempted to put
the Militia in execution. The report is here, that the King likes the City so
well, he intends shortly to return and winter with us. My Lord Strange, now
Earl of Derby (for on Monday last his father died here in Chester) is gone with
great Forces against Manchester, who have fortified themselves, and resolve to
keep him out with all the might they can; they have three Pieces of Ordnance;
my Lord Strange has six Pieces; Bullets have been exchanged on both sides, and
two of my Lords men slain, and some Commanders; which has so far incensed him,
that he is resolved to have the Town, or to die before it. The times are like
to be miserable, God grant a happy Reconcilement.

Worcester, September 29. 1642.
ON Monday last we set forward with his Excellency, accompanied with six
Regiments of foot, and 26 or 27 troops of horse purposing for Coventry, but
News near Coventry reaching us, that the Enemy being at Worcester, his
Excellency commanded our march thither, where within 8 miles upon Friday last
in the morning we attained, from whence Sir William Belford Lieutenant General
of the horse with 10 commanded troops and 600 Musketeers, were commanded to
make good the passage to the City, that our Army might march in safety from the
Enemy: Upon our passage we found little or no Intelligence of what strength the
other party was; and drawing near the City, we found the Enemy engaged on the
other side the bridge, and in fight with some of our troops, so that it was
impossible for us to make good our purposes, being not able to pass the River,
we laid several Ambuscadoes about the City, and the horse showed themselves,
but all in vain, for the Enemy durst not make the least ^^lly upon us; but they
after the skirmish, and about one of the clock at night still and silently with
their loss departed the City, and made good their retreat toward Bewdley, and
no living soul would give us the least notice of the same. It is certainly
reported, that Prince Robert came in with 11 Troops and 500 Dragooneers. Next
morning was found dead 24. but all not known when they were viewed; Prince
Maurice is certainly reported to be shot through the jaws, and Prince Robert in
the heel: Some two more of the great ones amongst them were buried the same
Friday evening ere they departed: Wilmot is certainly run through the body, and
it is said diverse of them dyed upon the way, but certain it is that their loss
was full as great as ours, which had been more, could we have had any
Intelligence out of the City, which is desperately Malignant, and the Country
also. Of our side only of principal Officers, Sargeant Major Douglas was
slain, and Colonel Sands sore wounded. Our next march will be toward Ludlow,
where Prince Robert is.

FINIS.

