New and Rare Inventions of WATERWORKS Showing the Easiest ways to RAISE
WATER higher then the SPRING. By which Invention The PERPETUAL Motion is
proposed Many hard Labors performd And Varieties of Motions and Sounds
Produced A Work both Useful Profitable and Delightful for all Sorts of People.

First Written in French. by ISAAK de CAVS a late Famous Engenier: And now
Translated into English by John Leak.

LONDON. Printed by Joseph Moxon: and Sold at his Shop in Cornhill, at the
Sign of Atlas. 1659.

THE PREFACE.
BEcause The Raising of Water heigher then the Spring (after the way
principally intended in this work) seems to be opposite to the common received
Opinion of all times, I have thought it not only sufficient to teach the
Construction of the Engine proper thereto, but also (for more ample
satisfaction) to premise certain Propositions to precede, in place of
Principles; only to make you understand the Effect of that Motion, by the
Cause thereof; that so the way may be more accessible to the other Phneumatike
Inventions; viz. [Engins moving by the force of Air.] To come to which, it must
first be considered that all the Elements whether simple or mixed, have two
principal motions, viz. Natural and Accidental.

The Natural motion is that whereby each Element searches and draws it self
toward the place assigned thereto by the Divine Providence in the Creation.

The Accidental motion is that which is moved by any outward Force, different
from the First: Now although diverse things seem to move contrary to their
order, without any external agitation: yet the reason is, that their contrary
motion is caused, to hinder some other greater Accident. As for example, It
shall be shown that the Water to shun Vacuity, mounteth contarry to the
ordinary Course thereof; because Vacuity is more repugnant to Nature then the
contrary motion of that Element: as shallbe seen by the principle Propositions,
which serve as a foundation of this Invention; which are founded upon this
Principle of Nature, That there can be no Vacuity in the Elementary Sphere,
whereof the Earth and Water do supply the inferior part, and the Fire and Air
(which incompass them) the superior part; and each of them are said To be
heavy or light, according as naturally they are near or further from the
Center; But in these four it will be necessary to have a regard as well to
certain things whereof the Air and Water are capable, as to those wherein they
cannot suffer Accident: as the Water which although it may be extended by the
intermixture of Air, or atenuated and converted into Air by the means of Heat,
which resolves it; yet nevertheless it cannot be pressed, that is to say, that a
certain quantity of Water cannot be forced by compression to be contained in
less space then its Natural extension: and the Air on the contrary may be
restrained and put up, being pressed; or rarefied and extended, being moved
beyond the other accidents whereof it is capable. These things shall hereafter
be Demonstrated by Propositions founded upon Experience; which I have thought
to be more convenient for this purpose then to involve the Reader in a
Labirinth of Geometrical Propositions; which (although most exact) yet are not
altogether pertinent for Instructions in this Subject. As for example, If we
should build upon this Rule of Archimedes, That the Superficies of the Water is
Spherical (when it is not moved) which Superficies has for its Center that of
the whole Earth; there will follow a Subjection that we must hold in the
Demonstrations; viz. That the Superficies of the Water is Circular, which (in
the like case as is that whereof we speak) is esteemed plain of every one; and
that, First, Because the difference is undescernable: and Secondly, Because it
cannot make a defect in any Opperation whatsoever; (a liberty therefore which
is not permitted in the Mathematics.) That therefore, with other reasons have
moved me to omit those demonstrations which seem to me to be too punctual for
this purpose.

Note also that when I speak of Water, I mean Water equally heavy, without
making any difference, although in case of necessity there must be had a regard
thereto; chiefly if the difference be such as in the Waters of certain Rivers
whereof Pliny speaks, wherein nothing will sink to the bottom; as in the
Water of the Lake Alphaltite, and in the Water of Arethuse which runs toward
Siracuse, and that because of their extreme weight, which returns heavy things
to the top, as Quick Silver does the Metal, which sink not in it (although it
be liquid) because it is more weighty. And in this we must make a distinction,
that Metals and heavy Solids sink in Water according to the figure they have:
For Copper, Silver, and Gold sinks not in ordinary Water, if it be beaten out
in plates or thin leaves: but if it be contracted into a more sollid form it
sinks forthwith to the bottom. But these and the like things I shall treat of
in a Commentary upon the books of Archimedes, concerning Weights, and Things
sinking in Water.

The Theorie of the Conduct of WATER.
PROPOSITION. 1.
The Air may be pressed, but not the Water.



To give an example whereof, let there be two vessels A and B, of one form,
matter, and bigness, the which let be full of Water; it is most certain that
in either of those vessels the Water cannot be pressed, so as the one of those
vessels may contain the least part that may be more then the other: but when
they are only full of Air, I say that the said Air may be pressed, and one of
those vessels may contain more then the other: which shall be thus
Demonstrated. Let the said vessels A and B be made very close on all parts,
and at the bottom of the vessel B let there be a small hole E, to which the
pipe ED is fastened, the other end thereof D is fastened to the upper part of
the vessel C, the which is also made very close one every side, and containing
about a third part of the vessel B, and to make the Water enter therein with
force, it will be necessary to fasten the pipe F near to the bottom of the
vessel C, the which shall be made as high as may be, that it may give so much
the more violence to the Water, the which entering the small vessel C, shall
make the Air that is therein to ascend into the vessel B, the which shall
contain more Air then A by the quantity which was in C, and so the Air shall
be pressed in the said vessel B; the which may be seen if you make a small hole
in the said vessel, by the which the said Air shall come forth with violence.
But if you pierce the vessel A there will not be the same effect, because in
it the Air is not pressed. But it is here to be Observed, that although the Air
may be pressed, it is but only to a certain degree, which is about a third part:
and for proof thereof, If the vessel C were as great as B, it were imposible
that the said vessel should be filled with water, but that the Air shall
often break forth, and that because B is not capable to contain so much Air:
therefore let it be held that the Air may be pressed in a close vessel to a
certain degree. There is another way to force the water with violence into the
small vessel, by the means of a Seringe, as in the second Figure.

PROP. 2
The water cannot enter into a vessel, but there must come forth as much Air,
except the water be sent in by force.



TO Demonstrate this, let there be a vessel as A, and let the pipe X be
fastened in the cover thereof, so that it may near touch the bottom of the said
vessel; and let the small vessel D be fastened to that end of the pipe which
is without the vessel: Then if you pour water into the said vessel A until
it comes to be of the height V, which is the end of the pipe, and then the Air
being shut in in the vessel A, hinders the water which is in D from entering
into the vessel A. But it is to be noted in this Rule, that if the water be
forced into the vessel A with violence, it may be filled to a third part or
thereabouts, and the said violence is caused if the pipe X be made very long,
or if you force the water in with a Seringe, as has been said; and as may be
seen in the second figure.

A Corollarie. PROP. 3.
It follows by the contrary reason that if a vessel be full of water it
cannot be emptied, so that the Air shall not enter therein.



AS let the vessel or Vial D be proposed, which let be full of water, and let
it be reversed, so as the mouth or neck may touch the water, which shall be set
under it in a vessel; it is certain that although the mouth of the said Vial
be downwards, no water shall run out, because the Air cannot enter to supply
the place of the water that should run out.

PROP. 4.
There can be no vacuity.



THis is that which has been said in the Preface: the proof whereof may be
gathered from the foregoing Corollarie, and diverse other examples, whereof here
is one: If you have a Copper pipe B, whereof the end C is in the water, and let
the other end D be open, to the end that the Pestle A may be put therein, which
shall be like to those which are used for Pumps and Forcors of water; and that
the said end A, well environed with leather, to the end that putting water in E
it may not run through to B; then if A be raised to the point F, the water X
which is level with the point C, shall ascend to B, to supply so much place as
is between A and F; so the water ascends higher then the level, that there
should be no void place left in B.

PROP. 5
If the Air be pressed in a vessel wherein there is water, and that you give it
passage by some pipe, the said water shall come forth with violence.



If the Air be pressed in the vessel X, (let it be by means of a Seringe or by
a pipe, as has been said before,) it is certain that then when the water has
passage, it comes with a great deal more force then if it came forth from an
open vessel, as B.

PROP. 6.
If the water Descends with violence into two equal vessels, there shall enter
more water into that vessel where the water Descends from the highest place,
and the Air shall be more pressed therein, and there shall be the same rate or
proportion between the quantity of water contained in those vessels, as there
is between the heights from whence the Water has descended.



LEt there be two vessels B and C, to which the water descends with violence
by the pipes M and N, the longest of which is N, From whence it follows that
there enters more Water in the vessel C then in B, and there is the same rate
of the Water D to the Water O, as there is of the length of the pipe N, to the
length of the pipe M. And it also follows from hence, that in the vessel C,
where there is more Water, the Air shall be more pressed then in B, and the
effects thereof may be seen by the small pipes P and X, of the which two P
casts the water highest; because the Air is more pressed in the vessel C, then
in the vessel B, in the same manner as before we may proportion the Air of
the two vessels to the heights of the Water springing forth by the small pipes
P and X, the which ought to be equal.

PROP. 7.
All heavy things whatsoever weigh more in the Air then in the Water.

ALthough that every heavy body has always in its self its proper weight,
yet nevertheless they are also considered diversely, according to the place
where they are placed, as it is certain that wood weighs nothing in the water,
because it does not des end toward the center of the Earth, which is proper to
all heavy things; But if it be in the Air, it falls toward its center with
weight: wherefore we may say that it weighs more in the Air then in the Water:
and so we may say of all Bodies, although they are heavier then the Water, for
although they fall toward their center of gravity in the Water, yet it is not
with such swiftness. It is not necessary to show here by what quantity the said
heaviness is more weighty in the Air then in the Water; sending the Curious to
the Books of Archimedes, concerning things falling in the Water: where it is
demonstrated that heavy things weigh more in the Air then in the Water, by the
quantity of Water, which is equal to them.

A Corollarie.
It is here to be Observed that Waters are of diverse weights, and they say
that on the Territories of Cara in Spain, there be two fountains, in the one
of which diverse things being put, sink to the bottom; the which being put in
the other, float at top. They report the same thing of the Lake of Sodom. and
of the fountain of Arethus. The which effect comes to pass by reason of the
weight of the Water: and from hence we may infer, that one and the same thing
weighs more in lighter Water, then in heavier Water.

PROP. 8.
Water weighs upon that which sustaineth it, according to its height.



I Have given this example, because that diverse deceive themselves upon this
subject, which have thought to raise Water, not considering the weight, when it
comes to be raised very high. That which is then to be understood by this
Proposition, is that the sucker C, being at the end of the pipe M, to sustain
the Water which is within the said pipe, that the Water weighs upon it
according as the height thereof shall be in the pipe. As let us suppose that
the Water be in the pipe as high as D, and that it weighs 20 pounds, if we fill
the said pipe to E, which is as much again, it shall weigh 40 pound, and if we
double it again, it shall weigh 80 pound: And according to the greater or
lesser height of the Water within the pipe M, the sucker C shall be harder or
easier to lift up; which is that which ought to be considered, when the water
is to be raised very high: to the intent to proportion the thickness of the
pipes to their height: so as the Water that is in them may not be too heavy
for the moving force. It is also to be Observed that in Cisterns the force of
the Water ought not to be taken from the bottoms where the pipe is souldered,
but from the superficies of the Water which is in them: as may be seen in the
Cisterns A and B: wherein the Water that is in B has more force, because it
is higher then A, although the pipes are of equal thicknesses and lengths.

PROP. 9.
The Water naturally ascends to the level of the place from whence it did
descend.

THis proportion is very intellegible, and is as much as to say that if there
be a Spring as B, the Water whereof enters into the Receiver C, and if there
be a pipe as D descending right down or obliquely, the Water shall ascend
therein to E, which is the level or height above of the vessel C: and if the
said vessel be not full but to the point F, the Water shall not ascend through
the pipe D, but to the point G, the level of the said point F, and although
the pipe comeing from the vessel C, be not drawn so high, if the end of the
pipe through which the Water passes be small and the pipe great, it shall
ascend to its level; but according as the ends of the pipes through which the
said Water passes are greater, so the Water is deficient in its height. This
may be seen in the figure by the small pipes XZP.



PROP. 10.
Of the crooked Pipe, by which the Water is darwn forth.



THis pipe is in use in diverse places, and has been treated of by Hero of
Alexandria. But it must not be here omitted, because it falls several times
in use for our subject, and also to understand the reason thereof: this pipe
then is called by diverse a Siphon: and has that end which is without the
vessel longer then the other; And if the Air be drawn forth which is within
the said pipe when it begins to run, it shall not cease until it have emptied
the vessel as high as the other end; And that which in effect may seem strange
of the said Siphon, is, that the Water rises higher then the top of the
vessel by the said pipe: the reason whereof shall be given thus. Let the
vessel be B, and the Siphon CVX. And let the top thereof be V and the end VX
longer then VC, then when the Air which is in it, is drawn forth by the end M,
the Water of the vessel B enters therein to fill the place. Now it being full
the Water contained from V to X being more heavy then that from V to C, makes
it run toward M. And as that Water cannot run forth of the pipe, unless there
enters something therein to fill the place, and the Air cannot enter the water
by any place of the vessel B, the Water shall ascend until it comes to empty
it self to the height of C, and then the Air entering therein the course of the
water shall cease.

PROP. 11.
Of another kind of Siphon: and how the Air may be drawn forth by the means of
another vessel.



THere may be made diverse kinds of Siphons, but behold here one which seems to
be most different: which nevertheless depends upon the same reason with the
former. Let the vessel be B, and let the pipe DC be souldered to the bottom
passing through it: Then let one end of the pipe AXZ be put about it, so as the
end X may be closed and souldered so as the water may not enter but by AZ, but
AZ must not touch the bottom: therefore the pipe AXZ shall be fastened to the
pipe D by two small tennons M and N, and it must be observed that the said pipe
AXZ ought to be made of such a thickness that the Water contained between it
and the pipe D may be equal to the water which is in D; the which being done
the Water may be drawn forth by D, and perform the same effect as the former.
But if either the one or the other of those Siphons contains so much Air that
it cannot be drawn forth by aspiration, there shall be made a vessel as P very
close and souldered on all parts, and it shall have one end F to join with D,
the which vessel fill with Water, and join F and D together without taking
Air, then if you turn the cock R the Water that runs forth from the vessel P
shall draw the Air of the Siphon. And make it run.

PROP. 12.
The Water runs equally by the means of a Siphon, if the end by which the
Water of the said Siphon ascends does only touch the Superficies of the water
of the vessel.



BEcause that in the foregoing pipes the Water runs not equally, being slower
at the end then at the beginning. It shall be shown in this example how it may
run equally, that is if to the end A of the pipe AC a small vessel of any
matter be put, let it be what it will, so it may float upon the Water, and the
end A of the pipe AC be put through the same, so as the end may touch the
superficies of the Water, it is certain that the end C shall run equally, which
is not so in other Siphons, the which run always swifter at the beginning then
at the end.

PROP. 13.
The farther that the moving force is distant from the center of motion, the
more force it has.

The force moved with the wheel XO is understood by a Tree or Axis marked with
DAM.

The force moving is represented by the three wheels marked with BF, CV and 8,
the which are of several magnitudes, that is to say BF of two feet in diameter,
CV of 4 feet, and the largest of 8 feet. I say that if each of these wheels is
turned alone and by it self, by an equal or the same force, (Let it be by
Water or counterpois) that the same weight or force put to the greater wheel
marked 8, shall make the tree and wheel XO move a times as forceable as if the
same weight or force were put to the wheel CV: (so it shall do between CV and
BF) and that because the circumference of the wheel marked 8, is further
distant from the center of the tree then the wheel CV, and CV farther distant
then BF, therefore it shall be concluded that the more the moving force is
distant from the center of motion, so much the more force it shall have.

From hence does result the force of the Leaver, the which has more force when
it is handled at the farthest distance from the burden.

And on this likewise depends the reason of the tree of the Screw press which
is an Engine of great force.

PROP. 14.
If a Wheel be turned by diverse Pinions, to whose Axis any weight be fastened,
the lesser Pinion shall be capable to move the greater weight: but it shall not
turn the Wheel so fast: and there shall be such rate or proportion of the
quantity of one weight to the other, as is the difference of numbers of the
Teeth of the said Pinions: and the times of raising the weights shall have also
the same proportion the one to the other.

LEt the toothed Wheel be A, the number of Teeth whereof let be 100. if this
Wheel be led with diverse Pinions, and the same force moves them, that Pinion
shall give the most force to the Wheel to raise any weight whose number of
teeth is the least: But the said Wheel shall turn slower, as has been said.
And herein behold the Example, If the Wheel A be turned by the Pinion C of 10.
Teeth, and be capable to raise a weight of 200. and instead of the Pinion of
10. teeth, it be turned by a Pinion of 5. then it the force to raise 400. But
as the weight is double in gravitie to the first, so also it shall be as long
again a raising up, because the Pinion being 10. and the Wheel 100. the Pinion
ought not to be turned above 10. times to make a whole turn or revolution of
the Wheel: But if the Pinion be 5. it must make 20. turns before the Wheel
makes one, because the number 5. is contained 20 times in 100. And so as the
Pinion C is double to the Pinion F, the weight raised by F, shall be double to
the weight raised by C, And the time of the raising it shall be also double.

PROP. 15.
If two Wheels are equal in Form and Matter, and there be unequal Weights
fastened to their Ax-trees, they cannot be moved by the same Force in the same
Time.

THis Proposition does in some sort result from the former, as may be seen in
the Demostration.

Let there be two equal Wheels D and F, of 96. Teeth, and let there be fastened
to the Axis G a weight of 300, and to B, one of 400; and let it be supposed
that the Pinion T, of eight teeth moves the said weight by the means of the
force of one Man. It is certain that if there be put to the Wheel F, a Pinion
equal to T, that the same Man or the same Force which was only made to turn T,
will not suffice to turn a Pinion equal to it in the Wheel F, because of the
weight V, which is heavier then M: If then you would move the Weight V by the
same force; you must put to the Wheel F a Pinion which has such proportion to
T, as the weight M has to the weight V. Now the Pinion T being of 8. the
Pinion X must be of 6. because that there is the same rate of 8. to 6. as of
400. to 300. and the same Pinion X of 6. teeth being moved by the force
aforesaid, the weight V shall be raised; but not in the same Time, because
there are made but 12. Turns of T, to make one Turn of D, and there must be 16.
Turns of X to make one Turn of F.

PROP. 16.
If two unequal Weights be put to the ends of the Beam of a Balance, and if
they be hanged on a point which divides the Beam into two parts having the same
rate the one to the other, in length, as the said weights have in heaviness,
Those weight although unequal shall be in equal balance, if the lighter be put
to the end of the longest part of the Beam.

LEt the unequal Weights be D and E, and let D be 15. pound weight and E 6; I
say that they being at the end of the Beam of the balance AB if they be hanged
on a point as C, so as the part AC may have such proportion to the part CB, as
the weight E to the weight D; D being at the shortest distance from the center
of the Beam shall not weigh more then E, which is at the longest end: because
the weights are heavy in proportion according to their distance from the point
on which the Beam of the balance is hanged.



Now if the Beam of the balance be divided into 7 parts there shall be 5.
parts on the one side of the Center, and 2. on the other; which are in the same
proportion as the Weights 15. and 6; because 6. is the two fifts of 15, as 2.
is of 5. And if the difference of the Weights D and E, were greater or lesser,
they shall always be in equal Balance, if the Beam be hanged from a point
which divides it as is before said. You may see other Examples in the Figures
following P, which differ from this.

A Corollarie.
From hence it follows, that two equal Weights are not alike heavy if they be
put at the end of a Beam which is hanged from unequal parts: And it must be
observed that although the two sides of the Beam are in equal balance, if they
are of unequal length, equal weights shall weigh unequal.

As for example, If the Beam AB be hanged in C, so as CB may be longer then AC
by a fourth part, and yet AC and CB be in equal balance, because the part AC
is thicker then the part CB, yet if the equal weights D and F, be put to the
ends of the Beam AB, the weight F shall weigh a fourth part more, which is the
difference of BC and AC.

PROP. 17.
The manner to shut and open the Cocks of the Phneumatique Engine, by the means
of Water.

IN the Construction of the Phneumatique Engine which causes Water to mount
higher then the Spring, There is required a Vessel which ascends and descends
by means of the Water to turn the Cocks; therefore I have put here certain
examples, among which you may choose the most convenient both for that Engine,
and for the other Engines.

As in the first place, Let there be the Cock A, which is to be turned by means
of a Vessel: First there must be put the key KE, which has two branches, B and
D, which must be long or short according as the said Cock is hard or easy to
turn; as may be gathered from the 13. Proposition; and there shall be two small
chains or chords at the ends of the two branches; at the one of them shall be
the weight L, at the other the Vessel M; but it is necessary that the weight L,
be heavier then the Vessel M when it is empty, but when the said Vessel M is
full, it ought to be heavier then the weight L, to the intent to make the Cock
may turn both ways.

Now behold the effect of the Vessel, in which there is a Siphon, which shall
be something lower then the height of the Vessel; and the said Siphon shall be
larger then the Pipe which gives Water to the Vessel; when M is empty the
weight L shall turn the Cock toward it, but when the Pipe H, has filled M,
then the said M weighing more then the weight L, shall draw back the Cock
toward it self, and then the Siphon beginning to run shall make M lighter then
the weight L, and so the Cock shall be turned back again.

There may be also made another Vessel as F, which may be so hanged upon the
handle as it may be moveable upon two Pins, and may over-turn and empty the
water when it is full. And to perform this, the Pins must not be diametrically
opposite, but more toward one side then toward the other; Now because the
said Vessel being empty should return of it self, the counter-poise E must be
put to the lighter side, to balance it equally; this being done, if there be a
weight (as has been said in the aforegoing Proposition) which shall be heavier
then F, that Vessel F shall be at the highest when it is empty, but when it is
half full being heavier then D, the said Vessel shall descend toward F, and
being full it shall empty it self toward X: and being empty it shall be
again lighter then the Weight, and return to its first place; where it shall be
till it be filled again to descend.

The reason of the emptying may be gathered from the Corolarie of the 16.
Proposition.

There may be also made another manner of Vessel for the same use: as you may
see in the Figure SZX.

PROP. 18.
Of the Value or Suspiral.

IT will be also necessary for the understanding of the following Engine to
demonstrate the manner of the value of Copper which opens it self by
intervals; to the intent that if the Air may enter into the Vessels from
beneath, and shut it self when the said Vessels are full; to the end that the
Water pass not out by it. The which value shall be figured thus; Let HIKL be a
small box of Lead, about one inch and a half in diameter, and 3 inches long very
well Soldered, within the said box is the value GDCE made after this manner: GD
is a small Pipe of Copper, about of an inch; and toward the end D there are two
small props which hang the tongue or value of Copper C, which falls upon the
hole D, to shut it when there is need, there is also to the box HIKL a small
Pipe XM, the lower part of which is soldered to the Pipe OC.



Then to see the effect of the said value; Let us suppose that there is two
Pipes to the Pipe CO, the one to empty it, and the other to fill it: and let
the Pipe X be stopped, which is that which fills the said Vessel, and let B be
opened; then the Water that comes from the Vessel draws in the Air by the small
Pipe DG, and lifts up the Copper tongue C and B: Being stopped it shuts it self
and when the Water has filled the Vessels CO, and HILL, the said Water pressing
the value against the end C, there shall no Water come forth.

PROP. 19.
Of the Cock with four Vents.



THis Figure following is set down to show more distinctly the manner of the
Cock D; whose barrel is pierced in 4 places; to the end that the key C turning
either one way or the other, in the required time, the Water may sometimes run
out by E, and sometimes by F; and that F or E may run when the hole of the key
C shall agree with the one or the other of them: It shall also empty by means
of the Vessel M, as the Cock H shuts, when one of the Pipes is opened, and then
when the said Pipe shuts to make the other Run, then the Cock shall open again
by means of the counter-pois GL, and the Pullies K. As you see it in the figure.

A Description of the Engine by which part of the Water is raised higher then
the Spring.
TO come to the Construction of this Engine. First let there be made 4. Pipes of
Copper, or of thick Lead sufficient to bear the strength of the Water and Air,
and let them be 6. inches in Diameter, and 6. or 7. foot long, marked in the
Figure with the letter A, and let the little Pipes E be Soldered to the ends of
them at the bottom, so as the Water may be communicated from one to the other:
furthermore let there be Soldered four small Pipes F, above the Pipes A, to the
intent that the Air be communicated from the one to the other: also let four
little Pipes marked with the figure 3 be Soldered, which are those by which the
Water ascends; and they must be Soldered a travers above the great Pipes, and
the end entering within almost to the bottom. Moreover there must be four other
great Pipes made like to the first, the which shall be put as much lower as you
would raise the Water higher then the Spring, and let the small Pipes D be
Soldered in them, to the end that the Air may enter there when the Water enters
by the Pipes C, and therefore let them be Soldered above; and let there be four
Pipes at I communicating all the Water to the Pipe GH, and let the Cock L be
Soldered to the bottom of that Pipe and above at the top let the value K be
Soldered, made as is before described in the 18th Proposition: and let the
Pipes D and F be made common by one Pipe: moreover let the small Vessel S be
made, which may have the sides about the height of one foot; and upon the
bottom of it by the base of the Emboiteure let there be Soldered the Cock N, to
which Cock let there be the Pipes O and P, the which Pipe P shall go almost to
the bottom of one of the Pipes marked with A, and O shall be conducted almost
to the bottom of the Pipes C: also at the top of the Vessel S, let there be the
small Pipe V, to give Water to the Vessel Y, when it is required: which Vessel Y
shall be of Copper, having a small hole at the bottom. Concerning the motion
whereof, it has been declared in the foregoing Examples. There must be also a
Counterpoise M, to the intent that when the Vessel Y shall be empty it may draw
back by its weight as well the Vessel as the Cocks, in their place

by means of the small chains and Pullies X: There shall be also at the end of
the Pipes marked 3, a Vessel marked 4, to receive the Water which shall be
there discharged by Intervalls from the said Pipes, and to render it by the
Pipe 7, which runs continually being of equal thickness to two of the small
Pipes marked 3, the which shall raise the Water higher then the Spring; as high
as you will, if there be place to put the Pipes C low enough: because that the
further the Pipes A and C are the one from the other, the higher the Water will
rise, to the Vessel 4.

Behold here so much as concerns the Fabric and disposition of the Pipes. We
come now to the effect.

Let T be the height of the Spring, and let the Water run into the Vessel S,
and let the Pipe P be open, then the Vessels A shall be filled, and when they
are full the Water shall begin to run by the small Pipe V into the Vessel Y, the
which being full (and then being heavier then the weight M) shall descend
toward R, and shut both the Cock L and the Pipe P, and then the Water falling
into S shall run by the Pipe O into the Pipes C, the Air of which Pipes passing
through the Pipe D into the Pipes F presses the Water which is in A, and
constraines it to ascend by 3. Now when A is empty and C full, the Vessel Y
shall be also made light by means of the small Pipe Z, which empties the said
Vessel about the same time as C is filled: then the same Vessel Y ascends
again in its place, and P opens as it was before to fill the Pipes A. And so
this Engine moves continually, by which the Water is raised higher then the
Spring, of the height as is between the Pipes A, and the Pipes C.

Behold here that which was to be demonstrated touching this Engine, which among
all the Phneumatique Engines, is that which with less force raises greatest
quantity of Water: And as concerning other inventions to Conduct the Water of
Springs or Falling Waters, or to make them Navigable, or to raise Water out of
Rivers by diverse ways, in great abundance for the use of Towns, Royal
Houses, or Palaces, shall be demonstrated in that which follows.

It is here to be noted that the Frame of Timber upon which the Pipes are put,
and the Pullies fastened in the foregoing Figures, are not there described:
Because they would have hindered the full Sight of all the parts of this Engine.

The Explanation of the PLATES and FIGURES Following.
The first Plate, Eigure I. To raise Water by the current of a River, and the
force of a Pump.
THIS Engine commonly called a Pump, is called by Vitruvius and Hero, the
Stesibique Engine, retaining the name of the Inventor thereof; which was
Stesibius of Alexandria. I will show three ways to raise Water by this Engine.
The first shall be by the current of a River (as the Figure Shows) where there
is a water Wheel, and at each end of the Axeltree of the said Wheel is a handle
of strong Brass, and forged to sustain the force and weight of the said Wheel:
and if the said Wheel be ten feet broad, and twelve feet in Diameter, the said
handle shall be at least four inches square, and shall be rounded in the middle
at the places marked with A, and there shall be also two pieces of wood called
Levers marked with the letters B and C, fitted to the arm of the said handles,
the one of which rises, and the other goes down when the Wheel turns: and the
said Levers shall be also fitted to two arms or branches marked with D and E; the
which raises the Buckets and Suckers of the Pumps Alternately, and so the
Water shall be raised to the Vessel F; And from thence you may conduct it
whither you please. As concerning the height which it ought to rise; I am of
opinion that it must not be constrained to rise more then thirty feet in height
with one Pump; as shall be taught in the following Problem: the great Pipe G,
is the place where the Sucker lies, which sustains the Water when the Buckets
or Suckers of the Pumps are not lifted up. The Figure with the ordinary
practice which is had of Pumps, will make you easily understand this Engine. And
if the current of the River be strong, and it is required to have store of
Water; you may make the Diameter within the Barrells ten or twelve inches, and
the height eight or nine Foot: And to make it well, the Buckets ought to rise
and fall four foot; and when they are at their greatest height that they may
have four foot of Water above them, to the intent that the Air may not escape;
for if the Water be not high enough between the top of the Barrel and the
Bucket, the Air will pass thorough the Water by bubbles, and make the Engine
useless: and especially when the Water is forced to rise above fifteen or
twenty foot. Therefore you must take heed that that accident do not happen. The
proportion also of the Pipes MNO shall be about four inches in Diameter, if the
aBrrels be twelve: if the said Barrels be less, the said Pipes shall be less in
proportion.

The Explanation of the Second Figure. Plate II. Another way to raise Water by
means of a falling Water.
THis other manner of raising of Water, is done by a falling Water, raised so
as it may fall upon the Wheel A, to turn it; and in turning it to raise the
Water of the Pump B, to 24. or 30. feet high, and the other side C takes the
said Water in the first elevation in the Trough D, and may raise it from thence
24. or 30. feet high. The aforegoing Figure will give the manner and way of the
raising of the Water in the first height: and the second height is done after
the same manner, as may easily be comprehended by the Figure: the which Figure
is not made high enough according to the proportion of the measures; because
the Paper would not permit: but you may easily imagine the said height, as it
ought to be.

Explanation of Plate III. To raise the Water of a Spring, or River by the
force of Horses.
BUt if there is not a River strong enough, nor a falling current, the Water
may be raised by the means and force of one Horse, or more, according to the
quantity and the height which is desired. This present design is made to raise
the Water 60. foot high, and four Horses will raise about 60. in an hours time,
which is about 30000. pound weight. Therefore first let there be a straight
Axeltree of wood, a foot square, and 60. foot high, marked with A, the which
turns between two Pins, and above near the end, there is a Wheel of 24 Teeth,
marked with B, the which turns a Lanthorn or Pinion of 12. Staves, marked with
C, and a Wheel of eighteen Teeth, marked D. But there are but nine Teeth in the
half of the Circumference, the other half is void; and there are also two other
Wheels, marked with E and F, of equal bigness, and also nine Teeth on each
Wheel; and let the toothed part of all the three Wheels be put above: then
there must be a Pully put above marked with G, over which a Cord must pass, the
which must be fastened by the two ends to the Axeltrees of the Wheels C and F,
so as turning about one of the Wheels it may unturn the other: as you may see,
and better consider in the Figure of the Orthographie following. Then you must
put the said Wheels E and F, against D, so as D turning always the same way
may make E turn half a turn, and then when it shall be in the last Tooth, the
first of the Wheel F shall represent it self against the Wheel D, because the
Wheel E shall make it turn back again, by means of the common Cord and Pully G:
and after the said Wheel D has caught the first Tooth of F, it shall continue
to the ninth; and afterward the first of the Wheel E shall represent it self
again. And so the two Wheels E and F shall turn forward and backward half a
turn alternately: and to the Axeltree H and L there shall be fastened two strong
Cords, which shall draw up the two Buckets which go into the Barrels M and N,
and have about three feet play, rising and falling; and they shall be made of
Brass, well fitted within the Barrels, and that they may descend of themselves
without being constrained: And so there is no Leather put about the Buckets, as
is ordinarily done in common Pumps. And it is to be noted that the swifter the
Buckets come up, so much the more Water they raise, which may be observed in
all sorts of Pumps.

It is also to be noted that the two Transverse pieces OP ought to be but one
piece, to the which the other Transvers piece Q ought to be joined, in the
which the four ends of the Axeltrees of the Wheels BCEF do turn.

The Explanation of Plate IIII. This Plate gives a larger demonstration of the
former, by means of the Orthographie.
FOr the better understanding of the foregoing Figure, I have represented here
the plain of the Orthographie; to the end that by it you may understand the
motion and meetings of the three Wheels EDF. Let then each of those Wheels have
nine Teeth in the half Circumference, and let that part of the Wheels that has
the Teeth in them be turned upwards, so as the first Tooth of the one meet with
the Teeth of the Wheel D, when the last of the other has passed beyond it: and
there must be a Cord marked RS to go in a Pully marked T, the which shall be
firmly fastened to the two Axtrees, as may be seen in the Figure. So as if the
Teeth of the Wheel E be entered, it shall make the Wheel F to turn half a turn
by the Cord which is fastened to the Axeltree of the said Wheel, and shall
present the first Tooth V when the last of the Wheel E marked with X shall be
passed: and so the Wheel F making its half turn, shall make E to return as it
was before; so as by means of these half turns (turning and returning) the
Buckets of the Pumps shall be raised and depressed, as if it were with a
turning handle: And the difference which is between the said handle and this
present Invention, is, that the said handle does not raise the Bucket
Perpendicularly, as this present Invention does, the which is much better.
Likewise to raise the Water very high, and in such abundance, it is necessary
that the said handles be very strong, as has been said before. And if you will
not use the said handles to the foregoing Engines to raise the Water by the
means of Water Wheels, you may use this present Invention.

As concerning the Barrels, if you would spare the quantity of Brass or Lead
which they ought to have in making of them 30 or 40 foot long, you may make
them only of 4 foot long, of the Diameter of the Bucket, and over them viz. at
ZY fit smaler Pipes into them: as you may see in the Figure.

The Explanation of Plate V. To make a Dyal with the course of a natural
Fountain, the which shall move very true, without being subject to be wond up
Daily.
LEt the course of the Fountain be from the Pipe marked with A, the which shall
be hollow within about the Diameter of a writing Quil, the Water whereof shall
fall into the Vessel B, to which there shall be two Pipes, that is one marked
with C, Soldered to the bottom of the said Vessel, which has a small Cock
marked D; then there is a small emptying Vessel marked with E, and the said
Vessel shall be fastened to a small Lever marked with FG, made as the Figure
demonstrates, with a hinge to bend only one way: and the end of the said Lever
shall be entered in one of the Teeth of a great Wheel, marked with HI, so as the
Vessel E descending the end of the Lever G shall raise the Tooth in which it is
entered, somewhat more then one Tooth, to the intent that the greater Leaver L
may fall into the next Tooth, and stop the Wheel HI: there shall be also a
counterpois marked O, fastened to the Lever FG, to draw down the end G, when the
Vessel E is empty, and so the Water falling in the said Vessel shall make it
heavier then the conuter-pois O, and then it shall descend and raise the end G,
and move the said Wheel H one Tooth: and the Water falling always shall fill
the said Vessel and make it to overturn, and then the counter pois O being
heavier then the empty Vessel shall again draw down the end G, and the other
above marked with L shall stay the wheel that it shall not return: The said
Wheel must have 60 Teeth; and so the Water which falls in the Vessel E being so
justned by the Cock D, that every minute of an hour the said Vessel may
overturn, and by that means the Wheel HI shall make one Turn in an hour: and
then you may make a Pignon to the Arbor of the said Wheel having six Teeth, the
which may move a Wheel of 72 Teeth, and by that means the hand above M shall
show the course of the 12 hours, and that beneath shall show the course of one
hour: and when the said Dyal shall be well justned, it shall continue a long
time without alteration. You must also note that it is necessary that the water
of the Vessel B be as high as the Pipe P, to the intent that the said Water
fall always equally in the emptying Vessel; and that it may so do, it is
necessary that there fall somewhat more Water into the said Vessel B, then
there runs forth by the Pipe C: and the overplus shall run out by the Pipe P.

The Explanation of Plate VI. To counterfeit the Voice of small Birds by means
of Water and Air.
LEt there be two Vessels marked with A and B, that marked with A shall be
filled with Water, and that marked with B very close and Soldered on every
side, then the Pipe CD, must be Soldered one end to the bottom of the Vessel A,
and the other passing to the upper part of B, and that the end D may be so far
distant from the bottom of B as is necessary to let the Water pass, there must
be a Cock marked with P, to the said Pipe, to open and shut it when it shall be
required: There must be also made the Pipe GH, by which the Air may pass
through the said Vessel A, or else it shall be conducted to the place where you
would make the Birds to Sing; to the end of which shall be fitted a small
Whistle like to those which the Organ makers do make, to represent the Song of
a Nightingale, and the said Whistel shall be put into the Water; and so when
you open the Cock F, the Water shall descend to the lower Vessel, and the Air
which is in the said Vessel shall issue forth by the Pipe GH, the which shall
make the Whistel to sound which is at the end of the said Pipe, and then you
may put to it an Artificial Tree, upon which you may put some Birds of Wood or
Metal, painted like as the natural.

As concerning the Figure of the Globe DB, it may serve for pleasure to cast
the Water very high by the Pipe A, after that you have forced it in with
violence with the Seringe C.

And for the manner of the Whistle put into the Water, you may see it Figured
in the following Figure at the place marked with K.

The Explanation of Plate VII. To add a Swan or other figure to the singing of
the Birds spoken of before, which shall Drink or Sip up as much water as you
shall present to her Beack.
THis is only the difference between this and the foregoing Figure, that the
Vessel above marked with A is close and Soldered on every side: it shall have a
small receptacle or Funnel N to fill it, the which being full and N stopped,
when you open the Cock F the Water entering into the lower Vessel shall make the
Air pass forth, and so make the Birds Sing, and the Water passing out of the
upper Vessel A shall sip up by the Beack of the Swan all the Water or liquor
which you shall put under her Beack.

It has been said before that K is the Figure of the Whistle put into the
Water to immitate the Singing of Birds.

The Explanation of Plate VIII. To make an Engine which shall move of itself.
THere have been diverse Men which have Traveled to find out a motion which
they have called (without knowledge) Perpetual, or without end, a thing very
ill considered and ill understood, because all that which has a beginning is
subject to have an end; and the word Perpetual or without end ought to be
applied to God alone, who as he had no beginning, cannot also have an end, so as
it is folly and deceit in Men to make themselves believe that they can make
perpetual Works; seeing that themselves are mortal, and subject to an end: so
also are all their works: Therefore I will leave those words of Perpetual or
without end, and will show the Fabric of an Engine which shall move of it self,
seeing it is Entertained of the four Elements, of which it is composed; and the
reason of its motion shall be Heat or want of Hear, which shall serve as a
Counter-pois to that Engine: as may be seen here by the Construction. Let there
be a Vessel of Lead or Copper, about a foot and a hal^ square, very close and
Soldered on every side, which shall have a Pipe in the middle, marked with DE,
the end E shall be near the bottom of the Vessel, leaving only room for the
Water to pass, the other end D shall be well Soldered against the top of the
Vessel, and it shall have also a vent marked with F: afterward you must raise
up the two sides of the Engine NM, so as the Axtree O with the Pully G may turn
easily, and may show the motion of the said Engine without the side M: the
motion of which Engine with the Index is opposite to the said Axtree: there must
be also the border PQ Soldered upon the Vessel, the which shall serve when you
will to put Water into the Vessel; and also when the Water ascends by the Pipe
ED that it might not scatter abroad: all this being well and justly made, power
Water into the said Vessel by D E, till it be about the third part full; and
while you put the Water in open the vent F, But when the Water is in, stopp it
very well. Then you must have a little bal of Copper very light, marked with
the letter L, the which may float upon the Water, and shall be fastened by a
small thread, so as the said bal may Ascend and Descend by the Pipe DE, when the
Water rises and falls: also the said thread to which the bal is fastened must
pass over the Pully G, to the end of which thread is fastened a small Counter-pois
R, as the whole may be well seen in the Figure. Afterward you may put the said
Engine in a Chamber, where the Sun shines in at Noon: Then when it is made a
little hot the bal is raised up, and the Counter-pois deprest, which will turn
the Index, and will show the height that the bal is mounted, and as it is
colder the bal Descends, and so as the Times change so the bal rises and
falls. You must note that if the Vessel be one foot and a half high, and being
filled a third part with Water, there shall remain one foot for the bal to rise
and fall: and making the Pully four inches in Diameter, then it shall turn one
Turn if the bal be raised up to the end D, so that dividing the Dyal into
twelve equal parts, each part shall show an inch that the bal has risen or
fallen.

As concerning the use of this Engine, it will serve to show the temper of the
Air, and whether the days are Hott, or Cold, or Temperate.

The Explanation of Plate IX.
IN this Plate there are two Figures marked with 1 and 2, the first marked with
1, is a Clock of an other manner, which may be made in places where there is
found no running Spring. First there is made a Vessel of Copper or Lead, as the
Figure A; the which shall hold about a Hogshead of Water: this Vessel shall be
square and somewhat higher then it is broad, in which there shall be a little
Vessel of Copper, marked with F, which shall be also square, very close, and
Soldered on every side; the which is to float upon the Water of the said Vessel
A: afterward there must be a Siphon, or Crooked Pipe, made as the Figure BCD
does demonstrate, the which must pass through a Pipe of Copper, which shall be
in the middle of the little Vessel: and the said Pipe must pass from one part
of the said Vessel to the other, and the Siphon must enter into it with some
force; and the end of the said Siphon must enter into the Water of the Vessel
A: and above at the point C there is fastened a Cord passing over the Pully L,
and at the other end the Counter-pois E shall be fastened, and there shall be
fastened an Index to the end of the Axtree I, the which shall show the Hours on
the Dyal OP: and after the Vessel A is filled the Vessel F is put into it, as
has been said, and also the Siphon and Counter-pois: then you shall draw the
Water of the said Siphon at the end D, with the mouth: and because the said end
is lower then the level of the Water of the Vessel A, the said Water shall have
its course and shall fall in an other Vessel marked with H, and according to
the measure that the Water of the said Vessel Descends, the small Vessel F
Descends with the Siphon; which causes the Pully to turn, and consequently the
Hand of the Dyal. To justen the course of the Hours, you must lengthen or
shorten the Siphon in the Copper Pipe of the small Vessel: for putting the said
Siphon more into the Water it shall run Swifter, and on the contrary drawing it
back it shall make it run flower: it must also be noted, to make it go very
true, it is necessary to fit a small Pipe to the end D, the end of which, where
the small hole is by which the water runs shall be of fine Gold; to the intent
that the said hole may not wear, which it will do if it be either of Lead or
Copper: and when the Vessel A shall be near empty, you shall raise it again
with a small Pump marked with G.

In the second Figure of this Plate marked by the figure 2. There is declared
the manner of a very Subtle Engine, to raise a standing Water, by means of the
Sun.
THis Engine has a great effect in Hot Places, as in Spain, and Italy, because
the Sun shines in those places almost always with great Heat; especially in
the Summer. The construction whereof is thus. You must have four Vessels of
Copper well Soldered round about, each of which shall be about a foot square,
and eight or nine inches high; the said Vessels are marked with ABC and D: and
there must be also a Pipe marked with E, put upon the said Vessels, to which
Pipe there shall be Soldered four branches, each branch being marked with the
letter F, the said branches shall be Soldered to the top of the Vessels passing
almost to the bottom of each Vessel: Then there must be Soldered a Sucker
marked with G to the middle of the Pipe, made and placed so that when the Water
Springs out of the Vessels it may open, and being gone forth it may shut again:
You must also have another Pipe at the bottom of the said Vessels marked with
P, to which there is also four branches, the which shall be all Soldered
against the bottoms of the said Vessels, and also a Sucker marked H, to the end
of which there is a Pipe which descends to the bottom of the Water, the which
shall be in a Cestern or Vessel marked with I: there shall be also to one of
the Vessels a hole or vent, marked with M. So placing the Engine in a place
where the Sun may shine upon it, power Water into the Vessels by the hole or
vent M, the which Water shall be communicated to all the Vessels by means of
the Pipe P: and the said Vessels must have about a third part of their content
in Water; and the Air which was in the place of the said Vessels shall pass out
by the passages 3, 4, 5, 6, afterward you must stop all those passages very
close, so as the Air may not come out of the said Vessels; and then the Sun
shining upon the said Engine shall make an expression, because of the heat (as
has been shown in the foregoing Problem) which causes the Water to rise from
all the Vessels to the Pipe E, and pass forth by the Sucker G, and the Pipe N,
and then fall into the Basin O, and from thence into the Cestern I: and when^
there shall be a great quantity of Water run forth by the violence of the heat
of the Sun, then the sucker G shall return; and after the heat of the day is
passed, and the Night shall come, the Vessels (to shun vacuity) shall draw the
Water of the Cestern by the Pipe and Sucker HP, and shall fill the Vessels as
they were before: so as the motion shall continue so long as there is Water in
the Cestern, and that the Sun shines upon the Vessels: And you must observe
that the two Suckers G and H must be made very light, and likewise very just,
so as the Water may not descend by them when it is raised.

The Explanation of Plate X. An Engine by which the force of the foregoing
Fountain is increased.
IF you desire to raise the Water five or six foot high, the foregoing Engine
cannot raise it, if the Sun do not shine upon it with great violence: and to
increase the force of the Sun, it is necessary that the Vessels of Copper be
made in manner as this present Figure does declare: and upon the side AB there
are put Burning Glasses, the which shall be well fitted to the Copper, so as no
Air may come forth, the said Glasses are marked (the two great ones of every
Vessel) by the letters CD, (and the small ones) EFGH, and the side of the Vessel
L must be put toward the South, to the end that the Sun shining upon the said
Burning Glasses may assemble the rays of the Sun within the said Vessels, the
which will cause a great heat to the Water, and by that means make it spring
forth in great abundance, and also higher if it be required: and as to the
other sides of the Vessels where the Glasses are, they shall be put toward the
West, for the Sun shins very hot Afternoon: and you must observe that if the
great heat makes all the Water to run out which is within the said Vessels,
that is to say the third part of their contents, then you may put in more then
the third, viz. a half of the content by the vent, as has been said before. I
have also made this present Figure greater then that which went before: and as
concerning the upper Sucker, it may be in the Vessel which sustains the Basin
of the Fountain: And the Burning Glasses may be as large as they are drawn in
the Figure AB, and they must be thick in the middle, as the said Figures do
declare.

The manner to make a Cement, to Cement the Glasses to the Vessels, so as the
Air may not come forth.
TO make a Cement to endure the heat of the Sun, and to bind well to the Glass,
take five or six pieces of quick Lime, the which being covered with Brick-dust,
power a little Water upon the said Brick-dust, the which shall slake the Lime,
and reduce it into powder: and you must be careful that you wett not the Lime
too much: being so brought into powder, then temper it with old Cheese, mixing
also about one third part of the said Brick-dust: then Cement well the joynings
of the said Glasses with the Vessels of Copper. There is also another Sort of
Cement to be made, the which is also very good for this effect: that is to say,
of Glass ground with Lin-seed Oil, and mixed also with a little Slaked Lime:
This last is also very good against the Water, and will not be moistened in any
manner as the first, which serves only for things that are out of the Water.

The Explanation of Plate XI. An Engine to Saw Wood very readily by the force of
a water Wheel.
THis Engine is very common among the Mountains of the Country of Switzer Land,
with which they Saw great quantity of Firr Boards: the said Engine is necessary
to be in a great City, or in a Forest, where there is great store of Wood to
Saw, either in Boards or other form: This here is not altogether like those
used by the Switzers, for they make the pieces of Timber to come to the Saws by
means of certain Toothed Wheels with a rochet; but because of the often
reparations of the said Toothed Wheels, I think always to avoid their use as
much as I can. So I have put the two Counter-pois each about two or three
hundred pound weight, the one whereof is marked with A, and the other with B:
the Cords on which the Counter-poises hang are fastened to two moveable pieces
of wood which slide upon two other fixed pieces of wood, by means of certain
small Pullies that may be within a hindge, and so the said Counter p^is always
drawing the said moveable pieces of wood: and the piece which is to be Sawed
being fastened between the said movable pieces, which shall come always forward
and the Saws rising and falling shall Saw the said piece with great speed: you
may put two three or four Saws at the least upon the same fram, so far asunder
as the thickness of the Boards which are to be Sawn shall require. And when the
piece of Timber is Sawn, then one or two Men with a Lever shall turn a Rowlet
to which a strong Cord is made fast, which shall draw back the said piece, and
draw up the Counter-pois, and then you may put the piece a little toward one
side, so as the Saws may take the said piece again.

The Explanation of Plate XII. An Engine of great service to Bore Elms or other
Trees to make Pipes to conveigh Water, and for other uses.
LEt there be a water Wheel to the Axtree, whereof let there be fastened a Wheel
of thirty six Teeth or more, according to the swiftness of the Water Wheel, for
if it turn slow there must be the more Teeth, and there must be a Pinion of
six, which is turned by the aforesaid Toothed Wheel, as may be seen in the
Figure: and to the Axtree of the said Pinion there shall be joined a long
Auger, marked with the letter A, which shall be put through a hole marked with
B, to be opened and shut as occasion shall require, as in a Turners Lathe: then
the Tree to be bored is to be placed fast upon a fram, marked with CD, so as
the said fram may slide easily by the means of certain little Wheels which are
in the holow thereof, and turn upon strong pins, so as one Man may put forward
or draw back the said Tree when it shall be fastened upon the said fram; and so
the Auger turning, the Man shall put the end of the said Tree against it, and
when it has entered it two or three inches, he must draw back the said Tree, to
draw out the chipps of the Auger, otherwise it will be in danger of breaking:
and so you must continue always to draw back the said Tree at the piercing of
every three or four inches, to take away the Chips, till the hole be quite
through: And afterward if you would have the hole wider, you must take such an
Auger as the Figure E represents, which shall widen the hole which was before
made.

The Explanation of Plate XIII. A rare and necessary Engine, by which you may
give great relief to Houses that are on Fire.
THis Engine is much practiced in Germany, and it has been seen what great and
ready help it may bring: for although the fire be 40* foot high, the said Engine
shall there cast its Water by help of four or five Men, lifting up and putting
down a long handle in form of a Lever, where the handle of the Pump is fastened:
the said Pump is easily understood. There are two Suckers within it, one below
to open when the handle is lifted up, and to shut when it is put down, and an
other to open to let out the Water: and at the end of the said Engine there is a
Man which holds the Copper Pipe A, turning it to and again to the Place where
the fire shall be.

The Explanation of Plate XIIII. To represent diverse Birds which shall Sing
diversely when an Owl turns toward them: and when the said Owl turns back
again, they shall cease their Singing.
THis motion has formerly been represented by Hero of Alexandria, but not with
so great variety of Birds, as I will here represent it. Therefore let there be
a water Wheel, as A, the which shall turn in a Case of Lead or Copper marked
with C, the which case shall serve to keep the Water from scataring abroad and
spoiling the motion, and the Axtree of the said Wheel shall rest upon two round
holes, which shall be on the sides of the said Case, and at one end of the said
Axtree which comes through the same Case there shall be a Pinion of 8 Teeth,
marked with D, which shall turn a Barrel of 12. or 15. inches; also there must
be 3 conveiances for the wind, marked with EFG, to which there are Soldered 3
Cocks, whereof the Keys are made as MO, to the end that when the Barrel turns
the pins Q and R they may make the said conveiances open to let the Air into
diverse Whistels, the which shall make several different Tunes, according to the
Fabric of those Whistles, and the disposition of the Pins and Touches Q and R.
And moreover you may give a certain motion to the Tayls and Beacks of the
Birds; if you put certain strings to the Keys of the Cocks: as the Figure
declares.

As concerning the motion of the Owl, which turns forward and backward in a
certain space of Time, the motion of it may be seen by the turning Vessel X,
and the small Lever 3, and 4. where there is the Counter-pois 8, for this Vessel
descends when it is full, and makes the Counter-pois to rise, and the pin of
the Lever stops the Barrel by means of the pin marked 6, which is at the end
thereof; and so the Birds cease their Singing: then when the Owl shall be
toward them, and when the Vessel X is void, she shall turn again by the means
of the Counter-pois, and the Barrel shall begin to turn: As the Figure will
demonstrate to you very exactly.

The Explanation of Plate XV. An Engine by which Galata shall be presented,
which shall be drawn upon the Water by two Dolphins, going in a right line and
returning of her self, while a Cyclope plays upon a Flajolet.
LEt there be a water Wheel marked with L, the breadth whereof is separated in
the middle, and that on one side the Boxes where the Water falls be made to turn
toward the right hand, and on the other side they be made to turn toward the
left hand: and to the Axtree of the said Wheel there is a Pinion which turns a
toothed Wheel marked with Z, and the said Wheel has an Axtree also divided
into two parts, marked with I and H, and to the said Axtree are two Chains
fastened, so that when the said Axtree turns, one of the said Chains may turn
about it, and the other unturn; the which Chains pass about the Pullies GF, and
are both fastened to the Pully B, but one shall pass by E, so as when one turns
the Axtree IH by the means of the water Wheel, the one of the said Chains may
draw the said Pully B toward the motion: but if the water Wheel be made to
turn the other way, then the Chain which passes through the Pully E shall draw
the Pully B to it self, and the other Chain shall let it go in proportion: and
as concerning the said Pully B, it shall be put upon a Pipe of Copper, so as
there may be a Plate of Copper under the said Pully, between the two long
stones C and D, so as the said Pully may slide easily upon the said Stones.
Then there shall be a small Box of Lead or Copper marked with P, about a foot
and a half long and broad, to which there is a Valve Soldered to the bottom,
marked with R, and at the end of the base thereof a Pipe marked with N, and at
the middle of the said Box, on the side there is a Pipe marked with O, and
between the space of the said Pipe and the bottom of the said Box there is a
small Pipe which shall let Water into the Basin marked with S, Which shall be
fastened to two turning Buckets marked* VT, so as when the Vessels shall be full
of Water, that it may be heavier then the cover of the Valve R, and on the
contrary, when the said Vessel shall be void, the cover of the said Valve must
be heavier, to the intent that it may shut and draw the said Vessel up, and so
when the Water shall run into the said box by the Pipe V it shall rise up to
the Pipe O, and fall upon the side of the water Wheel L, then the said Wheel
turning, shall turn I, and consequently the Axtree IH, so as the Chain shall
turn about I and unturn H, then the Figure of Galatea shall move toward the
Pully E, because it is drawn thither by the said Chain which turns about the
Ax^ree I, the small Vessel S must be so proportioned, that being fed by the small
Pipe, it may be full or near full and draw up the Valve when the Figure of
Galatea shall be near the Pully E, and then the Water which shall be in the
said box, shall fall by the Valve upon the other side of the water Wheel, and
make it turn the other way, so as the Chain H must turn about the Axtree on the
side H, and unturn on the side I, which will be the cause to make the Figure
turn toward the motion, and so the Pully B shall be drawn (upon which the
Figure is placed) sometimes forward, and sometimes backward, according as the
double water Wheel shall turn, sometimes by the Water that runs by the Valve R,
and sometimes by that which runs by the Pipe O, which is done diverse times by
means of the small Vessel S and the turning Buckets T and V, for when the Vessel
S is empty the Valve R is shut, and the Water rises up to the P^pe O to make
the water Wheel turn one way, and when S is full it opens the Valve, and then
all the water falls by the Valve R on the other side of the water Wheel, which
makes it turn the other way: and so successively.

As concerning the Cyclope playing upon the Flajolet, the motion shall be
showed in ^he following Figure.

It is to be noted that the little box marked with P, is here represented open
on one side, to the intent to show the Valve R.

The Explanation of Plate XVI. An Engine by which the Sound of the Flajolet
shall be represented by the course of the Water.
HEre shall be represented the Engine proper to make the Flajolet Sound to the
Cyclope of the precedent plate: Therefore let there be a Musical Wheel marked
with A, about 4 or 5 foot in Diameter, perfect round, and divided with Teeth,
as you may see in the Figure, so as a Pinion of 8 Teeth marked with B may turn
the said Wheel; and to the Arber of the said Pinion there shall be a Wheel
having 32 Teeth, marked with D, which another Pinion marked with C shall turn,
and to the Arber of the said Pinion C there shall be a water Wheel marked with
F, about 2 foot and a half or 3, foot in Diameter, which shall be turned by the
water descending from the Pipe G, and so when the said water Wheel shall turn
it shall cause the Musical Wheel to turn, by means of the other Wheels:
afterward there shall be put the Summer marked with H, the Fabric whereof
shall be shown at large, so as the Keys of the said Summer shall be Parallel at
half an inch dist^nce from the Musical Wheel: afterward div^de the said
Musical Wheel in 25, or 30. equal parts, each part in turning shall be an
ordinary measure of Music: and more-over all the said parts shall be divided
into 8 equal parts, to put on Crochets upon each division, if it be required,
of which there are 8 for one measure; and if you will you may put on Demi
Crochets, or Quavers: afterward the pins are to be put upon the said Wheel of
an inch above the Superficies of the said Musical Wheel, so as when the Wheel
shall turn, the said pins may touch the Keys of the Summer and put them down
and cause them to open the Valvs of the said Summer: as concerning the Pins
they shall be put according to the Tune that you desire the Flajolet to play.
That which is here set down begins thus, And when you would change the Tune, it
may be done by dismounting the Pinion B, out of the Musical Wheel by means of
the Rest of Iron, upon which the Pinion shall be put, and loosning a small Screw
which holds the said Rest in its place, then the said Rest being drawn from its
hole, the said Pinion shall be disjoined from the Musical Wheel, which may be
turned with the hand: you may fit any other Tune upon the said Wheel: the 12
holes that are in the Summer serves to conveigh the wind of the said Summer by
the conveiances of Copper or Lead, to the Organ Pipes, to represent the Sound
of the Flajolet; all which shall be joined to the Figure of the Cyclope. The
construction of the said Pipes shall be taught hereafter: the hooks which hang
at the Cords PO, serve to draw up the Musical Wheel, that if there be any fault
in the Valves within the Summer it may be helped by opening the said Summer
before, as is done ordinarily, the great conveiance marked with S may be of
Wood 4 inches square, to conduct the Wind to the Summer, which shall come from
the Bellows, as shall be taught.

The Explanation of Plate XVII.
IN this Plate is represented the Figure of Neptune, which shall turn
Circularly with certain Trytons, and other Figures, which shall cast forth
Water in turning. The Wheel work belonging to the motion of these Figures shall
be declared in the following Plate.

The Explanation of Plate XVIII. This Plate declares the motion, and Wheelwork
of Neptune, and other figures represented in the foregoing Plate.
LEt there be a water Wheel marked with A, which turning, shall turn a Toothed
Wheel marked with B, the Pivot whereof shall rest upon a straight piece of
wood, and the Arber above marked with PQ, shall be fastened firmly to a Pipe of
Copper marked with SR, and at the end thereof there shall be a small Receiver,
where the water shall fall: Then there shall be a great Pipe marked with TV,
which shall be also fastened to the Arber, a little lower then R, so as the said
Pipe may turn upon another marked with pointed lines which shall be interlaced
(marked also with pointed lines,) and the said great Pipe, and that in the
middle shall be Soldered firmly to the bottom of the Reserve of Lead maked with
CD, and the great Pipe XV shall be Soldered to a great Wheel marked with OF,
which shall be within two inches of the bottom of the said Reserve* so as when
the Wheel below B turns, the said Wheel OF may also turn; because they are
fastened in one common Axtree: then on the top of the great Pipe there shall be
another small Pipe marked with GH, which shall be Soldered against R, so as the
Water Descending by the said Pipe may spring forth by the end H, and so when
the water Wheel turns, the said Figures may be upon the said turning Wheel; and
you may place Neptune upon the end H, so as the water may come to his Trident
which he holds in his Hand, and to the Noses of the Horses which draws him, and
the two Tritons upon M, and the Cupid which leads the Dolphins upon N: And you
may likewise put certain other Figures upon Z; and to the intent to cover the
Pipe which descends from S to the Base of the Reserve, you may make a Rock, as
you may see in the foregoing design, which may descend from the top of the
Grote where the said motion shall be, almost to the bottom of the Reserve,
without touching it, nor also any of the Pipes, to the end that all may turn
freely, and the Reserve must be always full of Water a foot high, to the
intent that you may not see the motion of the Wheel OF in turning.

The Explanation of Plate XIX. An Engine by which you may make a pair of Organs
to Sound by the means of Water.
THis Engine is very like to that demonstrated in the 16 Plate, the difference
is that, this here is seen fore-right, and that other upon one side: the
Musical Wheel marked with A may be of five or six foot in Diameter, which shall
be turned by a Pinion of eight Teeth, to the Axtree whereof shall be fitted a
Wheel of twenty four Teeth, Which shall be turned by a Pinion on whose Axtree
the water Wheel C is fastened: the Keys are marked with D, and the Summer with
F: the construction whereof shall be caught afterward: the three Registers
marked GHI, are different the one from the other. And to the intent that the
noise of the motion may not be heard when the Organs play, it is good that
there be a wall of a foot thick between the Registers and the said motion, the
conveighances of the wind are of Copper, which coming from the Summer to the
Registers pass through the said Wall.

As concerning the Bellows to give wind to the Pipes; the motion of them shall
be shown in the next Problem, and also how to put the Music upon the Musical
Wheel.

The Explanation of Plate XX. An Engine by which the Bellows of the foregoing
Engine may be lifted up to give Wind to the Pipes of the Organs.
THere are two manners to give Wind to the Pipes of the Organs in Hydrautique
Instruments, the one is with Bellows made with thin Boards joined together with
Leather, the other is with the Air which comes from Cisterns by want of
Vacuity, as shall be taught hereafter. At the present I will show how to raise
the said Bellows by means of a water Wheel, as you may see by this present
design, where the long branch of Iron or Copper divided into four turning
handles, make the said Bellows to rise the one after the other, by means of the
said water Wheel.

The Explanation of Plate XXI. The representation of the Musical Wheel, to
serve for Plate 19.
TO demonstrate Entirely the Engine of Plate 19. I will put here the
representation of one part of the Musical Wheel as big as the natural, to the
intent that you may perfectly see how the Pins put down the Keys of the Organ:
the said part does only represent six measures, the one of which shall be
marked with Black or Gray all along the said Wheel, and the other shall be
marked with White, to the intent that the divisions may more easily be
discerned, which shall be Parallel to the Keys: and if you will you may pierce
the holes upon each division to change the Pins, when you would change the
tune: Then you shall put the said Pins so as they may touch upon the Keys about
the thickness of one of the said Pins, and so as the one touch not harder then
the other. Always when you come to Demi-Crochets or Quavers, whereof there are
sixteen in one measure, it will be good that they do not touch so hard as the
others, to the end that one Pin do not touch before the other have passed
beyond the Key, which is to be observed in all the other measures, otherwise
there will be a confused Music.

As concerning the construction of the Musical Wheel, it is necessary that it
be of Oak, very dry, and the pieces well Joined and Glued together, to the
intent that it do not swel neither on the one side nor on the other: As for the
Pins they shall be of Brass or of hard Wood. Further-more you shall observe
that in this present Figure, there is but half the Keys designed: also many of
the notes are wanting to the said Figure, because the Paper was not large
enough to draw it so large as the Natural: but that which is here designed may
serve to give understanding to the rest.

The Explanation of Plate XXII. To make Organs, or Trumpets of Organs, to Sound
always when the Sun shall be South, without any other principle of motion, but
the heat of the Sun and the Water.
LEt there be a Vessel of Copper or Lead marked with A, very close and Soldered
on every side, and let it have a Siphon marked with C, which may be so made
that the end which is within the Vessel be near to the bottom, and that the
height of the said Pipe or Siphon be near the height of the said Vessel, then
the other end shall come forth of the Vessel to run into the Vessel D.

And to order it so as the Sun may not heat the Vessel A till Noon, Behold how
you are to proceed: Let there be a Tablet made to the said Vessel of strong
Lead or Copper, marked with B, (as if it were the Cover of the said Vessel half
lifted up) well Soldered to the said Vessel, and let the said Vessel be
Invironned with a small Wall of Brick, so as there may be only the side before
open to the Sun, and that the said side be exactly placed toward the South. It
is certain that this being well done, that the Sun shall not shine against the
said Vessel, but just at Noon; and then the rays shine against the angle which
the top of the Vessel makes with the Table B, and by that means heats the top
of the said Vessel, which shall make a compression in the Vessel, so as the
water shall run forth by the Pipe C. Let there also be made a great Vessel
marked with F, into which the water of the Spring which is to make the motion
runs continually, and at the bottom of the said Vessel there is a Valve marked
with G, at the lower end whereof there is a Pipe with a Cock marked with H,
which serves to temper the course of the Water, which shall fall upon the water
Wheel which is below.

So when the Sun shall be directly South (as has bin before said) his rays
shall shine against the vessel A, which shall cause a compression of the water
which is within, which shall run forth by the Pipe C into the vessel D, which
being half full shall descend and open the Valve G, which being open the water
of the vessel F shall run upon the water Wheel and make the Musical Barrel to
turn, as has bin shown before; and the Pins that are put upon the said Barrel,
shall touch the Keys M* which being put down shall open the Valves which are
under the Summer X, and the wind that shall be in the said Summer, shall make
the Pipes of the Organs or Trumpets Sound which are above the Summer. Now Wind
may be given to the said summer after two several manners* that is to say, by a
Reserve, which is filled with the water which falls upon the water Weel, or by
Bellows which are raised by another water Wheel, which shall move when the
Vessel D descends, and shall open also a Valve, as that is marked with G: but
because the Instrument must stop just at the point where it began, (when the
Musical Barrel has made one turn) to the end that when it begins to Sound
another time, the Music may be of a just measure.

Behold how it is made to stop. You shall make a small Vessel of Copper marked
with E, which shall have a small hole in the bottom, and shall be so placed that
the Cord which holds it shall be fastened to a ring near the Valve G, and the
water which shall fil^ the said Vessel shall be conveyed by the Pipe marked
with L, so as when the Valve G is opened forthwith the water shall run into
the said Vessel, and when the water of the Vessel F, shall be a little abated,
then it shall run no more into the Vessel E, which shall always empty the
water which is in it by the small Hole at the bottom. And the time that the said
Vessel E empties must be fitted to the time that the Wheel requires to make one
turn, and the said Vessel being empty the Valve G shall fall down again,
because it ought to be made in a manner heavier then the two Vessels E and D,
when they are empty: and on the contrary, when one of the said Vessels is full,
that they may be Heavier then the said valve: And as concerning the vessel D it
is necessary that it empty rather then E, because it need not keep so exact a
measure as E. And see here how it empties, when it is half full with the Water
which descends by the Pipe C, then it draws down it self, and that marked with
E, also because it it Heavier then G, and at the same instant G opens, and the
water descends upon the Wheel and into the two vessels, and when D is full then
the Vessel turns the top downwards and empties, and in the same time the water
of the Vessel F abates and is lower then the height of the Pipe D, the water
shall run in no more, but the end of the Pipe L must be somewhat lower then
that of D, to the end that the water may there run longer. It remains to show
how the Pipe A is filled again with water:

Therefore let there be put a Pipe with a small valve under the said vessel,
after the same manner as in the foregoing Figure, and after that the Heat of
the Sun has made the compression, and that one part of the water of the said
vessel shall be run out after the Sun has passed the said vessel, to shun
vacuity it shall fill again by the said valve as has been taught in the 14th
Problem.

In Sum, if all the parts of this motion be well ordered, you shall have the
desired Effect with admiration to the Hearers.

The Explanation of Plate XXIII. To make an admirable Engine, the which being
placed at the foot of a Statue, shall send forth a Sound when the Sun shines
upon it, so as it shall seem that the Statue makes the said Sound.
Cornelius Tacitus in his History makes mention that there was in Egypt a
Statue of Memnon, which did send forth a certain Sound, when the Sun shined
upon ^. Pausmias is said to have seen the said Figure, and that the Sound was
like to the Sound of the strings of an Harp when they break.

The Demonstration of this present Figure does arise from that which has been
shown before in the 9th and 10th Plate, which teaches to raise the water in a
vessel of Copper or Lead (with the Heat of the Sun) by means of a valve A. Now
when the water shall be in F, it shall be transported into C by the Siphon B,
which casting its water into C shall make the Air breath forth of it, and
animate the two Organ Pipes, which with the Engine may be put in the Figure or
in the Pedestal, or otherwise, if the Engine be put at a distance you must use
conveighances for the wind, and so the Pipes only may be in the Figure, which
being of Brass and holow shall have no Air but by the mouth by which the Sound
of the Organ Pipes shall come forth.

The Explanation of Plate XXIIII. In this Plate is Figured the inside of the
Musical Summer, for the Organs or Hydrautique Engines, which we have spoken of
before.
THe Summer which is spoken of in the 16th and 19th Plate is here (for more
easier understanding) represented three several ways, that is to say, By the
Plane or Ignography, by the Orthography or Profile, and by the Senography or
Perspective: the Valves are marked with M, the Groves by E, the Springs by H,
and the Keys by L

As concerning the Covering of the Summer and valves, and the matter of the
Summer which ought to be of Oak, well dried, we might say diverse things, and
extend it more at large, but I think that it is not here needful, I will only
add that which the excellent Poet Dubartas says upon this subject in the
following Verses.

Where, as (by Art) one selfly Blast breathed out
From panting Bellows passes all about
Wind Instrument, enters by the under Clavers Dubartas fol 181.

Which with the Keys the Organ Master quavers,
Fills all the Bulk, and severally the same,
Mounts every Pipe of the Melodious Frame
At once reviving lofty Cymbals Voice
Flutes sweetest Air, and Regals shrillest noise.
But concerning the Systemes and Measures of the Organ Pipes, both in Length
and Breadth, Covered or Open, and also of the manner of the Registers, great
conveiance of the Wind, and the Trembling stop, etc. Is refered to a particular
Treatise of the Construction of Organs.

The Explanation of Plate XXV. A Sluice to render falling Waters Navigable.
AMong all sorts of Sluices which may be produced to retain the Water, and
render Rivers and likewise small falling Waters Navigable; I have observed this
here to be the most excellent:

It is placed between Venice and Padua, upon the falling water which is between
the two Cities, which by Art has been rendered Navigable for the facility of
come^s between the two Towns.

It is to be observed that the water A which is toward the Spring or Head of
the falling Water is always very much higher then the water B, which is at the
bottom of the second Sluice: Now to make the Boats and Barges Ascend or Descend,
they are tied to an Iron ring during the time that the Water contained between
the two Sluices Rises or Falls; let it be either to Ascend toward A* or Descend
toward B. The Ingenious Reader may easily see the effect of these S^uces,
without more words, and making other description then that which is described
in the Figure.

The Explanation of Plate XXVI.
BEsides that which has been handled before concerning Pumps, I have thought
good also to add this manner of force-Pump, which is one of the best
Inventions, and of which I have seen the experience: That which is here of
great advantage, is that the forces do Rise and Fall Perpendicularly in their
Barrels: It is easy to comprehend by the Figure that there are four places in
the Arber which are Hollowed or Channelled, and in the half of the Channels
there are Pins A E, incountring with Pins which are in P H, they make them to
Descend, and in Descending they raise B N without being hindered by the Pins
that are therein, because they pass by the void place of the Channels marked
with D C, and so they rise and fall each in his turn, and force the water with
great violence to 50, or 60* foot height, or higher, if it be required.



II


III


IIII


V


VI


VII


VIII






XI


XII


XIII


XII^^


XV


XVI


XVII


XVIII


XIX


XX


XXI


XXII


XXIII


XXIIII


XXV


XXVI



