Truths Caracter OF PROFESSORS And their TEACHERS.

Which by looking through, may bring to their remembrance the days of old, and
how it was then with them, which may evidently show unto them what has
befallen them, since they degenerated from the measure of God, which some of
them had in them; And it may also put them in mind of Gods Justice and severity
toward them.

Here is also something in Answer to some remarkable particulars, which were
extracted out of above thirty Addresses which were presented to Richard
Cromwell when he was Protector, and were published to the Nation in the (...),
as one by Tho Goodwin, by the appointment of the Officers and Messengers of
above a hundred Congregational Churches, And others from some of the Churches
of the Baptized people, b^t the most of them were from the parochial priests
and others that joined with them, from most of the Counties in the Nation,
whereby their hypocrisy and deceit, their folly and flatteries are made
palpably manifest, to their shame, and confusion of face.

By one that is appointed of the Lord to make war in Righteousness under the
banner of the Lamb, in the Truths behalf, both against the Beast and false
Prophet, known unto men by the name of William Caton.

The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel
shall know it, the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, Hos. 9. 7.

For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind, it has no
stalk, the bud shall yiel'd no meal, Hosea 8. 7.

Because I have called and ye have, refused, I have stretched out my hand and
no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would have none
of my reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes, Proverbs 1. 24, 25, 26.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate. 1660.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Friend,
THat which I have here published may give thee to understand (if with a meek
spirit thou will peruse it) how the Lord several years ago caused his Light in
some measure to shine out of the darkness in the hearts of many of these
professing Professors, whereby they came in measure to see the gross darkness
wherewith people was then covered, and many of the superstitions that were then
upheld by such as professed godliness; And then a zeal for God did stir in
many of them against them, and while they retained their tenderness and
simplicity, and kept in the fear of the Lord, then was the Lord near them; but
when they begun to seek and set up themselves more then the Lords glory and his
truth, then did the Lord by degrees withdraw from them; when they exalted
themselves and begun to persecute the harmless and innocent people, that were
brought (through mercy) to the enjoyment of what they saw at a distance; And
when they got the power into their hands, then their Priests with the help of
their power begun to silence others and keep under them, even as they had been
silenced and kept under; And they crept into their parsonage-houses, and
benefices, and in process of time became highly guilty of their abominations.

Moreover, by that which here follows thou may see how many of them will
change their merchandi^e to continue their trade and dishonest gain, and are
like unto subtle and cunning merchantmen, who observe what merchandise is the
most commodious, and will vend the best among those they deal withal, even
they will they provide for them, partly for their own advantage, and partly for
pleasing of the people, etc. This following Treatise also shows how they have
cried for help, and how they have been countenanced, and helped by the sundry
powers that have been in being for these many years; And particularly, how
generally from almost every County in the Nation they with others made their
deceitful Adresses unto R. Cromwell, by which thou may see their blasphemies,
and flatteries, their promises and engagements unto him; And do thou judge how
dec^^tful and hypocritical they have proved; And it also appears by what
follows, what has happened unto, and befallen those that helped them, who
are fallen, split and broken; yet they whom they combined together against
stand in as much power, authority, and dominion in Gods eternal Truth as ever,
and the Lord has appeared to their joy and honor whom they cast out, but to
their shame and confusion who have dealt deceitfully both with God and man: And
if the Lord shall cause the same measure to be mete to them, which they have
measured unto others, it would but be just with him who will in no wise acquit
the guilty, nor suffer the wicked to go unpunished.

These things are put forth to public view, not to add grief unto their
affliction that are already humbled and cast down, but rather to put them in
mind of their former proceedings, which have caused this day of distress and
calamity to be hastened upon them, of which they have been often warned and
foretold by us (the Lords Servants) who now rejoices not because it is come
upon them, for we have rather desired to have seen them have forsaken the evil
of their doings, and have returned unto the Lord with all their hearts, that so
they might have obtained Mercy from him; neither is this intended to strengthen
the hands of their persecutors, for we are as absolutely against the spirit of
persecution in their adversaries, as we were against it in them, and our
testimony by suffering under it, we expect and intend to bear against it now,
and henceforth, as heretofore if the Lord permit; And we are now as far from
siding with these Priests who cast them out, as we were from siding with them
in their covetous practices and their abominations which has long grieved the
hearts and spirits of the faithful; Now if thou be one that art concerned in
the things herein contained, be not offended with my plain and upright dealing,
for a necessity laid upon me to write and publish these things, which I saw in
the light of the Lord to be come and coming to pass; And if I be accounted
their enemy for telling them the Truth, I shall notwithstanding rest in peace
in the Lord, in whose sight I have cleared my conscience concerning them in
much love and tenderness toward the witness of God in them, which is now
nearer to answer unto the Truth in many of them, then it was when they were
high and lifted up; And oh that they would yet lay these things to heart, and
return unto him that smites them, then should they find favor in his sight,
with whom we know there is mercy that he might be feared.

W. C.

Truths Caracter of PROFESSORS and of their TEACHERS, etc.
HEar Oh ye wise and prudent men of this world, and seriously weigh and
consider the things that I have to lay before you; For a necessity lies upon
me to mind you of what is past, what is present, and what is to come to pass
concerning you, or many of you, who have had sundry tender visitations of Gods
eternal Love, and many precious opportunities has he put into your hands,
wherein you might have answered his Love, and have perfected his^ praise in the
earth, had you not sought your selves more then the glory of God, and the
welfare of others; And therefore is it just with the Lord now to pour out
contempt upon you in the sight of those whom you have contemned, and to make
you as contemptible in the eyes of others, as his despised people have been in
yours; You have had a glorious day of prosperity, as to the outward, What a
day professors have had.
wherein the Sun of Righteousness has caused his Light to shine forth
gloriously, to the illuminating of many of your understandings beyond your
fellow Creatures; but you have not liked to walk in his Light, nor to retain
his Counsel, therefore is a thick dark mist come upon you, so that you cannot
see afar off, Isa* 33. 14.
and fear that surprizeth many of you, and you are in a strait, not yet well
knowing what will be the end of these things that have befallen you; one
blaming another for his treachery and deceitful dealing, when he that blames
his fellow, is as inexcusable as he that is guilty of the thing for which he is
blamed; had you been free from the things that heretofore have been laid to
your charge, by those whose Testimony you could not then receive, then had not
these things come upon you, which the children of Light saw in the light of the
Lord would befall you, Pro 1. 24. 25.
seeing you hated reproof, and would not choose the fear of the Lord,
notwithstanding all that which he had done for you.

But oh that you would now call to mind the days of old, and the years that
are past, wherein you groaned under a heavy yoke of bondage, which many of you
for some years traveled under, when you were restrained from having the
liberty of your Consciences, to serve God in that way which appeared to your
understanding to be more agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth, then that
public way of worship which then was established in the Nation; which you then
saw the emptiness of by the light of the Lord in your own selves; How it was
with Professors in the days of old.
Do you not yet remember what a tenderness there was in those days in your
hearts toward the Lord and good people; And were not the meetings that you had
in those days in your own houses, or in other private places very comfortable
and refreshing, and was there not more of the presence and power of God felt
and seen amongst you in your meetings in those days, 1 Cor 14. 30. 31.
(when any man among you that feared God might have had liberty to speak what
was upon his Spirit) then there has been for sundry years, or is at this day?
And was it not better with you then, when you were branded with the name of
Puritan and Roundhead, and derided (if not stoned) in the streets, as you have
past and rep^st to and from those So they were in the eyes of your persecutors,
but precious to you at that time.
contemptible meetings, in which you found so much of the presence and
goodness of God? And could you not in those days have borne the revilings of
the people much better then you could do now? Could you not also have suffered
better for that which your souls then thirsted after, then now you could for
that which you profess? And was not your love very large to such as in those
days were persecuted for conscience sake? did not you then take part with them
(when you durst appear) against such as persecuted them? And was not that the
light of the Lord in you, which let you see in those days the evil of
oppression; and the evil of persecution, wherewith you were persecuted for
conscience sake? was not that also the light of the Lord that gave you to see
the emptiness of that worship which you then liked not to be conformable unto?
And was not that of God in you that made you willing to suffer for conscience
sake, rather then you would do that which was contrary to your conscience? And
had you not peace, joy, comfort, and refreshment in measure, in your sufferings
when you suffered (not as evil doers) but simply for conscience sake? was not
your prayers in those days offered up unto the Lord with much tenderness and
many tears? and did you not then feel something in your hearts making
intercession unto the Lord with sighs and groans, which were hard to be
uttered? And did you not in those days make many vows, The Professors vows
and promises which they made to the Lord.
promises and engagements unto the Lord ( even upon your bended knees) that if
he would be pleased to appear for you, and by the arm of his power bring
deliverance unto you, and set you free from that yoke of bondage which you then
groaned under, oh what you would then do in order to the propagating of his
Gospel, advancing of his glorious Truth, removing the oppressions from off the
oppressed, making of his people a free people, to the setting up of
righteousness in the earth, and to the showing forth of his praise among the
inhabitants of the earth, etc. Do you not yet remember that several years ye
were wont to brea^h forth such things in your prayers to the Lord, who was
determined to try you as he has done, as afterward may more fully appear?

Is it not well known unto many of you, how that when you were little in your
own eyes, When they were low and tender the Lord had respect to them.
and few in number in comparison of the multitude that was contrary minded,
that even then, and at that time when your hearts were very tender, and you
very low and humble before the Lord, then did he appear for you, for then he
had respect unto you, and his anger that was kindled against those that then
would not let you have the liberty of your Consciences, for they sought to
quench and extinguish that which he had kindled in your hearts, and their sins
and abominations were grown to a very great height, and many things the Lord
had against them, so that in process of time the fire of his jealousy did wax
so hot against them, Isa. 33. 14.
that they were not able to dwell in it, Hos. 10. 8.
but did begin to fly to the mountains, and to the hills, and unto them they
cried for help, but these could not save them from the terrible storm which
swept them away.

Then did your day begin to dawn, and the visitation of Gods eternal Love was
then unto you, whose cries had (in the days of your distress) entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, and then was he determined to try you, whom he
raised even as from the dunghill, and put a very excellent opportunity into
your hands; For then many in Authority and Power begun to advise with you, and
take counsel at you, and put you into places of preferment, (which you
receiving begun to alter from the Lord) and some of them you begot into your
own image, and these promoted you, and you flattered them; And by degrees, in
process of time you came to be invested with the supreme Authority in the
Nation; And then you strove to wind out those that were not for your design,
though for your own ends you made use of many that were not of your mind, but
them you kept under, and by guile caught them in your snare; so that it was so
with you for a season, that you might do what seemed good in your own eyes; How
evil befell them.
And then many begun to sit down at ease, having enriched themselves with the
spoil of their enemies, and were not only gotten into their possessions and
estates, but were also plunged into their sins, and were become as proud, as
covetous, as self-seeking as their enemies had been; And this many saw in the
light of the Lord, that had been one with you in your affliction and distress,
in your sufferings and servitude which you had passed through before you came
into the seats of those that the Lord drove out before you.

And when those that feared the Lord amongst you beheld your degeneration, Why
they that feared the Lord turned away from them
and saw so little was performed of what was promised by you, they begun to
desert you, and many that retained their sincerity toward God came out
voluntarily from among you, and others that could not bear your actions, but
must reprove you, were turned out by you; And even at that very time when many
of you were in Authority, did the Lord God of heaven and earth cause his Light
to shine out of the darkness in the hearts of a remnant, even more clearly and
more gloriously then it had done in yours; And by this eternal Light (which was
the same that had shined in your Consciences, whereby you had seen the evil of
those things which you had long groaned under) by this Light I say did the Lord
convince many of his everlasting Truth, and of the evil of destroying and
devouring one another, so that many came by the arm of Gods power to be
gathered into the life of those things which you professed, How others were
brought to that which they had lost.
and came again to be brought into that tenderness which you had lost, and
came to be more abundantly sensible of Gods eternal power and presence then
you had been before; And though those had been with you, and had hazarded life,
liberty, and estate with you, yet you could not bear them, because they could
not bear your hypocrisy and deceit, nor suffer it to pass unreproved,
therefore did you turn your hand against them that were your dearest friends;
and begun to make Leagues and Covenants with such as have now proved your
enemies indeed; How they crept into fal^e rests.
And crept into fellowship with them, and so sat down and settled your selves
in that which was not your rest; And then by degrees crept into Societies, and
some got into one form and some into another; And many became Presbyterians,
and strove to draw (if it had been possible) all men after them into that Form,
in which there were, (and yet to this day are) some, as bad as those that you
suffered under many years ago, so in process of time many came to see by the
light of the Lord, that they were not in the right way; And so left them and
went forth from that in themselves by which they had seen their covetousness,
their rigidnesse and the emptiness of their form, and so went too among them
called Independants, who in some things had a more show of godliness, How they
run from form to form, from the Light of the Lord in themselves.
(though but in a few) then the Presbyterians had; but in a certain time their
ambition and arrogance appeared, their covetousness and self-conceitednesse
which became a burden to such as retained their zeal and tenderness toward
the Lord, and many such honest-hearted and self-denying people came out from
among them, and could not be content to keep at a distance from all, till the
Lord showed them who were his flock, and where they did feed and rest; Cant. 1.
7.
And therefore did they run to the Anabaptists (so called) who differed much in
judgment from those with whom they had walked, but in process of time the
light of the Lord manifested the emptiness of their inventions, as it had done
the looseness of other Professors, who had lost their tenderness toward God,
How they lost their tenderness and became dry and barren etc.
which they seemed to have when they first settled in the forms before
mentioned, which many by running into them (from that of God in themselves)
lost, and so became dead, dry, barren, and unfruitful, as many of you are, who
are (as it were) scorched and withered as trees of the heath without sap in the
desert, Jer. 17* 6.
where you may behold your figure.

And when it came to be thus with you, then many such as were tender among you
(and could not find him whom their souls loved, Zach. 3. 2.
while they continued in your forms) came by the arm of the Lords Power to be
plucked out from among you, as fire brands out of the fire, and then many of you
came to be offended, and your indignation came to be kindled against them, as
the wrath of your adversaries was kindled against you in the days of your
tenderness, and then did you (instead of paying your vows which you made unto
the Lord in the day of your distress) add unto the afflictions of the
affl^cted, and began to augment the oppressions of the oppressed, and did
behave your selves so uncharitably toward a suffering people, even as if you
your selves had never been acquainted with suffering; How they behaved
themselves tow^rds the tender hearted, when they had lost their tenderness.
so when you had lost the tenderness that was in your selves you exalted your
selves over them that were tender, and made a prey upon them, and cast them out
from among you, out of places of authority, out of power, and out of your
Church fellowships; And then preferred shallow, selfish prating, and deceitful
men that would comply with you for their own ends) above discreet, sober,
honest and conscientious men that feared God, when they could not swear, nor
bow to you, nor give you flattering Titles; did you not then and often upon
that very account lay them aside, esteemed them unfit to be in any place of
office, and so lightly regard your truest friends, who bore much of the heat of
the day, and were more noble and valiant then your selves, and for whose sakes
(rather then for yours) the Lord often delivered you out of your enemies hands;
And some of you did not only turn them out of power, but gave your power unto
their (and your) enemies, for them to make a prey upon, such as were recovered
again to that state and condition which you were in, when you suffered for
conscience sake, Those that suffered by them for conscience sake did not unto
them as they had done unto their Adversaries.
by that power that they had joined with you against; and yet did you do unto
them, as your adversaries did unto you, when they had power over you, yet they
did not so unto you, as you did unto them by whom you suffered; For against
them you plotted, conspired, and sought both their Lives and Estates, as since
has appeared, but these that you cast out from among you, did not so
concerning you, but even suffered you to plow (as it were) long furrows upon
their backs, and resisted you not, neither would they turn away their cheeks
from you, when you pulled off the hair, Psa. 129. 3
neither would they resist you when you sent them to prison, when you spoiled
their goods, rifled their houses, drove away their Cattle, because for
conscience sake they could not do, such and such things as you contrary to
their conscience enjoined them unto; This sundry that have been one with you in
profession, have sustained these things from you with patience, and have not
sought to be avenged so of you, as you have avenged your selves of such as
heretofore injured you.

But oh let me ask you, are not your promises, engagements and Vows, which you
made unto the Lord in the days past (which you have not yet faithfully paid
and performed) are not these become a heavy burden unto many of you, who in
this thing are guilty? Or have you thought that it has been a light thing to
make a vow unto the Lord (as some of you have done many) and not to perform it?
Surely if you had had so much tenderness remaining in you, as Iephthah had,
Judge 11. 3c. (Who opened his mouth unto the Lord, and vowed a vow, saying, if
thou shall without fail deliver the Children of Ammon into mine hands, then it
shall be, that whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my house to meet me, I
will offer it up for a burnt offering; And behold his Daughter, his only Child
met him, at the sight of which he rent his clothes, and said, she had brought
him very low; yet he confessed he had opened his mouth to the Lord, and said he
could not go back: Now in this thing you are come short of Iephthah under the
Law who would not omit performing what he had vowed to the Lord, though it
bereaved him of his only child) then would not the non-payment of your vows
have been so heavy upon you, as (I believe) they are upon many of you at this
day; who may call to mind how it was with you, when you were little in your own
eyes; Was not your mouths then opened unto the Lord? And had you not a
testimony in your selves, that in those days the Lord heard your prayers, and
did in measure at times grant your requests, but when you once forsook that in
your selves (which begat the tenderness in your hearts toward God) then did
you seek your selves more then the Lord; How they came to be undone
And the more prosperity you had, the more liberty you took to your selves,
until you came to be taken in the snare of voluptuousness, when your hearts
were adulterated from the Lord, and run after your covetousness; And then many
of you sat down at ease in a carnal security, little regarding the cries of the
poor and needy in your selves, which groaned unto the Lord for deliverance, but
your ears were not len^ thereunto, but rather to vanity and folly which many of
you run into, When they forsook the Lord, then did he leavethem to themselves.
when you had lost your tenderness, and then when you went on in forsaking the
Lord, then did he withdraw from you and left you as it were) to your selves,
and yet you triuphed as Conquerers, and gloried too much in your wisdom and
strength (not considering the Lord had left you) until the Lord begun to
confound your wisdom, and weaken your bow, and bring your understanding to
nothing, 1 Cor. 1. 19.
yet would you not believe this, but supposed your throne had been firmly
established, Their confidence.
and that your party had been even invinceable, and that you knew of none that
you thought was able to make war with you, so politickandwise you were* so
potent and mighty, so strong and valiant, so rich and wealthy, so victorious
and dreadful you seemed to be; but all this would not serve, when you had lost
your sincerity and integrity, which was more with the Lord then your sword and
spear; How they came to be weakened, and then became like other men 1 Timothy 6. 9.
then your hearts fainted, and your says failed, and you became like unto
other men, when your hearts run after the Treasures and Riches of your enemies;
how suddenly then did you fall into temptation and a snare, and into many
hurtful and foolish lusts? And thus it happened unto you, even in the height of
your profession.

And now O ye Professors, know you what will be the end of these things that
have befallen you, who was once above all other men, invested with the
Authority of the Nation, one Professor recommending another to them that then
were in power, and one brother speaking in the behalf of another to their
superiors, How they came to get swords upon their thighs.
in order to the procuring of one another places of preferment, till that
almost every man that was a professor, got a sword upon his thigh, and who then
were accounted of but professors, or who were to be trusted with places of
Office and trust in the Nation but professors; And in those days when
profession was in such great reputation, then crept many into it hoping thereby
to get places of preferment, when they got to Be in fellowship, and of such a
Church, or of such an Assembly, for then they came to be in esteem with
professors, and some then would speak to their Superior officers who were
almost all professors) in the behalf of such a man who was become a member of
such a Church, and then he was looked upon to be a worthy man to bear rule, or
to be put in authority in the Nation; And thus did many of you get up, until
you became too high for all reproof; And then such as would not join with you
in your design, came to be even of almost no Reputation among you; but oh! how
have you instigated those (that fear the Lord, and did not a^prove of your
proceedings) to join with you in your designs? And how fair have your promises
and pretenses been unto them, who have been not a little tempted and tried by
you in that thing, when you have cried out unto them, What temptations they
that feared* the Lord had from them
saying, Oh now is the time if ever you will stir, stir now, if you will but
join with us you may do exceeding much good; Oh therefore be ^erswaded to stand
up in your own defense, and in the defense of the Good Old Cause, and receive
Commissions now when th y are tendered, etc. Thus have you provoked and tempted
the people of God from day to day, till that you have wearied your selves and
them also, yet still the Lord preserved them (that stood in his Counsel) out of
your snares, your preferment and promotion, honor and renown, favor and
friendship they little regarded, neither would they at all be persuaded to make
any League or Covenant with you; And when that you by your fair persuasions and
large promises could not prevail with them, then did you begin to frown upon
them; And many of you would choose rather to strengthen the hands of the wicked
against them, then put forth a hand to help them; Though its true there were
some amongst you that had it in their hearts (I believe) to do good, but such
were kept in a slavish fear of the major party, and so durst not do that which
was in their hearts, while they might have done it, and so the oppertunity was
taken out of their hands, and instead of getting Honor and Renown by their
well doing in their day, they have brought infamy and contempt upon themselves,
and this is already come upon many of you, who have joined hand in hand to
augment the sufferings of the affl^cted; How they became pe^secutors of the
Innocent.
As witness the many Independants and Presbiterian Justices Warrants and
Mit^imus which they have made, whereby they have caused the innocent to suffer,
in the sundry Counties of the Nation; Insomuch, that I confidently believe
there is never a County in the Nation but You Professors (to wit Presbyterians,
Independants, (so called) with others, have had Your hands in Persecution, You
have been principally the men for several Years, that have hailed the innocent
before your Judgment Seats So I call them because you have sitten in judgment
upon them
, that have committed them to Prison, that have caused them to be whipped, that
have caused them to be set in the Stocks, that have fined them, that have given
out Warrants for the spoiling of their goods; You and your Teachers have been
the men that have been chiefly acc^ssary to these things; Therefore does it lie
much upon me at this time to lay these things upon You, in the light of the
Lord and before men, and know assuredly that if You come to be dealt withal, as
You have dealt with others, then shall those things which You have done unto
the innocent, become Your heavy burden, A prophesi^ concerning them.
and as it was hard for them to escape Your hands, so will it be hard for You
to escape the hands of others; For Your Professing Magistrates have most
frequently set to their hands and Seals (when they were in Commission) unto the
Warrants that have been granted out against the innocent, whereby such Priests
have been authorized to make a prey upon the People of God, as they themselves
little regarded, nor peradventure would very scarcely hear them, Yet often have
they given up the innocent into the hands of such merciless men, as gloried in
making a prey upon them.

Moreover it has been observed, Note.
how that in sundry parts of the Nation professing Magistrates, or such as made
a great profession, were the very first men that began with a pretense of a Law
to pers^cute them that feared the Lord, to the great dishonor of their
profession, though they were at that time in such a zeal against the appearance
of Truth, Joh. 16. 2.
that they thought they did God good service, by their imprisoning and
shamefully entreating such as the Truth appeared in: And certainly the people
that God by his eternal power has raised up in this Nation This is spoke of
them that in scorn ^re called Quakers.
, have had more opposition from them that have been in profession in many parts
of the Nation, then they have had from the vulgar sort of people.

True it is when they were first raised up by the Power of God, both professor
and profane did with much bitterness of Spirit oppose them, and often branded
them with many ridiculous names and scurrelous titles, thinking thereby to make
them odious to all, if it had been possible, and when they saw they could not
prevail against them, but wearied themselves with their own folly, then they
begun to withdraw, not with renown in triumph, but rather with shame in
contempt, which is justly come upon them, so that some are ready to en^uire
after them as the Apostle did after the wise, and after the Disputer of this
world, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
saying, where are they, etc. even so, where are the chief Disputing Priests,
and the high contentious professors? seeing they do so little appear to what
they have done formerly; What do they want their Goals? Their Houses of
Correction, their Stocks and Commssiions now? And does their hearts therefore
fail them? What is the power taken from them, and given into their hands that
they have had power over, Serious questions concerning them.
and are they therefore cast down? What are the places of honor taken from
them, and they turned out of their fat benefices; and is that the case,
wherefore they are cast down? What must they become as poor, miserable and
contemptable as they have been; And is this the cause of their heaviness? Must
their wisdom be confounded, and their understanding brought to nothing? Must
the Weapons that they have been forming against others, be turned into their
own bowels? And must the like prejudice (as they have sought to beget in others
against the innocent) be begotten in others against them? And as they have
done, and would have had others to have done unto the innocent, even so must
they be done unto; and must not now the same measure be met unto them that they
have measured unto others? Even by such as will have no more pity in their
hearts toward them, then they have had toward the innocent; And what must not
jealousy be stirred up in the powers of the earth against them, as they have
stirred up jealousy in the powers of the earth against others, that were much
more harmless and innocent then themselves; And as they have sought to make
others rediculous, As they have done to others, so shall they be done unto
even so shall they become contemptable in the eyes of those which they by
their flatteries fawned upon, who may for a season suffer them for their own
ends, as they suffered others for their own advantage; And as they have sought
to remove others out of their way, so shall they be removed out of the way of
others; And their honor which they have sought one of another shall be laid in
the dust, and their glory shall fade like the flower of the field: And when the
Lord brings (...) things upon you (O ye persecuting (yet professing) Priests
and Professors, which of you shall dare in that day to say unto the Lord, Why
do thou thus? Shall you not rather be made to confess that it will be the
just hand of God upon you, when you come to be dealt withal, as you have dealt
with others whom you have cast out; saying, (deceitfully) let the Lord be
glorified, but behold has he not appeared for them, and is it not You now
(that cast them out) that hated them and persecuted them, Isa. 66. 5.
that begins to be ashamed and astonished? And oh that You would but observe
the hand of the Lord in all these things, surely then You would humble Your
selves under it, that so You might come to obtain mercy from him, psalm. 130 7
with whom there is mercy that he might be feared.

Here follows the Truths Caracter of the Professors Teachers.
MOreover as concerning the chief Priests and Teachers of this Nation, which
You Professors have run after, much I have to say concerning them; Oh that You
had an ear open to hear, and a heart to receive and understand the things that
I could declare of them, who with fained words and fair promises and pretenses
have deceived many of You, they have had their day of visitation, as well as
You, and they have also had a day of prosperity, wherein they have promised
Peace to themselves and to You also; several of them have had some tenderness
in their hearts toward God (I do believe) when they saw (by the light of the
Lord in their own consciences) the heavy Yoaks and many oppressions that the
upright in heart groaned and traveled under, and then there was a zeal in them
for God and godliness, and after that power came to be overturned, whereby
some of them had been silenced, then did they begin to stir themselves, and
night and day labored and endeavored to induce You into Church Fellowship and
so came too get You too under their discipline; Note here the subtilty of the
Priests
And then began to make their party strong, and so came to prevail against
them, that had been authorized by such as had kept them under; And then they
began to silence others with the same power and weapon by which they themselves
had been silenced; And then they begun to turn out others by the strength of
the same arm by which they themselves (...) been kept under, and then did they
draw many after them; And then they came to be highly exalted in the Nation,
and began to grow into arrogance and covetousness, and several of them begun
then to look after great benefits; And they having the powers of the earth much
on their side, could by the help of their order easily get others out that were
not of their mind, and so by degrees could wind themselves in; And when they
were once settled in their places and livings, and got the name of
Parliament-Ministers, few then durst oppose them, or find fault with them, they
being settled by order of Parliament. Then did they begin to insult over many of
their Parishioners, Mark their authority. How they received the wage, but did
not the work.
and proved deceitful and treacherous to many of them, whose Tithe of Corn,
Hay, Wool, Lamb, Hemp, Geese, Eggs, Pigs, Apples, Cheries, and Turnups, etc.
these have coveted and received, and when they have gotten them of poor men,
they have refused to do those things which they were to do, upon whom these
benefits were first conferred, and so the poor men have been constrained to
hire others to do that which they judged their Priests should have done for
them; as baptized their Infants, churched their Wives, and have administered
that they call the Lords Supper to them, which some of your Highpriests would
not do to many of their Parishioners, and so the poor men have paid double for
that which is little worth; and if any of them desired to have a Funeral Sermon
at their Burial, these Priests would not give it them under ten shillings at
the least, neither would they admit several of their Congregation into
fellowship with them, except they would take on their form, and comply with
them in their Traditions, which many simple people could not do; And therefore
has that been withheld from them by their Priests (that have exercised
Lordship over them) which the people did think they had as good right unto, as
their Teachers had unto their Tithe, which the poor simple people durst not
withold from them, though they did not administer bread and wine, nor read
the Service Book; But in those days you and your Priests might do what seemed
good in your own eyes, for you had then the sword in your hand by which you
ruled; ^ow professors were a (...) to some while they had the power in their
hand.
And so you (...) for a season a dread and a terror to such as did not fear
the Lord more then you, who then had power to make Laws, and likewise to
disanull Laws; And when your Teachers had got a Law on their sides, by virtue
of which they might recover not only the Tithe it self, but treble damage of
such as did detain it from them, then did several of them put it in execution,
whereby they have caused many deeply to suffer, who (for conscience sake) could
not pay them Tithe; yet these men of corrupt minds have pretended they could
not do the things beforementioned for Conscience sake, 2 Timothy 3. from the
first to the 10. verse.
when their Parishioners required them, as to give them bread and wine, church
their Women, and sprinkle their Infants, etc. yet they* with their defiled
Consciences could receive their Tithes, and did not seem to scruple at the
receiving of them, nor yet at going to Law and taking treble damage of such as
(for conscience sake) could not pay them; And those eminent professing Priests
could spoil men's goods, rifle their houses, drive away their Cattle, High
professing Priests as cruel and wicked in some things as others, yea and as
profane, as those that were judged to b^ scandalous.
and rail as much against such as feared the Lord in their Pulpits, as any; and
many of them have been known at sundry times to threaten us very much, and that
especially at such times as they perceived their party prevailed, so that from
them the people of God have suffered, and that de^ply* And much more opposition
we have had from them, then we have had from them that you ( their professing
friends) turned out, for them to come in; And those that you secluded were
adjudged to be scandalous Ministers; but now let the judicious and upright in
heart judge what they were that crept into their places and benefices, and took
their livings from them and did not their work, but proved to be more severe
toward those that did not put into their mouths, then they that were thrust
out by them, From whence they had their power.
who have often intruded into places by force, having received power and
Authority from the Powers of the earth, so that they have prevailed, when
there has been scarce twenty in a parish for them, and the rest of the parish
has been against them in their minds and in their hearts, And how they fed
poor people with their inventions.
yet peradventure durst scarce appear so to be, being that he that should have
been a servant to them all, even exercised Lordship over them all; and they
must be contented and satisfied with what he invented and studied and provided
for them, when the people would rather have had that which he withheld from
them.

And thus ( you Professors) when you were but few in a Parish, (while you had
the sword upon your thigh, and power in your hand) could keep a number of
people under you, who were dis-satisfied and discontented (though they sought
to hide and conceal the thing from you) with your discipline, yet must be
subject though by constraint rather then willingly; and thus with a high hand
have they exercised Lordship, How they have usurped Authority, and over whom.
and usurped Authority, not only over tender Consciences, but also over
simple ignorant people, who rather would have had their former discipline which
they had been educated in, then new inventions.

But in those days when profession came in fashion and was in estimation, many
for their own ends crept into it, and these high professing Priests got many
Proselites, and many followed them in their pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2. 2.
and upheld them in their covetous practices, and sided with them in their
plots, designs and conspiracies; But let people now mark well and observe them,
how they stand to their principles, and how they continue, whether constant or
inconstant; if constant without shrinking or falling under in the time of
trial, A caracter by which their end (in creeping into profession) may be known.
when persecution comes, then we shall the rather conclude that their end has
been good, simple and honest, in their going into that profession, for which
they are willing to suffer, and in walking answerable to which they hope to be
saved: But and if they fall by bowing, complying and condescending to that
which they have fought against, prayed against, and strongly contended against,
then they will appear to be unstable and inconstant, and we may the rather
conclude their end was not good, nor single before the Lord, in their aspiring
into profession, if that they renounce it for fear of persecution; and this may
be a Caracter for many whereby many shall be made manifest to the Nation.

But what have we not already observed that many of you Professors (with your
Teachers) have already brought much contempt upon your selves, How they have
already brought contempt upon themselves.
by deviating and falling from your principles, who have appeared to be worse
then many that did scarce bear the name of profession; as witness your making
of bone-fires, and your giving money to others for ringing of the Bells (when
you would not take the pains to do it your selves) And your drinking of the
Kings health (till he prohibited it, by his serviceable Proclamation) yea many
things were done by some of you some months ago, One great evil of theirs
manifested.
whereof several of you are now ashamed; and among the rest this was one great
evil, (to wit) your fury and madness, rage and persecution which you run into
against us (the people of the Lord) about the time that the King came into the
Nation, when you were afraid your selves of being called in question; Oh! what
havoc did you then in some places make of us, to manifest to all that you were
not of us; how then did you side with those that rose up against us; insomuch
that had not the Lord been on our side, and appeared for us, in all likelihood,
you with those with whom you joined would even have swallowed us up.

For at that time it was the expectation of many, Note.
that we should have been given up into the hands of the rude multitude, and so
to have become their prey; but hitherto the Lord has not suffered it to come
to pass according to the expectations of many, which the Lord has frustrated
in a great measure, and marvellously did he still the raging of the boisterous
Sea, and after a great storm we beheld a sudden calm, which we look upon to be
the Lords doing, which indeed was mavelous in our eyes.

Though I have here a little digressed from what I have to say further
concerning the Caracter of your Teachers, now I purpose to come to it again,
for my Spirit is grieved with their treacheries, and the souls of the Righteous
are vexed from day to day with their deceitful dealings, and hypocritical
flatteries and pretenses; and if the Lord should give them up into the hands of
their adversaries, as we have been given up into theirs (by such as should have
protected us from their cruelty) it would be just with the Lord, who has a
controversy with them, because they have exalted themselves more then him; And
therefore will he in process of time (I believe) throw them by, as he has
done Parliaments, Protectors and Counsels that upheld them, who are now become
as withered branches, though once they spread themselves as a green Baytree;
How they ^heltered themselves always under such as did flourish the most, and
what is befallen their friends.
and then did these cuning men shelter themselves under them, until their
branches begun to wither, and then they withdrew, and crept toward those that
seemed to flourish the most, but many of their friends are departed, and
scattered, and contempt is powered out upon them, and their strength is departed
from them, and the power that they once had in their hands it is taken from
them and given to their neighbors; And therefore have these Teachers that made
so many Addresses to them (with large promises, that they would stand by them
to assist them with Lives and Estates against all enemies and disturbers
whatsoever, etc.) withdrawn from them, when they saw they could not save
themselves nor help them; to what end then was their blessings, wherewith they
had blessed them, and their prayers which they had made for them? surely many
were deceived by them, who thought they had leaued upon the Lord, and that he
had been among them, and that therefore no evil could have come upon them; yet
even at that time when they cried peace, Jer. 6. 14. 15.
came sudden ruin and desolation even in one day upon many, whose confidence
was more in the arm of flesh then in the Living God.

Surely had not these Teachers (of whom I write) renounced them that once were
their only friends, and cried up those whom before they had detected, they had
fallen with them that fell, and they had been split when others were broken to
pieces; but what! do they think they stand yet; if so, let them take heed least
they fall, for assuredly they stand upon very slippery places.

It has been observed, Note.
how that their renowned friends by all their backsliding, revolting,
conforming, submitting and condescending from one thing to another, could not
become guiltless and inexcusable, neither could they thereby keep their places
of preferment, preserve their honor, retain their reputation, and continue in
Authority, but were by degrees wrought out by a generation of men that were as
subtle and politic as themselves, but this was done by degrees, and not all in
one day; now such as perceived what things would tend to, that begun to break
forth among them in Authority, who could not renounce their principles, but
would rather throw in their Commissions, surrender their places, Wherein some
was more noble then their fellows.
and lay down their Arms, then they would act contrary to their Consciences,
such got more honor by their so doing (though then it was contemptible) then
they got that continned so long as they could in power, by their becoming all,
almost to any thing, till that their inconstancy appeared in almost every
thing, and then some would scarce trust them in any thing: And thus it has
happened unto the Rock of your Teachers (once) defense, which is now broken,
and breaking down; Let not them think then totally to escape, for though they
may be spared a season as Solomon spared Abiathar the Priest, and Shimei that
cursed his Father, 1 Kings 2. yet they shall not always go unpunished, though
for the present they may yet a little escape that which is decreed to come upon
them, even till their measure of iniquity be as full as the Amorites was.

Surely he that executed justice and judgment upon their consorts will not
hold them guiltless, who have been the instigaters and stirrers up of one
party against another, to the bringing the Nation into much d^straction and
unsetlednesse, confusion and disorder, yet many of the Rulers have not
considered it, nor laid it to heart, but have been generally leavened with
their Spirit, and therefore has their counsel been unto them as Ahithophels
was unto David and Absalom, which was unto them in those days as if a man had
enquired at an Oracle of God, even so has the Counsel of many of the High
Priests been unto many in profession that have been in Authority, who are at
this time laid aside, and (as it were) are removed out of the way; Now behold,
have not those men been much cast down since their counsel is come to naught,
and since others have been put into their places, have they not been wroth in
their minds, and are not their countenances somewhat fallen, and has not the
Lord already begun to abase some of their haughtiness, and to lay their
loftynesse in the dust; Isa. 2. 17.
But now observe their deceit and subtlety in their striving and laboring to
curry favor, Note.
and to get into reputation and esteem with those that now are in Authority,
who have not much liking to the ware which they have sold for many years,
therefore does some of them (and it is expected many more may in time) already
begin to traffic again with that which is most vendible, What the expectations
of many are.
and the most pleasing to the major party, which they will strive to keep on
their sides.

So that already several of them have begun to trade with that again, which for
some years have lain by them as a thing that had been old and so grown out of
fashion; but now when they perceive that people will buy it rather then that
which they trafficked withal, they will willingly lay that aside which people
^lights, and deal with that which people do most esteem; They are like unto
subtle Merchantmen.
so are like unto wary Merchantmen, who observes what Merchandise is the most
Commodious, and will vend the best among those they deal withal, even that
will they provide for them, partly for their own advantage, and partly for
pleasing of the People; even so it is with these Bab^lonish* Merchants, that
have made Merchandise of men's souls; 2 pet. 2.
when they saw that their reading of the Common Prayer Book, and their
observing of the things therein required, were not allowed of by the Powers of
the earth that then were in being, then did these cunning men begin to study to
find out a sort of Merchandise that would be more desired, and more
satisfactory, and such as had a finer color, Observe their craft and policy.
and a better show then that which many professing people could not well away
with in those days; And then did they begin to pray by the spirit (as they
pretended) without a constant form, and that they found to be more taking with
many then the other, and they began to expound Chapters, which was more taking
with many, then reading of Homilies; and kept Lectures, which was more pleasing
to Professors, then keeping holy days; and set days a part to give thanks in,
which they called days of Thanksgiving, and likewise days of Humiliation (so
called) they had; which had a more show of godliness, then Play days, which
some set apart for Sport and pastime; And they likewise did see, that gathering
people into Church Fellowship, and administering that they called the Sacrament,
only unto some (whom they judged to be believers) that this would be more
acceptable unto some (who were difficult to please) then to Administer the
Sacrament unto all; and to Baptize the children of such as they counted
^elievers only, would be more pleasing to some, then to baptize all without
making a difference; And to read Chapters, sing Psalms, and to make repetitions
of the heads of Sermons, and to make Prayers Evening and Morning in Families,
How they changed their Merchandise.
that this was more accounted of, then reading a Prayer or two out of the
Service Book; And when these Priestly Merchants saw that this Merchandise was
more vendible, and that they that could set it out with the most elegancy and
curiosity, with the excellentest excellency of speech, such came to be most in
esteem with the richer sort, then began abundance of them to get into this
conformity, or at least to imitate it for their own ends, when they saw that he
that sold the old ware was not to be tolerated, maintained nor upholden, then
did they almost generally strive to get into that way of traffiking, How they
strove to pleasesuch as did bear rule.
which they deemed would be most commodious, and would bring them in the most
gain, and which they knew would be the best pleasing unto professing people
which then begun to bear the greatest sway in the Nation.

Thus they have done heretofore when there was a great change in the Nation;
And behold, what do they now? Is not that becoming old, and growing out of
fashion with them which was new about the beginning of the wars? and is not
that come and coming again into request and estimation, and so now vendable
again, which then was old, and lightly esteemed by many? Why they change their
Merchandise.
And is not that the cause wherefore some of these men leave trading with the
wares, which of late were in esteem, but now are not so much regarded, by them
that are in power, as they have been by them that have been in authority; and
therefore will they now traffik again with such things as they perceive are
most pleasing to peoples fancies, though for many years they have laid them by,
and have been as of no reputation with them, but now the powers of the earth
allowing them, and seeming to stand by them, and to help and assist them
against such as do not allow of their Merchandise, this is a great
encouragement to them; What need they have of the help of the powers of the
earth, and how they are begun already to cry unto them.
And therefore do many of them, even do what in them lies, to get the powers of
the earth on their sides, for they know they have as much need of their help
now as ever; And therefore have they begun already (in effect) to cry out unto
them, as the Jews did unto the men of Israel, who cried help, this is the man
that teaches all men every where against the people, Act. 21. 28
and the Law, etc. So the Priests they have cried unto the long Parliament, and
they heard their voice, and did in part answer their requests, as appears by an
Ordinance of theirs, which they made in November 8. (so called) 1644. for the
true payment of Tithes and other such duties, That was O. C.
according to the Laws and Custom of the Realm. So when they were dissolved
and broken, they made their addresses unto him What the long Parliament did for
them.
that had dissolved those that had helped them before, Their lies and
blasphemies manifest^^.
and they made their boast of him, stiling him the most Illusterous Light of
these three Nations, the Light of their E^es, and the breath of their Nostrils;
their Glorious Sun; the Nations pious and worthy Patriot, that gave them life
and light to their fainting spirits, a Moses that had led them out of the Land
of Egypt, who had given them more then a taste of the clusters of the grapes of
Canaan into their c^p; Thus did they style him and write of him in their
addresses to his Son Which are to be s^en in the abstract that I have taken out
of their addresses to R. C.
after his disease, saying, though their Sun was set, yet no night ensued, etc.
So unto him (to wit O. C.) did they lift up their voices, and sent their
Petitions, and he heard their cries, and did in a large measure answer their
requests, as appears by his reviving of an Ordinance, in the years, 1654. Yea
he was so careful and tender over them, This Ordinance was made by the
Parliament for Tithes, Ano. 1647.
that he and his Parliament enacted, Vide, An Act made by O. C. and his
Parliament, An. 1656.
That if any molested, hindered or disturbed them, when they were officiating
and doing their duty, or in their going to or returning from their places of
worship, the party so offending was to be committed to Prison, and there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize, until the next General Sessions of the Peace,
to be holden for the County, etc. And if upon information, presentment, or
Indictment, such person or persons shall at the General Sessions of the peace
be found guilty, for maliciously, wilf^lly or of purpose, molesting, letting
disturbing or otherwise troubling such Minister or public Preacher, or making
any disturbance as aforesaid, every person so convicted, shall forfeit the sum
of five pounds, Ho^ O. C. above many in his day helped them. The Prophets and
Apostles had never such an Act made on their behalf.
or at the discretion of the Justices, shall be sent to the house of Correction
to be set to hard labor with such moderate correction as in the discretion of
the said Justices shall be thought sit, etc. Come ye Priests (who say he was
the light of these three Nations, and the light of your eyes, and life of your
fainting spirits; And a Moses that had led you out of the Land of Egypt) come
tell^ us where did ever Moses (who wished that all the Lords people had been
Prophets) make such an Act or Ordinance as this) to protect the Priest by, in
the time of the Law? Had the Prophets and Apostles any such Acts or Ordinances,
thus to deal with such as molested them in their going or coming to, or from
their meetings? Surely no, what was this one of the clusters of the grapes he
put into your cup, which are indeed more like the Garlic of Egypt then the
fruits of Canaan: And sundry clusters of sower Grapes did he and his
Pa^liaments put into your cups, yet would not your mouths be stopped, neither
would you ever be satisfied, nor cease clamouring and crying at their judgment
seats, being as unsatiable as those men the Prophets spoke of that never have
enough; Though they made Ordinance after Ordinance for you, How tedious they
were, and how difficult it was for the Magistrates to keep them quiet, or to be
quiet for them Vide O. C. Ordinance made, An. 1654.
yet could they scarce keep you quiet, nor be quiet for you, when they had
turned others out to put you in, their great care was to procure you
Parsonage-houses, Tithes and other profits, as Salleries and Augmentations, as
appears from an Ordinance of Parliament, Entitled, Ministers placed in livings
by Authority of Parliament, made in the year 1647. And it likewise appears from
another Act of Parliament, made in the year 1649. For the maintenance of
Preaching Ministers. And it is manifest, that you had their help and assistance
in getting of your Tithes, as the Ordinance it self will show, which was made
by the Parliament, An. 1647. and revived by O. C. Anno. 1654. for the true
payment of Tithes and other duties. Thus it appears, how he and the Parliaments
that were in his days helped you with their power; How they were placed in
places by the authority of man, and not by Christ's Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38.
And then did you pray for them, while they put into your mouths, after they
had put you into the Parsonage-houses, and given you Tithes, Salleries and
Augmentations, and placed you in others Livings by their Authority, and
afterward protected you in them, ordering such to be apprehended by their
Authority (as obstructed the payment of Tithes, and other profits due by the
Parishoners (as they pretended to you whom they placed by their Authority, How
the Ministers of Christ had no Augmentation allowed them or provided for them
by the powers of the earth.
and such were to be sent to Prison, there to remain until they made you
satisfaction, who were placed by Authority of Parliament; ( note) where were
any of the Prophets, Apostles, or Ministers of Christ so placed? That had trial
of-cruel mockings and scourging, of bonds and imprisonment, who wandered about
in Deserts, in Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth; And had no certain
dwelling place in any Parsonage-house whatsoever, neither were they placed in
other men's livings, by authority of Parl. neither do we read that they had
Sallaries and Augmentations allowed them by the powers of the earth for
preaching neither does it appear from the Scriptures of Truth, that ever the
Magistrates had any trouble with them, How the Magistrates heretof^re have been
troubled with the Priests
for providing them Livings, Sallaries and Augmentations, nor yet with making
of Acts and Ordinances for the punishing of such as molested, troubled, or
disturbed them, and injoyning people to pay them their Tithe, etc. nay, but on
the contrary, the Magistrates in their days were troubled with such a
clamorous generation of men as you are; who cried out unto them to help; And
their ears being open to them, as the powers of the earth has been unto you,
they came to have trouble upon trouble, with executing of their wills upon the
innocent: even as the Magistrates of this Nation have had, first with you, till
they made you Laws; And secondly, with executing these Laws upon the
innocent, and some like your selves have imputed the case of their trouble to
the innocent and harmless people, whom you troubled the Magistrates withal,
How they have had trouble with them
when they could not for Conscience sake pay you Tithe; or if they spoke to you
in the time of your worship, or in your going to it or coming from it, then you
have cried out they disturbed you, How Officers must be troubled (...) Priests
How have (...) upon Ruler^ for (...) years.
and then the Mayors Justices of Peace, and other inferior Officers must be
troubled with you till they execute that Law upon them, which the Parliament
was troubled with making for you.

And in this very thing you h^ve been the men that have been chiefly accessory
to abundance of the trouble which the Magistrates of the Nation have had for
this fou^teen or sixteen years, as many can testify who have had their share
in the trouble with you, upon whom trouble now is come, and they can neither
deliver themselves nor you.

Thus it appears that O. C. your nursing Father, (as you have called him) and
the Parliaments that sat when he ruled did much for you, and therefore did you
in your Addresses to his Son ( for whose Succession in the Government you
blessed God, stiling him your most excellent Prince, Sovereign, most serene
Highness, your Joshua, and Solomon, etc.) How they flattered R. C. when they
sought his help.
seemingly much bewail the sad stroke of Providence that took away the breath
of your nostrils, and smote your head from off your shoulders, etc. As in your
Address to R. C. from Coventry City, so when the Lord in his wrath had removed
him whom you had so flattered and applauded, then did you begin to crave the
help of his Son, (whom you looked upon to be the Lords Joshua, which he ushered
in (as you say) when he took away Moses) and many were your Addresses which you
sent from sundry parts of the Nation unto him; an abstract out of which I think
good to publish to the Nation, that both high and low, The end wherefore their
following Addresses were published to the Nation.
rich and poor, may take notice of your flatteries, and see you to be
incontinent, and truce breakers, hypocrites and dissemblers; And that your
folly may appear unto all men, that henceforth the Rulers of the Kingdom may
not be deceived by your flatteries, as many have been before them. And seeing
you made so many Addresses in so little a time unto R. C. how many then might
you make unto his Father.

But first of all I am determined to speak something to the Addresses of some
Independants and Anabaptists. As first, Doctor Tho. Goodwin (so called) in the
name, and by the appointment of the Officers and Messengers of above an hundred
Congregational Wha^ did fear begin to possess you (oh ye Pro^essors) that you
also ^ust make your address, and (...) your (...) by (...), what example for
^his had you in the holy scripture.
Churches, from several parts of the Nation addressed to R. C. representing
their humble acknowledgement and most affectionate d^ty to him in a speech;
wherein they say they have not eaten the bread of adversi^y, nor drunk the
water of If you have not, many good people in this nation have, to whose bonds
you congregational Churches have added af^liction.
affl^ction, but have served God in abundance of all things in their Land: All
which mercies have been continued to them, through the protection of that great
If you mean Oli. he was liker Hamon then Mordecai in his self-seeking honor
and promotion, more then the weal of Gods people, who stood at his gates like
Mordecai, and when he in great pomp has come by could not bow unto him.
Mordecai that sought the weal of the people, etc. Moreover they gave R. C. to
understand, that they had showed their harmony with the most Orthodox, at home
and abroad, they expressed their assent to that confession of faith, to which
all the Reformed Churches, with the Churches of Scotland and New England, If
your faith be one with theirs in New England, then we know how far it will
extend; yet we have better hopes of many of you, then of them of New England,
whose desperate wickedness have ex^ended to the taking away of the lives of
the innocent, whose blood continues crying for vengeance upon them who have
done that ho^rid wickedn^sse, which cannot but amaze the simple among you, that
yet retain any tenderness in your hearts toward the Lord and good people.
had given their Assent unto; namely, the Articles of Religion approved and
passed by both Houses of Parliament, to which they unanimously without the
least contradiction, We have not yet found so many of you in one mind, without
contradicting one another, especially in matters pertaining unto Religion.
(as he said) assented and agreed: They also committed their faith unto his Oh
mi^^rable men ^had your faith been the faith of Gods Elect, you needed not have
been so ^aithlesse, neither would you have been so foolish, as to have
committed your faith to him to countenance and propagate, who could not
propagate, defend, and protect his own: Oh you of little faith, who were so
suddenly surprised with fear, when you saw you had lost the protection of that
great Mordecai, ^hen you showed your selves like the Reformed Churches (so
called) indeed who run with them for help, from him that then had the power in
his hand, for whom you then engaged to pray, but do you now according to your
engagement?
trust, as their chief Magistrate, to countenance and propagate it, and engaged
themselves to pray for his Highness both in private and public Assemblies,
etc.

The Independants (so called) did not only make their Address as before
mentioned, to R. C but sundry Churches of the Baptized What could not your
says keep you out of Egypt neither, but you must run with Presbyterians and
Independants into Egypt for help? tell us (that could not go with you) what
found you when you came there? did you not rather get shame and reproach
thereby, then either help or profit? what did you not know before you went that
the Egyptians help was in vain, and to no purpose, would it not have been more
honor and advantage to you to have stood still, and in the faith and pa^ience
to have waited upon the Lord, then to have run down into Egypt, and to trust in
the shadow thereof, which is now become (and that justly) your shame and
confusion?
people, they also made their Addresses to R. C. wherein they acknowledged the
much benefit they had reaped under the Government of his Princely Father of
precious Does his memory yet remain precious to you, wherefore then do you not
strive to wipe away the reproach that is cast upon him?
memory, and that he had been unto them as a nursing Father; And therefore did
they lament for his death with the words of the Prophet; My Father, If he was
your Father as Elijah wa^ Elishas; then t^ll us whether his spirit of policy do
rest upon you since his departure, as Elijahs spirit did rest upon E^isha after
they were both parted asunder yea or nay?
My Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the H^rsemen thereo; Further they
declared they would immediately lift up their hearts and hands to God, that he
might But it seems that you with your listing up your hearts and hands to God
could not prevail with the Lord, (as Jacob did that wrestled with him) though
you had the help of the prayers of the Officers of the Army, and the help of
the prayers of above a hundred congrega^ional Churches; And likewise you had
the help of the prayers of Lord Mayors, H^gh Sheriffs, Aldermen, Lords,
Knights, Recorders, Gentlemen B^^liffs and Priests, both in the Country and
Ci^ies, as appears by their several Addresses; yet it is manif^st (I sa^) that
you all co^ld not prevail with the Lord, for to continue him long, and
prosperous in the Government, out of which he was soon excluded; And who of all
you Addressers, whether of the Officers of the Army, or of the m^^bers of above
a ^undred congregational Churches (commonly called Independants) or of the
members of the baptized Churches, or of the Majors, Aldermen, High She^iffs,
Recorders, Lords, Knights, Ba^liffs, Gentlemen and Priests; (...) which of you
all have proved true and faithful to him, according to your vows, promises and
engagements, in using the utmost of your ability f^r the preservation of his
Person and Government? ^ave you not rather all proved treacherous and
deceitful, and so may a^^ume the shame unto your selves, which is very justly
come upon you all, Isa. 30 2. 3. 7. 13.
long continue prosperous in the Government, and they promised to contribute
their cordial assistance to their ability, etc.

Now shall I come to the Addresses of the P^iests to R. C. which they sent or
Communicated to him after he was Proclaimed, which may somewhat tend to the
manifesting of their fo^ly and treachery, deceit and hypocrisy to such as fear
the Lord and hate double dealing, which is not comely nor convenient among
Christians.

And first, the Priests of the City of London and Southwark (even the
eminentest of them) as Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Spurstow, Dr. Seaman, Ash, Calamy,
Manton, Ienkins, William Cooper, etc. did for themselves, and in the names of
many others of their Brethren, make a very hearty Oh ye Doctors and chief
Priests, where do you read that ever the Prophets or Apostles made Addresses to
men in Authority after this sor^? did not fear take hold upon you, and were not
many of you afraid that you should have lost your Benefices, and that you
should have been turned out of your places, and did you not therefore make your
Address unto him who was then the supreme Magistrate in the Nation, whose
protection you desired, and for a season obtained it, but it would have been
more honor to you if you had never craved it, by your Addressing to him whose
help was so small; and his time upon the Throne so short, which had you known
it in time, I believe you would not have so manifested your folly and weakness
to the Nation, as you did in that very thing.
Address (so called) to R. C. and did confess they owned him as Prince of
these Nations, and Captain General, and said they would always But have you
not now ceased praying for him? And are you not of another mind now, then you
were when you thus Addressed to him?
pray for him and own him in those But I suppose, you now neither own him as
Prince of these Nations, nor yet as Captain General, and so are fallen from
that which you have given under your hands; And therefore is contempt and shame
come upon you, you Doctors and chief Priests of the City of London and
Southwark.
Capacities, etc.

The Address of the Priests and others in Hartford County, and in the Borough
of St. Albans.
WHerein they speak deceitfully of his Father, and affirms that the Lord had
made him as a Joshua to redeem But he did not redeem you out of your envy
wrath, pride, not covetousness, for in that he found you, and in that he left
you.
his people from their wilderness estate, and lead them in a good measure unto
a Canaans And to Canaans rest you are not yet come, but you are further off it,
then you were when you first expected Redemption by him that was not able to
redeem himself.
rest, (yea) it makes them smite upon their thighs, saying, what have we done
Oh you have done very (...), you have preached for hire, you have borne Rule by
your means, you have done that to others y^u would not have others to do unto
you, you have imprisoned and shamefully in rea^ed the Lords Servants and
Messengers, and the Lord will not hold you guiltless for such things as these.
?

They also prayed that the Lord would both cause the mantle and Spirit of their
departed If you mean O. C. I say he was not like Elijah but rather like unto
king Ahab who killed and took possession; And did not O. C. the like? Who in
his life time, was often reproved for his wickedness, but the same hatred was
in him against some that reproved him, that wa^ in Ahab against Elijah, 1 Kings
21. 16, 19. And you (who flattered him in his life time, and wrote thus of him
when he was dead and gone) have been like unto Ahabs four hundred Prophets,
that with one accord declared good-unto that wicked man; but Michaiah the True
prophet of the Lord, the King hated him, because he did not prophecy good unto
him; So he was committed to prison, and fed with bread and water of affliction,
but the lying Prophets, (into whose mouth a lying spirit was entered) they went
free and escaped punishment as you have done, when the true and faithful
Servants of the Lord have been committed in his name whom you called your
Elijah, read 1. Kings 22. chap.
Elijah to rest upon his head and heart; And with all cordialnesse they did
declare their solemn resolutions, with their lives and all that was dear unto
them in their hand, to True and faithful to him you have not continued, neither
did ye ever hazard life, liberty or estate on his behalf that we know of,
neither would you appear with any of those in your hands on his behalf, when he
was turned out of that, which you with fained words pretended to stand by him
in; but these your lies and fained speeches, are but like unto your brethrens;
which will become your shame and your burden.
continue true and faithful to him, as their supreme Governor, according to
the Humble Petition and Advice, etc.

The Addresses of the Priests of Surrey and others, unto R. C.
Wherein they say, They cannot but mourn under that inexpressible lose that
these Nations sustained, in the death of so choice and eminent a Servant as his
late Father, the most What more renowned by you then any King that went before
him?
renowned that ever ruled in these Nations: They presumed to present themselves
the Real Friends Had you not been his friends, he would not have had such care
of you, to have placed you in other men's livings, and to make Acts and
Ordinances on your behalf, whereby you might get your Ti^hes, and possess with
quietness your Parsonage-houses which he turned others out of, for you to come
into.
of his late Father, who spent his days in the cause of God and his people,
till the world was no longer He was not therefore taken out of it; for many
that are more precious then he was, yet remain in it, witnesses against the
wickedness of it.
worthy of him, etc.

The Addresses of the Priests and others of the County of S^ss^x, to R. C.
WHerein they desire him to own and encourage the faithful You are not the men
that have proved faithful for you have been in constan^ and unfaithful in more
things, then in this concerning him.
and industerous Preachers of Christ's Gospel, and to preserve them from How
should he preserve you from it, when you bring it so wilfully upon your selves,
as you have done in this. very thing.
reproach; And they do likewise declare, they will own him with their lives and
estates, against all parties and interests Whe^efore did you not then appear
for him when he was ejected and laid aside, surely you have not meant as you
spoke in your Addr^sses, so exceeding contrarily you have acted, insomuch that
it will be hard for you to get the reproach wiped away that is fallen upon you,
who have not done according to your engagements, neither have you fulfilled
your promises; and therefore does the reproach and oblique ( which you speak
of) lie upon you.
whatsoever, who shall presume to disturb his Government upon what color or
pretense whatsoever, etc.

The Address of the Priests and others of Colchester unto R. C.
WHerein they pretend grief and But was it not much more in words then really
in your hearts.
sorrow for the great loss of these three Nations, in the death of his Father
of blessed Is his memory yet blessed aamong you
memory; They declare he has been lawfully nominated and appointed to succeed
in the Government of these three Nations; So that they do with unanimous
consent acknowledge him to be undoubted Protector, and rightful chief
Magistrate of this Commonwealth, and are resolved but it is manifest, your
resolutions were soon altered, when you perceived another party turn him out
and lay him aside, which of you then retained your resolution in adhering unto
him, or in assisting of him? but your high swelling and boasting words did him
little service, when he had need of your assistance, for then ^id you withdr^w
from him, like the rest of your brethren, whom you did not come behind in
Addressing unto him, nor yet in ^^volting from him; so you are like unto them
in those things, and therefore must your words become your burden, as their
promises must become the^rs, and all of you must come to judgment for these
things.
by the blessing of God, to adher unto and assist him therein.

The Priests and others of Suffolk Addressed to R. C.
SAying, the sad thoughts of his Fathers most lamented death filled Yet it did
but little appear in some of you otherwise then in hypocri^ie.
all their hearts with sorrow and tears, yet (say they) although our Sun is
set, no night has ensued; And their prayers were that his Government might
still be as a morning without but it is clear that your prayers have not
prevailed for it never was so clear as a morning without clouds; but might well
have been compared unto an early dew, or unto a morning cloud, because it was
so soon vanished and gone, notwithstanding your prayers and the prayers of your
brethren.
clouds; and they assured him, they should continue their cheerful submission
to his Government, and stand Ready you were not to assist him in the u^most
capacity, wherein you were able, when others opposed and withstood him, and
prevailed against him; where was th^re one of you to be found in readiness to
perform what you have pro^ised? If R. C. put confidence in such as you, it is
then not so much to be admired, that those things befell him (which unavoidably
are come upon him) as it is to be wondered, that yo^ yet have escaped as you do;
but look to your selves, and consider how sundry of the Powers unto which you
have addressed, are fallen and overturned; And your standing is on slippery
places.
ready in the utmost capacity wherein they are enabled to serve him.

The Priests of Norfolk and of the City of Norwich, they Addressed to R. C.
ANd professed their deep sense of the loss of their late renowned Protector
Had he not protected you in your Parsonage-houses (which had been other men's
livings) and Tithes and Benefices, and allowed you Salleries and Augmentations
you would not have renowned him so much as you pretended to do.
, the Commonwealths most tender Father, and they did solemnly promise Your
Promises and Engagements were to little purpose, for which of you all can come
forth, and say, he does both keep and observe them
and engage themselves faithfully to serve and obey his most Serene these
fained words that you spoke in hypocrisy you may now be ashamed of, and your
spirit of deceit is now manifest, that you have spoke and wrote from.
Highness as his Liege people, in the defense of his person and When or where
did you defend it, either with your lives or estates? Oh ye deceitful men.
Government with their lives and estates, etc.

The Priests and others of the County of Bedford Addressed to R. C.
ANd in their Address, they professed their mourning If you mourned at all, it
was so little, as that Judge few or none perceived it, for many of you had
little affection to him in your hearts, notwithstanding all your flatterie^ and
deceitful expressions, wherewith your Addresses are filled, which savours
merely of hypocrisy and deceit, and not of sincerity and truth.
(for his (and his countries renowned) father) was turned into joy by his happy
and peaceable entrance into the Government of these Nations, to the
astonishment of the enemies and satisfaction of the good people There were many
in the Nation that are looked upon to be good people, that had not good
satisfaction in the thing; but lies in hypocrisy you could tell him, like the
rest of your Brethren.
thereof; and they hoped God would make his mountain to stand strong. If it had
stood strong, it would have stood longer; but it was not according to your
(professed) hope, who begun to cry to it and look for help from it, because it
was a Mountain.
And they thought it their duty, to give a public testimony You had better
have kept your Testimony to your selves, then to have produced it, and not to
stand true and constant to it.
of their hearty affections, and readiness in their several places, and
capacities to the utmost of their powers, faithfully and cheerfully to assist
But where ^id any of you appear to assist him in your capacities, in a needful
time when many for^ook him, then did you also leave him (instead of serving and
assisting him) like the rest of your deceitful brethen.
and serve him, etc.

The Priests and others of Buckingham County Addressed (as others did) unto R.
C.
ANd in their address, they expressed their deep sense of their great loss by
the death of his Father, of ever blessed memory Are you not of another (...)
now, when his memory begins already to be de^ested by many.
; And they hope he will make the example Do you mean in his placing you in
other men's livings, and in making. Acts and Ordinances on your behalf, by which
you might recover your Tithe, Sallaries and A^gmentations; or do you mean his
suffering the ^^nocent to be committed to prison in his Name, and suffering
their goods to be spoiled, their Cattle to be driven away, and they to be made
a prey upon in his name? this his Father did, and if he had followed his
example according to your hopes, then he might have done the like.
of his Father to be his pattern; And they also did declare they would be ready
to testify their affections While he was in power, and that you expected help
from him, then were you seemingly affectionate to him, but when he begun to be
opposed, then instead of obeying and assisting him, you desented from him.
to him and obedience to his Government.

The Priests and others of the County of Northampton Addressed to R. C.
ANd in their Address they speak of the precious memory of his thrice Renowned
Father, who was so in love and tenderness to the people of God Had he been as
you say, then would he not have suffered so many of them to have lain so long
in prison as he did; neither would he have suff^red such flattering deceitful
men as you, to have made a prey upon them as you did
, in zeal for Reformation in Church and State, in bounty and compassion to the
suffering Saints When their suffering was laid before him, he would very seldom
put forth his helping hand to assist them, but rather strengthened your hands
against them, so their suffering was continued unto his dying day; And at his
death he left many of them in prison, which brought Infamy twofold upon him,
rather then thrice Renown.
under whose shadow we sat for a time with great safety Yea his care was over
you as appears by the Acts and Ordinances before mentioned, which were made on
your behalf, by him and his Parliaments, which being now repealed and
nihilated, you are forced to creep under the shadow of these, whom he and you
in those days called the common enemy, against whom you with him took part:
And when you had overcome them, you got into their Livings and their Parsonage
houses, in which you sat under O^ivers shadow, with great safety and sweet
repose;
and sweet repose; And that they were amazed at the divine stroke that took
from them in a time so unlooked for, ( mark) the light of our eyes Be not then
offend^d at us hereafter if we call you blind guides, and say you are
Physicians of no value, seeing you have confessed that the Light of your eyes,
and the breath of your nost^i^^ is taken from you:
and the breath of our nostrils, whom they declared to be the wisest and most
glorious What, was he more glorious then the Lord of Glory, who is called the
Prince of peace? if so, how then came his Glory to fade to almost nothing, so
that it is now become but as a dead and withered flower of the field.
of Princes; And so treading So being found speaking lies in hypocrisy, I
confess with you, you are treading in the steps of your Brethren, who have
dealt deceitfully like your selves.
in the steps of their Brethren that had gone before them, they humbly prayed
That his Highness would exercise just severity against despisers of dignities
Many that feared the Lord did as much despise the dignities wherewith O C. was
dignified, as Elisha despised the gift of Naaman, 2 Kings 5 16
, and revilers of A^thoritie, whose unhallowed Your tongues appear to be
unhallowed by the many lies that are spoken by them in hypocrisy.
tongues spare not to flash out their insolent And are not you now become of
the number of them that flesh out insolent reproaches against his Government
and Sepulcher, and so become guilty of that which you would have had others
punished for, and therefore are inexcusable your selves?
reproaches and impious execrations against your Fathers Sepulcher, and your
Highness Throne.

That his Highness would countenance a faithful You have proved both
unfaithful and unsound in the sight of God and men.
sound, able, and godly Ministry. And that his Highness would still own and
adhere But which of you now will adhere unto them in their distress, like as
you did in their prosperity, when they were in power, and able to help you,
then for your own ends you could follow them and adhere to them.
unto the faithful Friends and Counsel of his Renowned Father; Then shall the
people of God be with you, to obey But when he enjoined the people of God to
pay such deceitful workers as you Tithe, they could not obey him, and therefore
did they in his Name suffer by you, as they had done in his Fathers days.
you, to assist you, to love you, to rejoice in you, to bless God with
incessant But what have not you in particular ceased praying for him? even in
the time of his distress, when he has need of the help of the prayers of the
faithful.
prayers for you; And as for themselves they unfainedly acknowledge ( as falsely
they said) themselves obliged to pay unto his Highness, all the duties of
faithful Subjects to a good and worthy Prince, even to the utmost hazard Many
fair speeches you have used to him in your sundry Addresses, but where, or at
what time, did you hazard either life or estate on his behalf? oh you
menpleasers and time-servers, the Lord will judge you.
of life and estate, etc.

The Priests and others of Berks County Address to R. C.
Wherein they say that with much sadness Are you not here sound with a lie in
your mouth, like the rest of your Brethren,
of heart they bewail their great loss If he was the light of your eyes, and
the breath of your nostrils as some of your brethren said, then your loss in
loosing of him was great:
in the death of his Princely Father; And withal they also declared that they
would stand by him with their estates Surely you speak this as your formallity,
in hypocrisy and not in sincerity, as has appeared by your not performing
your promises, nor much regarding your engagements which you have so generally
made in your Addresses.
and hazard of their lives etc.

The Priests of Hampshire they also Addressed unto R. C.
ANd some things they made mention of that was done by his Father, which ( they
said) was but the first fruits of far greater blessings desired What could he
have done more for you then he did? did he not give you other men's livings? did
he not (with his Counsel) cause Salaries and Augmentations to be paid unto you?
And did he not give you power to recover trebble damage of such as could not
pay you Tithe? and did he not give you power to spoil honest men's goods, and to
c^st them into prison if they spoke to you in your going to your worship, or in
your coming from i^? And could you not be satisfied and contented with these
clusters from such a degenerate ^^^nt of a strange Vine as he was become, but
you must expect and desire more, and that from an ignoble branch that sprung
from the plant, that had it is rise from a strange Vine: Oh ye covetous
self-seeking men when will you have enough.
and expected, and as it were clusters of Canaan to refresh them in their
wilderness condition. And ( flattering of him) said, they observed in him zeal
for Gods glory, affectionate actings for the Truth What were they? that others
did not see them so well as your selves.
, faithful execution of Justice, Do you mean in his suffering so many to be
committed to prison for not paying you your Tithe, and for disturbing of you,
whom he did more for in endeavoring to procure you your Tithe, then many of
you ever did for him, notwithstanding your lying promises in your fained
Addresses to him.
countenancing of godly Ministers, tenderness toward such as feared the Lord,
a humble frame of Spirit, and a most amiable behavior toward all, etc. saying
they should never Have you not ceast praying for him already now, when you see
he cannot give you such clusters of Salaries and of Augmentations as his Father
did?
cease to pray, that the God of all their Mercies would be present with him in
his person, etc.

The Priests and others of Dorchester and of the County of Dorset they
Addressed unto R. C.
WHerein they speak of the loss of his Renowned Father, of whom ( say they)
themselves and the three Nations may say they have lost their Father As a
Father ca^eth and provideth for his children, so did he provide Livings,
Salaries, and Augmentations for you
of their Country, yet being he is established, his Rightful Successor in the
Government, their sorrow was turned into joy But will not your joy be turned
into sorrow again, if you should loose your Livings as they did that yo^ got
them from, your Sallaries and Augmentations? for I perceive a little thing will
turn your sorrow into joy, and your joy into sorrow, who are as inconstant as
the wind, and as unstable as the waters.
; so to him and his Government they declared they would adhere, etc.

The Priests and others of Wilts County made their Address to R. C.
Wherein they ( pretend) to bewail Surely he has been the greatest helper
you have had in the earth, seeing you so bewail his death.
the death of his Father, but with all thankfulness acknowledges, and
admireth as they say, the wonderful workings of God, in preventing their fears
Who pursued you when you thus ^eared, or what was the cause of your fears? did
you fear any thing more then the decay of your trading, and the loss of your
Salaries and Augmentations? So when his Son succeeded him in the Government,
and continued these thing to you which his Father had provided for you, then
your fears were prevented; Oh ye faithless generation, how long will you cover
after these things which the Gentiles seek? Math. 6. 31. 32.
by bringing him legally to succeed him in Government, and do declare their
free and cordial owning of him whom the Lord had set over them If the Lord had
set him over ^ou, and if then he had continued in the Lords Counsel, then he
would have continued longer over you, and with you:
, And they also declared their firm resolutions But it appears your Resolutions
continued not firm and steadfast, seeing you deserted him, and left him,
contrary to ^our promises an engagements: And seeing you did so to him, if you
should promise to others as you engaged to him, who do you think would be so
foolish as to confide in you, or believe you?
to stand by him and assist him in the Administration of his just power, etc.

The Priests of Taunton, and others of the Inhabitants of that Town Addressed
to R. C.
Wherein they expressed their deep sense of the heavy But you are like to feel
a heavier stroke yet for your hypocrisy and dissembling
stroke of God in taking from them his renowned Father; But since, say they, it
was the Will of God this Glorious Sun You that call him a glorious Sun, are in
the night of Apostasy yet, are ought to keep silent in the darkness, least
another sun go down upon you in his wrath, whom you had need to kiss, least he
be angry with you, for your blasphemy, deceit and flattery.
, Mark, should set, yet no night has followed. And they promised to be wholly
at his command, and humbly to submit was their unalterable resolution Yet it
appears you can alter and change your Resolutions (notwithstanding your
promises and engagements;) as times, Laws, and Governments alters and change,
so can you, as is apparent and evident at this day, to your shame and
confusion; Who can even bow to and comply with, even any Government that is set
up to be the supreme among you, whose folly is now manifest in a large measure
to the Nation, that long has been deceived by you.
, as they falsely said, and readily with all cheerfulness, assist by their
Persons and Estates, etc.

The Priests of Chard in the County of Somerset, with others of the Town,
addressed to R. C.
WHerein they expressed their deep sense of the terrible providence, in taking
off from their heads, the joy of their hearts Oh you silly men that ever you, (
the mayor Magistrates and Priest of Chard) should utter such things, and that
your folly should by the uttering of such things, be thus manifested to the
Nation, by setting forth mortal man to be the joy of your hearts; What are your
hearts filled with now, when so much infamy is come upon him, (who, as you say)
was the joy of them? surely, had you foreseen what is come to p^sse, you ^ould
not have uttered such frivelous things.
, his most Illusterous Father; but they bless God that providence gave them
such a Joshua If he was your Joshua, then some of you that followed him were as
bad as Achan that coveted the goodly Babylonish garment, and the shekels of
silver, and the wedge of Gold; yea, I believe many of you have stolen and
dissembled, and have taken of the spoil of your enemies, and have put it among
your own stuff, as some did that followed Joshua, and therefore could they not
stand before their enemies, no more then you and your Joshua could stand before
yours, who fled and none pursued; And then was R. C. in as great a strait I
believe, as Joshua was, when he cried out, wha^ shall I say, when Israel
turns their backs before their enemies, Joshua 7. chap.
to conduct them into the Land of promise; And as they subscribe their hands,
so shall be ready to hang their lives and estates, as Labels to that sincere
fealty and most cheerful obedience which God and his Highness called for, from
them.

The Priests of Tiverton, with others of the Inhabitants of the Town Addressed
to R. C.
ANd confessed they had had a share in the Priests Astonishments and Fears We
know you had cause to be pos^est with fears, and to be amazed to think upon the
danger you were like to be plunged in, when he that had so mightily helped you
was fallen; And when he that had been as your refuge (from those that did
oppose you) w^^ taken away, fearfulness and astonishment must then needs
surprise you, who had your helper (that helped you) in the earth; So when he
was removed, you addressed to his Successor, and interceded to him that he
might become your helper, that so you might always have one in the earth, but
our help is in the Lord Iehova, and not in the Arm of flesh.
at the sad news of his renowned Fathers death; And they did unfainedly
congratulate his Highness, serene pious and prudent beginnings, and they did
bless the Lord (as they said) who had laid up un-thought-of provisions, for the
good of the People in these Nations, etc.

The Priests of Hereford County, and many others Addressed to R. C.
SAying, That the great loss in this Common wealth w^h happened by the death of
his dear Father, had oppressed their spirits with fear, had not divine
providence given Had divine providence given him; [as you s^y] then it had been
your duty to have stuck more firmly and faithfully to him, then you did,
his princely person to succeed in the protection of Religion, While he did
protect you in your Parsonage houses and M^ss-houses (commonly but falsely
called Churches) you prayed for him and gave him flattering Titles, but when he
could not protect you, you ceased making Addresses to him, and gave over
praying for him.
Laws and Liberties of the Nations, over which the Lord had placed him Then
greater will your judgment be who proved so deceitful to him.
as chief Magistrate, and they did declare their firm Resolutions To little
purpose have your Resolutions been, which have been so changeable and
al^e^able, of which you may now be ashamed.
to yield, all Loyalty, fidelity and obedience, and to assist him to the utmost
Here you are treading in the steps of your brethren, whose lies, ^alshoods, and
absurdities represents unto the Nation what a Generation you are.
extent of their abilities.

The Priests and others of Warwick County Addressed to R. C.
Showing their sorrow for their late unspeakable loss by the death of his
Highness incomparable Father, so worthy a nursing Father Of whose flock you
were who sat under his shadow with sweet repose, being nursed with the Tithes,
Salleries and Augmentations, which he procured you out of other men's estates
and livings, but not out of his own.
to his people, yet they have no more cause of mourning, that they were
deprived of him so soon, then of thankfulness they enjoyed him so long But if
you had enjoyed him longer, and not the things before mentioned by him, you
would not have given hearty thanks for the enjoyment of him.
, saying, though their Sun was set, yet no night ensued; For no sooner was the
most illusterous Light Oh you Blasphemers, how durst you say, That he who was
but a mortal man, was a more illusterous Light of the three Nations, then he
that is the Light of the World, and of every Nation and Dominion in the whole
world? Formerly you have cried out of the Quakers blasphemy, but now behold
your own and repent of it.
of these three Nations extinguished, but it pleased the Father of Lights to
set up another Do you mean his Son being another Light, when he was set up;
However he now is thrown down, what say you then is now their Light, and in
what must they now walk, if not in the Light of the Lord?
.

And they speak of Gods renewing his loving kindness unto them, saying, that
taking away a Moses If you mean O. C. I say he was liker Pharaoh then Moses,
for Pharaoh oppressed Gods people and afflicted them sore, with the many
burdens that he in his cruelty laid upon them, who set such taskmasters over
them as your selves, that were cruel and hard-hearted; And when Pharaoh saw
that they were many, he consulted how they should keep them under, least that
it had come to pass, that when there had been war in his Land, the people of
God should have joined with their enemies against him and his Subjects; And
thus did O. by his Laws and Impositions oppress Gods people, and would not
suffer them to go free from under the oppression of Tithes which you, cruel
taskmasters did much afflict them with, as you do at this day; Yet the more
Pharaoh and the Taskmasters afflicted them the m^re they grew, and Moses
chused rather to suffer affliction with the afflicted, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season^ but so did not O. after he was made Protector.
bestowed on them a Joshua If you mean R. C. I say he was more like unto
Ahaziah Ahabs Son, in that he walked in the way of his Father, who provoked the
Lord God of Israel by his streng^hening your hands against the innocent, by his
not loosing the bands of wickedness, by his not undoing the heavy b^rthens,
when it was in his power, and by his not suff^ring the oppressed to go free;
and therefore did he provoke the Lord ^o wrath, whereupon his days were
shortened for the Elects sake.
, though their governor be removed, their government remains, But now you
cannot say the same, for the Lord does not only change Governors, but he has
also changed and is changing Governments, and you as well as other men must be
tried.
and their happiness under it, and for his Highness whom next unto their most
high, their eyes and hearts were upon and their hopes But in whom are your
hopes now? Oh ye vain men, how long will it be before you cease from hoping for
salvation from the Mountains and from the Hills?
, they should uncessantly pray.

The Priests and others of the City of Coventry, Addressed to R. C.
ANd in their Address they ( pretend to) bewail the sad stroke of providence,
that took away the breath of their nostrils If at that day the Lord had
withheld life and breath from you, then your transgressions would have been
fewer in number then they are at this day; for I perceive that it is as easy
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as it is for you and your
Generation to cease from speaking of lies i^ hypocrisy, you are so exceedingly
given up to the thing.
, Mark, and smote their head from off their shoulders, his Highness most
Gracious renowned Father, etc.

But Gods aim and end, say they, in taking away his Moses, was to usher him in
his Joshua To these two names I have spoken in my answer to the last Addresses.
; And now they desire the zeal of Good Josiah for a reformation But he was too
much leavened with your priestly spirit, to press after a Reformation.
may center in him; they declare they are resolved to stand by and adhere to
him in his Person and Government with their lives and estate Large were the
Promises, and fair were the Pretenses that you generally made, and as you have
appeared to make them unanimously, so have you manifestly broke them a^
generally to the shame and dishonor of your profession.
, etc.

The Priests of Leicester County and City, with others Addressed to R. C.
WHerein they do encourage him to endeavor the just liberties and freedom of
this Nation If he had done so, then he should have done some thing in order to
the removing of that grand oppr^ssion of Tithe, and not have strengthened your
hands by enjoining people to have paid them to you.
, from whom God has taken so eminent a pillar he was a Pillar to your forced
maintenance, Salleries and Augmentations,
, who was looked upon both at home and abroad, as the great support and
Protector of their peace He did not so truly and faithfully protect the peace
of the peaceable, as he did you in your parsonage houses and Mass-houses, which
you crept into by degrees, and then did you begin to exercise Lordship over
Gods heritage, and to feed upon the fat, and to cloth with the wool, and then
your hearts came to be exalted.
and joy; And they do declare they will humbly beg at the Throne of Grace that
as his renowned Father, who as a designed instrument helped them our of Egypt
Nay, though he helped you in many things, he never helped you out of that
really and truly, for both he and you loved the treasures of it too well, and
were not only unwilling to come out of it your selves, but have also striven
to continue the oppress^d in it in the aff^ictions under your rigor and cruelty.
having Canaan in his eye, yet he as another Joshua with his Fathers Spirit
redoubled upon him, may by the efficatious conduct of the Captain of the Lords
Host, lead them into a more full possession Are not you blind guides indeed,
and unfit to lead others, who said, you will beg at the Thro^e of grace that R.
C. as another Joshua may lead (...) into a more full p^ssession of Truth,
Righteousness and peace; Oh Hypocrites, well might you cause people to err by
your ^s and hypocrisy, for which God will ^^ge you.
of Truth, Righteousness and Peace as their desired Canaan, etc.

The Priests and others of Derby County Addressed to R. C.
Wherein they also express sorrow for the death of his Father, yet they had
hopes that God had raised him up to promote the same common interest of Zion;
In many things he did promote his own Interest and yours more then Zions, or
her converts, who wept in her, and he did not comfort them, but suffered them
to be committed to prison in his Name, and there he did not visit them; And
that which he suffered to be done unto them, the Lord took it as done unto
himself, and he was wroth with him, and removed him in his displeasure^
And they sincerely, and cordially Rather fainedly and deceitfully did you
promise and engage unto him, whose help ^herewith he helped you was to little
purpose, even so were your flattering and hypo^itical promises vain, and of no
value.
, as they said, promised to submit to him, and did declare in the strength of
Christ, to be assistant to him with whatsoever was precious in their eyes, etc.

The Priests and others of the county of Stafford Addressed unto R. C.
Wherein after many lying and flattering expressions of his Father, whom they
call their glorious Sun Surely you are blind and cannot see afar off, and out
of the fear of God, who have not yet seen the day of the Son of man, who
arises with healing in his wings; And therefore dare you ^he rather presume to
put mortal men in the place of him who is immortal, And gives light to these
three Nations, (and not R. C.) and likewise to all the Nations upon the face of
the earth; And who are you that dare presume to set a mortal man in his place?
, and himself their no less glorious shining Sun, by whose light, heat, and
influence these three Nations are quickened It is the spirit that quickneth, and
gives both light and life unto the Nations that are saved.
to a lively hope of enjoying happy times; They desire that in his days the
Righteous may flourish, and the lying lips put to silence that speak proudly
The lying lips are your own, who speak blasphemously against the Lord and his
Spirit, and many lies have you and your Brethren uttered with your lying lips.
and contemptuously against the faithful Ministers, the Stars of this Nation
And you are like the wandering stars the Apostle Jude speaks of, who runs from
mountain to hill, and from one power to another to get help of them, but the
Lord will plead with you in one day.
, and they do engage to be assistant to him with their lives and estates,
against all that shall seek to annoy his sacred Person and Government.

The Priests and others of the Town of Nottingham and County Addressed to R. C.
WHerein they pretended to bewail the stroke of Gods sore displeasure in
taking away his Renowned Father, who admirably got O^ds the wor^ honor and
wealth, glory and riches he got abundantly, but when the Lord put an end unto
his days, what did these things then avail him?
and never lost When he begun to seek himself and his own Interest, then did he
begin to loose both the hearts and affections of good people,
but left three Nations in peace; And they do pray that he will vestigate the
good footsteps Wherein do you mean? in upholding and protecting you in your
Ben^fices, in suffering the innocent to be made a prey upon by you, in making
fair pretenses and large promises like your selves to little purpose? if these
things were not the footsteps in which you would have had him to have
vestigated and followed his Father, then declare more plainly what they were.
of his dear Father; And they shall to their utmost readily and cheerfully
serve and obey Though you pretended to do it with cheerfulness for a season,
were you not soon weary of it? especially when you saw you could have no
advantage by it.
him.

The Priests of Lincoln County, and many others of the same County Addressed to
R. C.
AFter they have spoken something of his renowned Though he was renowned with
you, so was he not with all, because he did not show mercy (as mercy was shown
him) but suffered the poor and needy to be persecuted, therefore are his
children become as vagabonds, and strangers have spoiled his Labor, Psalm. 109.
10. 11.
Father of ever blessed memory say they, their hearts pressed them For your own
ends it was, and that you might be seen to be conformable to your Brethren in
their ^latteries and deceit.
forwards to make that humble Address to testify their good affection to his
Person and Government, declaring they shall engage their continual prayers Are
your prayers yet engaged for him? Do they continue for him to this very day, I
suppose nay.
, sincere affections Are your engaged affections yet to his Government? If so,
wherefore did you then so much rejoice when you were brought under the power of
another:
, and faithful endeavors to seek the preservation when or how did you seek his
preservation, when he could not preserve you in your P^rsonage-houses, glebe
Lands, and fa^ Ben^fices; did you not then withdraw from him like the rest of
your Brethren? Oh you de^eitful men.
of his Person and Government.

The Priests of York County did also make their Address like the rest of their
Brethren to R C. but at present I have it not by me; But here follows a C^py
of one from the Priests and others of East Ridding of the County of York to R.
C.
WHerein they express their hearty sorrow for the loss of his Father, the
Nations pious Had you said politic, then many would have believed you For his
policy was more apparent to many then his piety
and worthy Patriot, and that which gave them Life and Light ( mark) to their
fainting spirits Here your tongues have uttered falsehood, like the rest of your
Brethren; could he give life to you, who could not preserve his own life from
death? And have you been without light and life, since life and breath was
taken from him? Are you not ashamed of your sayings, who set up that vain man
in the room of Christ, who only gives Light and Life, which is his gift unto
the sons of men, which it appears you have not yet received, who thus
blasphemes.
, And they were confident, that through his Highness Religion, the Laws of the
Land, and liberties of the people would be preserved and nourished unto a
perfect But in his days Religion came not to a perfect growth among you,
neither were the Liberties of Gods people in his days perfectly preserved by
him from your cruelty.
growth; And did unanimously offer to contribute to him their utmost services,
and to stand by him with their lives and estates against any opposers. In few
months after your Addre^^e to him he had many opposers, and where did any of
you (either to the hazard of Life or Estare) oppose any of them: so your thus
Addressing has ^ended to the manifesting of your folly to the Nation.


The Priests and others of the City and County of Durham Addressed to R. C.
Wherein they say they bewail that great loss which themselves sustained
Your loss was tolerable for you, while you retained your Tithe, Sallaries and
Augmentations which he and his Parliaments procured you.
by removal of his most Illustruous and endeared Father; and that which
remains as their duty What, did you then neglect your duty, when you declined
from him and encouraged and strengthened the hands of his enemies against him?
is to encourage and strengthen his hands, not doubting but they shall find him
treading in the imitable steps of his Father In countenancing you in your
making a prey upon the innocent, he imitated his Father in that sin especially,
And therefore was not the Lord well pleased with his doings.
, saying they were persuaded, that God had given him to them as a pl^dge of his
purpose of much love to be defender of the Faith, Your faith he de^ended but a
very little time, Oh ye earthly-minded men! where do you find that ever the
Ministers of Christ Addressed to the powers of the earth as Defenders of the
Faith, for the defense of their faith? Did not this custom get up in the
Apostasy since the Apostles, whose faith stood in the power of God? And he who
was the Author and fi^isher of it was their Defender and Protector in it; now
were you in that faith which the Apostles were in, then would you not Address
and Petition to one power after another, (as your manner is) in order for
receiving and obtaining help from them, ^or the procuring of your Tithe and
other pr^fits, which are looked upon to be your livelihood that you get by your
trade of preac^ing; And by them things you subsist and live, rather then by
faith, by which the just do live.
Liberties, etc. And in so doing he may with their greatest confidence, and
fullest assurance, expect their best services,

The Provost and Fell^wes of Durham College, they also Addressed to R. C.
Wherein they speak very highly of his Father for founding that College, and
proportioning a revenue to it I suppose that was one of the clusters of Canaan
which your brethren in Ham^shire spoke of, when they told of the good things
(good in their Account,) done by O. C.
etc. And they bless God for his providing for the continuance of their peace
and liberties, by setting him in his Fathers Throne; And they bese^ched God to
make him an heir to all his Fathers matchless abilities for war and
Go^vernment, so of Love, Zeal, and Resolution to promote that work That you
might have your proportionable Revenues, and that your number might be
increased in the Nation, to the filling of every Par^onage-house, and to the
deceiving of unstable souls, in every Masse-house, for which they become more
apt, and in which they became more expert by being at that place, (which your
Patriot (as your brethren called him) had founded) then they were before;
which he begun in that place, that by the vital beams of his prospicious
Aspect, it may be cherished and grow till it bear much fruit The fruit of many
of those that have proceeded from such places as it, and Oxford and Cambridge,
have been so detestable to many sober minded people, that at this time I judge
I need not particularly prescribe it, it has been so plenteously published to
the Nation.
for the good and happiness of those parts of the Land, in which it was
planted by a hand ( note well) which never miscarried What then? was all that
ever he did in the time of the late and deploreable wars, and after he came to
be made Protector tell his d^ing day, right, just, Lawful and unreproveable?
seeing you say, his hand never miscarried; but the same flattering tongue which
will speak lies in hypocrisy is found in and among you, which I have found all
along among your brethren, who like your selves could hold persons in
^dmiration because of advantage, And that was one of your miscarrages (among
the many) that is to be found in your Colleges, the Fountains of the Waters of
strife, and among the filthy dreamers that proceed from them, who who are like
the raging Waves of the Sea, that foam out their own shame, as you and your
brethren have done in these Addresses, Jude 1.
in any of its high and magnanimous achievements.

The associated Priests and others in the County of Cumberland Addressed to R.
C.
ANd craved his pardon that they paid this debt so late Had you never paid
it, I judge he would never have called you to an account for it, and I know
that your shame will be the greater then it would have been if you had kept
silent, which might better have become you then thus to have uttered words
without knowledge.
, for they had heard that his eyes and heart had been big and full with tears,
for the loss of his most incomparable Father, a loss so individual, that it is
no marvel the whole Nations Lamentation Nay, the Nations lamentation was not
like Rachels, who wept for her children, and refused to be comforted, because
they were not, for the most of the Addresses that came from sundry parts of the
Nation did signify the joy and comfort which the inhabitants pretend they had
received by the news of his being proclaimed rightful successor; And therefore
did they sundry times declare that their sorrow was turned into joy, etc.
is like Rachels, that even refused to be comforted; and further they do say,
they have lost a Father as well as himself, whose heart and hands they declared
to strengthen Have you not now more need to crave pardon for breaking your
promise to him, then you had to crave pardon of him for sending this no sooner
to him?
what in them laid; And though this poor mite can add nothing to his merits Yet
it will add to your shame who Who have forged such a bundle of lies and
falsehoods in your Address, what a debt is that that this can pay, which is not
worth a mite,
yet the desire of their souls are to go hand in hand I believe you very well
in this thing that your desire is to go hand in hand with your Brethren, in
falsehoods, hypocrisy and vain deceit, in cruelty, persecution, and oppression,
as witness your severe proceeding against the inhabitants of that County, who
have sustained as much cruelty and wickedness from you, as any people in the
Nation have done from your Brethren.
with their Brethren; and they declare they will not let the Lord go It appears
plainly that you have not like Jacob prevailed with God, for which of you all
dare say that he was blessed o^ the Lord beyond all his Princely fellows* and
have you not contrary to your word let the Lord go, and so have given over
wrestling with him ^n his behalf; the day is broken, and the Light of the
morning discovers you, whither can you go or where can you hide your selves so
as the Light will not find you out, and manifest your folly and nakedness to
your shame, as it is at this day.
till he has blessed him above and beyond all his Princely fellows through the
Christian world, and that he may live long the Defender His time of defending
you and your faith was very short, but who shall now defend you from the shame
and contempt which will come upon you, and be as dung upon your faces, yea so
shall your blasphemies, lies, and flatteries (which your Addresses are stuffed
withal) be upon you and your Brethren.
of the Faith and them etc.

The Priests and others of Lancaster, Liverpool, Priston and Wiggan in
Lancashire, Addressed likewise to R. C.
WHerein they expressed the sadness of their of their hearts at the news of the
death of his Renowned This is rather expressed by you, as your formality in your
style of writing, then in the simplicity and sincerity of your hearts.
Father, and do render their most humble acknowledgements This was because you
would not be behind your Brethren, in Addressing and flattering, what ever you
were in practicing and Performing.
to his Highness, the noblest branch of that Illustrous Stock, and
congratulate him as the inheritor of his Fathers spirit But so large a measure
of its policy he had not, and therefore was he lightlier betrayed by such
fawning, flattering, deceitful tongued, and lying lipt men as you are, who
might have showed more wisdom by keeping of silence, then you have by uttering
what you have writ in your contemptible Address, Plsal. 31. 18.
as well as dignity.

Further (they say) they look upon him as the precious How long did you look
upon him to be precious, and what was it that made him so in your eyes, if not
his countenancing you in your dishonest gain, Parsonag^-houses, T^the, and his
allowing you to execute your wills upon the innocent and harmless people among
you*
person upon whose safety the right interest of establishment both in Church If
it have depended upon such as him, then the great unse^tlement (that has been
both in Church and Estate for many years) is not to be adm^red at; but such as
you who have been active in contriving, plotting, and conspiring against one
power after another, have been the chief instruments that have obstructed the
establishment of the Nation in p^ace.
and State depend, and under God the repairer of their breaches And when you
have made breaches and caused distractions in the Nation, then has your eyes
been upon, and your cries they have been unto the powers of the earth* who
could not make up and repair the breaches so fast as you made them: And
therefore has the Nation been unsettled, and the inhabitants in many parts of
it unestabl^shed in peace, love, and unity. For when the Lord has appeared
for the throwing down of that which his hand was against, then you have sought
to establish and build it again: And when he has manifested his power among
his people, in order to the rearing and setting up again the Tabernacle of
David, then you like Rehum, Shimshai, and Haman, have by your words and
writing^, instigated and (...) up both Parliaments, Protectors, Counsels and
Committees against such a people, even as they beforementioned did, as you may
read at large, in Ezra 4. 9. 12. 13, etc and Ester the 3. 8. 9.
and prime preserver of their Rights and Liberties etc. And do promise to
uphold him in the supreme dignity as their undoubted Prince and Leader, with
the utmost hazard Sundry of you as It is well known did hazard in part, both
your lives and estates with George Booth, but I have not, heard of any of you,
that have hazarded either with him according to your promise; but I perceive
you are of your Brethrens mind in Cumberland, in having a desire to go hand in
hand with your brethren, whether it be in plotting, or conspiring, in rising,
or insurrections, in flattering or deceiving, in lying or blaspheming, or what
else soever; but withal I would you knew this, That if you partake of their
si^s, so must you also of their plagues.
of their lives and estates.

The Priests of Cheshire and others of the inhabitants of that County Addressed
to R. C.
WHerein they twice expressed they cordially, though in the rear of Englands
Mourners, join in a real deep resentment of their incomparable loss Though
many of you counted it loss in your Addresses; Yet did you not count it gain
in your hearts, notwithstanding your pretended faining sorrow and mourning.
in the decease of his illusterous Father, on whose shoulder the good hand of
providence had laid the Government Was that your real faith and belief, or did
you not rather dissemble when you spoke or wrote these words.
of these Nations, and that their fear of spliting in the fall of his said
Highness had risen to a higher tide, but that he his serene Highness
succeeded in his stead as a skilful pilot But when the winds of your selfish
expections came contrary, he with all his ^kill and serenity could not convoy
you into your much desired carnal security; so upon the great deeps of
confusion, where he found you rouling, did he leave you, and had much a do to
escape himself the wrath of your indignation which began to kindle against him,
notwithstanding all your flattering addresses and fair pretenses and many
promises that you and your brethren made in the same, which at this day will
tend to your shame.
to guide that Vessel, (wherein their chief concernments were embarked) into
the desired Haven.

And they also said, they hoped that God had designed him While you hoped he
would carry on your design, you could unanimously flatter him with your lying
tongues; but when you saw he wanted power to encourage and defend you in your
^^^shly Liberties, then did you desert him and his Government.
in special mercy to the advancement of his Glory, the propagation of the
Gospel, the vindication of this Truth against heresy, error, and the
encouragement of Magistracy and Ministry, and defense of their Rights, Laws and
Liberties, and so promised to yield entire obedience to his Government.

The Priests and others of Salop County Addressed to R. C.
WHerein they said, happy may that Nation be called of whose late chief
magistrate it may be justly said, Gloririous things are spoken of thee That was
while his Son bore rule, that such as you spoke deceitfully of him; but what
things are now spoken concerning Your Moses even by Your brethren, even things
that are not glorious but notorious.
, etc. a Moses who through the good hand of God with him, not only led them
out of the land of Egypt If we see You returned again into those things which
he brought You ou^ o^, as the Common Prayer Book and other things which many of
You came out of in his days, may we not then conclude from Your own words,
that You are gone back again into Ae^ypt? But tell me (if You be really come
out of it as You pretend, then) wherefore have You sed so long upon ^ts leeks,
onions, and garlic? Have You been so long in the Wildern^sse as You pretend,
and have gotten no Manna yet which descended freely, but that you are
nece^^^ated to continue feeding to this present day upon Your Tithe and forced
maintenance, which the Israelites (that were so indeed) have loathed as
detestable for many Years.
, but himself attained to more then a Pisgah fight of the Land of Can^an, and
gave to them more then a taste of the clusters With clusters he sed You, but not
of the Grapes of Canaan which are sweet and pleasent to the taste, but with
bitter clusters which he gathered from the vine of Sodom in the fields of
Gomorrah, so that your Grapes wherewith he has sed You, have been as Grapes of
Gall, and not of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32. 32.
of its grapes into their cup, and they hoped that he would walk with the Lord
in the steps of his Father of most happy memory; and they declare their most
effectual prayers Your prayers have proved ineffectual and unhelpful to him;
And Your thus addressing to him for a very little season, will prove your
shame, upon whom the Lord has begun to power out contempt, which will be Your
portion.
shall be no ways wanting, with their faithful enendeavours, and ready
obedience, etc.

Thus it appears how they Addressed from sundry parts of the Nation unto R. C.
whom they applauded and extolled, and his help they craved, and he added
something to what his Father had done for them, by putting forth his helping
hand to support and uphold them by that unconsecrated way of Tithes, How the
Priests renoun^ed R. C. and his Government, when he could not help them
but behold his time was very short, and his help to them was very little; And
when he could help them no longer then did they decline from him, and renounced
his Government, notwithstanding their many promises which they made in their
sundry Addresses unto him.

Afterward when he was laid aside, then did they cry unto the Parliament and
the Army for help from them, but in this thing they were not all of one mind,
How they flattered the Parliament which let in their Spirits, and then they did
for them again, as others had done before.
for many of them plotted and conspired both against the Parliament that then
was, and against the Army also, and when they were discovered, and they and
their party subdued, then their Brethren excused themselves and flattered the
Parliament, who let in their spirits, and gave them thanks with other
flattering expressions, beyond what they gave to other petitioners; And that
Parliament did for them as others had done before them, thinking thereby to
appease their unruly spirits, and to satisfy their unsatiable desire by their
putting into their mouths, yet nevertheless they could not thereby quiet them,
but they stirred up and incensed the people against them, and shot their arrows
at them, and that was all the thank they gave them for the favor they had
shown them: And when they were overturned then was their faith abundantly
renewed, and great was their expectations from them that then were the supreme,
who countenanced and encouraged them, as others had done before them.

Thus all along have they fawned upon, and flattered the supreme Authority of
the Nation, How a lying Spirit in the Priests have often prevailed over the
Rulers of this king^dome though they have been warned of (...)
and that lying spirit wherewith they were possessed has mightily prevailed
time after time over the Rulers and Magistrates of the Nation; who have been
often forewarned by the Servants of the Lord, of that cup of fornication which
the Priests have put into their hands; And when they were inflamed with it,
then were they easily persuaded that the Lord was with them, when indeed he had
left them unto themselves, and then did they begin to turn their backs upon
their enemies, and were conquered without shedding of blood either with sword
or spear; And then some of them begun to see that those that had flattered
them, and had cried Peace unto them, and cried for help unto them against such
as could not uphold them, that those were the men that had betrayed them, and
those in whom they had reposed confidence, had dealt treacherously with them.

Note*
Now the most of those that they cried and petitioned unto for help, How they
that Priests cried for help against, y^^ stand, and how they that they cried
unto are fallen and broken How the Lords people have s^ffered both by
professors and profane.
are split and broken; And they whom they cried for help against, yet stand in
as much dominion, power, and Authority in the Truth of God as ever; what then?
had not they need that have been helped to take heed how they stand, seeing so
many as have helped them are already fallen and broken to pieces like a potters
vessel, surely if that stone upon which they have been broken that have helped
them do fall upon these Priests that have been helped, it will even grind them
to powder; And in that day they shall know that the Lord has a remnant among
them, for whose sakes he has reproved many of the mighty, and many of the
wise, who have gloried more in their wisdom and strength then in the Lord, who
has formed a people for himself in this Nation, who have been persecuted and
withstood both by Professors and profane Teachers, and have suffered both by
Priests and people of almost all sorts, either in one respect or another, yet
are they not destroyed, but are more in number then they were sundry years ago;
And many now begin to ^ear that they shall scaree escape the rod wherewith they
have been lashing others, but that they must have the same measure met unto
them which they have measured unto others, so that now they begin to adhere
much more unto us, ^ow many are nearer to recei^e the truth since they were
^based, th^n they were when they were exalted.
then heretofore, and are much more open to hear and receive the Truth, now
when they are dejected and excluded out of their places of preferment, then
they were when they had the power in their hands, and their swords upon their
thighs, when they little expected to have seen this dark and gloomy day which
is come upon them, wherein they can scarce see to work for the great foggy mist
which is arisen.

Note.
It was much observed, how that when they had enriched themselves with their
adversaries riches, and were become guilty of their abominations, and were set
down at ease in the flesh, then the pride of their hearts would not endure nor
suffer such men among them as were not for their design, How hard it was to
find a just man among them, when they that feared the Lord were cast out from
among them.
nor could not suffer their iniquities to go unreproved, then did they thrust
out such from among them, until a just and faithful m^n that feared God and
hated covetousness could scarce be found among them, and when they begun to
see how their strength, manhood and courage failed, then would they again have
had those to have joined with them, that before they had cast out from among
them, but thereunto they would not be persuaded, for they foresaw in the
eternal Light of the Lord, what the Lord was determined to bring upon them; and
therefore did they warn them often, but they seemed to them as Lot did unto his
sons in Law, Genesis 19. 14.
when he told them of the destruction of the City, he seemed unto them as one
that mocked.

Again it is to be observed, Note.
how that shame and contempt with fear and astonishment came upon them, when
the generality of Professors in the nation were bu^^^ng and exceeding active,
What befell Professors when they were at the height of their pride and
vainglory
yet they all could not be able to stop the floodgates which forceably were
broke open by a mightystream, which drove many before it even as cha^^e before
the wind, and then the Anchors of many Professors would not hold, but their
faith failed, and their hope perished, and their honor fell into the dust, and
their glory faded like a flower, their feasting soon turned into fasting, their
rejoicing was turned into mourning, and their joy into heaviness even in one
day, surely this was the Lords doing, which was indeed mavelous in our eyes
and when these things happened unto them, these that had been their friends
became their enemies, and those whom they had looked upon to be their
adversaries, proved their harmlessest friends; yet so doleful and terrible was
the day that came upon them, that they knew not whom to trust nor whom to
believe, nor in whom to confide; How deceitful they pr^ved one unto another in
the day of trial.
many proved so treacherous and d^ceitful, so unstable and inconstant, that
they were ready to betray one another to save themselves, and then they begun
to perceive where the Judas spirit was, that was entered into their professed
Friends, and with which they were leavened, then did the Lord recompense that
into their own bosoms which they had given as a portion unto others.

Thus has the Lord already dealt with many of our Perse^utors, by whom we have
suffered for conscience sake, yet many of them were eminent in profession when
it was held in reputation; but when they became persecutors of the innocent,
How the Lords anger was kindled against them when they became persecutors.
the Lord began to be angry with them, and the fire of his jealousy begun to
burn against them, and shame and confusion of face came upon them for their
unfaithful dealing with the Lord and with his people; Now oh that others by
their fall would take warning and not for the future form weapons against the
Lord and against his anointed, least they be turned into their own bowels.

And as for us that fear the Lord, Note.
who for many years have been a suffering people, by the many powers that have
been in being in this Nation; If our sufferings must be prolonged and continued
under such now as have little profession of Religion in them, in comparison of
what others have had by whom we have already suffered, that they may fill up
the measure of their iniquity as others have done, by their persecuting of us
without a just case; The peoof Gods resolution
We do resolve and determine in the Name of the Lord to bear them with
patience, and not to resist them no more then we have resisted others, but
shall commit our cause unto the Lord, who leaves us not comfortless in our
sufferings, which we have learned to bear with patience, having found them to
the furtberance of the Gospel of peace.

Yet this we can say in truth to the shame of many professors that we have
found more moderation and simplity in many, who make very little profession of
Religion, then we have observed in many of them, and in that particular we
counted them more noble then the rigid professors, Wherein some few that are
^ow in ^ower ^ave ap^eared ^ore no^le then ^any pro^essors.
who have been trying us, but now they must be tried; yea some of them have
tasted already of that cup which they put into our hands, and without doubt
many of them must drink of it, except they renounce their Principles, and
become conformable again to that which many of them (several years ago) have
renounced and rejected, which if they do, their folly will thereby the more
appear, and so much the more shame and contempt will be rendr^d unto them, and
this we have seen already fulfilled upon them, who have added affliction unto
the bonds of the afflicted, and they have increased the sufferings of the
oppressed, instead of easing them when an opportunity was put into their hands,
wherein they might have done good, but their hearts not being right before the
Lord their day was shortened; What is ^oreseen that will ^efall them.
And many of them shall be oppressed with a sore oppression, by them that are
cruel, and their oppressions shall be a vexation to them, even as they have
been to others; And this they shall find to be the word of Truth unto them, by
one of those people that have suffered by them* in whose behalf I can say we do
as freely forgive them, ^ow free^y they that have ^uffered (...) them,
^nforgive them, and ^nfained (...) they desire their ^elfare.
as we did desire to be forgiven; And it is not their overthrow and downfall
that we can so much rejoice in, as we did desire to be forgiven; And it is not
their overthrow and downfall that we can so much rejoice in, as we could in
their salvation, and restoration unto their first love, that he might come to
reign in them and over them, whose right it is, who is King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, to whom be infinite Praises, Glory and Dominion over all, henceforth
and for ever. Amen.

THE END.

