THE CAUSES AND CURES Of an unwilling WAR.

OR, Justice awakened from Gowns to Guns Historified By Philalathec.

Omnia tentanda priusquam Armis.

Printed in the year. 1645.

To the judicious Reader who can, and the unpartiall, who will, truly Critic
the Times.
GReat are our sores, what Gallenist yet may,
Or Paracelsian prescribe a way
For our Curation, we do feel our evils
Like scandals base, up conjured, yea, like Devils,
But who, Malignant spirits can conjure down?
Known plagues to Court, Camp, City, Country Town!
To this I answer, sooner comes the Cures,
Known Causes when removed, Gallen assures,
(Hipocrates and Rasis hold this true,
Barlow, Fernelius, and Chyrurgians new,)
Now Papisme Cause is, more then heretofore
Why now, we wallow in our bloody Gore,
Like Cadmus brethren, and Polinices,
Mutually wounded by Etcocles,
In Barbarismes writ in blood, in postures cruel,
We vulnerate one another, in each duel,
In these domestic Wars, both hatched and fed,
By bloody Priests, (our home breast vipers bred.)
As in all Christian coasts, East, West, South, North.
Rome her Palladium Pretended to be sent from Pallot.
fatal, has sent forth
As full of Treasons, which State Ruins seeks,
As was the Trojan Horse, once full of Greeks.
Chiefly with Jebusites, it is stuffed and gorged,
Whose Tongues and Pens, black Treason have disgorg'd,
And vomited even in the face of Kings,
And tide their Crowns to Miters, by strange strings.
England and Ireland, and often Warwrackt France,
(Where Jesuits, their Factions did advance,)
With Lacerate Germany, and Palatinate,
Have felt their Tongues, Teeth, Matchevillian Pate,
So have the Belgicks, Anno 1584 1594. 1598. so the Belgic Chronicles, Tom. 1.
page 519.
80 Moravia,
Bohemians, Suevians, and Silecia. Anno 1608 1609.

And all parts else, where they a foot have got,
And sent poor Praiest unto the pot.
Their Tragic plots, prancks, Pageants so well known,
Felt, feard'd, I need not rip, they may be shown
Writ on truth's Columes, with the blood of Kings
And States: Romes vassalized underlings:
In England, Ireland, now (both Lands of Ire)
How have they kindled their infernal fire?
More hot then Aetna, or Vesnvius burning,
(Which Pliny choked) which turns our mirth to mourning.
We hang our Harps, (our heart strings broke) upon
The whipping Willowes of proud Babylon,
What their sanguinolent Agents, old and new
Their Superstitious Factors, with the crew
Of miscreant Malignants, Cavilliers
Have done (of Heaven and Hell devoyd of fears)
How they have made our wounds, how to be cured,
I salves prescribe: the chief, Charles rightly Lured,
This high flowne Eagle, whilom, (who now smites
Our Doves,) reclaimed be from Harpies Kites,
Who his good Genius poison, and his nature
Crossed mould, to be their own-game-pouncing-creature,
Then shall the plucked Innocuous birds have rest,
And quietly sit and sleep in theirowne nest,
As in Augustus days, and in the times
of Solomon, Grace, Peace shall bless our Clymes.
Besides all know, what Court Dames do, brave Beagles,
More fierce then Males, (like shee-Haukes, Wolves and Eagles)
To help Nimrodian's, Nero's, Readiness, and Caine's,
To dye white Albion red, in bloody grains:
Confederates with God-dam-mee's, Pluto's Proctours,
Witches and Conjurers. and the Devils Doctors.
What I have done, these pests for to discover,
Peruse these Shedules, if thou be'st truths lover;
Open thy unpartiall eye, try gold from dross,
See what is Englands stouping Plague, Curse, Cross,
In just scales poize the Cause, if thou be'st wise,
and see on whom, our British blood now lies.
And if from Babylon our Land now be
Made an Acheldema, out of her Flee;
Detest the Favorites of the Scarlet Whore,
Our bloods, our goods who pluck, and sqneaze us poor!
To the Honorable, and ever Honored Colonels, Captains and Commanders in
these Defensive Wars.
THese muzzle puzzle Momists, hook the Jaws
Of Doegs: who accuse your Righteous Cause;
These spure your speeds, Anchour (sans fluctation)
Your right resolves for Church, State, Reformation,
These whet your Swords, fuellize your zealous Fires
For Grace, Peace, Truth, which wished, my loves, desires;
All my poor best, my Martial mind, tongue, pen,
Are with you, for you, brave resolved Men.
Fight you for us, we will your Trophies raise,
Crown your devoires, with Prayers, Praises, Bays.
H. Redivivus.

The Causes and Cures of an unwilling War, etc.
LOng Albion flourish't, in a Lawreat Peace,
With her fair Daughters, Plenty and Increase,
Bright did Heavens Sun, in our Horizon shine,
With influence, of Moral and Divine
Blessings, and gifts; the Muses and the Graces,
Moses Minerva wise, fixed in their places;
Spoke her the Wonder, yea, the Mistress great
For adjuments and ornaments complete
To all the welkin World, tho her confine,
Were but an Angel in the Western line;
Scarce known in former Times, so far remote
From Continents: yet late of such high Note
To Foreign Countries was she paramour,
The garden of the World, for every flower:
A Sun she was amongst the lesser Stars,
Splendent and Lustrous both in Peace and Wars:
Fruitful in sons, whody'd in Honors bed,
With Dromedes hands, Ulysses head.
Her Essex, Sydneys, Talbots, Howards, Praise
I need not sing, all Crowned with Martial Bays,
With millions since, out or their ashes sprung,
As worthy Virgils pen; and Homers song,
As that Achilles, or Anchises son;
Hector, or he that killed the Misrmidon.
Here Tempe was, Hesperides here, the Fleece
Called Goldens not in Colchos, nor in Greece;
Our Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Hampshire Wool,
In staple Traficke, this spoke to the full.
Nay, here was Gideons flerce, and Goshen bright,
The world blood wett and dark, we dry and light:
Cape of good hope, Elizian fields, withal
Fortunate I Will, we might our Albion call.
She was a Rubie in the Ring enrolled,
Of the glob'd Earth; a Pearl right set in gold?
Foreigne and neighboring Continents, Coasts, Isles,
Did Idolize her glories; beg her smiles:
A Crystal glass she was where other Nations
Saw mental spots, and civilized their fashions,
And luster from her took, as Cynthia bright,
From Phoebus borrowes herrefulgent light.
She Was an Eagle which did sore above
Her circling Birds, awed all by fear, or love.
Hence was she proud Spaines scourge; Romes Cross or Cui^^,
Wild Irelands Curb, and the Low Countries Nurse.
Her wodden walls, and her Sea horses rid
On Neptunes back, Tritons their homage did,
She the Seas Mistress might in every Dittie,
Be styled, Sea-wed, more then the Maiden Veni^^
City.
But my Thalia now, in new strains must
Recant her Glories late, laid in the dust;
Brittle as glass, be our Terrestrials all,
Up down like Wea-scales; tossed like Tennis ball;
Ebbing and flowing, like to floods and seas,
On Eagles wings they fly, which way they please;
Like snow built Castles, how they soon melt down,
Waxing and waining like the pale face't Moon:
Oh how on Reeds, Bogs, Quags on them we build!
Our helps, hopes, peace, now be we taught and schoul'd.
Englands sweet waters, now like Jordan turn
Brinish; and Red sea like, they bacward run.
Changed are our calmes to storms, here shoe does wing
Here ^ad Melpomine, begins, to sing,
Her dolorous Accents; and he tragic Tones
Like to the Turtl^s sads, Hien^^ groans,
The moanes of Bitturne, Pelican and Swan,
Of nest robbed Nightingales, or dying man,
She sympathizeth, Jeremies sad streines,
And Ovids Tristia, suite with her complains.
Albions Halcion Days, they Last not long,
Dog-dayes succeeded, which quite spoiled her Song,
And all the music of her joys, turned frets,
Eclipst her Sun, and her Solary heats.
Dissolved into a black, and pitchy cloud
With rained blood, from which we could not shroud
Our plagued selves, no more then from Joves Ire
Of Ralne the worldings, Sodom from strange fire;
From Dan we to Beersheba, we do reele,
And plagues like Egypt, Ammon, Moab, feel.
Chiefly the Sword, which eats our flesh, drinks blood,
Changing our waters to a crimson flood,
As best effect of sin, which brings all evils,
Turns Heaven to Hell, sads Angels, glads the Devils.
Sin is that Agrippina, which has bred
Our Nero's, which their Mothers blood have shed.
Sin worst of Vipers, now has hatched each pest,
Which tears his Countries breeding feeding breast.
Sins to us Sodoms grapes, and gall afford,
Sins are our colloquint, our poisoning gourd.
Sins are our French Fleas, our chief unctions marring,
Which oiled the Crown; our tuned strings, turn they jarring,
Our Peace to Wars; in Irish Bogs of woe
They plunge us still, for up to Heaven they goo
With Ninive's; and cry for vengeance more,
Their guilt and stain, since slightly we deplore.
Our Harps (our hearts) unstring, we sing harsh notes
Like to the Scritch-owles cries, the Ravens croakes:
Even changed be in a trice, our songs of Sion,
To Babels sighs; incensed Iudahs Lion
For hundredth years a Lamb, now seems to tear us,
Nemesis provoked, he could no more forbear us;
Our sugared Wine to Vinegar, now turns,
Wrath brings (sin poisoned) to untimely urnes.
Millions of peccant souls, who in the dust
Now sleep, (as Israel once) in graves of lust,
Besides these Abels, Naboaths, Zachariab's,
Slain by Rome, Neroes, Ahabs, Zedekia's.
But how may some say, did our Paradise,
Turn real Purgatory in a trice,
How did our Gold turn Dross, our Silver Tin,
How did Religion lose, Rebellion win.
How did we Peace (with Grace) quit at a clap,
Listen Nimrodian wiles, and Hells main^ trap;
For as I may, I will unrip a Fardle,
Would move a heart of Caucasus; melt Marble,
Yea into Niobe's, turn Jangling Jayes,
Heaven bred Urania, inspire my lays.
I have not drunk at Aganippe's Well,
Nor scaled Parnassus; I plain truth to tell,
Desire not Phoebus, not the sisters nine,
But the true Jove, for to direct each line,
Dropped from my pen like blood in piteous Ruth,
Whilst I anatomize the naked truth.
Thus thus; the Serpent enemy to Grace,
As to external, and internal peace;
Who betwixt God and man sew Ata's seeds
Of discord first; and still with wheat sowes weeds:
Hating Gods Image, in best Saints that were,
As Panthers doemans hated picture tear.
This Serpent by his spawnes long lodged in cells,
His Gundimers, Machivils, Achitophels,
Court Hammans, French Sanballats, Romes Tobiahs,
Deanes, Temporizing Doctors, Zedechiahs.
Prelates, Court Chaplains, Pasbures, Jer. 20. 2.
Amaziahs,
Hating pure Micha's 1 Kings 22. 24.
, Patriot Obediah's 1 Kings 18. 13.

(Church and State pillars) every Amos loving, Amas 7. 10, 11.

As Foxes Lambs, their flesh and fleece off shooving.
Helin, White; couzening Couzens, Laud, wretch't Wren)
With birds of such black feathers, pests of men,
As Simeon to Levi Genesis 49. 5.
, brethren bloody,
Drunk with Romes Philters, till braine-sick, and giddy;
As Crows intoxicate with nux vomica,
And Fish with oculus India,) in mad play:
Aiming to turn Grace and Religion both
Into vain Rites Gal. 4. 9. Co. 2. 20. 21, 22.
, as Bottle-Ale to froth;
Or as some Sycamore Trees, their fruits to leaves,
As bad grounds change to cares, and weeds wished sheaves;
(As Owls have little flesh, but feathers all,)
These Sinons, Simons Acts. 8. 23.
, Sathanists, with gall
Full gorged; with vilde Malignants, like to these
Infected with the Frenchifi'd disease,
Of Spleen, Lust, pride,: Arminians Romanized,
Papized Prela^es, mainely Jesuitized,
With such Sampsonian Foxes Judge. 15. 14.
, linckt in Ire;
Gods planted Vines, (and Vinitors) to fire:
In hearts, hands, heads and tails, close chained in one,
Plotting with Pluto, sought to cast a bone
Twixt King and Parliament, with damned dintent,
From the sound Body, this great Head to rent:
They thought withal to Cyclops, his clear eyes,
That Poliphemiz'd (in Ulysses Guize)
They might escape Gunshot of the Laws strickt bent
From a Trienniall feared Parliament:
At Schoole-boyes and Ship squabs, who mad prancks play,
These feared the whip, and the correction day:
As much as Stewards false, Mat. 16. 2.
which do dissemble,
At thoughts of Audits strickt, do quake and tremble.
Yea Woodcocke like, a Mist they wished and watched,
With Finch on Windy-bancks, to fly, ere caught.
Wilmot and Digby, wily cubs and fly,
A Germane too, had fingers in the pie;
With many such, clear peace, who stirred, to mud,
To fish their own base ends in A^bions blood.
Aiming to purge out all, pure just and good,
Who for Religion, Laws and Justice stood.
Suggesting to the Lion, for their prey,
His right straight ready, and compendious way
To work his will, and give to lusts the day
Over all Laws, as Turkish Tyrants sway: Per^^^^ more quod libet lia cet.
Lanclavius dear but Turcicis.

Was to crush Puritanes: or cut them down
As Remora's to their ends; Foes to his Crown:
To bang up, hang up so, the sheapheards Dogs, Allusio olins Demostheuis suis
Atheniensibus.

That they like Wolves might worry, wroute like Hogs
Even where they list, without control or check,
Curb by no Laws, but by the Princes beck,
(Like Ianissaries who all powers withstand,
And move at their great Ottomans Command. Knolls in his Turkish History.

As Novices, hang at their Jesuits strings Vide Ignat. de obedientia Sect. 3,
5, 7, 15, 17. and Morpheum in vita Ignatii. Lib. 2, cap. 9

In blind Obedience, to poison Kings.)
So pind to Kings, as Vines unto their walls,
Ivies to Oaks, in risings or in falls:
Their King to be their Law, their Lord their God,
Their great Apollo; let him feel the rod,
Yea heading Axe, if any Puritan,
This Contradict; A Traitor call him than.
But Papists for their good and mild behavior,
In England, Ireland, France, Charles ought to favor;
Good Subjects, they their beards and brains do pledge
As ever any King hanged on his hedge:
(Sure of their Regal service, they may boast,
Done to their Pope and Queen in Patrickt Coast.)
Deep Politicians, then by this naught lose,
To change their Protestant Dublets for French hose;
Rotchets and Tippets for a Cardinals Hat,
(Parsons and Wolsey thought to gain by that:)
And so did Eccius, Piggius too, I wot,
Else had they not, against Luther been so hot:
But if the Puritanes stood, they knew right well,
God's Ark went up, they and their Dagon fell, 1 Samuel, 5. 3.

They and their mists should fade, their clouds decline,
In Gods right Worship, should the Gospel shine:
Gone were the counterfelts, brought to the Tests, Verum est index sui, and
ubiliqui.

The candle shows the thieves, it them molests.
These Cockatrices eggs, Esaias 59. 5, 6.
though whilst they hatch,
Ixtons clouds, Apud Lucianum in Dialogis.
they for French-Iuno catch
Shadows for substance, those most venerable
Dorbels have graspt, or claspt with Esops Fable:
(Goate-like) so high they climb, on old State walls,
Till they have caught Hamans Esther 6. 13
and Wolsey falls:
Yea with a vengeance, by Afiraea's frown,
Our Empsons, Dudltys, Mortimers come down;
As Spencers once, and that Cat, Rat, and Dog,
Who this spung'd kingdom swai'd, ruled by a Heg. Rich. the 3.

Chiefly great Charles, his safety so builds on
Each ^^^hob^amiz'd 1 Kings 2, 10.
young Phaton.
And Ammons lonadabs, 2 Samuel 13. 3, 4.
(neglecting so
True Ionathans, 1 Samuel 18. 1.
and Hushays 2 Samuel 15. 37.
to his woe:)
As if with Inck and Tar, he thought to wash
The face of Church and State: or gave a mash
Of poudered Lead, unto the sick or sore:
In Court or Camp: or swam unto the shore:
On milstoues in a storm: for in this fashion,
His Papiz d Champione, stand for Reformation.
His heart not Agents, so Religion love,
As Hounds do Hairs; Cats, Mice, or Hawks the Dove,
These our State Empericks by their verbal diet,
(Little acquainted ere with Doctor Quiet:)
Not purging, but procuring the Kings evil,
As Hels maine Organs, Factors for the Devil,
So stirred ill humors, that our fixed peace long
Fled: which to mourning, turned our Patriots song.
Who grieving credulous Charles, should give an care
To such his worst of snakes and vipers were.
And that he should be carried on their fist,
(Hauke-likehood-winckt, to pounce, even whom they list.
Since Dionisius once by Diceles,
And Aristippus; Sycophants like these,
And Peers and Princes, more, Read the catalogue of them in brusomus his
examples. Lonicer in his Theater. Tex tor in his Officina. and Fulgosus, titulo
de idulations
by flatterers fell,)
By Antidotes they thought to care him well:
But more, since he in Rhehoboams case,
Seduc d was, yea bewitched, by Counselors base,
Chief, least that he should taste (uxorious mere,)
Wise Salomons 1 King. 11. 8, 9. Nehem. 13. 26.
and Theodosius cheer, What mischiefs heritreall women have brought to Kings,
and wrought in Courts: read Cytreus upon Iud. page 374 Sigfridas Saccus bis
sermons. 107. 3. par. 4. p 760 and Melanctons cronicles lib. 2. page 2. p 6.
page 256. 269.

(As now their sour sauce, each griey'd Subject feels)
Ere all were shipwrackt: which now ran on wheels,
Themselves, Church, State, to save, from threatening harms,
Their Prince to rescue chief, from poysouing charms
Of Parasites, who for to plunder moneys,
Drawn from rich mines, even still make ropes of honeys,
For these ends: (tho known soes, to all Alarms)
Our Tribunes were infor't to take up Arms.
As hunted David did 1 Samuel 22. 2.
and Mordachy, Est. 1. 1, 2, 3

Jews, Romans Ever fighting, pro aris and facis.
Christians, in all history.
Sincereason, (nature) has, to men: beasts, suited,
Defensive Arms, unjustly prosccuted: Fugiunt nociva.

Bees, Wasps, Asps use their stings, the crawling wormo
Will save a life: Fish, Birds, Brutes, Serpents turn,
Their powers, their policies, against grim death
Lion and Locusts yield unwilling breath:
Who then can justly tax, their acts, aims, end,
A State by Wars last refuge to defend.
To steare the Churches ship from threatening rocks,
Where all ways else: were words but spoke to blocks,
And Adders cares: and such effects did find.
As for to sow the dust, and reap the wind.
As colors which were showed unto the blind,
Yea Physics, which the desperate do not mind
In this case, tell me, pollitick Gallio:
To save themselves, what they distressed, should do;
Should they lie down, and cry with Craven notes,
Come Saulasts, Ababs 1 King. 21.
cut our sheepish throats.
Come Doogs, come Court Dogs, and false accuse us,
Then kill us if Saul bid 1 Samuel 22. 9, 10, 18.
more to misuse us:
Come Nimrods Genesis 10. 9.
come God-dam-ruee's, slash our pates,
Come Romes Brandetties; French Assassinates:
You are the Foxes, we will be the Sheep:
You Wolves, homo homini Lupus.
we Lambs, we scarce can bleat or weep.
(Acteons Fate) you Poulcats, we will let in
To worry all, without trap, batt, or Gin:
You are the hounds, we timorous hairs, or dear,
We will not use our heels yet; shoot us here.
Just at a stand, each Roundhead, Sound-head think,
A Rufus, Abbots shafts may more blood drink.
Hit home; we will not run, nor squat, nor double,
Tapez or Croize; to save a life from trouble.
The bolts wkich you do make; if Caesar shoot,
Are Jove's Procul a love, procul a fulmine.
own darts, we can say nothing no't.
Just must all be, that is done by Alexander,
Tho drunk at Babylon: he cannot wander Alexander fecit, orgo justimest.
:
Tho burn Persepolis, and Clitus kill Curtius and Plutarchus in Alexandres.

Yea learned Calisthenes: Just is his will,
(As Aeolus) luno Mihi jusse capes^ere fas est.
who dare him gainsay;
Tho that a Lais, Thais he obey,
Albion, must Persian like, make lusts, her Laws.
Alas we are Simplicians, Dulmans Dawes!
Kill Naboaths, Esays Sawne in pieces by Manasses.
take Uriahs wife:
Squeaze, plunder goods, bloods, liberty and life
Of most and best: (for wolves on fat sheep prey,
And fat bucks flesht dogs single, Woodmen say.) q bunishing of best men in
Rome and Athens.

Be Ostracism: 1 Samuel 11.
up conjured; Hell renewed.
Roman Triumvirs, cannot be eschued:
Athenian Tyrants, nor yet Cateline:
Seylla, nor Dracoe's Laws Said to be writ in blood
can we decline.
Egypts Taskmasters Exodus i. 13. 13. Cha. 5. 6
may not be gainsaid,
Commotions of Array, must be obeyed.
In Turkish cruelty, tho squeazing all,
Chopping rich Bashawes, into gobbets small.
Strangling great Begglerbegs In Lanclavius, and purchase his pilgrimage.
by active mutes,
Yea Mustapbaes Mortuus est Mustapha proverbium tragicum apud Turcas.
when Ottomans will so suites:
If Cannibals, Hannibals, Goths, Vandals, G^^es,
Be regaliz'd, we must endure their heats;
Submit our necks, to a Vatiman hate:
Though sprung from France or Rome, yea Rhyne of late.
Prince Rupert Rake-all, is a younger Brother,
He must return rich home, there is no way other,
In his squeaz'd soil The Palatinate.
to make his weak wing good,
But our plucked Golden plumes, sleept in our blood.
Each Croesus, Crassus Of their vast weal. (...) read Brusonius, Textor
Fulgosus. titulo de divitibus.
Midas, Phidias,
Must be a rinden, stridden, golden Ass.
Each rich one, must be Rebel, or Roundhead,
As once a Tyrant, fits with all one bed.
The shortest stretching long, by racking strength,
Cutting them shorter, who had too much length.
As once Farnefius A commander under the Prince of Parma.
vowed in Eighty eight
His sword, all English bred should hew down right,
And that in Lutherans blood, his horse should swim,
(An Irish spirit Pythagoriz'd was in him.)
If Ass (or Mule) be fat, the Lion swears,
That metamorphizd Horns; be his long ears:
As in prime Paganish, Arrian persecutions,
Our tears must be our svvords Arma nostra, preces and lachryma
our resolutions
With Primitive Saints, must passive be: we parts
Of Abell act, tho Cains should pierce our hearts.
Our chopping cramb'd Court Chaplains, will impeach us
Of Treason: our selves saving: for they teach us,
God that Augustus gave, Domitian sent,
If Kings be Storkes, the Frogs must be content.
Jupiter sends no Logs, vevv Caesar's Line
From Nero, to peace-planting Constantinea. Apud Eusebium in vita Constantini

What Christians ere resisted, good cause why,
Their powers were vveake, besides what History,
Shows any Paganish King, in any Region,
By oath was to defend Christ's true Religion.
Yea under Deeiue, Traian, Attilas,
Neiva, proud Cosro's, steme Totilos. Victor and prosopius passim ale
persecutione Vandalocum.

Theodoricke, Genserious, all more
Of Romans, Goths? Christ's sheep and lambs who tore,
Where ere were Parliaments of patriots?
Tyrants to curb, and save poor Christians throats?
Who by sanguinolent Doctors, now must bleed:
From blood wrung Texts, which come not, in my Creed.
Since all irrationalls: by art, knew well
To save poor life, the Crow will powder smell.
Cranes, wild ducks, wilde-Geese too, keep centinell,
To warn the flocks to fly, ere killed pell mell.
Yea when that growing sicknesses disease them,
Nature to Birds, Brutes, dictates De quibus fusius apud Tholosanum in synt
ag^^^te artis murabilis.
what will ease them;
The Weazell, Bue, sick Dogs (Cats) five leaved grass,
Does cure: Hemlocks the Mauritanian Ass.
Spiders heal Apes, and Munkies stomach sick:
And man's dung Panthers, which they seek to lick:
So honey physics Bears; Doves, Partridge, Jayes,
Are purged by lawreall leaves, experience says.
Yea, Pliny, Gesner, and Physicians note
How physicail cures, man from the creatures got.
And every animal still, does what it can
To save or cure a life; but passive man
Must yield his yoaked neck, to strangling thieves,
Lie in the ditch, and seek for no relieves.
Just safeties must but cloakes be, from Heaven showers,
Reast (forsooth) he must not higher Powers;
Tho turned to Tyranny, as Wine to dregs:
These Doctrines feed a Church, like rotten eggs.
When that the Lion roares, best beasts must fear,
When Eagles please to prey, poor birds they tear:
Thus must our Peers and Stae, be fooled to death,
Unless inforct Arms, save their vital breath:
Court Sycophants, by smooth Sophisme, all would Chut,
To make us lie down, till our throats were cut:
Which since it is a damnable conclusion:
To bring on all, Phaeronian confusion;
Our vvifer Ephorists, from Religion, Reason,
Grace, Nature, Laws, took Arms without least Treason,
In just defense of Parliament and Laws,
To save the Land from Minotaurioen jaws:
From Papiz'd, Irish, French, and Atbions soil,
Who all cry still, up Moah to the spoil: 2 King. 2.

Withal, as with one bolt, to kill outright
Two Birds: and two walls with one pencill white:
They had another just, politic end,
From foreign soes the Land for to defend.
From Turk, Pope, Spain: who in their hot desires,
Dance at our frets; and warm at our wished fires;
Gardiners, ay'md withal, to root out weeds,
Cockles and darnell Infelix Lollium sterilesque dominantur avena.
with their stems and seeds.
Even known Delinquents. Lastly, to protect
These Laws, which gross Delinquents Gross Delinquents ought to be punished
by Gods Law. Lev. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 17. 10, 11, 12, 21. 3 and cha. 24. 13. By the
Cannon Law L. prospiciendum F. de poenis. And Politicians verdict Bodin lib. de
Rep. cap. 10. number. 100. and War. ab Erenb. de Reg. subd. cap. 3. number. 3.
should correct:
For take away our Fundamental Laws,
And take the bit and bridle from the jaws,
Of Horse, Mule, Cammell: from the pendent vine,
Osyers, and Hops: the props on which they twine;
Yea, from their strengthening oaks, weak Ivies slip.
Nay more, helm, anchor, mast, take from the ship:
And let it be exposed, by waves, and shocks,
When Boreas blusters, on the splitting rocks:
No Pilot then, no Palamure affoard it,
When mutineers would rob it, Pirates board it.
Yea pull from houses their foundations strong,
And like to Dagons Shrine, lay all along:
From cities too, their circling walls pull down,
Castles, ports, forts, the strength of each Mart town.
(As if into Thebes, Babylon, Rome, Troy,
Medes, Goths, Greeks, Turks, were let in to destroy.)
Yea nerves and sinnewes, from the body take,
When Laws we do, annihilate, scorn, break,
For none but dolts, in grace, art, natures schools,
Do think that Kings rule men, like beasts, and mules
Which they may yoke; whip, draw, drive as they will,
And as mere brutes, whom (when) they please may kill:
Without more cause or ground, then Butchers give,
Why they let ox, sheep, cow, or dye, or live.
And that men may not in Elias case, 2 King. 1. 9, 10.

David's 1 Samuel 20. chapter 21, 22. 23
and Jonathans Sam. 14. 15.
resist acts base:
Kind, bloody: when rage rules, and reason sleeps,
(Then Hagar beturn'd out Genesis 21. 9. 10.
tho Ismael weeps.)
What Is Regal, if Illegal? well we know,
Sydrack and Misacke, did disdain to bow,
In idolizing Dan. 3. 18.
to great Babels King.
Daniel is Gods too, (not man's underling: Dan. 6. 8, 9, 10.

So Martyrs, Prophets, and Apostles: all
Confessors did to God Acts 5. 28, 29.
not men, rise, fall.
Romes Praetor must, against Traian Plutarchin Trajane.
use the sword,
If crossed by Law be his Command, Act, Word.
Oh wash your brains with Saige, you Tibers Dawes,
As Kings rule men, know Kings are ruled by Laws:
Withouten which, like Tiber, Tigris, Thames,
Yea like svvel'd Sea, they overflovv their Realms,
Noah's and Ogyges flood: their devastations
Do emblem: yea Ducalions inundations.
Oh then they clapper-clavv the best, long hated,
As lions, balls, and bears, let loose, when baited.
But for to sparr more close, to put a hook
On the Malignants nose, right led, to look
That Parliaments, be now the powers supreme,
(Tho Rotchets Rebels, Robes, long held cross Theme.)
Yea Ephorists and Tribunes glob'd in one,
Not Popes) may plant, supplant Read their power affirmed and confirmed by
(...) de Senatus. Alibusius Polit. a page 193. 194 ad page 223. Junior (...) de
vindice lib. 1. 9. 1. Borrh. de author magniconsilii number. 170. Haitoman in
histan Franc. cap. 10 and 10
a Regal throne:
Chiefly Electives peccant, may go down,
As often the Germain, and Polonian Crown.
The great Venetian Dakes, the Palatine,
Ill governed, to others may decline:
With all, the power successive cannot stand,
If that the svvord be in a tyrants hand.
Wolves, Tigers, Heriticks, Fools they bridle may;
Oppose, depose some; Politicians say.
Timpler, Althusius, Bodin; Tholosens,
A^^sius and Daneus, make it plain:
With Lipsius, Coquier, and the rest; Inditers
Of Politics; of Common-vvealths the Writers:
Chiese Junior Br^^us in his rods and whips
For Tyrants; De vindice Tyrano^um.
Where he, as with pincers nips,
Wolvish Caligula's, Demitions,
Nero's, Herodians Hero l, Antipas, Agryppa Asalonnes.
Dionisians
Phalaris, Busiris, and our crookt-back Dick,
Hastings and Buokingham, who (like Boares) did stick.
Bohemlab's Wenceslans, Jewer Uzziah,
Polands Popiell, treacherous Athalia.
Phereus, Cosroes, Basilides,
With millions more, who sympathiz'd with these,
In pride, lust, blood, in books enumerated, Of these and other Tyrants
deposed or slain, read Melancton Chron. lib. 2. Iosep. anti^. lib. 13 c. 18.
Daneus lib. 6 Polit. cap. 3. ^ Aelianus varioe, hist. li. 15. Gorlicius in
polit. axioni. 116. Lipsius li 6. polit. cap. 5. Bodin lib. 2. de Rep.

Who from ill-governed Crowns were dislocated.
Our Beuclark Prin; (after whose pen to write,)
Were Iliads after Homer to indite:
Whose works unparalleled, unanswered be,
Like to learned Reynolds, Romes Idolatry De Idolairia Romans ccolesin.
:
He proves the Case, by demonstration plain,
From England, Scotland, Italy and Spain:
From Polland, Denmark, Hungary and France.
Bohemia too: in passing measures dance,
Of Avirice, Lust, Injustice; blood; each King
Was curbed or cured; when they abused their sting:
Like master Bees in Hives, they had no Thrones,
But were extruded Of the Parliamentary power in our Nation, read Case in his
politics li. 3. ca. 15. and Sir Tho. Smith in his English. Government, lib. 2.
sect. 2. and how exercised against Hen. 3. H. 6. and Rich. 2. read Pollidor
Virgil, Hist. li. 11 Walsin. in R. 2. Hollinshed in H. 6. and Westminster. in H^the 3.
like to Wasps and Droanes.
Shepherds and dogs, if once with wolves they side
Against the sheep, what sheep can this abide.
How the great Pan (just Jove) does much adhorre it,
Hanging or banging, it is to good for it.
But if the shepherd do the wolf detest,
Why walks he with him? hugs him in his breast
Chiefly the wolf called Rebel, that' the worst
Of Irish Wolves; of God and man accursed.
Who like a Curtian gulf, and Minotaured,
Not only many millions has devoured
Of brutes and sheep; but ore the world has sluncke,
With Hecatombes of Christians blood, late drunk.
And like a good flesht dog, unworm'd, and wood,
Is now hugged, fed, to gulf more righteous blood
Of every Naboath and Nathaniell,
Who will not side with Rome, Pope, Prelate, Hell.
If any cavilling Thrase, make his vaunt,
His Regal Pastor, is a Protestant,
And has confirmed his Faith by solemn oath,
By Edicts, and by Proclamations both;
That he has neither Jesuits tongue, nor pate,
(As Arrius once) for to equivocate.
More then his Prelates, (on whose sleeves he pins,
His Rites, Religion, Faith: War, Bloud-sheds, Sins,
To carry them in postures odd, or even,
As they poize dubious scales, to Hell or Heaven.)
Yet if a Protestant, great Coesar be,
With the Papiz'd, why holds he sympathy?
Such is the man, as he, with whom he talks,
Italians say, but chief with whom he walks:
And Gods Word faith, which cannot be beguiled,
Together two walk not, unreconciled.
Though that the Swallow eat no corn, all knows,
What does she yet amongst the carrion Crows.
As the Clown told her, when their necks were wrung,
She bore a sad part in their fatal song.
Sound sheep, sound men, sound apples get a spot,
And taint, by living, (lying) with the rot Est aliquid mali prop^er vicinum
malum, and dumvident l^es^s oculi, leduntur and ipsi.

And who to bad men's manners, be no strangers;
By their conversings, do incure their dangers Rev. 18. 4.

Why should Iehoshaphat in lawless war,
Assist an Ahab, an Idolater 1 Kin. 22. 4. 2 Kin. 3. 7.

Salve this sly Sophisters, with Papal prattle:
His life was well nigh lost Verse. 32.
in that mad battle;
Besides, he so far felt Astroea's rod,
That he was sore redargued by his God 2 Chr. 19. 2
.
But Cavilliers will cavil here, and prate,
Charles was distressed, and in a piteous strait:
(As once our English Edward, John, and Stephen;
Richard the Second to) and so strait driven
By his own Barons, who on him did War,
That he must seek for aid, both near and far.
And like a pit fallen man, might use the fist
Of Turk, Jew, Pagan, Popist, Polithist:
As one diseased to heal him in sound fashion,
May use his art, that's of a foreign Nation.
(Gallon, Hipocraies, of Gretian Race,
Razit or Avicen, Arabians base.)
This is a Gordian knot, Malignants think,
Put one may loose it, who does dream or wink.
For first Court Sycophants put him in the pit,
As all may see; who hood-winck not their wit:
His patriots too, firm friends, as pure as gold,
If on their helping hand he had took hold,
Had like to Reuben Genesis 37. 21.
, and to Ieremi's Ier. 38. 11, 12.
friend,
Soon hugged him out, and brought a calming end
To his feared storms; had kept him safe and sure,
(Tho Fears no fence have, Jealousies no cure.)
If his true friends then, (vainly thought his foes,)
Had frost-nipt in their buds, his self made woes?
What need had he to use his Mount'bancks more,
Who make his bloody salves worse then his sore.
But easy cries the child, whose lip does hang,
And soon we find a staff Facile est invenire baoulum, ut cedas canem.
a dog to bang:
And we may in the streightest bulrush got,
(As Mice make holes in walls) soon make a knot.
As easy, Kings: as combats from the barrel,
With their best Peers may pick or make a quarrel.
Foxes, tho at the fountains head they drink,
Lambs at the streams Fabula Aespi.
, themselves yet wronged may think.
(From reason and Religion, tho much swerving)
Base flattery gets respect Obsequium omicos, veritas odium parit.
, more then deserving:
In Courts, in Camps, in Colleges, in Schools,
Shows more then substances, please flattered Fools:
But as Kings sow, they reap Gal. 6. 7.
, self do, self have,
Better to make no wounds, then balmes to crave:
Better sit still, then fall; for factious fellows,
In clawing Kings, but rope themselves for th'Gallowes,
As Empson, Dudley did, and Gavestan,
Mortimer, Spencers Haman, crushed each one?
Ill counseled Kings, spliton the wracking shelves
Of their self-will: by none hurt, but themselves:
Causeless on others, tho the blame they lie:
As children full dugs sucking, then most cry.
If lawless Kings will do, what do they should not,
Tho Kings, they suffer must, even what they would not.
(No more then Angels, high Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Casman his Angelographia, ^^d
Smal^alds look of Angels.
, now turned low Devils)
They are not free from active passive evils;
Torrents of woes break on them, still ground winning,
Which they might well have stopped in the beginning:
Soon is the fracture knit, the broken bone,
The fresh wound balm'd; scarce cured long let alone.
Who on the hill top stands, he needs not run
Down, neck break, cliffy rocks, he well may shun:
But if he will run down: his wilful race,
Precipitation brings: (a woeful case.)
He stays not till, he to the bottom come:
Then Kings fall Fatalianen funt alia and quos perdere vult Deus? res prius
(...). Instat in multis Gorlieius in axtomotibus Eccles. and polit.
, when their brittle glass is run:
They need not kindle fires: they may prevent,
(By quenching sparks) the flames, which they repent:
Yet as a man half drowned, on ought lays hold,
With frivolous, scruples, they do still make bold,
Forsooth we must not touch the Lords Anointed,
In David's case? How is this Text di^^oynted:
For were not Priests Anointed, as were kings?
What false notes, yet, so ere, Court flattery sings:
Malignant Priests were touched, yea two combust,
Scorcht (like Romes Priests of Priapus) with lust.
Besides how topsie turvie, head to tale,
Is the Text turned, as underboard the sail,
For God reproved Kings for Isreal's sake,
His own Anointed Psalm. 105. v. 13, 14, 15,
, not, (as most mistake,)
Israel for touching Kings: whom they destroyed,
(Seon and Og Psalm. 136. 18, 19,
: and such as them anoy'd:
Thus regal mists dispersed, and clouds dispel'd,
For legal must our patriots wars be held.
Lord open all eyes; how is the sword abused,
Against them: Is It for Liberties, Laws used?
For, or against the Wolf? your wits bring hither,
Birds of a feather ever flock together.
To shut your eyes against the Sun its vain;
Prynns royal favorite, does make this plain As also the blabbing Letters
now lopcned. sound in the Kings Cabinet at Nasby Field. T

Hence our Armodians, Aristogitons,
Our Brutusses, and our Timoleons:
Our Statists, Ephorists, have just Arms took up,
Ere they their own blood drunk, in such a cup,
As Alexander Pops, prepared one night
To poison Cardinals Apud Guiccardinum and platinam.
: or Monkish spite, The Monks of Bangor poisoned him in the Eucharist

For English John, and Henry Emperor,
When their worst humors, they began to stir,
Hence grew Vatiman, tho defensive wars,
More bloody then the worst, of civil jars,
'Twixt Guelphes, and Gibellines, Italians,
The French, Aurelians, and Burgundians,
The Florentine Pazzi, and the Medices,
Yea, Spinolists and Dorians, not like these,
In Genoa: Nor in Saint Patricks Land,
Where Butlers bold, did Geraldines withstand.
Yea these hot bickerings, which Romes ruins wrought,
When the Casarians with Pompeians fought:
And when fierce Saylla, who Marius slew,
Unto his side sanguinolent Factions drew.
Nor Catelines Conspiracy of old,
Which Saluft has, in bloody lines inrol'd:
Nor these Battalians, when Laucastrian line,
In Albion, did from house of York decline.
When as the White Rose in twice fourteen years,
Was died in blood of Vulgars, Nobles, Peores
All these with many such, where lust, pomp, pride,
In bloody coaches, did in Trophies ride,
Were scarce like ours so fatal, fierce, false, thieving,
Sanguinolent, mercurializ'd, mischieving.
Like Cadmus brethren, and the Midi^nites Iud. 7. 22. y 2 Samuel 2. 16
;
Joahs and Abners men y, in Martial fights;
We one another stab: the Son the Sire,
Some scarce know why, since Gospel all desire,
As all pretend: yet must be propagated
By such as Grace, and Gospel ever hated.
(As Puttocks, Chicks,) Arminians Painted Papists.
, Papists, Kebs,
Athests; with Harpies Talents, bloody nebs?
Who would pervert, (subvert) Religion, Laws,
With wiles of Foxes, and the Lions paws.
Great Charles, blind-folded long Collirium Rev. 3. 18.
get,
And Hellibare Opus esi Helebaro Horace
, to cure thy after wit:
Least Trojan like, thy dear bought, after lore,
Cause thee to wish thou had been wise before:
Used art thou ladder like, Romes ends to climb, c Sero sapiunt thriges, sero
medicina paratur.

A Masse-God to resetle in this Clime:
Round-headed sheep devoured, dogs, shepherds, hanged:
Tiberian Wolves brought in; unbit, unbang'd,
England a golden Goose, like Venice, Spain,
Fresh plucked, by Peter Pence, brought in again:
Then throw this Ladder by, they will cry or burn it,
Unless to Rome or Tiber, we can turn it,
Fauxes and Ravillacks, they have yet store,
To use thee as French Henry's heretofore:
As living Insects do from dead Brutes breed,
From Parry, Lopus, Titohburne, Squire, proceed.
A nest of vipers, which would sting thy breast,
Thee (as our Deborahs See Cambdeus Eliz. b. and Spencers fiery Queens, of this
late Deborah.
once) they do detest:
Unless like their two Mary's, thou be known,
Their Catholic creature; tooth and nail their own:
Thy face, (fate state) in other Kings, broke glasses,
View, rue: be not feduc'd, by snakes, or asses.
In Court and Camp, thou wil'st be waited on,
By many a Jacques, Clement, Babington:
Jesuits, assassinates, to make thee break,
Unless the language of the Beast Rev. 13. 15. 16.
thou speak.
And be an Agent of the scarlet Whore,
Sure as thy Creed, they aim the King no more.
If every Roundhead, in Herodia's wish,
Were lopt like Iuhasf, Mark 6.
laid in a Courtly dish:
If Protestants all, were in their bloody doom,
As headless as Caligula Suetonius.
, wished Rome:
Thee and thine Esther, (tho not worth the name,)
Thy Hamans would consume Cum hereticis nulla fides.
in self same flame,
With thy best Subjects, who the Whore do hate Rev. 17. 14.

Thou (thine) would ruin, with thy ruined State:
Eyes quick as Argus, Linceus, Hawks and Eagles,
Do see thee haunted, hunted, with Romes Beagles.
French, Irish, English; and lament thy state,
'Moagst thy Nimrodia^s, most Italianite.
Who tho they Spaniell-like, now feine and jeere thee,
(As Apes and Monkies mop,) yet would they tear thee
Worse then Actaeons dogs, when to dire dangers,
They had thee brought, by Romaniz'd Meanders.
Most Noble Charles, what England, Ireland fears,
Or feels from Papists come, and Cavilliers.
Right saddles for to set upon right horses,
Thy Priests thy Prelates, be our curses crosses.
Yet tho the naked truth in Ruth I write,
With beasts at Ephe sui, I seem to sight.
Yet sheep do bleat, bulls bollow, orblaspheme.
Vociferating loud this threed-bare theme:
What, shall we have no King? will you put down
His Regal Scepter; Diadem, and Crown?
Shall Monarchy, turn to Democracie?
Or into flourishing Arristocracie?
(As once in Lacedemon, Athens, Greece,
And now in Venice, with their golden fleece;
The Cantons, Belgicks, and the prosperous Duteh,
What dares your zeal, the Lords Anointed touch:
Is this concordant to Religion, reason?
Or to speak roundly, plain Roundbeaded Treason:
Thus like the Clownes shorn Hog, the world you gull,
Here is much cry, but very little wool.
The poor bird Taurus Apud Plinium,
has a little body,
Yet such a night voice has, would fear a Noddy.
Here Is rock and spindle, but our yarne you want,
Your Queree's have someshowes, with substance scant.
Great bolts you shoot, but will you stand and stay,
The Persians and Hybernians run away;
(Their darts once cast,) as Cravens out of pits,
Cowards, have Clineas, and Dametas wits,
To scold, not fight; your scruples we indite them
Of spleen: It Is to confute them Reeitasse est confutasse ut ^lim Bernardus do
heresibus.
to recite them,
To all your quests; simplicians, hear our noes,
You vent what is vain: Oh see your self wrought woes
The Roundheads cause the ruins of the Land,
As Stentertons Steeple, caused Goodwins sand:
They like to Noah, Lat, Moses, Aaron stay
Floud-gates of wrath, would wash us quite away.
Elias did not trouble Israel,
But Ababs Chaplaiues, and their Jezabelle
The Lambs Plea to the Fox stands in small stead,
He dies for troubling of the Fountains head.
Had powder plot prevailed, the Puritan,
Not acting Papist, should have borne tho blame.
Emilius did it, but Rutilius Fecit Emilius, plectitus Rutilius.

Must suffer, Is not this injurious
Court brambles we would lop, but they are held
Precious; and fruit trees best, for briars repel'd.
We loath Court gangreenes, spread from ill to worse,
We love all pure like gold, we hate the dross:
We love not thorns and pricks: we love the rose,
The King we dearly love: but not his foes:
Except as we for their conversion pray,
Or feared conclusion; (dogs have but their day;
As had Apostate Julian, whose cursed head,
By prayers the Primitive Church, soon crushed dead,
Tyrants like him be clouds Nubecula eito Iransiens
or squibs I think,
Their flashes, fires, cracks, thunders Read the book called Brute fulmi^^
, end in stink.
Quince, Apples, Pears, we love, but we love not,
In pears (or Pears) or Prince, what is naught and rot,
Like to Ezekiels Figs; the nuts fair shell,
We loath: of worms, if the rot kernel smell:
A King we love for wisdom, not for wracks,
Borne in Malignants Arms, or on their backs;
Chained to their hearts: his power pind on their sleeve,
To shoot their bolts, to seal what they believe:
We love a shepherd, who loves in his heart
His sheep: but not as he with wolves takes part,
Seals them a warrant, or his Shepperdesse,
(Or sleeps till sealed,) to woory great and less,
A hundredth fifty thousand, as Priests boast,
In (the right land of Ire) Saint Patricks coast.
Besides these naked stripped, as creckets, worms,
In frosts, and colds, sterv'd to untimely urnes.
The Sun we love and Planetary powers,
Ripening plants, minerals; filling our bowers
With Ceres, (Bacchus) Fruits: but when in May
Malignant Planets so do be are the sway;
Calm air that they imbitter, and dive hence,
Phoebus his sweet, and fruitful influence,
This we love not: since what God gives most good
Turns worst infected Corrup^io optimi pess^^.
, like corrupted blood,
Which purer that it was, it sooner locks
Life in Death chains, by seavers, pests and pox,
Infection taking soon; as tinder powder
Takes fire; which makes the crack (the wrack) the louder.
A sword we love well matched, well watched, well manned,
In David's 1 Samuel 21. 9.
, Salomons 1 Kin. 3. 24.
, or Samuels hand;
To how our Hagags 1 Samuel 15. 32, 33.
, our Amalakites,
Which does avenge our bloods, our wrongs with rights;
Not governed by a fem, fox, child Ne puera gladium.
or boy Iuvenis atate and moribus apud philosophum.

Themselves or others likely to destroy:
This is Tom-tell-truth; and in plain words said,
We Macedonians call a spaide a spaide:
We from equivocating are averse,
With Friars and Iesartes we do not converse;
Their vermisht Lies, and their Gunpowder evil,
They learned from the Serpent Genesis 3. 5. Eritu tanquans dij, id est demon^^.
, from the Devil.
For to anatomize our hearts more plain,
Let Momus through and through them look again.
A Pilot wise we love; which set at Helm,
Steeres right: not those, who State-ships overwhelme,
Ill counseled, to split us on the rocks
Of Papisme, Lawless, will, Court flattering, blocks:
Our Children dear we love: but we love not
In Children, scuiffes, scabs, carbuncles, or spot;
Their bodies, souls, healths wealths, and names we love,
But their vain humors we do not approve:
Chief their unequal weddings; when vain elves,
With us they quite undo, their silly selves:
Ruinate their houses, break their parents hearts,
As Esau did, by acting Esau's parts:
By marrying with a Hetbete Gen 26. 34. 35.
, Cananite Deuteronomy 7. and Chap. 13.
,
Whom God and good men have abhorred quite:
By matching with a Dallilah, a Lais,
A Rhodope, Zantippe, Flora, Thais:
Romes proud Poppea, or French Bruni child,
(Best Peers of France, by bloody wiles, who killed)
Chief wedding one infected with disease
Of swollen spleens like, Katherine de medices:
Margaret of France, and such French fems as ever,
Ominous to England were, but prosperous never:
As now our pressures are beyond expression
Able in marbled hearts, to make impression,
More cause to show of our enforced Wars,
Were drops to add to scas, to Sunshine Stars.
As we Charles Person, (not his Parasites) love,
Heaven speed our Plough: our Cause so bless great Jove,
Moralists who Ethics read, know in a trice,
That we may love a man, but hate his vice:
In Loser, Loves, Lusts, Follies sons we hate,
Chief when their Comrades, would them ruinate,
And they with Eli's sons to ruin tending 1 Samuel 2. 25

To all good counsels deafned ears belending;
As Records writ (like Thehas and Troy) in blood,
Relate their falls, who Counsels have withstood:
Lies then which tax our loves, come from the Devil,
Once more we love the King; not the King a Evil,
Which has killed more within this three years space,
In both Climes, of each Sect, Sex, Garb. and Race;
Then all late plagues, in Austria In Grosius his Tragical Histories.
Rome, Vienna,
Which Idolizers shipped for Gehenna,
In Charons boat: Oh here the shoe does wrinch!
We do not put it off, yet tho it pinch,
As Court, Camp, State, by Doegs be disjoynted,
Doegs we touch; but not the Lords Anointed.
Let this then muzzle all Malignant lips,
The Prince we love; but not his Pests, our Whips Esaias 10. 5.
:
We are not Spaniels, nor yet Russian Wives,
We cannot love our beaters, for our lives.
We are not Stockfish, Irish-Lacquies-Lasses:
Better for beating, like to Hemp and Asses:
Of Travelers coriatiz'd, we pass the ranks,
We cannot injuries receive with thanks.
If a Musalman strike an English man
Right bred; he sparrs but with a Cock oth' game.
What need my moved Muse Apologize
More, for our Senators, just, pious, wise:
Our Patriots themselves well understand,
They aim to sweep Romes Locusts from the Land:
To shake those poisonous vipers off, which cleave,
More like to Charles his heart, then hand or sleeve;
By demonstration this is more then plain,
To every eye not blind, head mad, heart vain:
A King they wish like gold, resin'd (removed
The dross) as once of God and man beloved,
Like John Luke 1. 80.
and Samuel, by 1 Samuel 2. 26
good behavior,
Who grew with God and man in grace and favor,
As Nero In ^is qu^n niu^.
for some years was loved of Saints,
Ere fired Rome, with Martyrs blood he paints,
Their loves turn pities, that by slattering breath,
Too credulous Kings, should laughing go to death,
As did Cel^nus Apud Curtium.
that Gymnosaphist.
And learned Democritus, Philologist.
Tho subtle cubs, by clawings, Tigers please,
(As Dionisius hugged, base Damocles)
Their paws yet felt, ill managed by their breeders,
They kill for want of clawing, friends and feeders.
I draw my paper sails up at this time,
In few words, add my Colophonian line:
We love a wise, just, and right counseled King,
But not a vassalized underling;
To what his creature mould him, tossed and hurried,
As in their ship and coach; or hauke-like carried,
As on his Faulconess fists, (whom he so loves,)
Tibers Crows span'd, to pounce his rich plumed Doves.
Phoebus we love, not Phae^on to ride.
Drawn with wild horses trapt in Prelates pride:
Yea Horses of Belleroph^n, too bad,
Which wise Minerva's curbing bit never had.
David Saul's skin ^oucht not 1 Samuel 24. 10.
, yet in his rage,
His harp and hand 1 Samuel 16. 23.
, his frenzies did assuage:
Now our Patritians, David's Art and Heart
Do use; enforced to act the curbing part,
Of just wise Ephorists, as most phys^call,
To cure the humors tumors of some Saul,
Whose furious daris are thrown in either clime,
At Jonathans just 1 Samuel 20. 23.
but at no Philistine,
Unto, untuned States, Pretors, Tribunes ever,
Musicians were, Chyrurgians, which the Liver,
Yea, Heads and Hearts of dead sick Commonwealths,
Did seek to cure, and to procure their healths:
As our Samaritans seek to heal and help,
Now a sick King, sick state, (what ere Kebs yelp)
Yea for to rescue him, my faith believes,
Both fallen and wounded' among a den of thieves.
His true friends credit this, sure as their Creed,
Their Pater noster is, he may not bleed:
That no hair from him fall, no finger ache,
At thought of which, their very hearts do quake:
They wish that from Court Philters free, from Charms
Of Baby'onians, he be free from harms:
His Senators (firmest friends) these snakes detest,
Who hate his Person: Crown: Seed: Eagled nest,
For him and his, they heartily do pray 1 Timothy 2. 2.
,
As Paul for Nero Nero reigned in Paul's time under whom be was crucified with
Peter.
, (tho contrary way,
Some Serpents hiss) for King of Babylon,
As Ienos did pray: (what ere fools babble on)
So they for him: that God would open his eyes,
Direct, correct his will, and make him wise;
Like the patrizing son of him, whose name,
Of Rex pacifious, loud trumps his fame:
We pray his course by Parliamenting lore,
That he may sleare, as Albions Kings of yore:
This Via Lactea, in a golden mean;
Would make him unto after times a Theme.
Yea, subject of an Annall, and a Story,
Graven in brass, to his immortal glory:
As were our Henry's, Fifth, and Seventh, (Not Eight)
Young Edward, James, Eliza. who rul d right.
Alphonsus, Domocles, and Aristides,
Envied Thanistocles, Mil^iades.
We pray he may live blessed, like Charldemaine,
And rise in Honor, (dead) above Charles Waine:
Thus votes each Roundhead, and each Sound-head plain,
His, and the Kingdoms loss, so to regaine:
This would them glad, as if from France and Spain
Charles were returned, into himself again;
(As by a metaphoriz'd transmutation,
Or by a Pythagoriau transmigration,)
His going from himself, into vain hearts,
Good souls has sadded (madded) hatched our smarts.
Malignants do not these believe at all,
But on our Senators acts, still spurt more gall.
Our State disease now found withouten fees,
I curing counsel give; cut down the trees
Which bud from Tiber, and to Tiburns tend,
At least their lopping cropping I commend:
Or else translate them to another soil;
Who would not worry wolves, the lambs who spoil?
When the great Pan (beats dogs, which fright the fox,
And sides with wolves, then Roundheads fit for blocks;
Then will the world run round on whirling wheels,
Antipodiz'd, then go our upward heels,
And down fallen heads: the Cavillier then swaggers,
Or reeles, like calves with sturdy, horse with staggers,
Fools we who choose the brambles, leave the Cedars,
Olives and Vines to be our Heads, Guides, Leaders.
Whilst each Abimelecke, like ram or bear, Judges 9. per toium.

Our Gidconized heads would crush; throats tear:
Dragging the Lion too, to take their part,
(As does the Lioness) whilst they his heart,
(Unpapiz'd) plot to pierce, yet amongst themselves,
Scichimites may fight: milstones verse 53.
may crush these elves;
As once on Ameleck were hailstones rained,
(Sling'd stones Sam. 17 49
, horns Josh. 6. 20.
, goads Judges 3. 3
, jawbones Cha. 15. 16.
, have Tyrants (tamed,)
Some way just Nemesis will burn our briars:
What trees be not for fruits Mat. 3. 10.
, must be for fires:
Down must they, tho whole woods, and groves for number,
The Commonwealths grand forest, if they cumber:
Our Iothams just, from times and histories,
Propound these parables, these mysteries:
Tho like Cassandra, they be not believed,
Which glads mad Greeks, tho Trojans true be grieved:
Each trusty Troilus, Laomedon,
Chalcas and Hector for their madness mourn,
Whilst every Paris, who his Paradise
Plants in his lusts, is blind to all advice:
So much Court Philters, poisoned, can bewitch them,
Till their own rods of ruin, scourge and switch them:
Mean space Aeolian, and Dardanian smarts,,
Whilst princely Priamus acts even pitied parts:
Who least his fatal favorites be annoyed,
Lets Troy Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi.
still burn; till Ilium be destroyed:
Yet he and his for blood of many an Abell,
May by his mad blades fall, tho propt by Babell:
(As in good David's days it came to pass p, 2 Samuel 21. 1,

Whose Kingdom for Saul's bloody house plagued was.)
Unless some Herb of Grace, so rub his eye,
For crimson siunes seen, he for mercies, cry
(As did Mauritius Crying when murdered by Phocas: just us est dominus and
rectum judicium.
Theodosius After his Thessalonian Mass^^^ Ambrose brought him to public
penance.
, Saul Acts 9. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 13.

Isreal's sweet singer 2 Samuel 11.
, Paganish converts all:)
Unless that mercy pull him from the jaws
Of murderers, thieves, (they left unto the Laws,)
As well deserving in my resolution,
As Seyron, Cacus, Faux: just execution:
The bloody oaths of his God-dam-mec's must,
Turn out their blood to Mummiamized dust:
Yea their grand Proctors (with their Doctors all
Right Balaamiz'd) like house of Ahab 2 Kings. 9. 26.
, Saul 1 Samuel 20. 2 2 Samuel 21. 6.
,
Yea like the house of Dagon and Black Friars,
May fall down flat; for blood still blood requires:
And Idols which do most pollute a Land,
Tho propt by Royal favorites; cannot stand:
Retaliating vengeance in times all,
Keeps measures Mat. 7. 2.
which be Geometrical,
And Arithmeticall: like sins still heap,
Like sorrows Poena and culp a proportierata.
, as men sow, so must they reap;
Eat as they bake, and drink such as they brew,
Tho bowls of blood, their last Herb must be Rue.
Admize^eck who the Thumbes off cut,
Of seaventy Kings Judge. 1. 6. a Sicnecis artifices art perire sua.
, was to like penance put:
And that Perillus, who himself did gull,
Phalaris him roasts a, in his own torturing Bull:
That Dancing Minions head too in a trice,
Who Johus head begged, was lopt (some say) by ye.
A bloody King, worse Queen by dogs were gnawne.
Their bloody Pageants, perisht-all their spawne.
Most Page in Arrian, Papal persecutions,
Found Judas fates, and Ioabs executions.
Whole Volumes could I write to let Kings see,
From former misled Kings, their Tragedy,
Their steps who following fast, their cross ways running,
They needs must fall, for all Romes dawbing cunning.
To salve all these, great Charles that wars may cease,
Thou and thy Crown secured, get grace with peace;
Peace with thy God, peace with thy Parliament,
For Gospel, God, thy Good, whose aims be bent.
This cleares all clouds, this tears wipes from the eyes
Of all good subjects, heales all maladies;
See with their Lincean eyes, work with their hands,
Thou and thy Scepter so securely stands.
Rome had not bled an object of poor pity,
But flourisht like that Sea-wed maiden City.
Had bloody Nero, stern Domitian,
Clodius and Claudius, like Vespasian,
Fortunate Augustus, Traian, Adrian,
(Praised like Germanicus by every man,)
Consulted with Romes Senate, as of late,
The great Venetian Duke, with that wise State;
As Homer (his best president for Kings)
With Nestor and Ulysses, counselling brings,
His Agamemnon; Zenopbon his Cyrus,
With his grand Peers: in History Darius,
With his Zopyrus: with his Cyneas,
Great Pirrhus: by whose wits he Conqueror was:
As Alexander by Parmenio,
Did victorize ewhat he did undergo,
Great Assuerus by his Persians wise,
Is quit with Vasti who did him despise.
Yea Isreal's singer in the Text divine,
By Hushai's Council, plots did countermine;
And Nineve's King consults with his grand Peers,
Heavens wrath to pacify by Prayers and Tears.
Yea Absalom hears his Achitophel,
Tho a Malignant worse then Matchavell:
Oh shut thy ears great Prince to Counsels given
By Serpents, open them wide to votes from Heaven:
Good men be ships, wide open to sun and sky,
To earth and water, yet close shut they lie.
Good ears and hearts open (like the Marygold
Unto the Sun) to Counsel rightly told;
The bad shut like the spring-lock: Adders deaf,
Hear not, or to their hearing give belief:
Like Zedekiah, or like Eli's sons,
Who threatenings scoft, like squibs and paper guns:
Lightnings and thunders held till bolts they felt,
Hearts Pharoiz'd, less then Smiths Anvils melt.
Lord soften thine like wax, to take impressiou
Of sound advice, this soon salves all digression.
Oh bless our eyes or eats with that bless day,
To know thee with thy Peers; for which we pray:
(A Senate just they be, tho thou retire,
A wife's a wife, tho scorcht with jealous ire:
A husband wrongfully seduced, forsake her.)
But of thy presence be they once partaker,
This would turn Guns to Gowns, and Blades to Books,
Calm furious Mars, and clear Bellona's looks:
This Targets turns to Plowes: Helmets to Hives,
Spears into Mattocks, Swords to Trades-mens knives:
Penury to Plenty, Discords into Loves:
Haggards to Hens, and Harpies into Doves.
Wars into Peace; and into pleasure pain,
The golden Age should thus return again.
Oh this would dignifie our Albions fame!
Angloi's should name of Angels thus regaine;
Yea whatsoere is lost this would make even,
In dry hay make up all, our Hell turned Heaven.
Thus have I ripped State wounds, Church wracks, Camp woes,
With salves: ere Cynthia yet few circles goes;
If these my sound prescriptions be took well,
My Muse to balm our bleedings, more may tell,
Ecclesiastic and Political,
Tho against those some Doegs loud will baule;
Some Asses bray, some Snakes sting; which no cure
For the Kings Evil, can or will endure:
In touch of which each Cavillier who kicks,
Shows that his galled hide, my sharp pen pricks.
FINIS,

