ENTERTAINMENTS For LENT.

First Written in French, and Translated by Sir B. B.

The delight of sin is momentary, the torment Eternal.

LONDON. Printed for I. W. and are to be sold by Philemon Stephens the younger
at the Kings Arms over against the middle Temple gate in Fleet-streete. 1661.

To the most Excellent Majesty of Henriette Maria, Queen of Great Britain.
Madame,
AMongst all the public joys for your Majesty's happy return, I know not
better how to express my own particular, then by most humbly presenting to
your Majesty my Translation of this excellent French Book, in the solitude of a
Prison, which was made more easy by some relation it had to your Majesty's
service.

And I presume the rather upon this Dedication, because all that good which is
derived to us from France, (whereof I conceive this may be a part) should
receive honor and in^rease of value from your Majesty, that it may so diffuse
it self with mo^e authority and profit amongst those who may be capable to
receive ^t. Your Majesty, (having read the Orginall) ^oth well know, that the
principal scope of it is ^o teach the love of God, and contempt of this world,
with many other principal virtues.

And for the practice of them all, this age ^ould not have hoped for so rare an
example to ^nstruct all the great Ladies of Christendom) ^s it has found in
your Majesty, as well by ^our admirable fortitude, and perfect resignation to
Gods holy will in all your Majesty's extreme afflictions, dangers and pressures
at Sea and Land, as also by your Majesty's many sacred retirements (in the most
holy time of the year) to sprinkle your pleasures (voluntarily) with some of
that Gall which was upon our Saviors lips, when he suffered his bitter passion
and death for our sins. Our great Divines affirm, that the present sufferings
of Mount Calvary, lead directly to the future glories of Mount Thabor.

And therefore since your Majesty has patiently endured so many unjust and
rigorous Crosses in the Mount Calvary of this World, we have great reason to
hope, that our blessed Savior has prepared for your Majesty, a most glorious
Crown in the next, which will never have end. And this shall ever be the
incessant. and fervent prayer of

Madame, Your Majesty's poor and most humbly devoted Beadsman Basil Brook.

Table of all the Gospels and particulars of our Saviors passion, mentioned in
this book, with their Moralities and Aspirations
UPon the word of Genesis, lib. 1. cap. 3. Thou art dust, and to dust thou
shall return. Fol. 1 Upon the Gospel of Saint Matthew, cap. 6. Of hypocritical
fasting. 4 Upon Saint Matthew the 18. af the Centurions words, O Lord I am not
worthy. 8 Upon Saint Matthew the 5. Wherein we are directed to pray for our
enemies 12 Upon Saint Matthew the 6. Of the Apostle danger at sea. 15 Upon
Saint Matthew the 4. Of our Saviors being tempted in the desert. 19 Upon Saint
Matthew the 25. Of the judgment day. 25 Upon Saint Matthew the 21. Jesus drove
out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. 30 Upon Saint Matthew th 12. The
Pharisees demand a sign of Jesus. 33 Upon Saint Matthew the 15. of the woman of
Canaan. 38 Upon S. John, c. 15. Of the probatick pond. 42 Upon Saint Matthew
the 17. Of the transfiguration of our Lord. 46 Upon Saint John the 8. Jesus
said to the Jews Where I go ye cannot come. 5^ Upon Saint Matthew the 23. Jesus
said, the Pharisees sit in Moses chair, believe therefore what they say. 54
Upon S. Matthew the 20. The request of the wise of Zebedee for her sons James
and John 58 Upon Luke the 16. Of the rich Glutton and poor Lazarus. 62 Upon
Saint Matthew the 21. Of the master of the vineyard whose son was killed by
his farmers. 67 Upon S. Luke the 16. Of the prodigal Child. 71 Upon Saint Luke
the 11. Jesus cast out the devil which was dumb. 77 Upon S. Luke the 4. Jesus
is required to do miracles in his own country. 81 Upon Saint Matthew the 18.
If thy brother offend thee, tell him of is alone. 85 Upon Saint Matthew the 15.
The Pharisees asked, why do thy Disciples contradict ancient traditions. 90
Upon Saint Luke the 4. Jesus cured the fever of Simons mother in law. 94 Upon
Saint John the 4. Of the Samaritan woman at Jacobs well near Sichar. 98 Upon
Saint John the 8. Of the woman found in adultery. 104 Upon Saint John the 6. Of
the five fishes and two barley loaves. 107 Upon Saint John the 6. Of the
whipping buyers and sellers out of the Temple. 113 Upon Saint John the 7. the
Jews marvel at the learning of Jesus who was never taught. 117 Upon Saint John
the 9. Of the blind man cured by clay and spittle. 121 Upon Saint Luke the 7.
Of the Widows son raised from death to life at Naim by our Savior. 128 Upon
Saint John the 11. Of the raising up Lazarus from death. 132 Upon Saint John
the 8. Of our Saviors words, I am the light of the world. 137 Upon Saint John
the 8. Of these words, Who can accuse me of sin? Upon Saint John the 7. Jesus
said to the Pharisees, you shall seek and not find me: and, he that is thirsty
let him come to me. 145 Upon Saint John the 7. Jesus went not into Jury,
because the Jews had a purpose to take away his life. 149 Upon Saint John the
10. The Jews said, If thou be the Messiah, tell us plainly. 153 Upon Saint John
the 7. Of Saint Mary Magdalens washing our Saviors feet in the Pharisees
house. 158 Upon Saint Mary Magdalens great repentance. 162 Upon Saint John the
11. The Jews said, What shall we do? for this man does many miracles. 164 Upon
Saint John the 12. The chief Priests thought to kill Lazarus, because the
miracle upon him made many follow Jesus. 167 Upon Saint Matthew the 21. Our
Savior came in triumph to Ierusalam a little before his passion. 172 Upon
Saint John the 12. S. Mary Magdalen anointed our Saviors feet with precious
ointment, at which Judas repined. 177 Upon Saint John the 13. Of our Savior
washing the feet of his Apostle. 181 Moralities upon the garden of Mount Olivet
187 Moralities of the apprehension of Jesus. 192 Aspiration upon Saint Peter's
passionate tears 193 Moralities upon the Pretorian or Judgment Hall. 194
Moralities for Good Friday, upon the death of Jesus Christ. 198 The Gospel for
Easter day, Saint Mark the 16. 211 The Gospel for Easter Monday, S. Luke 24.
215 The Gospel on Tuesday, S. Luke 24. 220 The Gospel on Low Sunday, Saint John
the 20. 224
Entertainments for Lent:
And for the first Day upon the Consideration of Ashes.
THou art Dust, and to Dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.

1. It is an excellent way to begin Lent with the consideraon of dust, whereby
Nature gives us beginning and by the same, Death shall put an end to all our
worldly vanities. There is no better way to abate and humble the proudest of
all Creatures, then to represent his beginning and his end. The middle-part of
our life (like a kind of Proteus) takes up on it several shapes not understood
by others; but the first and last part of it deceive no man; for they do both
begin and end in Dust. It is a strange thing that Man, knowing well what he
has been and what he must be, is not confounded in himself, by observing the
pride of his own life, and the great disorder of his passions. The end of all
other creatures is less deformed then that of man: Plants in their death retain
some pleasing smell of their bodies: The little rose buries it self in her
natural sweetness, and carnation color. Many Creatures at their death leave
us their teeth, horns, feathers, skins, of which we make great use. Others
after death are served up in silver and golden dishes, to feed the geatest
persons of the world. Only man's dead carcass is good for nothing but to feed
worms: and yet he often retains the presumptuous pride of a Giant, by the
exorbitance of his heart, and the cruel nature of a murderer, by the furious
rage of his revenge. Surely that man must either be stupid by nature, or most
wicked by his own election, who will not correct and amend himself, having
still before his eyes ashes for his glass, and death for his mistres.

2 This consideration of Dust is an excellent remedy to cure vices, and an
assured Rampire against all temptations. S. Paulinus says excellently well;
That holy Job was free from all temptations when he was placed upon the smoke
and dust of his humility. He that lies upon the ground can fall no lower; but
may contemplate all above him, and meditate how to raise himself by the hand of
God, which pulls down the proud and exalts the humble. Is a man tempted with
pride? The consideration of Ashes will humble him. Is he burned with wanton
love (which is a direct fire?) But fire cannot consume Ashes. Is he persecuted
with covetousness? Ashes do make the greatest Leeches and Bloud-Suckers cast
their Gorges. Every thing gives way to this unvalued thing, because God is
pleased to draw the instruments of his power out of the objects of our
infirmities.

3. If we knew how to use rightly the meditation of death, we should there find
the streams of life: All the world together is of no estimation to him, that
rightly knows the true value of a just man's death. It would be necessary that
they who are taken with the curiosity of Tulips, should set in their Gardens a
Plant called Napell, which carries a flower that most perfectly resembles a
Deaths head. And if the other Tulips do please their senses, that will instruct
their reason. Before our last death we should die many other deaths; by
forsaking all those creatures and affections which lead us to sin. We should
resemble those creatures (sacred to the Egyptians) called Cynocephales, which
died piecemeal, and were buried long before their death: So should we bury all
our concupiscences before we go to the grave, and strive to live so, that when
death comes, he should find very little business with us.

Aspiration.
O Father of all Essences, who give beginning to all things, and art without
end; This day I take Ashes upon my head, thereby professing (before thee) my
being nothing; and to do thee homage for that which I am; and for that I ought
to be by thy great bounties. Alas, O Lord, my poor soul is confounded to see so
many sparkles of pride and covetousness, arise from this caitiffe dust which I
am: so little do I yet learn how to live, and so late do I know how to die. O
God, of my life and death, I most humbly beseech thee, so to govern the first
in me and so to sweeten the last for me, that if I live, I may live only for
thee; and if I must die, that I may enter into everlasting bliss, by dying in
thy blessed love and favor.

The Gospel upon Ashwednesday, S. Matthew 6.
Of Hypocryticall Fasting.
WHen you fast, be not as the hypocrites, sad: for they disfigure their faces,
that they may appear unto men to fast. Amen, I say to you that they have
received their reward.

Put thou when thou do fast, anoint thy head, and wash thy face; that thou
appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father
which sees in secret, will repay thee.

Heap not up to your selves treasures on the earth: where the rust and moth do
corrupt, and where thieves dig through and steal. But heap up to your selves
treasures in heaven: where neither the rust nor moth does corrupt, and where
thieves do not dig through nor steal. For where thy treasure is, there is thy
heart also.

Moralities.
1. THat man goes to Hell by the way of Paradise, who fasts and afflicts his
body, to draw the Praise of Men. Sorrow and vanity together, are not able to
make one Christian Act. He deserves everlasting hunger, who starves himself,
that he may swell and burst with vain glory. He stands for a spectacle to
others, being the murderer of himself, and by sowing vanity reaps nothing but
wind. Our intentions must be wholly directed to God, and our examples for our
neighbor. The Father of all virtues is not to be served with counterfeit
devotions; such lies are abomination in his sight, and ^ertullian says, they
are, as many adulteries.

2. It imports us much to begin Lent well, entering into those lists, in which
so many holy souls have run their course with so great strictness, having been
glorious before God and honorable before men. The difficulty of it is
apprehended only by those who have their understandings obstructed by a
violent affection to kitchen stuff. It is no more burdensome to a courageous
spirit, then feathers are to a bird. The cheerfulness which a man brings to a
good action in the beginning, does half the work. Let us wash our faces by
confession: Let us perfume our Head (who is Jesus Christ, by alms deeds.
Fasting is a most delicious feast to the conscience, when it is accompanied
with pureness and charity: but it breeds great thirst, when it is not
nourished with devotion, and watered with mercy.

3. What great pain is taken to get treasure; what care to preserve it; what
fear to lose it; and what sorrow when it is lost? Alas, is there need of so
great covetousness in life, to encounter with such extreme nakedness in
death? We have not the souls of Giants, nor the body of a Whale. If God will me
poor, must I endeavor to reverse the decrees of heaven and earth, that I may
become rich? To whom do we trust the safety of our treasures? To rust, to moths
and thieves: were it not better we should in our infirmities depend only on God
Almighty, and comfort our poverty in him who is only rich, and so carry our
souls to heaven, where Jesus on the day of his Ascension did place our
Sovereign good. Only Serpents and covetous men desire to sleep among
treasures as Saint Clement says. But the greatest riches of the world is
poverty free from Covetousness.

Aspirations.
I Seek thee (O invincible God) within the Abyss of thy brightness, and I see
thee through the vail of thy creatures. Will thou always be hidden from me?
Shall I never see thy face, which with a glimpse of thy splendor can make
Paradise? I work in secret, but I know thou art able to reward me in the light.
A man can lose nothing by serving thee, and yet nothing is valuable to thy
service, for the pain it self is a sufficient recompense. Thou art the food
of my fastings, and the cure of my infirmities. What have I to do with Moles,
to dig the earth like them, and there to hide treasures? Is it not time to
close the earth, When thou do open heaven* and to carry my heart where thou
art, since all my riches is in thee? Does not he deserve to be everlastingly
poor, who cannot be content with a God so rich as thou art?

The Gospel upon the first Thursday in Lent, S. Matthew 18. of the Centurions
words.
O Lord I am not worthy.
ANd when he was entered into Caphearnaum, there came unto him a Centurion,
beseeching him, and saying, Lord, my boy lies at home sick of the palsy, and
is sore tormented.

And Jesus says to him, I will come and cure him.

And the Centurion making answer, said, Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof: but only say the word, and my boy shall be
healed. For I also am a man subject to Authority, having under me soldiers:
and I say to this, go, and he goes: and to another, come, and he comes: and
to my servant, do this, and be does it. And Jesus hearing this marvelled, and
said to them that followed him, Amen, I say to you, I have not found so grea,
faith in Israel.

And I say to you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven: but the children
of the kingdoms shall becast out into the exterior darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said to the Centurion, go, and as thou
have believed, be it done unto thee. And the boy was healed in the same hour.

Moralities.
1. OUr whole Salvation consists in two principals; The one is in our being
sensible of God, and the other in our moving toward him; the first proceeds
from faith, the other comes of charity and other virtues. O what a happy thing
it is to follow the example of this good Centurion, by having such elevated
thoughts of the Divinity, and to know nothing of God but what he is: To behold
our heavenly father, within this great family of the world, who effects all
things by his single word; Creates by his power; governs by his council; and
orders by his goodness this great universality of all things. The most
insensible creatures have ears to hear him. Fevers and tempests are part of
that running camp, which marches under his Standard; They advance and retire
themselves under the shadow of his command: he only has power to give
measures to the heavens, bounds to the sea; to join the east and west together
in an instant, and to be in all places where his pleasure is understood.

2. O how goodly a thing it is to go unto him, like this great Captain: To go
said I? Nay rather to fly as he does by the two wings of charity and humility.
His charity made him have a tender care of his poor servant and to esteem his
health more dear, then great men do the rarest pieces in their Cabinets. He
does not trust his servants, but take the charge upon himself: making himself
(by the power of love) a servant to him, who by birth was made subject to his
command. What can be said of so many Masters and Mistresses now adays, who
live always slaves to their passions? having no care at all of the Salvation,
health or necessities of their servants, as if they were nothing else but the
scumme of the world. They make great use of their labors and service (which is
just) but neglect their bodies, and kill their souls by the infection of their
wicked examples, Mark the humility of this soldier, who does not think his
house worthy to be enlightened by one sole Glimpse of our blessed Saviors
presence. By the words of Saint Augustine we may say, he made himself worthy by
believing and declaring himself so unworthy: yea worthy that our Savior should
enter not only into his house but into his very soul. And upon the matter he
could not have spoken with such faith and humility if he had not first enclosed
(in his heart) him whom he durst not receive into his house.

3 The Gentiles come near unto God, and the Jews go from him; to teach us that
ordinarily the most obliged persons are most ungrateful; and disesteem their
benefactpurs for no other reason, but because they receive benefits daily from
them. If you speak courteously to them, they answer churlishly; and in the same
proportion wherein you are good, you make them wicked; therefore we must be
careful that we be not so toward God. Many are distasted with devotion, as the
Israelites were with Manna: All which is good does displease them because it is
ordinary: And you shall find some who (like naughty grounds) cast up thorns
where roses are planted. But we have great reason to s^ar, that nothing but
Hell fire is capable to punish those, who despise the Graces of God, and esteem
that which comes from him as a thing of no value.

Aspirations
O Almighty Lord who 'doest govern all things in the family of this world, and
do bind all insensible creatures, (by the bare sound of thy voice) in a
chain of everlasting obedience: Must I only be still rebellious against thy
will? Fevers and Palsies have their ears for thee, and yet my unruly spirit is
not obedient. Alas, alas, this family of my heart is ill governed; It has
violent passions; my thoughts are wandering and my reason is ill obeyed. Shall
it never be like the house of this good Centurion, where every thing went by
measure because he measured himself by thy commandments? O Lord I will come
resolutely by a profound humility, and an inward feeling of my self, since I am
so contemptible before thine eyes. I will come with Charity toward these of my
household, and toward all that shall need me. O God of my heart, I beseech thee
let nothing from henceforth move in me, but only to advance my coming toward
thee, who art the beginning of all motions and the only repose of all things
which move.

The Gospel for the first Friday in Lent S. Mat. 5. Wherein we are directed to
pray for our Enemies.
YOu have heard that it was said, thou sha^e love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy. But I say to you, love your enemies, do good to them that hate you: and
pray for them that persecute and abuse you: that you may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven, who makes his Sun to rise upon good and bad,
and raineth upon just and unjust. For if you love them that love you, what
reward shall you have? Do not also the Publicans this? And if you salute your
brethren only, what do you more? Do not also the heathen this? Be you perfect
therefore, as also your heavenly Father is perfect.

Moralities.
1. A Man that loves nothing but according to his natural inclination, loves
only like a beast or an infidel. The best sort of love is that which is
commanded by God, and is derived from judgment, conducted by reason and
perfected by Charity. Me thinks it should be harder for a good Christian to
hate then love his enemy. Hate makes him our equal, whereas love places us
quite above him. By hating a man's enemy, he breaks the laws of God; he fights
against the Incarnation of Christ, which was acted to unite all things in the
bands of love: he gives the lie to the most blessed Eucharist, whose nature is
to make the hearts of all Christians the same: he lives (like another Cain in
the world) always disquieted by seeking revenge, and it is a very death to him
to hear of another man's prosperity. Whereas to love an enemy does not bind us
to love the injuty he has done us; for we must not consider him as a
malefactor, but as a man of our own nature, as he is the Image of God, and as
he is a Christian. God does only command perfect things, not impossible. That
which is very hard to flesh and blood, becomes easy by the help of grace and
reason. Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ being the Father of all harmony can
and does reconcile all contrarieties at his will and pleasure.

2. If revenge seem sweet, the gaining of it is most bitter: But there is
nothing in the world more profitable then to pardon an enemy by imitation of
our Savior. For it is then that our conscience can assure us to be the
children of God, and inheritors of his glory. We must not fear to be despised
for esteeming virtue, for such contempt can only proceed from those who know
not the true value of that glory which belongs to the just. There is no better
way to revenge then leave it to God, who always does his own business. Ween
David wept for Saul who was his enemy, his Clemency did insensibly make
degrees, by which he mounted up to the throne of Judah. A good work which comes
from the spirit of vanity is like an emptied Mine, good for nothing. God who is
invisible, would have our aspects turned always toward him, and blind toward
the world. Alms given by the sound of a Trumpet, makes a great noise on the
earth, but reaps little fruit in heaven. The fly of vanity is a mischievous
thing which destroys all the perfumes of charity. What need we any spectators
of our good works, every place is full where God is, and where he is not, there
only is Solitude.

Aspirations.
O God of all holy affections, when shall I love all that thou love and have
in horror all that displeases thy divine Majesty: If I cannot love in some
person his defects and sins, I will love in him thine Image, and in that will
I acknovvledge thy mercies. If he be a piece of broken glass; in that little
piece, there will shine some lines of a God Creator, and of a God Redeemer. If
thou have chosen him to exercise my patience, why should I make him the object
of my revenge, since he gives me trouble to gain me a Crown. He is a hammer
to pollish and make me bright, I will not hurt him, but reverence the arm that
strikes me. I resign all vengence into thy hands, since it is a Right reserved
for thy Almighty power. And certainly the best revenge I can take is to
gratify my enemy. Give unto me (O most merciful Prince) the grace to suffer,
and let the sacrifice of my sufferings mount up to thy propitiatory throne.

The Gospel for the first Saturday in Lent, S. Matthew 6.
Of the Apostles danger at Sea, and relief by our Savior.
ANd when he had dismissed them, he went into the mountain to pray, and when it
was late the boat was in the midst of the Sea, and himself alone on the land.
And seeing them laboring in rowing (for the wind was against them) and about
the fourth watch of the night he comes to them walking upon the sea: and he
would have passed by them. But they seeing him walking upon the sea, thought it
was a ghost and cried out, for all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately
he talked with them; and said, to them, have confidence, it is I, fear ye not.
And he went up to them into the ship and the wind ceased, and they were far
more astonished within themselves, for they understood, not concerning the
loaves, for their heart was blinded.

And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Genesareth, and set
to the shore. And when they were gone out of the boat, incontinent they knew
him, and running through, that whole country, they began to carry about, in
couches those that were ill at ease, where they heard he was. And whethersoever
he e^tred into towns or into villages or cities, they laid the sick in the
streets and besought him that they might touch but the hem of his garment, and
as many as touched him were made whole.

Moralities.
1. WHat a painful thing it is to row when Jesus is not in the boat; all our
travel is just nothing without Gods favor: A little blast of wind is worth
more then an hundred strokes of Oars. What troublesome businesses there are:
how many intricate families do labor much and yet advance nothing, because God
withdrawes himself from their iniquities; if he do not build, the workman
destroys what he is building. But all falls out right to those, that embark
themselves with Jesus. They may pass to the Indies in a basket, when others
shall miscarry in a good ship well furnished.

2. But how comes it about that the ship of the poor Apostles is beaten so
furiously by the winds and tempests* There are many ships with silver beaks,
with fine linen sails and silken tackles, upon which the sea seems to smile.
Do the waters reserve there choler, only to vent it upon that ship which
carries just persons? This is the course of man's life: The brave and happy men
of this world enjoy these wishes, but their ship does perish in the harbor as
it is sporting; whereas God by his infinite providence, gives tempests to his
elect, that he may work a miraculous calm by his Almighty power. Dangers are
witnesses of their floting, and Combats are causes of their merit. Never think
any man happy in his wickedness, for he is just like a fish that plays with
the bait, when the hook sticks fast in his throat. We must wait and ^ttend
for help from heaven patiently (without being tired) even till the fourth,
which is is the last watch of the night. All which proceeds from the hand of
God, comes ever in fit time, and that man is a great gainer by his patient
attendance, who thereby gets nothing but perseverance.

3. They know Jesus very ill, that take him for a Phantome or an illusion, and
cry out for fear of his presence, which should make them most rejoice: So do
those souls which are little acquainted with God, who live in blindness, and
make much of their own darkness. Let us learn to discern God from the
illusions of the world: The tempest cease when he does approach; and the
quietness of our heart is a sure mark of his presence, which fills the soul
with splendor, and makes it a delicious Garden. He makes all good wheresoever
he comes, and the steps which his feet leave, are the bounties of his heart. To
touch the Hem of his Garment, cures all that are sick; to teach us, that the
forms which cover the blessed Sacrament, are the fringes of his holy humanity
which cures our sins.

Aspirations.
O Lord, my soul is in night and darkness and I feel that thou art far from
me. What Billows of disquiet arise within my heart? what idle thoughts which
have been too much considered? Alas (most redoubted Lord and Father of mercy)
can thou behold from firm land this poor vessel, which labors so extremely,
being deprived of thy most amiable presence? I row strongly, but can advance
nothing, except thou come into my soul. Come (O my adored Master) walk upon
this tempestuous Sea of my heart; ascend into this poor Vessel; say unto me,
take courage, It is I. Be not conceited that I will take thee for an illusion;
for I know thee too well by thy powers and bounties, to be so mistaken. The
least thought of my heart will quiet it self to adore thy steps. Thou shall
reign within me; thou shall disperse my cares; thou shall recover my decayed
senses; thou shall lighten my understanding; thou shall inflame my will; thou
shall cure all my infirmities: And to conclude, thou only shall work in me, and
I will be wholly thine.

The Gospel upon the first Sunday in Lent, S. Matthew the 4.
Of our Saviors being tempted in the Desert.
THen Jesus was led of the spirit into the Desert, to be tempted of the Devil,
and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward he was hungry:
And the tempter aproached and said to him, If thou be the Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread: Who answered and said, it is written, not in
bread alone does man live, but in every word that proceeds from the mouth of
God.

Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and set him upon the pinnacle of
the Temple, and said to him, If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down, for
it is written, that he will give his Angels charge of thee, and in their hands
shall they hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stone.
Jesus said to him again, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Again the Devil took him up into a very high mountain, and he showed him all
the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said to him all these
will I give thee, if falling down thou will adore me. Then Jesus says to him,
avaunt Satan; for it is written, the Lord thy God shall thou a door, and him
only shall thou serve. When the Divil left him, and behold Angels came, and
ministered to him.

Moralities.
1. Jesus suffered himself to be tempted (says Saint Augustine) to the end he
might serve for a Mediator, for an example, and for a remedy to work our
victory over all temptations. We must fight on his side: Our life is a
continual warfare, and our days are Champio^s which enters into the lists
There is no greater temptation then to have none at all: Sleeping water does
nourish poison. Motion is the worlds soul; fighting against temptations is the
soul of virtues, and glory does spring and bud out of tribulations. Virtue
hinders not temptation, but surmount it. Jesus fasted (says the ordinary
Gloss) that he might be tempted, and is tempted because he did fast. He fasted
forty days and then was hungry; he did eat with his Disciples the space of
forty days after his resurrection, without any more necessity of meat, then
the Sun has of the earths vapors: to make us thereby know that it only
appertained to him, to teach that great secret how to manage want and
abundance, by which S. Paul was glorified.

2. The first victory over a temptation, is t^ know that which tempts us:
Some temptations are gay and smiling at their beginning, as those of love and
pleasure, which end in terrible and bitter storms: Others are troublesome and
irksome: Others doubt full and intricate: Others rapide and sudden, which
cease upon their prey like an Eagle: Others are close and catching. These are
the snares of Satan, who fomes like a Bore, to arsike a Lion, and hisseth like
a Serpent. We should alvvayes have an eye ready to mark from whence the
temptation comes, whither it tends, what is the root of it, what the course,
what the progress, and what power it may have over our spirit.

3. Solitude of heart, fasting, prayer, the word of God, are weapons of an
excellent temper, which the word incarnate teaches us to use in this conflict.
These things are to be used with discretion, by the counsel of a good
directour, to whom a man must declare all his most secret thoughts, and bear a
breast of Crystal toward him, with a firm purpose to let him see all the
inward motions of his heart. It is also good to note here that our Lord would
expressly be tempted in that Desert which is between Jerusalem and Jericho,
where the Samaritan (mentioned in the parable) did pour wine and oil into the
sores of the poor wounded man; to teach us that by his combat he came to cure
the wounds of Adam, and all his race, in the very place where they were
received.

4. Sin is killed by flying the occasions of it. Absence, resistance,
coldness, silence, labor, diversion, have overcome many assaults of the
enemy. Sometimes a Spiders web is strong enough to preserve chastity, and at
other times the thick walls of Semiramis are not sufficient. God governs all,
and a good will to concur with him, is a strong assurance in all perils, and it
will keep us untoucht amidst the flames of lust.

5. Since it imports us so much to fight valiantly, let us bring the hearts of
Lions. Where is our Christianity, if we do not give testimony of it to God both
by our sidelity and courage? How many Martyrs have been roasted and broild
because they would not speak one ill word? What honor can you expect by
yielding at the first entrance to a temptation? Look not upon the violence of
it, but contemplate the Crown which you should gain by conquering it; think at
your entrance how you will come off, and know for certain that he who truly
considers the consequence of a wicked action, will never begin it.

6. Lent is the Spring time for sanctified resolutions, it mortifies the body
that the spirit may triumph, it is a time of grace which tends to salvation and
mercy. It imports extremely to commend all to God at the beginning, to
sanctify this fasting which is a part of our devotion: we must abstain from
flesh, and be content with one meal at seasonable hours, without making over
large collations; except age, infirmity, or weakness, labor, or necessity of
other functions, shall dispense with our diet: for those who are unable to
fast, suffer more by their disability, then others do by fasting. It is good to
follow the counsel of Athanasius, who advises to eat late and little, and at
a table where there is but one sort of meat. We must also fast by abstinence
from vice. For to weaken our body, and yet nourish our naughty passions, is to
fast as the Devils do, who eat nothing, and yet devour the world by the rage of
their malice. Sobriety is a stream which waters all virtues. Our soul and body
are as the scales of a balance; if you pull down the one, you raise up the
other; and if you tame your flesh it makes the Spirit reign and govern.

Aspirations.
O Most merciful Lord, Father, and Protector of all my life, how great are
the temptations and snares, whereunto I am subject; when I eat, drink, sleep,
when I do business, when I am both in conversation and solitude? Whither
shall this poor soul go which thou have thrown into a body so frail, in a
world so corrupt, and amongst the assaults of so many pernicious enemies? Open,
O Lord, thine eyes for my guidance, and compassionate my infirmities: without
thee I can do nothing, and in thee I can do all that I ought. Give me, O Lord,
a piercing eye to see my danger, and the wings of an Eagle to fly from it, or
the heart of a Lion to fight valiantly, that I may never be wanting in my duty
and fidelity to thee. I owe all that I am or have to thy gracions favor, and I
will hope for my salvation, not by any proportion of my own virtues (which are
weak and slender) but by thy boundless liberalities, which only do crown all
our good works.

The Gospel upon Monday the first week in Lent, out of S. Matthew 25.
Of the Judgment day.
ANd when the Son of man shall come in his Majesty, and all the Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his Majesty. And all nations shall be
gathered together before him, and he shall separate them one from another, as
the Pastor separateth the sheep from the goats: And shall set the sheep at his
right hand, but the goats at his left.

Then shall the King say to them that shall be at his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for yo^ from the
foundation of the world. For I was hungered, and you gave me to eat: I was
athirst and you gave me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took me in: naked,
and you covered me: sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came to
me. Then shall the just answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see the^ an
hungered, and fed thee: a thirst and gave thee drink? and when did we see thee
a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and covered thee? or when did we see
thee sick, or in prison, and came to thee? And the King answering, shall say to
them, Amen, I say to you, as long as you did it to one of these my least
brethren you did it to me. Then shall he say ^o them also that shall be at his
left hand, Get you away from me you cursed into fire everlasting, which was
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was an hungered, and you gave me
not to eat: I was a thirst, and you gave me not to drink: I was a stranger,
and ye took me not in: naked, and you covered me not: sick, and in prison, and
you did not visit me. Then they also shall answer him, saying, Lord, when did
we see thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister to thee? Then he shall answer them, saying Amen, I
say to you, as long as you did it not to one of these lesser, neither did you
it to me. And these shall go into punishment everlasting: but the just, into
life everlasting.

Moralities.
1. BEhold here a Gospel of great terror, where our spirit like the Dove of
Noah, is placed upon the great deluge of Gods wrath, and knows not where to
find footing. Every thing is most dreadful; But what can be more terrible,
then the certainty of Gods judgment, joined with the great uncertainty of the
hour of our death? It is an unchangeable decree, that we must all be presented
before the high Tribunal of the living God, to render a just account of all
which our soul has done, while it was joined with our body, as we are taught
by S. Paul. We must make an account of our time spent, of our thoughts, words,
actions, of that we have done, and that we have omitted, of life, death, and of
the blood of Jesus Christ; and thereupon receive a judgment of everlasting
life or death. All men know that this must certainly be done, but no man knows
the hour or moment when it shall be. So many clocks strike about us every day,
and yet none can let us know the hour of our death.

2. O how great is the solitude of a soul in her separation from so many great
inticements of the world, (wherein many men live) and in an instant to see
nothing but the good or ill we have done one either side us, what an
astonishment will it be for a man suddenly to see all the actions of his life
(as upon a piece of Tapistree) spread before his eyes; where his sins will
appear like so many thorns, so many serpents, so many venomous beasts. Where
will then be that cozening vail of reputation, and reason of state, which as
yet cover so many wicked actions? The soul shall (in that day of God) be showed
naked to all the world, and her own eyes will most vex her, by witnessing so
plainly what she has done.

3. O what a parting water is Gods judgment, which in a moment shall separate
the metals so different? O what a division will then be made of some men which
now live upon the earth? Some shall be made clear and bright like the stars
of heaven, and others like Coals burning in hell. O what a dreadful change
will it be to a damned soul at her separation from this life, to live only in
the company of devils in that piercing sense of torments, and eternal
punishment? It is a very troublesome thing, to be tied with silken strings in a
bed of Roses for the space of eight days together. What may we then think of a
damned soul which must dwell in a bed of flames so long as there shall be a God.

4. Make use of the time given you to work your salvation, and live such a life
as may end with a happy death, and so obtain that favorable judgment, which
shall say; Come, O thou soul blessed of God my Father, possess the kingdom
which is prepared for thee from the beginning of the world. There is no better
means to avoid the rigor of Gods judgments, then to fear them continually.
Im^tate the tree (mentioned in an Emblem) which being designed to make a ship,
and finding it self wind shaken as it grew upon the land, said, what will
become of me in the sea? If we be already moved in this world, by the bare
consideration of the punishment due to sin, think what it will be in that vast
sea and dreadful Abyss of Gods judgments.

Aspirations.
O King of dreadful Majesty, who do justly dam and undeservedly save souls;
save me O fountain of mercy. Remember thy self (sweet Jesus) that I was the
cause of that great journey which thou tookest from God to man; and do not
destroy me in that dreadful day, which must decide the Question of my life or
death for all eternity. Take care of my last end, since thou art the cause of
my beginning, and the only cause of all that I am. O Father of bounties
would thou stop a mouth which desires so earnestly to praise and confess
thee everlastingly? Alas (O eternal Sweetness) would thou dam a soul which
has cost thee so much sweat and blood, giving it for ever to those cruel and
accursed p^wers of darkness? Rather O Lord pierce my heart with such a fear of
thy judgments, that I may always dread and never feel them: If I forget,
awake my memory, if I fly from thee, recall me again: If I defer my
amendment, stay for me; If I return, do not despise my soul, but open those
arms of mercy, which thou did spread upon the Cross, with such rigorous
justice against thy self, for satisfaction of my sins.

The Gospel upon Tuesday the first week in Lent, out of S. Matthew. 21.
Jesus drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.
ANd when he was entered Jerusalem, the whole city was moved, saying, Who is
this? And the people said, this is Jesus the Prophet, of Nazareth in Galilee.
And Jesus entered into the Temple of God, and cast out all that sold and bought
in the Temple, and the Tables of the bankers, and the chairs of them that sold
pigeons he overthrew: and he says to them, it is written, my house shall be
called the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of thieves. And there
came to him the blind and the lame in the temple: and he healed them. And the
chief Priests and Scribes seeing the mavelous things that he did, and the
children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David: they
had indignation and said to him, hear thou what these say? And Jesus said to
them very well, have you never read, that out of the mouths of infants and
sucklings thou have perfected praise? and leaving them, he went forth out of
the city into Bethania and remained there.

Moralities.
1. JEsus entering into Jerusalem, went strait to the Temple, as a good Son
goes to his Fathers house; as a high Priest to the Sanctuary; and as a
sacrifice to the altar. He does very lively interest himself in the goods of
His heavenly Father, and chaseth out every profane thing out of that sacred
place to give thereby glory to the living God, and to put all things in order.
It is a wicked stain to Religion when Ecclesiastical persons are vicious and
when Churches are profaned. Saint Chrysostom sai h, that priests are the
heart of the Church, but when they are wicked they turn all into sin. A
decaying tree has alvvayes some ill quality about the root; so when any
people are without discipline, the pastors are without virtue. The want of
reverence in Churches, begets the contempt of God; they cannot have Jesus in
their hearts when they give him affronts even in his own Temple.

2. His House (says he) is a house of prayer; but your heart should be the
sanctuary and your lips the door. So long as you are without the exercise of
prayer, you shall be like a Be without a sting, which can make neither honey
nor wax. Prayer is the chiefest and most effectual means of that Angelical
conversation to which God calls us, by the merits of his passion, and by the
effects of his triumphant resurrection. It is the sacred business which man
has with God, and (to speak with Saint Gregory Nazianzen) it is the art to
make our souls divine. Before all things you must put into an order, the
number, the time, the place, the manner of your prayers; and be sure that you
pay unto God this tribute with respect, ferver, and perseverance. But if you
desire to make a very good prayer, learn betimes to make a prayer of all your
life. Incense has no smell without fire, and prayer is of no force without
charity. A man must converse innocently, purely with men, that desires to Treat
worthily with God.

3. Keep your person and your house clean from ill managing all holy things,
and from those irreverences, which are sometimes committed in Churches. It is a
happy thing for a man to be ignorant of the trade of buying and selling
benefices, and to have no intercourse with the tribunals of iniquity. Many
other sins are written in sand, and blown away with a small breath of Gods
mercy; But the faults of so great impiety, are carved upon a corner of the
altar, with a graver of steel, or with a diamond point, as the Prophet says.
He deserves to be made eternally culpable, who dries up the fountain, which
should wast himself or poisons the stream, which he himself must drink; or
contaminates the sacraments, which are given him to purify his soul.

Aspirations.
SPirit of God which by reason of thy eminent height can pray to no body, and
yet by thy divine wisdom make all the world pray to thee. Give me the gift
of prayer, since it is the mother of wisdom; the seal of virginity, the
sanctuary for our evils, and fountain of al our goods. Grant that I my adore
thee in Spirit with reverence, steadfastness and perseverance: and if it be thy
divine pleasure that I pray unto thee as I ought; inspire unto me (by thy
vittue) such prayers as thou will hear by thy bounty.

The Gospel upon Wednesday the first week of Lent, S. Matthew. 12.
The Pharisees demand a sign of Jesus.
THen answered him certain of the Scribes and Pharisees, saying, Master we
would see a sign from thee, who answered, and said to them.

The wicked and advouterous generation seeks a sign: and a sign shall not be
given it, but the sign of Jonas the Prophet: For as Jonas was in the Whales
belly three days and three nights: so shall the Son of man be in the heart
of the earth three days and three nights. The men of Nineveh shall rise in the
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, because they did penance
at the preaching of Jonas. And behold more then Jonas here. The Queen of the
south shall rise in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it;
because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
behold more then Solomon here. And when an unclean spirit shall go out of a
man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest and finds not. Then he
says, I will return into my house whence I came out. And coming he finds it
vacant, swept with besomes, and trimmed, then goes he and takes with him
seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and dwell
there; and the last of that man be made worse then the first. So shall it be
also to this wicked generation.

As he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother and his brethren
stood without, seeking to speak to him, and one said unto him, behold thy
mother and thy brethren stand without seeking thee. But he answering him that
told him, said, who is my mother, and who are my brethren? And stretching forth
his hand upon his Disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren: for
whosoever shall do the will of my Father that is in heaven, he is my brother,
and sister, and mother.

Moralities.
1. It Is a very ill sign when we desire signs to make us believe in God. The
signs which we demand to fortify out faith are ofttimes marks of our
infidelity. There is not a more dangerous plague in the events of worldly
affairs then to deal with the Devil, or to cast nativities. All these things
fill men whith more saults then knowledge. For divine Oracles have more need to
be reverenced then interpreted. He that will find God must seek him with
simplicity, and profess him with piety.

2. Some require a sign, and yet between heaven and earth, all is full of
signs. How many creatures soever there are, they are all steps and characters
of the Divinity. What a happy thing it is to study what God is by the volume of
time, and by that great Book of the world. There is not so small a flower of
the meddows, nor so little a creature upon earth, which does not tell us some
news of him. He speaks in our ears by all creatures, which are so many
Organ-pipes to convey his Spirit and voice to us. But he has no sign so great,
as the word incarnate which carries all the types of his glory and power. About
him only should be all our curiosity, our knowledge, our admiration, and our
love, because in him we can be sure to find all our repose and consolation.

3. Are we not very miserable since we know not our own good but by the loss
of it, which makes us esteem so little of those things we have in our hands?
The Ninivites did hear old Jonas the Prophet. The Queen of Saba came from far
to hear the wisdom of Solomon: Jesus speaks to us usually from the Pulpits,
from the Altars; in our conversations, in our affairs and recreations: And yet
we do not sufficiently esteem his words nor inspirations. A surfeited spirit
mislikes honey, and is distasted with manna, raving after the rotten pots of
Egypt. But it is the last and worst of all ills to despise our own good. Too
much confidence is mother of an approaching danger: A man must keep himself
from relapses which are worse then sins, which are the greatest evils of the
world; he that loves danger shall perish in it. The first sin brings with it
one Devil, but the second brings seven: There are some who vomit up their
sins as the sea does cockles to swallow them again. Their life is nothing but
an ebbing and flowing of sins, and their most innocent retreats, are a
disposition to iniquity. For as boild water does soonest freez, because the
cold works upon it with the greater force; so those little fervours of
devotion, which an unfaithful soul feels in confessions, and receiving (if it
be not resolute quite to forsake wickedness) serve for nothing else but to
provoke the wicked spirit, to make a new impression upon her: It is then we
have most reason to fear Gods justice, when we despise his mercy. We become
nearest of kin to him, when his Ordinances are followed by our manners, and our
life by his precepts,

Aspirations.
O Word Incarnate, the great sign of thy heavenly Father, who carriest all the
marks of his glory, and all the characters of his powers. It is thou alone whom
I seek, whom I esteem and honor: All that I see, all I understand, all that I
feel, is nothing to me, if it do not carry thy name, and take color from thy
beauties, nor be animated by thy Spirit. Thy conversation has no trouble, and
thy presence no distaste. O let me never lose by my negligence, what I possess
by thy bounty. Keep me from relapses, keep me from the second gulf, and second
hell of sin. He is too blind that profits noting by experience of his own
wickedness, and by a full knowledge of thy bounties.

The Gospel upon Thursday the first week in Lent, out of S. Matthew the 15.
Of the woman of Canaan.
ANd Jesus went forth from thence, and retired into the quarters of Tire and
Sidon. And behold a woman of Canaan came forth out of these coasts, and crying
out said to him, have mercy upon me, O Lord, the Son of David: my daughter is
sore vexed of a Devil, who answered her not a word. And his Disciples came and
besought him, saying, dismiss her, because she cries out after us: And he
answering, said; I was not sent but to the sheep that are lost of the house of
Israel. But she came and adored him, saying, Lord help me, who answering, said;
It is not good to take the bread of children, and to cast it to the dogs: but
she said, yea Lord: for the dogs also eat of the crumbs that fall from the
tables of their masters. Then Jesus answering said to her, O woman great is thy
faith, be it done to thee as thou will: and her daughter was made whole from
that hour.

Moralities.
1. OUr Savior Jesus Christ, after his great and wondrous descent from heaven
to earth; from being infinite to be finite; from being God to be man; used many
several means for salvation of the world. And behold entering upon the
frontiers of Tire and Sidon, he was pleased to conceal himself: But it is very
hard to avoid the curiosity of a woman, who seeking his presence, was thereby
certain to find the full point of her felicity. A very small beam of
illumination reflecting upon her, carried her out of her Country, and a little
spark of light brought her to find out the clear streams of truth. We must not
be tired with seeking God, and when we have found him, his presence should not
diminish but increase our desire to keep him still. We are to make entrance
into our happiness by taking fast hold of the first means offered for our
salvation; and we must not refuse or lose a good fortune which knocks at our
door.

2. Great is the power of a woman when she applies her self to virtue; behold
at one instant, how one of that sex assails God and the devil, prevailing with
the one by submission, and conquering the other by command: And he which gave
the wide Sea arms to contain all the world, finds his own chains of a prayer
which himself did inspir^^ She draws unto her (by a pious violence) the God of
all strength, such was the fervency of her prayer, such was the wisdom of he^
answers, and such the faith of her words. As he passed away without speaking,
she has the boldness to call him to her; whiles he i^ silent, she prays;
when he excuses himself, she adores him; when he refuses her suit, she draws
him to her. To be short, she i^ stronger then the Patriarch Jacob, for whe^^ he
did wrestle with the Angel, he returned lame from the conflict; but this woman
after she had been so powerful with God, returns strait to her house, there to
see her victories, and possess her conquests.

3. Mark with what weapons she overcame the greatest of all conquerours.
Chatity drew her from home to seek health for her daughter, because like a good
mother, she loved her not with a luxurious love, but in her affliction; feeling
all her dolours, by their passionate reflection upon her heart. Her faith was
planted upon so firm a rock, that amongst all the appearances of despair, her
hope remained constant. Humility did effect that the name of Dog, was given her
for a title of glory, she making profit of injuries, and converting into honor
the greatest contempt of her person. Her words were low and humble, but her
faith was wondrous high, since in a moment she chased away the devil, saved her
daughter, and changed the word Dog into the name of a Sheep of Christ's flock,
as Sedulius writes. Perseverance was the last of her virtues in the Combat, but
it was the first which gained her Crown. If you will imitate her in these four
virtues; Love, Faith, Humility, and Perseverance, they are the principal
materials of which the body of your perfection must be compounded.

Aspiration.
O Jesus Christ, Son of David, I remember well that thy forefather did by his
harp chase away a devil from Saul. And wilt not thou, who art the Father of all
blessed harmonies, drive away from me so many little spirits, of Affections,
Appetites and Passions, which trouble and discompose my heart; This poor soul,
which is the breath of thy mouth, and daughter of thine infinite bounties, is
(like the Sun under a cloud) possessed with many wicked spirits, but it has
none worse then that of self-love. Look upon me (O Lord) with thine eyes of
mercy, and send me nor away with silence, since thou art the Word. Rather call
me Dog, so that I may be suffered to gather up the crumbs which fall from thy
table. Whatsoever proceeds from thy mouth is sacred, and must be taken by me as
a relick. If thou say I shall obtain my desire, I say I will have no other,
then what thou inspirest, and I can be contented with nothing, but what shall
be thy blessed will and pleasure.

The Gospel upon Friday the first week in Lent, St. John 15.
Of the Probatick Pond.
AFter these things, there was a festival day of the Jews, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem: and there is at Jerusalem upon Probatica, a Pond, which in Hebrew is
named Bethsaida, having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of sick
persons, of blind, lame, withered, expecting the stirring of the water. And an
Angel of our Lord descended at a certain time into the pond? and the water was
stirred. And he that had gon^ down first into the pond after the stirring of
the water, was made whose of whatsoever infirmity he was holden. And there was
a certain man there that had been eight and thirty years in his infirmity. Him
when Jesus had seen lying, and knew that he had now a long time, he says to
him, Will thou be made whole? The sick man answered him, Lord, I have no man,
when the water is troubled, to put me into the pond: for whiles I come, another
goes down before me. Jesus says to him, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk. And
forthwith he was made whole: and he took up his bed, and walked. And it was the
Sabbath that day. The Jews therefore said to him that was healed, it is the
Sabbath, thou may not take up thy bed. He answered them, he that made me
whole, he said to me, take up thy bed, and walk. They asked him therefore, What
is that man that said to thee, take up thy bed and walk? But he that was made
whole, knew not who it was. For Jesus shrunk aside from the multitude standing
in the place. Afterward Jesus finds him in the temple, and said to him.
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest some worse thing chance to thee.
That man went his way, and told the Jews that it was Jesus that made him whole.

Moralities.
1. ALl the world is but one great Hospital, wherein so many persons languish
expecting the moving of the water, and the time of their good fortune. The
Angels of earth which govern our fortunes go not so fast as our desires. But
Jesus who is the great Angel of council, is always ready to cure our
maladies; to support our weakness, and make perfect our virtues. We need only
to follow his motions and inspirations, to meet with everlasting rest. It is a
lamentable thing, that some can patiently expect the barren favors of men
twenty or thirty years together, and yet will not continue three days in
prayer to seek the inestimamable graces of God.

2. The first step we must make toward our salvation is to desire it. That man
is worthy to be eternally sick, who fears nothing else but the loss of his
bodily health. Men generally do all what they can possibly to cure their
corporal infirmities; they abide a thousand vexations (which are but too
certain) to recover a health which is most uncertain. And as for the passions
of the mind, some love the Fevers of their own love, and their worldly
ambition above their own life. They suck the head of a venomous aspick, and are
killed by the tongue of a viper. They will not part with that which kills them;
and if you take from them the worm which makes them itch, or the executioner
who does indeed torment them, they believe you take away the chiefest of their
felicity. Happy is that soul which holds nothing so dear in this world, but
will forsake it willingly to find God, and will spare nothing to gain Paradise.

3. There is nothing more common, nor so rare as man. The world is full of
vicious and unprofitable men. But to find one very complete in all good things,
is to find a direct Phoenix. There are more businesses without men, then men
without businesses. For how many charitable employments might many lazy and
idle persons find out? So many poor men's affairs continue at a stand: so many
miserable creatures languish: so many desolate persons long to find some man
who (with little trouble to himself) would take some small care of their
affairs and make up a little piece of their fortunes. Jesus is the man of God
desired of all ages; to him we must apply our selves, since he is both life and
truth. By him we may come to all happiness, by him we may live in the fountains
and streams of life, and in him we may contemplate the chiefest of all truths.

Aspirations.
WHat patience have I in committing sins and how impatient am I in my
sufferings for them? I am ever most ready to execute vice, and unwilling to
abide the punishment. O good God, there are many years in which I have retained
an inclination to this disorder, to that sin. My soul is bound as it were with
Iron chains, in this unhappy bed: will there be no Angel to move the water for
me? But art not thou the Lord and Prince of Angels? Then I most humbly beseech
thee (O blessed Savior) do thou command, and by thy only word my affairs will
go well, and receive a happy dispatch; my body will become sound, my soul
innocent, my heart at rest, and my life an eternal Glory.

The Gospel upon Saturday the first week in Lent, and the Sunday following,
out of St. Matthew 17.
Of the Transfiguration of our Lord.
ANd after six days Jesus takes unto him Peter and James, and John his
brother, and brings them into a high mountain apart: and he was transfigured
before them. And his face did shine as the Sun: and his garments became white
as Snow. And behold there appeared to them, Moses and Elias talking with him.
And Peter answering, said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here, if thou will, let us make here three tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one
for Elias. And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them.
And lo, a voice out of the Cloud, saying, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased, hear ye him. And the Disciples hearing it, fell upon their
face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them: and he said to
them, Arise, and fear not. And they lifting up their eyes, saw no body, but
only Jesus. And as they descended from the mount, Jesus commanded them,
saying, Tell the vision to no body, till the Son of man be risen from the dead.

Moralities.
1. THe words of the Prophet Osee are accomplished; the nets and toils planted
upon mount Tabor not to catch birds but hearts. The mountain which before was a
den for Tigers and Panthers (according to the Story) is now beautified by our
Savior, and becomes a place full of sweetness and ravishments. Jesus appears
transfigured in the high robes of his glory. The cloud made him a pavilion of
gold, and the Sun made his face shine like it self. The heavenly Father does
acknowledge his Son as the true Prince of glory; Moses and Elias both appear in
brightness, the one bearing the Tables of the Law, and the other carried in a
burning Chariot (as Origin says, which made the Apostles know him. For the
Hebrews had certain figures of the most famous men of their Nation in books.
They both (as Saint Luke says) were seen in glory and Majesty; which fell upon
them by reflection of the beams which came from the body of Jesus, who is the
true fountain of brightness. The Apostles lose themselves in the deliciousness
of this great spectacle; and by ^eeing more then they ever did, desired to lose
their eyes. O that the world is most contemptible to him, that knows how to
value God as he ought. So many fine powders, so many pendents and favors of
Glass; so many Towers and Columns of dirt plastered over with gold are
followed by a million of Idolaters. To conclude, so many worldly ^ewels are
like the empty imaginations of a sick spirit, not enlightened by the beams of
truth. Let us rely upon the word (says Saint Augustine) which remains for
ever, while men pass like the water of a fountain, which hides it self in the
Spring, shows it self in the stream, and loses it self at last in the Sea. But
God is always himself, there needs no Tabernacle made by the hands of man, to
remain with him; for in Paradise, he is both the God and the Temple.

2. Tabor is yet but a small pattern, we must get all the piece; we must go to
the Palace of Angels and brightness, where the Tabernacles are not made by the
hands of men. There we shall see the face of the living God clearly and at
full: There the beauties shall have no vails to hide them from us: Our being
shall have no end: Our knowledges will not be subject to error, nor our loves
and affections to displeasure. O what a joy will it be to enjoy all, and desire
nothing; to be a Magistrate without a successor, to be a King with out an
enemy, to be rich without covetousness, to negotiate without money, and to be
everliving without fear of death.

3. But who can get up to this mountain, except he of whom the Prophet speaks?
who has innocent hands and a clean heart? who has not received his soul of
God in vain, to bury it in worldly pelf. To follow Jesus we must transform our
selves into him; by hearing and following his doctrine, since God the Father
proposes him for the teacher of mankind, and commands us to hearken unto him.
We must follow his examples, since those are the originalls of all virtues. The
best trade we can practice in this world is that of transfiguration: and we may
do it by reducing our form to the form of our Lord, and walking upon earth like
men in heaven. Then will the Sun make us have shining faces when purity shall
accompany all our actions and intentions. Our clothes shall be as white as
snow, when we shall once become innocent in our conversations, we shall then be
ravished like the Apostles, and after we have been at mount Tabor, we shall be
blind to the rest of the world, and see nothing but Jesus It is moreover to be
noted that our Saviou^ did at that time entertain himself with discourse of his
great future sufferings, and of his death, to teach us that his cross was the
step by which he mounted up to beatitude.

Aspirations.
O Blessed Palace, O Magnificent Tabor which this day did hold upon thee the
Prince of Glory; I love and admire thee, but I admire somewhat else above thee:
It is the heavenly Jerusalem, that triumphant company, that face of God; where
all those beauties are, which shall never cease to be beauties. It is for that
I live, for that I die, for that I languish with a holy impatience. O my Jesus,
my most benign Lord, transform me then into thee, that I may thereby be
transformed into God. If I have carried the earthly Image of Adam, why should I
not also carry the form of Jesus? Catch me O Lord within those tissued nets and
golden toils of brightness, which thou did plant upon this sacred mountain.
It is there I would leave mine eyes it is there I resolve to breath out my
soul. I ask no tabernacles to be their built for me, I have long since
contemplated thy heart, (O Father of essences and all bounties) as the most
faithful abode of my eternity.

The Gospel upon Monday the second week in Lent, St. John 8.
Jesus said unto the Jews, where I go, ye cannot come.
AGain therefore Jesus said to them, I go, and you shall seek me, and shall
die in your sin. Whither I go, you cannot come. The Jews therefore said, why
will he kill himself, because he says, whither I go, you cannot come? And he
said to them, you are of this world, I am not of this world. Therefore I say to
you, that you shall die in your sins. For if you believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins. They said therefore to him, Who art thou? Jesus said to
them, The beginning, who also speak to you. Many things. I have to speak and
judge of you: but he that sent me is true: and what I have heard of him, these
things I speak in the world. And they knew not that he said to them that his
Father was God. Jesus therefore said to them when you sha l have exalted the
Son of man, then you shall know that I am he, and of my self I do nothing, but
as the Father has taught me, these things I speak: and he that sent me is with
me: and he has not left me alone, because the things that please him, I do
always.

Moralities.
1. ONe of the greatest misfortunes of our life is, that we never sufficiently
know our own good, till we lose it. We fly from that we should seek: we seek
that we should avoid, and never begin to bevvail our losses, but when they
are not to be recovered. Those Jews possessed an inestimable treasure, by the
presence and conversation of the Son of God. But they set light by it, and so
at last they lamented amongst eternal flames, what they would not see in so
clear a light. Let us take heed of despising holy things, and avoid hardness
of heart, which is a gulf of unavoidable mischiefs.

2. It is a strange thing that God is so near us, and yet we so far from him.
That which hinders us from finding him, is because he is above and we below. We
are too much for the world; too fast nailed to the earth; too much bound to our
superfluous businesses and cares of this life; and too much subject to our own
appetites. He must not be slave to his body, that pretends to receive good from
God, who is a Spirit: He must not embark himself deeply into worldly matters,
who desires the society of Angels. He must pass from his sense to his reason,
from reason to grace, from grace to glory. If you desire to find God, search
for him as the three Kings did in the manger, in his humility: Look for him as
the blessed Virgin did in the temple, in his piety: Seek him as the Mary's did
in his Sepulcher, by the meditation of death: But stay not there, save only to
make a passage to life.

3. When you have lifted me up to the Cross (says our Savior) you shall know
that I am the true Son of God. And indeed ^t is a great wonder that the
infinite power of that Divinity would manifest it self in the infirmity of the
Cross. It was only for God to perform this great design, and ascend up to his
throne of Glory, by the basest disgraces of the world. The good thief saw no
other title or sign of his kingdom, but only his body covered over with
blood, and oppressed with dolours. He learned by that book of the Cross all
the glory of Paradise: and he apprehended that none but God could endure with
such patience so great torments. If you will be children of God, you must make
it appear by participation of his Cross and, by suffering tribulation: By that
Sun our Eagle tries his young ones, he who cannot abide that shining ray
sprinkled with blood, shall never attain to beatitude. It is not comely to see
t e members of a head crowned with thorn; sit in a rotten chair of delicacies.

Aspirations.
O Blessed Savior who do lift up all the earth with three fingers of thy
power, raise up a little this sinful mass of my body, which weighs down it
self so heavily. Give me the wings of an Eagle to fly after thee, for I am
constantly resolved to follow thee, whithersoever thou go: for though it
should be within the shadow of death, what can I fear being in the arms of
life? I am not of my self, nor of the world, which is so great a deceiver.
Since I am thine by so many titles, (which bind me to adoration) I will be so
in life, in death, in time, and for all eternity. I will take part of thy
sufferings, since they are the ensigns of our Christian warfare. Tribulation
is a most excellent engine; the more a man is kept under, the higher he mounts:
He descends by perfect humility, that he may ascend to thee by the steps of
glory.

The Gospel upon Tuesday the second week in Lent, S. Matthew the 23.
Jesus said, the Pharisees sit in Moses chair, believe therefore what they say.
THen Jesus speak to the multitudes and to his Disciples, saying, upon the
chair of Moses have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees. All things therefore
whatsoever they shall say to you observe ye and do ye: but according to their
works do ye not, for they say and do not: for they bind heavy burdens and
importable, and put them upon men's shoulders, but with a finger of their own
they will not move them. But they do all their works for to be seen of men for
they make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge their fringes. And they love
the first places at suppers, and the first chairs in the Synagogues, and
salutations in the market place, and to be called of men Rabbi: But be not you
called Rabbi; for one is your Master, and all you are brethren, And call none
father to your self upon earth, for one is your Father, he that is in Heaven,
neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, Christ: he that is the
greater of you shall be your servitour. And he that exalts himself shall be
humble: and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

Moralities.
1. IT is a very dangerous error to think that our Savior in this Gospel had
a purpose to introduce an Anarchy, and to make all men equal. He shows in
many places, that he would have Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Fathers and
Doctors. But he would not have men come to honors by a vain ambition, nor
others to honor them but only as they have dependency upon the power of God
Almighty. Let every soul (says the Apostle) be subject to higher powers, for
there is no power but it comes from God: He gives us superiors not for us to
judge, but to obey them. If a man cannot approve their manners, he must at
least reverence the character of their authority. They should be good
Christians for themselves, but they are superiors for us. He that resists
their power, does resist God who ordained them. And all the great evils
happening by heresies and rebellions, proceed from no other fountain, but from
contempt of powers established by the decree of heaven: A man may pretend zeal,
but there is no better sacrifice then that of obedience. If great persons abuse
their offices, God will find it out, and as their dignities are great, so their
punishment shall be answerable.

2. One of the greatest disorders of this life is, that we go for the most part
outwardly to please the world, and are little careful of a good inward
application of our selves to please God. Instead of taking the way of Gods
Image (from whence we all come) we are content to have virtues only by
imagination, and vices in their true essence. Nembroth professed himself a
servant of the true God, and yet adored the fire in secret. Jesus has many
worshippers in words, but few in truth. Some stand upon formalities, others
upon disguised habits, others amuse themselves about ceremonies, others go as
upon certain springs to make themselves counted wise. Most men would seem what
they are not, and much troubled to be seen what they are. All their time does
pass in fashions and countenances; but death and Gods judgments take of all
those maskes.

3. To say that we have seen a man exteriously devout and spiritual (except he
be so inwardly) is to say, we have seen a house without a foundation, a tree
without a root, a vessel move upon the sea without a bottom, and an excellent
clock without a spring. For the same which the foundation is to a house, the
root to a tree, the bottom to a ship, and the spring to a clock, the same is a
man's interior life to all virtue. What is a man the better who resembles
window cushions which are covered with velvet, and stuffed with hay; or to be
like the picture of Diana, in Homers Island, which wept to some, and laughed to
others. A little spark of a good conscience is better then all the lights of
the world. Why do we crucify our selves with so many dissimulations, so many
ceremonies, so many enforcements upon our natures, to serve and please men,
only to get smoke? He that sows wind (says the Prophet) shall reap a storm.
Let us live to our selves in the purity of a good conscience, and of a perfect
humility; if we desire to live for ever with God. Those shadows of false
devotion proceed from the leaves of that figtree, wherewith Adam and Eve
covered their nakedness: do not we know that hyprocrisie is the same thing to
virtue, which painting is to faces? and that it is the very moth which devours
sanctity, and will at the day of judgment make all those appear naked, which
to the world seem well apparelled.

Aspirations
O God of all truth, wherefore are there so many fictions, and counterfeit
behaviors? Must we always live to please the eyes of others, and run after
the shadow of vanity, which leaves nothing but illusion within our eyes, and
corruption in our manners. I will live unto thee (O fountain of lives) within
whom all creatures have life. I will retire my self into my own heart, and
negotiate with it by the secret feeling of a good conscience, that I may treat
with thee. What need I the eyes of men, if I have the eyes of God? They alone
are sufficient to do me good, since by the aspect they give happiness to all
the Saints. I will seek for thee (O my beloved Lord) from the break of day till
the dead time of the night. All places are solitary where thou art not, and
where thou art, there only is the fulness of all pleasures.

The Gospel upon Wednesday, the second week in lent, S. Mat. 20.
The request of the Wife of Zebedee for her sons James and John
ANd Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve Disciples secretly, and said
to them, behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be delivered
to the chief Priest and to the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified, and the third day he shall rise again.

Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee with her sons a loring
and desiring something of him, who said to her, what will thou? She says to
him, Say that these my two sons may sit one at thy right hand, and one at thy
left hand in thy Kingdom. And Jesus answering said, you know not what you
desire. Can ye drink of the cup that I shall drink of? They say to him we can,
He says to them, My cup indeed you shall drink of: but to sit at my right
hand and left, is not mine to give to you, but to whom it is prepared of my
Father.

Moralities.
1. WHat a short life have we, and yet such large and vast ambitions? We fear
every thing like mortal men, and yet desire all, as if we should be immortal
upon earth. It is a strange thing to observe how the desire of honor slides
even amongst the most refined devotions. Some one is counted an Angel of
heaven amongst men, who has not forsaken his pretenses upon earth. Ambition
sleeps in the bosoms of persons consecrated for the Altars. It overthrowes
some whom luxury could not stir; and moves those whom avarice could not touch.
We desire all to be known, and to seem what we are not: but this seeming is
that which does bewitch us. All passions grow old and weaker by age; only the
desire of worldly riches and honors, is a shirt which we never put off till we
come to the grave. Why do we so extremely torment our poor life, by running
after this shadow of honor, which we cannot follow without trouble, nor
possess without fear, nor lose without sorrow? Is it not astrange folly that
men love such vanities till the very last instant of their own ruins, and fear
nothing, so they may tumble into precipices of gold and silver?

2. What great pains you take for these children, as if they did not more
belong to God then you: you cast day and night where to place them when the
providence of God (which is the great Harbinger of the world) has already
marked their lodgings. One is settled in a good Religious course, another in the
grave, another perhaps shall have more then is necessary to make him a good
man. Eve imagined that her son Cain (having all the world) would have become
some great God, when ambition made him a devil incarnate. You shall rarely make
your children great Saints by getting them great honors. You desire they
should possess all that which overthrows them; and pretending to make a
building with one hand, you destroy it with the other. By all your earnest
wishes, and all your laborious endeavors (for advancement of your children)
you effect nothing, but thereby give them inticements to pleasure and weapons
for iniquity.

3. Whereupon should we build our ambitions, if not upon the blood of the holy
Lamb? At the foot of the Cross we behold a God covered with blood, crowned with
thorns, and reproaches, who warns us to be humble; and at the same time we
egarly pursue worldly glory and ambition: We resemble that unhappy daughter of
Miltiades, who did prostitute her self under her fathers Trophies. By our
unmeasurable hunting after honors amongst the ignominies of Jesus Christ, we
abandon our selves to dishonor, and make no other use of the Cross, but only
to be a witness of our infidelity.

Aspirations.
AVoid, be gone you importunate cares of worldly goods and honors; you little
tyrants which burn the blood within our veins, and fill the most innocent
pleasures of our life with bitter sorows, what have I more to do with you? My
children shall be what God will. They shall be but too rich when they have
virtue for their portion, and but too high when they shall see a true contempt
of the world under their feet. God forbid that I should go about any worldly
throne upon the holy Lambs blood, or that I should talk of honors, when there
is mention made of the holy cross. O Jesus thou father of all true glories,
thou shall from henceforth be my only crown. All greatness where thou art
not, shall to me be only baseness, I will mount up to thee by the stairs of
humility, since by those thou came down to me. I will kiss the paths of
mount Calvary, which thou have sprinkled with thy precious blood, and esteem
the Cross, above all worldly things, since thou have consecrated it by thy
cruel pains; and brought us forth upon that dolours bed to the day of thy
eternity.

The Gospel upon Thursday the second week in Lent, out of S. Luke 16.
Of the rich Glutton and poor Lazarus.
THere was a certain rich man, and he was clothed with purple and silk, and he
fared every day magnifically. And there was a certain beggar called Lazarus,
that lay at his gate full of sores, desiring to be filled of the crumbs that
f^ll from the rich man's table, but the dogs also came, and licked his sores.
And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried of the Angels into
Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died, and he was buried in hell, and
lifting up his eyes, when he was in torments, he saw Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom. And he crying said, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and
send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger into water, for to cool my
tongue, because I am tormented in this flame. And Abraham said to him, son
remember that thou did receive good things in thy life time, and Lazarus
likewise evil: but now he is comforted, and thou tormented. And beside all
these things, between us and you, there is fixed a great Chaos: that they which
will pass from hence to you, may not, neither go from thence hither. And he
said, then, fath r, I heseech thee that thou would send him to my fathers
house, for I have five br^thren, for to testify unto them, lest they also come
into this place of torments. And Abraham said to him, they have Moses and the
Prophets: let them hear them. But he said, no, father Abraham, but if some man
shall go from the dead to them, they will do penance. And he said to him, if
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither if one shall rise again from the
dead, will they believe.

Moralities.
1. A Rich man and a poor, meet in this world, the one laden with treasures,
the other with ulcers. They both meet in the other world, the one in a gulf of
fire, the other in an Abyss of delights: Their ends are as different as their
lives were contrary: to teach us that he which shall consider rightly, the end
of all worldly sins and vanities will have in horror the desire of them. And
as there is nothing, for which godly poor men may not hope, so is there nothing
which wicked rich men should not fear. He that is proud of riches, is proud of
his burdens, and chains, but if he unload them upon the poor, he will be eased
of his pain, and secured in his way.

2. The life of man is a marvelous Comedy; wherein the greatest part of our
actions are played under a curtain, which the divine providence draws over them
to cover us. It concealed poor Lazarus, and kept him in obscurity, like the
fish which we never see till it be dead. But Jesus draws the curtain, and makes
himself the historian of this good poor man, showing us the state of his soul,
of his body, of his life and death. He makes him appear in Abraham's bosom as
within the temple of rest and happiness, and makes him known to the rich man as
to the treasurer of hells riches. Are not we unworthy the name which we carry,
when we despise the poor, and hate poverty as the greatest misery? since the
Son of God having once consecrated it upon the throne of his Manger, made it
serve for his spouse during life, and his bride maid at the time of his death.

3. This rich glutton dreamed, and at the end of his dream found himself buried
in hell. All those pomps of his life were scattered in an instant as so many
nocturnall illusions, and his heart filled with eternal grief and torment. His
first misery is a sudden, unexpected and hideous change from a huge sea of
delicacies, into an unsufferable gulf of fire: where he does acknowledge that
one of the greatest vexations in misery is to have been happy. Another disaster
which afflicts him, is to see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, to teach us that the
damned are tormented by Paradise, even to the very lowest par of Hell; and that
the most grievous of their torments is, they can never forget their loss of
God, So says Theophilact that Adam was placed over against the terrestrial
Paradise from whence he was banished, that in his very punishment he might see
the happiness he had lost by his foul fault. Now you must add to the rest of
his sufferings the great Chaos which (like a diamond wall) is between hell and
Paradise, together with the privation of all comfort; those losses without
remedy; that wheel of eternity, where death lasts for ever, and the end
begins again without ceasing, and the torments can never fail or diminish.

4. Do good with those goods which God has given you, and suffer them not to
make you wicked; but employ your riches by the hands of virtue: If gold be a
child of the Sun, why do you hide him from his father? God chose the bosom of
rich Abraham, to be the Paradise of poor Lazarus. So may you make the needy
feel happiness by your bounty; your riches shall raise you up, when they are
trodden under your feet. The Prophet says, you must sow in the field of Alms,
if you desire to reap in the mouth of Mercy.

Aspirations.
O God of justice, I tremble at the terror of thy judgments. Great fortunes
of the world (full of honor and riches) are fair trees, often times the more
ready for the ax: Their weight makes them apt to fall, and prove the more
unhappy fuel for eternal flames. O Jesus, father of the poor, and King of the
rich, I most humbly beseech thee never give my heart in prey to covetousness,
which (by loading me with land) may make me forget heaven. I know that death
must consume me to the very bones, and I shall then possess nothing but what I
have given for thee. Must I then live in this world (like a Griffin) to hoard
up much gold and silver, whereof I shall never have use, and still be vexed
with care how to preserve it? O most merciful Lord, suffer me not to be taught
by hell fire, that which I may have neglected to learn out of thy Gospel. I
most heartily renounce all luxury and pomp of the world, and this carnal life,
which would always busy it self about my body. If thou be pleased to make me
rich, I will be so for the poor; and if thou make me poor, I will make my self
rich in thee, who art the true riches of thine elect.

The Gospel upon Friday the second week in Lent, S. Matthew. 21.
Of the Master of a Vineyard whose Son was killed by his Farmers.
ANother Parable hear ye: A man there was, an householder, who planted a
Vineyard, and made a hedge round about it, and dug in it a press, and
builded a Tower, and let it out to Husbandmen, and went forth into a strange
Country. And when the time of fruis drew, nigh, he sent his servants to the
Husbandmen, to receive the fruits thereof. And the Husbandmen apprehending his
servants, one they beat, another they killed, and another they stoned. Again,
he sent other servants more then the former; and they did to them likewise. And
last of all he sent to them his Son, saying, They will reverence my Son. But
the Husbandmen seeing the Son, said within themselves, This is the heir, come
let us kill him, and we shall have his inheritance. And apprehending him, they
cast him forth out of the Vineyard, and killed him. When therefore the Lord of
the Vineyard shall come, what will he do to those Husbandmen? They say to him,
The naughty men he will bring to naught: and his Vineyard he will let out to
other Husbandmen, that shall render him the fruits of their seasons.

Jesus says to them, have you never read in the Scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the corner? By our
Lord was this done, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Therefore I say to you,
that the Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given to a
Nation yielding the fruits thereof. And he that falls upon this stone, shall
be broken: and on whom it falls it shall all to bruise him. And when the
chief Priests and Pharisees had heard his Parables, they knew that he spoke of
them. And seeking to lay hands upon him, they feared the multitudes: because
they held him as a Prophet.

Moralities.
1. We have reason to fear all that is in us, yea even the gifts of God: All
his favors are so many chains; If they bind us not to do our duty, they will
bind us to the punishment due for that neglect. Our soul is given us by God as
a thing borrowed from heaven, we must not be too prodigal of it. We must dig
up ill roots as we do in land cultivated: The time will come, that we must
render up the fruits; and shall we then present thorns? Examine every day how
you profit, and what you do: draw every day a line, but draw it toward
eternity. What can you hide from God who knows all? What can you repay to God
who gives all? and how can you requite Jesus who has given himself?

2. How many messengers does God send to our hearts without intermission, and
how many inspirations which we reject? So many Sermons which we do not observe,
and so many examples which we neglect. Jesus comes in person by the Scrament of
the Altar, and we drive him from us, to crucify him, when we place the Devil
and Mortal sin in his room. What other thing can we expect for reward of all
these violences, but a most fearful destruction, if ye do not prevent the sword
of justice, by walking in the paths of mercy? Our vanities which at first are
like small threads, by the contempt of Gods grace, come to be great cables of
sin. He that defers his repentance is in danger to lose it, and will be kept
out of the Ark with the croking Raven, since he has neglected the mourning of
the sorrowful Dove.

3. It is a most horrible thing to see a soul left to it self, after it has so
many times for, saken the inspirations of God. It becomes a desolate Vineyard,
without enclosure. The wild Boar enters into it and all unclean and ravenous
creatures do there sport and leap without control. God hangs clouds over it,
but will let no drop of water fall upon it. The Sun never looks upon it with a
loving eye: all there, is barren, venomous, and near to hell. Therefore above
all things we must fear to be forsaken of God. Mercy provoked, changes it self
into severe Justice. All creatures will serve (as Gods instruments) to punish a
fugitive soul, which flies from him by her ingratitude, when he draws her to
him by the sweetness of his benefits.

Aspirations.
ALas, O great father of the worlds family I am confounded to see thy vineyard
so ill ordered, made so barren and spoiled. My passions domineer, like wild
beasts, and devour the fruits due to thy bounty. I am heartily sorry I have so
little esteemed thy graces, and to have preferred all that (which makes me
contemptible) before thee. I do this day renounce all the abuses of my soul. I
will grow and prosper under thy blessings: I will flourish under thy aspect,
and fructify under thy protection. Command only thy graces and sweet dews of
heaven (which are as paps of thy favors) to rain upon me and water this rotten
trunk of my heart. Speak to that eye of love; that beautiful eye of Jesus that
it will shine upon me but once with that ray, which does make souls happy for
ever.

The Gospel upon Saturday the second week in Lent, S. Luke 15.
Of the prodigal Child.
ANd he said, a certain man had two sons; and the younger of them said to his
father, Father, give me the portion of substance that belongs to me: and he
divided ^ unto them the substance. And not many days after, the younger son
gathering all his things together, went from home into a far Country, and
there he wasted his substance, living riotously. And after he had spent all,
there f^ll a sore famine in that Country, and he began to be in need: and ^he
went and cleaved to one of the Citizens of that Country, and he sent him into
his Farm to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his belly of the husks
that the swine did eat, and no body gave unto him. And returning to himself, he
said, How many of my fathers hirelings have abundance of bread, and I here
perish for famine? I will arise, and will go to my father, and say to him,
father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, I am not now worthy to
be called thy son, make me as one of thy hirelings. And rising up he came to
his father; and when he was yet far off, his father saw him, and was moved with
mercy, and running to him, fell upon his neck and kissed him. And his son said
to him Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, I am not now
worthy to be called thy son. And the father said to his servants, Quickly bring
forth the first stole, and do it on him, and put a ring upon his hand, and
shoes upon his feet, and bring the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat
and make merry, because this my son was dead, and is revived, was lost, and is
found. And they began to make merry. But his elder son was in the field, and
when he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard music and dancing: and he
called one of the servants, and asked what these things should be? And he said
to him, Thy brother is come and thy father has killed the fatted calf, because
he has received him safe. But he had indigination, and would not go in. His
father therefore going forth, began to desire him. But he answering, said to
his father, Behold, so many years do I serve thee, and I never transgressed thy
commandment, and thou did never give me a kid to make merry with my friends.
But after that thy son, this that has devoured his substance with whores, is
come, thou have killed for him the fatted calf. But he said to him, Son, thou
art always with me, and all my things are thine. But it behoved us to make
merry and be glad, because this thy brother was dead, and is revived; was lost,
and is found.

Moralities.
1. THis parable is a true table expressing the excursions of a prodigal soul
and her return to the mercy of God by the way of repentance. Note that the
first step which she trod toward her own destruction (as Cain did) was her
departing from God, not by changing of place, but of heart. It departed from
the chiefest light, which made it fall into an eclipse of reason and so into
profound darkness. She diverted her self from the greatest bounty, which made
her incline toward all wickedness (being strayed from her sovereign being)
which made her become just nothing.

2. She continued in sin, as in a country which was just nothing, where she
was vexed on all sides with disquiet, with cares, with fears and discontents.
All sins toss their followers, as the ball is tossed at Baloon. Vanity sends
them to pride: pride to violence; violence to avarice: avarice to ambition,
ambition to pomp and riot: pomp to gluttony: gluttony to luxury: luxury to
idleness: idleness to contempt and poverty, and that poverty brings them to
all worldly misery. For all mischiefs follow a wicked soul which departing from
God thinks to find a better condition.

3. Affliction opens the eyes of man, and makes him come to himself that he may
the better return to God. There is no journey so far as when a man departs
from himself not by place but by manners, A sea of Licentiousness interposeth
it self between his soul and innocence, to divorce her from the way of
goodness: But Gods grace is a burning wind, which dries it up; and having
brought man to himself, takes him by the hand and leads him even to God.

4. O what a happy thing it is to consider the effects of Gods mercy in the
entertainment of the good father to his prodigal son: The one had lost all
which he had of a good son: but the other had not lost what belonged to a
good father. The son had yet said nothing, when fatherly affection pleaded
for him in the heart of his father; who felt the dolours of a spiritual
labor; and his entrails were moved to give a second birth to his son. Though
he were old, yet he went the pace of a young man: Charity gives him wings to
fly to the embracements of his lost child. He is most joyful of all that
comes with him, eve^ of his very poverty. This without doubt should give us a
mavelous confidence in Gods mercy, when we seek it with hearty repentance. It
is a sea of bounty which washes away all that is amiss. Since he has changed
the name of master into that of father, he will rather command by love, then
reign by a predominant power. No man ought to despair of pardon except he, who
can be as fully wicked as God is good, none is so merciful as God, none is so
good a father as he: for when you may have lost your part of all his virtues,
you can never (while you live) lose the possibility of his mercy. He will
receive you between his arms without any other reason but your return by
repentance.

5. The same Parable is also a true glass showing the life of those young
unthrists, who think they are born only for sport, for their bellies and for
pleasure. They imagine their fathers keep for them the golden mines of Peru;
and their life being without government, their expenses are without measure.
Some of them run through the world; they wander into all places, but never
enter into consideration of themselves. They return from forain parts, laden
with debts, and bring home nothing but some new fantastical fashions, irps,
cringes, and corantoes. There are many of them in whom pride and misery
continue inseparable, after they have lost their money and their brains. Their
fathers are causes of their faults, by gathering so much wealth for those, who
know not how to use it. Yet if they have the true repentance of the prodigal
child, he must not deny them pardon: But mercy must not be had of those who ask
it by strong hand, or seek it by a counterfeit sorrow.

Aspirations.
IT is an accursed wandering to travel into the country of nothing. Where
pleasure drops down as water from a storm; the miserable consequences whereof
have leaden feet, which never remove from the heart. Good God what a country
is that where the earth is made of quicksilver, which steals it self from under
our feet when we think to tread upon it What a country is that where if a man
gathered one bud of roses, he must be forced to eat a thousand thorns, and be
companion with the most nasty, filthy beasts in their stinking ordures, and be
glad to eat of their loathsome draffe for want of other meat. Alas, I have
suffered, and such a misery as this, is necessary to make me remember the
happiness which I possessed in thy house: O merciful Father behold my
prodigal soul which returns to thee and will have no other advocate but thy
goodness; which as yet pleads for me within thy heart. I have consumed all
which I had, but I could not consume thy mercy. For that is an Abyss which
surpasses that of my sins, and miseries. Receive me as a mercenary servant, If
I may not obtain the name of a son. Why should not thou receive that which
is thine, since the wicked spirits have taken that which was not theirs? Either
show me mercy, or else show me a heart more fatherly then thine, and if
neither earth nor heaven can find the like, to whom would thou have me go
but to thy self, who do not yet cease to call me?

The Gospel upon the third Sunday in Lent. S. Luke 11.
Jesus cast out the Devil which was dumb
ANd he was casting out a devil, and that was dumb. And when he had cast out
the devil, the dumb spoke, and the multitudes marvelled. And certain of them
said, in Beelzebub the Prince of Devils he casts out Devils. And other
tempting, asked him a sign from Heaven. But he seeing their cogitations, said
to them: Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall be made desolate, and
house upon house shall fall. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how
shall his Kingdom stand? because you say, that in Beelzebub I do cast out
Devils. And if I in Beelzebub cast out Devils; your children, in whom do they
cast out? Therefore they shall be your judges. But if I in the singer of God do
cast out Devils, surely the Kingdom of God is come upon you. When the strong
armed keeps his court, those things are in peace that he possesses; but if a
stronger then he come upon him, and overcome him, he will take away his whole
armor, wherein he trusted, and will distribute his spoils. He that is not with
me, is against me; And he that gathers not with me, scatters. When the
unclean spirit shall depart out of a man, he wandreth through places without
water, seeking rest; and not finding, he says, I will return into my house
whence I departed. And when he is come, he finds it swept with a besome, and
trimmed. Then he goes and takes seven other spirits worse then himself, and
entering in they dwell there. And the last of that man be made worse then the
first.

And it came to pass, when he said these things, a certain woman lifting up
her voice out of the multitude, said to him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps that thou did suck. But he said, Yea rather, blessed are
they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Moralities.
1. THe Almond tree is the first which begins to flourish, and is often first
nipt with frost. The tongue is the first thing which moves in a man's body, and
is soonest caught with the snares of Satan. That man deserves to be speechless
all his life, who never speaks a word better then silence.

2. Jesus, the eternal word of God, came upon earth to reform the words of
man: his life was a lightning, and his word a thunder, which was powerful
in effect, but alvvayes measured within his bounds. He did fight against ill
tongues in his life, and conquered them all in his death. The gall and vinegar
which he took, to expiate the sins of this unhappy tongue, do show how great
the evil was, since it did need so sharp a remedy. He has cured by suffering
his dolours what it deserved by our committing sins* Other vices are
determined by one act, the tongue goes to all: it is a servant to all malicious
actions, and is generally confederate with the heart in all crimes.

3. We have just so much Religion as we have government of our tongues: A
little thing serves to tame vvild beasts, and a small stern will serve to
govern a ship; Why then cannot a man rule so small a part of his body? Is it
not sufficient to avoid lying, perjuries, quarrels, injuries, slanders and
blasphemies, such as the Scribes and Pharisees did vomit out in this Gospel
against the purity of the Son of God. We must also repress idle talk, and
other frivolous and unprofitable discourses. There are some persons who have
their hearts so loose, that they cannot keep them within their breasts, but
they will quickly swim upon their lips, without thinking what they say, and
so make a shift to vvound their souls.

4. Imitate a holy Father called Sisus, who prayed God thirty years together
every day to deliver him from his tongue, as from a capital enemy: You shall
never be very chaste of your body, except you do very well bridle your tongue.
For loosnesse of the flesh proceeds sometimes from liberty of the tongue:
Remember your self that your heart should go like a clock, with all the just
and equal motions of his springs, and that your tongue is the finger, which
shows how all the hours of the day pass When the heart goes of one side, and
the tongue of another, it is a sure desolation of your spirits kingdom. If
Jesus set it once at peace and quiet, you must be very careful to keep it so;
and be very fearful of relapses. For the multiplying of long continued sins,
brings at last hell it self upon a man's shoulders.

Aspirations.
O Word incarnate, to whom all just tongues speak, and after whom all hearts do
thirst and languish; chase from us all prating devils, and also those which are
dumb: the first provoke and loose the tongue to speak wickedly, and the other
bind it when it should confess the truth. O peacemaking Solomon, appease the
divisions of my heart, and unite all my powers to the love of thy service.
Destroy in me all the marks of Satan's Empire, and plant there thy Trophies and
Standards, that my spirit be never like those devils which seek for rest, but
shall never find it. Make me preserve inviolable the house of my conscience,
which thou have cleansed by repentance, and clothed with thy graces: that I may
have perseverance to the end without relapses, and so obtain happiness without
more need of repentance.

The Gospel upon Monday the third week in Lent, S. Luke 4.
Jesus is required to do Miracles in his own Country.
ANd he said to them, Certes, you will say to me this similitude, Physician
cure thy self: as great things as we have heard done in Capharnaum, do also
here in thy Country. And he said, Amen I say to you, that no Prophet is
accepted in his own Conntrey. In truth I say to you, there were many widows in
the days of Elias in Israel, when the heaven was shut three years and six
months, when there was a great famine made in the whole earth; and to none of
them was Elias sent, but into Sarepta of Sidon, to a widow woman. And there
were many Leopers in Israel under Elizeus the Prophet, and none of them made
clean but Naaman the Syrian. And all in the Synagogue were filled with anger,
hearing these things. And they rose, and cast him out of the City: and they
brought him to the edge of the hill whereupon their City was built, that they
might throw him down headlong. But he passing through the midst of them, went
his way.

Moralities.
1. THe malignity of man's nature undervalueth all that which it has in hand,
and little esteems many necessary things because they are common. The Sun is
not counted^rare, because it shines every day, and the elements are held
contemptible, since they are common to the poor as well as the rich. Jesus was
despised in his own Country, because he was there known to all the world, and
the disdain of that ungrateful Nation closed the hands of his great bounty. Is
it not a great unhappiness to be weary and tired with often communicating? to
be wicked because God is good, and to shut up our selves close, when he would
impart himself to us: Men make little account of great benefits, and spiritual
helps for that they have them present. They must lose those favors to know
them well, and seek outrageously without effect, what they have kicked away with
contempt, because it was easily possessed.

2. The choices and elections of God are not to be comprehendedwithin our
thoughts, but they should be adored by our hearts. He is Master of his own
favors, and does what he will in the Kingdoms of Nature, Grace, and Glory. He
makes Vessels of Potters earth, of gold and silver. He makes Holydaies and
working days (says the Wise man) his liberalities are as free to him, as his
thoughts. We must not examine the reason why he does elevate some, and abase
others. Our eye must not be wicked, because his heart is good. Let us content
our selves that he loves the humble, and to know, that the lowest place of all,
is most secure. No man is made reprobate without justice, no man is saved
without mercy. God creates men to repair in many, that which he has made; and
also to punish in the persons of many, that which he has not made.

3. Jesus does not cure his brethren and yet cures strangers; to show that his
powers are not tied to any Nation but to his own will. So likewise the graces
of God are not to be measured according to the nature of him who recieves them,
but by the pure bounty of him who gives them. The humility of some, does call
him, when the presumption of others does estrange him. The weak grounds of a
dying law, did no good to the Jews, who disdained the grace of Jesus Christ:
And that disdain deprived them of their adoption; of the glory of the New
Testament; of all the promises, and of all Magistracy. They lost all because
they would keep their own wills. Let us learn by the grace of God to desire
earnestly that good which we would obtain effectually. Persons distasted and
surfeited cannot advance much in a spiritual life. And he that seeks after
perfection coldly, shall never find it.

Aspirations.
THy beauties (most sweet Jesus) are without stain, thy goodness without
reproach, and thy conversation without importunity. God forbid I should be of
the number of those souls which are distasted with Manna, and languish after
the Onions of Egypt. The more I taste thee, the more I incline to do thee
honor. Familiarity with an infinite thing, begets no contempt but only from
those whom thou do despise for their own faults. O what high secrets are thy
favors. O what Abysses are thy graces We may wish and run: But except thou
cooperate, nothing is done. If thou cease to work, all is undone. I put all my
happiness into thy hands: It is thou alone which know how to choose what we
most need, by thy sovereign wisdom and thou give it by thy extreme bounty.

The Gospel upon Thursday, the third week in Lent, S. Mat. 18.
If thy Brother offend thee tell him of it alone.
But if thy brother shall offend against thee, go and rebuke him between thee
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou shall gain thy brother: and if he
will not hear thee, join with thee besides, one or two, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses every word may stand. And if he will not hear them, tell
the Church: and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the
Heathen and the Publican. Amen. I say to you, whatsoever ye shall bind upon
earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed also in heaven. Again I say to you, that if two of you shall
consent upon earth, concerning every thing whatsoever they ask, it shall be
done to them of my Father which is in Heaven: for where there be two or three
gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

Then came Peter unto him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother offend
against me, and I forgive him? until seven times? Jesus said to him, I say not
to thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven times.

Moralities.
1. THe Heavens are happy that they go always in one measure and in so great a
revolution of ages, do not make one false step: but man is naturally subject to
fail. He is full of imperfections and if he have any virtues he carries them
like dust against the wind or snow against the sun. This is the reason which
teaches him that he needs good advice.

2. It is somewhat hard to give right correction, but much harder to receive it
profitably. Some are so very fair spoken that they praise all which they see,
and because they will find nothing amiss, they are ordinarily good to no body.
They show to those whom they slatter, their virtues in great, and their faults
in little; they will say to those who are plunged in great disorders, they have
no other sault, but that they are not sufficiently careful of their own
health. Others do correct with such sharpness and violence that they wound
their own hearts to care other men's, and seem to have a greater mind to please
their own passions, then to amend those whom they would instruct. Correction
should be accompanied with sweetness but it must carry with all a little
vigor, to make a right temper and to keep a mean between softness and
austerity. Jesus in the Prophet Isai is called both a rod and a flower: to show
us (according to Origin) that he carries severity mingled with sweetness; to
use either of them according to the diversity of persons.

3. It is not a very easy thing to receive brotherly correction patiently, we
are so far in love with being well thought of. And after we have lost the
tree of life, (which is virtue it self) we would keep the bark of it, which is
only reputation. All shadows proceed from those bodies upon which somewhat
shines; honor is the child of a known virtue: and many, when they cannot get
one lawful, are willing to have a Bas^ard. This is the cause why so many
resemble those serpents, which requite them with poison, who sing to them
pleasant songs. Whatsoever is spoken to instruct them, makes them passionate,
and dart out angry speeches against those, who speak to them mild and gentle
words of truth, and tending to their salvation Rest assured you can never get
perfection, except you count it a glory to learn, and discover your own
imperfections.

4. There is nothing of more force then the prayers of just men: which are
animated by the same spirit, and cimented together with perfect concord. They
are most powerful both in heaven and earth. When they desire what God will,
they are always heard; if not according to the wishes of their own nature, yet
according to the greater profits of his grace. He is always happy, who has
that which he would; because he knows how to wish what is fitting, and finds
means to obtain what he desires, by reason of his abstinence from coveting that
which cannot be had.

5. We must not offer to limit our goodness, but as it comes from an infinite
God, we should make it as near being infinite as we can. He gives the lie to
virtues, who will reduce them to a certain number. We must never be weary of
well doing, but imitate the nature of celestial things which never make any
end but to begin again.

Aspirations.
O God what spots are in my soul, and how little do I look into my own
imperfections? Will thou never show me to my self (for some good time) that I
may cure my self, by horror of seeing what I am, since I do so often wound my
self, by being too indulgent to my own naughty affections. It is a great
offense to break the glass which represents me to my self by brotherly
correction, and to think I shall commit no more sins when no body will take
liberty to reprove me. I will humble my self to the very dust, and mount up to
thy glory by contempt of my own baseness: Alas, must my soul be always so far
in love with it self, that it cannot suffer the remonstrance of a friend? how
will it then endure the tooth of an enemy? what can she love, being so partial
to her self, if she do not love most ugly darkness: O, my redoubted Master, I
fear thine eyes which see those obscurities, which the foolish world takes to
be brightness. If I cannot be always innocent, make me at least acknowledge
my self faulty, that I may know my self as I am; to the end thou may know me
for an object capable of thy mercy.

The Gospel upon Wednesday the third week in Lent, Saint Matthew 15.
The Pharisees asked Jesus, Why do thy Disciples contradict ancient Traditions?
THen came to him from Jerusalem, Scribes and Pharisees, saying, Why do thy
Disciples transgress the tradition of the ancients? For they wash not their
hands when they eat bread. But he answering, said to them, Why do you also
transgress the commandment of God for your tradition? For God said, Honor
Father and Mother: and he that shall curse Father or Mother dying, let him die.
But you say, Whosoever shall say to Father or Mother, The gift whatsoever
proceeds from me, shall profit thee, and shall not honor his Father or his
Mother: and you have made frustrate the commandment of God for your own
tradition. Hypocrites, well has Esaias prophesied, of you, saying, This people
honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. And in vain do
they worship me, teaching doctrines and commandments of men.

And having called together the multitudes unto him, he said to them, Hear ye
and understand, Not that which enters into the mouth defiles a man, but that
which proceeds out of the mouth, that defiles a man. Then came his Disciples
and said to him, Do thou know that the Pharisees when they heard this word
were scandalized? But he answering, said, All planting, which my heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Let them alone, blind they are,
guides of the blind: and if the blind be guide to the blind, both fall into the
ditch. And Peter answering, said to him, Expound us this parable. But he said,
Are you also as yet without understanding? Do you not understand, that all that
enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is cast forth into the
privy? But the things that proceed out of the mouth, come forth from the
heart, and those things defile a man. For from the heart come forth evil
cogitations, murders, advouteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
blasphemies: These are the things that defile: but to eat with unwashen hands,
does not defile a man.

Moralities.
1. THe spirit of man is wretched, and makes it self business by being
disquieted with petty little things: and tormenting it self with formalities,
whilst it lives in a deep neglect of all that which is most essential to her
salvation. The Pharisees did place their perfections in washing themselves every
hour of the day; in bearing writs of the Law upon their foreheads, and thorns
upon their heels; but made no scruple to take away the honor due to fathers and
mothers from their children; to make spoil of the world by a ravenous avarice
(which took upon it the appearance of piety) and to give up innocent blood under
show of justice. The world does now furnish it self with such like devotions.
Some make it a sin to look upon a fair flower with delight: to eat with a good
appetite: to drink cool wine in hot weather: to burn a paper, upon which the
name of Jesus is written: to tread upon two straws that lie a cross. But to set
money to usury, to remember injuries for ever to keep a poor workmans wages, to
oppress the weak, to accuse the innocent, to spoil miserable persons: These are
the little sins which pass for virtues in this world. Assure your self that
such proceedings are abominable before God; and there can be no better devotion
in the world then to have a true and right seeling of God and to live in
honesty, not sophisticated, but such as is produced out of the pure lights of
nature. The conscience of hypocrites is a spiders web, whereof no garment can
ever be made. Hypocrisy is a very subtle fault, and a secret poison, which
kills other virtues with their own swords.

2. Jesus is our great Master, who has abridged six hundred and thirteen
Precepts of the old Testament within the law of love. Do but love (says Saint
Augustine) and do what you will: but then your love must go to the right
fountain, which is the heart of God. It is in him you must cherish and honor
your nearest friends; and for him also you are bound to love even your greatest
enemies. Be not afraid to show him your heart stark naked, that he may pierce
it with his arrows for the wounds of such an archer are much more precious
then rubies. You shall gain all by loving him; and death it self, which comes
from this love is the gate of life. If you love him truly, you vvilll have the
three conditions of love, which are, to serve him, to imitate him, and to
suffer for him. You must serve him with all fidelity in your prayers, and all
your actions: you must imitate him (what possibly you can) in all the passages
of his life; And you must hold it for a glory to participate (with a valiant
patience) all the fruits of his Cross.

Aspirations.
O Great God, who judge all hearts, and do penetrate the most secret
retireme^ts of our consciences, drive away from me all counterfeit Pharisaical
devotions, which are nothing but shows, and cannot subsist but by false
apparencies. O my God, my Jesus, make me keep the Law of thy love, and nothing
else. It is a yoke which brings with it more honor then burden; It is a yoke
which has wings, but no heaviness: Make me serve thee (O my Master) since
thou beholdest the services of all the Angels under thy feet: Make me imitate
thee (O my Redeemer) since thou art the original of all perfections: make me
suffer for thee (O King of the afflicted) and that I may not know what it is to
suffer, by knowing what it is to love.

The Gospel on Thursday the third week in Lent, S. Luke 4.
Jesus cured the Fever of Simons Mother in Law.
ANd Jesus rising up out of the Synagogue, entered into Simons house, and Simons
wives mother was holden with a great Fever, and they besought him for her. And
standing over her, he commanded the Fever, and it lest her: And incontinent
rising, she ministered to them. And when the Sun was down, all that had diseased
of sundry maladies, brought them to him: But he imposing hands upon every one,
cured them. And Devils went out from many, crying and saying, that thou art the
Son of God. And rebuking them, he suffered them not to speak that they knew he
was Christ. And when it was day, going forth he went into a Desert place, and
the multitudes sought him, and came even unto him: and they held him, that he
should not depart from them. To whom he said, That to other Cities also must I
Evangelize the Kingdom of God: because therefore I was sent. And he was
preaching in the Synagogues of Galilee.

Moralities.
1. A Soul within a sick body, is a Princess that dwells in a ruinous house:
Health is the best of all temporal goods; without which all honors are as the
beams of an eclipsed Sun: Riches are unpleasing, and all pleasures are
languishing. All joy of the heart subsists naturally in the health of the body.
But yet it is true, that the most healthful persons are not always the most
holy. What profit is there in that health, which serves for a provocation to
sin, for an inticement to worldly pleasure, and a gate to death? The best
souls are never better nor stronger, then when their bodies are sick: their
diseases are too hard for their mortal bodies, but their courage is
invincible. It is a great knowledge to understand our own infirmities.
Prosperity keeps us from the view of them, but adversity shows them to us. We
should hardly know what death is, if so many diseases did not teach us every
day that we are mortal. Semiramis the proudest of all Queens had made a law
whereby she was to be adored in stead of all the gods, but being humbled by a
great sickness, she acknowledged her self to be but a woman.

2. All the Apostles pray for this holy woman which was sick, but she herself
asked nothing, nor did complain of any thing. She leaves all to God, who is
only Master of life and death. She knew that he which gives his benefits with
such bounty, has the wisdom to choose those which are most fit for us. How do
we know whether we desiring to be delivered from a sickness, do not ask of
God to take away a gift which is very necessary to our salvation? That malady
or affliction which makes us distaste worldly pleasures, gives us a disposition
to taste the joys of heaven.

3. How many sick persons in the heat of a Fever promise much, and when they
are well again perform nothing. That body which carried all the marks of death
in the face, is no sooner grown strong by health (which rejoices the heart and
fills the vains with blood) but it becomes a slave to sin. The gifts of God
(being abused) serve for nothing but to make it wicked, and so the soul is
killed by recovery of the flesh. But this pious woman is no sooner on foot but
she serves the Author of life and employes all those limbs, (which Jesus cured
of the Fever) to prepare some provisions to refresh him. He that will not use
the treasures of heaven with acknowledge meant, deserves never to keep them.
When a man is recovered from a great sickness, as his body is renewed by
health, so on the other side, he should renew his spirit by virtue. The body
(says Saint Maximus) is the bed of the soul, where it sleeps too easily in
continual health, and forgets it self in many things. But a good round
sickness does not only move, but turn over this bed, which makes the soul
awake, to think on her salvation, and make a total conversion.

Aspirations.
O Word Incarnate, all Fevers and Devils fly before the beams of thy
redoubted face. Must nothing but the hea^ of my passions always resist thy
powers and bounties? To what maladies and indispositions am I subject? I have
more diseases in my soul then limbs in my body. My weakness bends under thy
scourges, and yet my sins continue still unmovable. Stay (O benign Lord)
stay thy-self near me. Cast upon my dull and heavy eyes one beam from those
thine eyes, which make all storms clear, and all disasters happy. Command that
my weakness leave me, and that I may arise to perform my services due to thy
greatness, as I will for ever ow my salvation to thy infinite power and bounty.

The Gospel upon Friday the third week in Lent, S. John 4.
Of the Samaritan woman at Jacobs Well, near Sichar.
HE comes therefore into a City of Samaria, which is called Sichar, beside
the Manner that Jacob gave to Joseph his son, And there was there the fountain
of Jacob. Jesus therefore wearied of his journey, sat so upon the fountain. It
was about the sixth hour.

There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water, Jesus says to her, Give me to
drink: for his Disciples were gone into the City to buy meats: therefore that
Samaritan woman says to him, How do thou being a Jew ask of me to drink
which am a Samaritan woman? for the Jews do not communicate with the
Samaritanes. Jesus answered and said to her, If thou did know the gift of
God, and who he is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou perhaps
would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. The woman
says to him, Sir, neither have thou wherein to draw, and the Well is deep.
Whence have thou the living water? Art thou greater then our father Jacob who
gave us the Well, and himself drank of it, and his children and his cattle.
Jesus answered, and said to her, Every one that drinks of this water, shall
thirst again; but he that shall drink of the water that I will give him, shall
not thirst for ever: but the water that I will give him shall become unto him a
fountain of water springing up unto life everlasting. The woman says to him,
Lord, give me this water, that I may not thirst, nor come hither to draw.

Jesus says to her, Go call thy husband, and come hither. The woman answered
and said, I have no husband. Jesus says to her, Thou have said well, that I
have no husband: for thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have, is
not thy husband. This thou have said truly.

The woman says to him, Lord, I perceive that thou art a Prophet. Our Fathers
adored in this mountain, and you say, that Jerusalem is the place where men
must adore. Jesus says to her, Woman believe me, that the hour shall come,
when you shall neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, adore the Father.
You adore that you know not: We adore that we know: for salvation is of the
Jews: but the hour comes, and now is, when the true adorers shall adore the
Father in spirit and verity. For the Father also seeks such to adore him.
God is a spirit, and they that adore him, must adore in spirit and verity. The
woman says to him, I know that Messiah comes, (which is called Christ)
therefore when he comes, he will show us all things. Jesus says to her, I am
he that speak with thee.

And incontinent his Disciples came: and they marvelled that he talked with a
woman. No man for all that said, What seek thou, or why talkest thou with
her? The woman therefore left her water pot, and she went into the City, and
says to those men, Come and see a man that has told me all things whatsoever
I have done: Is not he Christ? They went forth therefore out of the City, and
came to him.

In the mean time the Disciples desired him, saying, Rabbi, eat. But he said to
them, I have meat to eat which you know not. The Disciples therefore said one
to another, has any man brought him for to eat? Jesus says to them, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me, to perfect his work. Do not you say,
that yet there are four months, and harvest comes? Behold I say to you, lift
up your eyes, and see the Countries, that they are white already to harvest:
And he that reapeth, receives hire, and gathers fruit unto life everlasting,
that both he that sows, and he that reapeth, may rejace together. For in this
is the saying true, that it is one man that sows, and it is another that
reapeth. I have sent you to reap that which you labored not: others have
labored, and you have entered into their labors.

And of that City many believed in him of the Samaritanes, for the word of the
woman giving testimony, that he told me all things whatsoever I have done.
Therefore when the Samaritanes were come to him, they desired him that he would
tarry there. And he tarried there two days. And many more believed for his own
word: and they said to the woman, That now, not for thy saying do we besieve:
for our selves have heard, and do know, that this is the Savior of the world
indeed.

Moralities.
1. THe God of all power is weary, the main sea desires a drop of salt water:
the King of Angels becomes a suppliant for a little part of all that which is
his own. This Gospel shows us clearly the love of God toward humane nature and
the infinite zeal which he has to the salvation of souls. Is it not a thing
which should load us with confusion, to see that he who is filled with all
felicities has only one thirst, which is, that we should thirst after him,
and that we should make chief account of that living water which he carries
within his breast, which indeed properly is grace, the only way to glory.

2. Behold the difference between Jacobs Well, and the Well of Jesus; between
contentments of the world, and the pleasures of God. The Well of Jacob is
common to men and beasts; to show unto us that a man which glorifieth himself
of his sensual delights, makes a Trophee of his own baseness and a triumph of
his fault. It is just as if Nebuchodoneser forsaking his crown and throne (to
transform himself into a beast) should brag, that he had gotten a hansom
stable, and very good hay. But the fountain of Jesus holds in it the water of
graces, a wholesome water pure and Christalline; which brings us to the society
of Angels. The water of Jacob though it be but a water for beasts, yet it is
hard to obtain: There are many which run mad after riches, honors and
contentments of this world, and can never come to possess them: They live in a
mill, and gain nothing out of it, but the noise and dust. They turn round about
upon the wheel of disquiet, and never rest. But if a good fortune some times
cast them a bone, there are a hundred dogs which strive to catch it. All their
life is nothing but expectation, and their end only despair. Whereas the Well
of Iefus is open to all the world; he seeks, he asks, he calls, he gives
gratis he requires nothing of us but our selves, and would have us for no
other reason but only to make us happy. The Well of Jacob begets thirst,
but does not quench it. Do not you consider that the Samaritan woman left her
pot there and did not drink? After so many fantomes and illusions, which do
amuse worldlings, they must part from the world with great thirst. But the
fountains of our Savior free us from the desire of all creatures, and do
establish within man's spirit, an object of which the heart can never lose the
delight. O happy Samaritan! (says Saint Ambrose) which left her pot empty,
that she might return fall of Jesus Christ. She did no wrong to her fellow
citizens, for if she brought no water to the town, yet she made the fountain it
self come thither.

3. Is it not a shameful thing that God should seek us amongst the heats of
his love and sufferings, desires nothing but us; is contented with the
possession of our heart, and yet we cannot be content with him? Shall not we
forsake all the discorders of a sensual life which hinder the effect of Gods
grace? Shall not we forsake and leave behind us our pitcher, bidding farewell
to all those occasions which lead us to sin, to avoid that fire whereof we
have reason to fear the smoke?

Aspirations.
O (Unexhaustible fountain of all beauties that my soul has been long
alienated from thee. I have so many times run after the salt waters of worldly
pleasures and contentments, which have not ceased to kindle a wicked thirst
within my veins, in such a violent proportion, that I could not quench it. now
(O sweet Savior) my soul (being weary and distasted with all the fading
delights of this transitory world) does languish incessantly after thee.
Whether the break of day begin to gild the mountains with his brightness,
whether the Sun be advanced high in his course, or whether the night do cast
a dark vail over all mortal things. I seek and desire thy entertainments,
which are the only sweet Ideas of my soul. I plunge my self within the
contemplation of thy greatness, I adore thy powers: The thirst which torments
me (by loving thee) is so precious, that I would not lose it to drink Nectar;
and I can never quench it, but in the strean s of those delights and pleasures,
which proceed from the throne of the holy Lamb.

The Gospel upon Saturday the third week in Lent S. John. the 8.
Of the woman found in adultery.
ANd Jesus went into the mount Olivet, and early in the morning again he came
into the temple, and the people came to him, and sitting he taught them.

And the Scribes and Pharisees bring a woman taken in adultery, and they did
set her in the midst, and said to him, Master, this woman was even uow taken in
adultery. And in the law Moses commanded to stone such. What say thou
therefore? and this they said tempting him, that they might accuse him. But
Jesus bowing himself down, with his finger wrote in the earth. When they
therefore continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said to them, He that
is without sin of you, let him first throw the stone at her. And again howing
himself, he wrote in the earth. And they hearing, went out one by one beginning
at the Seniors, and Jesus alone remained, and the woman standing in the midst.
And Jesus lifting up himself, said to her, Woman, where are they that accused
thee? Has no man condemned thee? Who said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said,
Neither will I condemn thee. Go and now sin no more.

Moralities.
1. MEn naturally love better to censure the life of another, then to examine
their own. The Ravens accuse Doves, and he sits often upon a Tribunal to
condemn vice, who does lodge it in his heart. Many resemble the Cocks which
crow against a Basilisk, and yet bear the seed of it in their intrails. Reason
would always, that we begin to reform others, by the censure of our own life.
No word can carry such life and vigor with it, as that which is followed by
action. To talk all and do nothing, is to build with one hand, and destroy with
the other. The land of the living shall never be for those, who have their
tongues longer then their arms.

2, To what purpose is it to speak good words, and yet lead an ill life? A man
can neither hide himself from God not himself: his conscience is a thousand
witnesses. Those who were ready to lift up their hands to stone the adulterous
woman, were diverted, and departed with confusion, seeing their sins written in
the dust, with certain figures to express them. If we could always behold our
own life before our eyes (as a piece of Tapistry) we should there see so many
Serpents amongst flowers, that we would have more horror of our own sins, then
will to censure those who are like our selves.

3. God shows mercy, but will not suffer his mildness to be abused, sin must
not print its steps upon his clemency. It is a false repentance for a man to
act that which himself has condemned; and after so many relapses, to take but
one fall into everlasting pain. The ordinary Gloss observes, that our Savior
bended down, when he wrote upon the earth, to show that the remembrance of our
sins lay heavy upon him: But when he began to pardon, he arose up; to teach us,
what joy and comfort he takes in the Kingdom of his mercy.

Aspirations.
O Sovereign Judge, who sit upon a Tribunal seat, born up with truth and
power; make me rather judge mine own life, then censure the lives of others.
Must I be full of eyes without, and blind within? Show me my stains, and give
me water to wash them out. Alas, I am altogether but one stain, and thou art
all purity. My soul is ashamed to see it self so dark before thy light, and so
smutted over, before thine immortal whiteness. Do not write me upon the
ground, as a child of earth; write me in heaven, since I am the portion which
thou have purchased with thy precious blood: Blot out my sins, which are but
too deeply graven upon my hands, and pardon, by thine in finite mercy, what
thou may condemn by justice.

The Gospel upon Sunday the fourth week in Lent, S. John 6.
Of the sive Fishes, and two Barley Loaves.
AFter these things Jesus went beyond the Sea of Galilee, which is of Tiberias;
and a great multitude followed him, because they saw the sigus which he did
upon those that were sick. Jesus therefore went up into the mountain, and there
he sat with his Disciples. And the Pasche was at hand, the Festival day of
the Jews. When Jesus therefore had lifted up his eyes, and saw that a very
great multitude comes to him, he says to Philip, Whence shall we buy bread,
that these may eat? and this he said, tempting him, for himself knew what he
would do. Philip answered him, two hundred penyworth of bread is not
sufficient for them, that every man may take a little piece. One of his
Disciples, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, says to him, There is a Boy here
that has five Barley Loaves, and two Fishes: but what are these among so many?
Jesus therefore says, Make the men sit down. And there was much grass in the
place. The men therefore sat down, in number about five thousand. Jesus
therefore took the Loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed to them
that sat. In like manner also the Fishes, as much as they would. And after
they were filled, he said to his Disciples, Gather the fragments that are
remaining lest they be lost. They gathered therefore, and filled twelve baskets
with fragments of the five Barley Loaves which remained to them that had eaten.
Those men therefore when they had seen what a sign Jesus had done, said. That
this is the Prophet indeed that is to come into the world. Jesus therefore when
he knew that they would come to take him and make him a King, he fled again
into the mountain himself alone.

Moralities.
1. WHat a happy thing it is to serve God, whose conversation is so worthy all
love? See how he carried himself toward this poor multitude which followed him
with such zeal and constancy. It seems they were his children, that he carried
them all upon his shoulders, that he had their names, their Countries, their
qualities, and the conditions of their small fortunes graven in his heart. He
is so tender over them, he so afflicts himself about them, as a Shepherd over
his poor flock. He instructs them, he speaks to them of heavenly things, he
heals their maladies, he comforts their sadness, he lifts his eyes up to
heaven for them; and for them he opens his divine hands (the treasures of
Heaven) and nourishes them by a miracle, as they had wholly resigned themselves
to him with such absolute confidence. O how are we cherished by heaven, since
God does bind himself to help us! And we should be unfaithful not to trust
him, who makes nature it self so faithful to us. It is here much to be
observed, that God does no miracles for his own profit; he does not change
stones into bread in the Desert to nourish himself after that long fast which
he did there make; but for his faithful servants he alters the course of
nature, and being austere to himself, he becomes indulgent to us; to teach us,
that we should dispoyl our selves of self-love, which ties us to our own flesh,
and makes us so negligent to our neighbor.

2. What precious thing is to be gotten by following the world, that we should
forsake Jesus in the Desert, and run after vain hopes at Court, and great men's
houses, where we pretend to make some fortune? how many injuries must a man
dissemble? how many affronts must he swallow? how many deadly sweats must he
endure to obtain some reasonable condition? how many times must he sacrifice
his children, engage his own conscience, and offer violences to others to
advance the affairs of great men? And after many years service, if any
fore-^ird or ruinous business committed to his charge (in the pursuit whereof
he must walk upon thorns) shall chance to miscarry, all the fault must be laid
upon a good officer; and if he prove unlucky, he shall ever be made culpable,
and in the turning of a hand all his good services forgotten and lost: and for
a final recompense, he must be laden with infinite disgraces. It is quite
contrary in the service of God: for he encourages our virtues, he supplies our
defects, governs our spiritual, and yet neglects not our temporal occasions.
He that clothes the flowers of the Meadows more gorgeously then Monarchs, who
lodges so many little Fishes in golden and azure shells, he who does but open
his hand and replenishes all nature with blessings, if we be faithful in
keeping his Commandments, will never forsake us at our need. But yet we find
all the difficulties of the world to put our trust in him, we villifie our
cares of eternity: and by seeking after worldly things whereby to live, we
torment our selves, and in the end lose our own lives. A man that must die,
needs very few worldly things; a very little Cabin will suffice nature, but
whole Kingdoms will not satisfy covetousness.

3. Jesus flies from Scepters, and runs to the Cross; he would have no worldly
Kingdoms, because their Thrones are made of Ice, and their Crowns of Glass.
He valued the Kingdom of God above all things, that he night make us partakers
of his precious conquest; and infinite rich prize. But now it seems that heaven
is not a sufficient Kingdom for us; men run after land, and itch after the
ambition of sading greatness: and sometimes all their life passes away in
great sins, and as great troubles to get a poor title of three letters upon
their Tomb. Alas! do we know better then God, in what honor consists, that we
must seek after that which he did avoid, and not imitate that which he followed?

Let us follow God, and believe that where he is there can be no desert or
solitude for us. They shall never taste the delights of virtue that feed upon
the joys of vanity. All worldly pleasures are Comets made fat with the smoaks
and vapors of the earth; and in stead of giving light and brightness, they
bring forth murders and contagions: but the following of God is always sweet,
and he which suffers thereby, changes his very tears into nourishment.

Aspirations.
O My God! Shall I always run after that which flies from me, and never follow
Jesus who follows me by incomparable paths, and loves me even while I am
ungrateful. I will no more run after the shadows of worldly honor, I will no
more have my own will, which both is, and has proved so unfaithful. I will put
my self into the happy course of Gods disposition, for all which shall happen
unto me, either in time or et rnity. His careful eye watches over me, it is
for me that his hands have treasures, and the very Deserts possess abundance.
O crucified love, the most pure of all beauties, it is for thee that so many
generous Champions have peopled the Deserts, and passed the streams of
bitterness and sorrow, bearing their crosses after thee; and thereupon have
felt the sweetness of thy visits amongst their cruel rigours. God forbid that
I should give the lie to so great and so generous a company. I go to thee, and
will follow thee amongst the deserts; I run not after bread, I run after thy
divine person, I will make much of thy wounds, I honor thy torments, I will
conform my self to thee, that I may find joy amongst thy dolours, and life it
self amongst thine infinite sufferings.

The Gospel upon Monday the fourth week in Lent, S. John. 2.
Of the whipping buyers and sellers out of The Temple.
ANd the Pasch of the Jews was at hand and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and he
found in the Temple them that sold Oxen, and Sheep, and Doves, and the Bankers
sitting. And when he had made, as it were, a whip of little cords, he cast them
all out of the Temple, the sheep also and the oxen, and the money of the
Bankers he poured out, and the tables he overthrew. And to them that sold
Doves, he said, Take away these things hence, and make not the house of my
Father a house of Merchandise. And his Disciples remembered that it is written,
The zeal of thy house has eaten me. The Jews therefore answered, and said to
him, What sign do thou show us, that thou do these things? Jesus answered
and said to them. Dissolve this Temple, and in three days I will raise it. The
Jews therefore said, in forty and six years was this Temple built, and will thou raise it in three days? But he spoke of the Temple of his body. Therefore
when he was risen again from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he said
this, and they believed the Scripture, and the word that Jesus did say. And
when he was at Jerusalem in the Pasche upon the festival day, many believed in
his name, seeing his signs which he did. But Jesus did not commit himself unto
them, for that he knew all, and because it was not needful for him that any
should give testimony of man: for he knew what was in man.

Moralities.
1. PIety is a silver chain hanged up aloft, which ties heaven and earth,
spiritual. and temporal, God and man together. Devotion is a virtue derived
to us from the Father of all light, who gives us thereby means to hold a
traffic or commerce with Angels. All which is here below, sinks by its proper
weight, and leans downward toward natural corruption: Our spirit though it be
immortal, would follow the weight of our bodies, if it were not endued with
the knowledge of God which works the same effect in it, as the Adamant does
with iron: for it pierces and gives it life, together with a secret and
powerful spirit, from which all great actions take their beginning: You shall
never do any great act if the honor of God, and the reverence of sacred things
shall not accompany all your pretenses. For if you ground your piety upon any
temporal respects, you resemble that people which believes the highest
mountains do support the skies.

2. There are no sins which God does punish more rigorously, nor speedily,
then those which are committed against devotion and piety: He does not here
take up the scourge against naughty Judges, usurers and unchaste persons,
because the Church is to find a remedy against all faults which happen in the
life of man. But if a man commit a sin against Gods Altar, the remedy grows
desperate. King Ozias felt a leprosy rise upon his face at the instant when he
made the fume rise from the censor which he usurped from the high Priests. Ely
the chief Priest was buried in the ruins of his own house for the sacrilege of
his children, without any consideration of those long services with he had
performed at the Tabernacle. Keep your self from symonies, from irreverence in
Churches, and from abusing Sacraments. He can have no excuse which makes his
Judge a witness.

3. Jesus was violently moved by the zeal which he bare to the house of his
heavenly Father. But many wicked rich men limit their zeal only to their own
families. They build great Palaces upon the peoples blood, and they nothing
care though all the world be in a storm, so long as they (and what belongs to
them) be well covered. But there is a revenging God who does insensibly dry up
the roots of proud Nations, and throws disgrace and infamy upon the faces of
those who neglect the glories of Gods Altars to advance their own. He who
builds without God, does demolish, and whosoever thinks to make any great
increase without him, shall find nothing but sterility.

Aspirations.
O Most pure Spirit of Jesus, which wast consummate by zeal toward the house of
God, will thou never burn my heart with those adored flames, wherewith thou
inspirest chaste hearts? Why do we take so much care of our houses (which are
built upon quicksilver, and roll up and down upon the inconstancies of humane
fortunes) while we have no love nor zeal toward Gods Church, which is the
Palace we should choose here upon earth, to be as the Image of heaven above? I
will adore thy Altars (all my life) with a profound humility. But I will first
make an Altar of my own heart, where I will offer sacrifice; to which I doubt
not but thou will put fire with thine own hand.

The Gospel upon Tuesday the fourth week in Lent, S. John 7.
The Jews marvel at the learning of Jesus who was never taught.
ANd when the festivity was now half done, Jesus went up into the Temple and
taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, how does this man know letters, whereas
he has not learned? Jesus answered them, and said my doctrine is not mine but
his that sent me. If any man will do the will of him, he shall understand of
the doctrine whether it be of God, or I speak of my self, he that speaks of
himself seeks his own glory. But he that seeks the glory of him that sent
him, he is true, and injustice in him there is not. Did not Moses give you the
Law, and none of you does the Law? Why seek you to kill me? The Multitude
answered and said, thou have a Devil, who seeks to kill thee? Jesus answered
and said to them, One work I have done, and you do all marvel. Therefore Moses
gave you circumcision, not that is of Moses, but of the Fathers, and in the
Sabbath ye circumcise a man. If a man receive circumcision in the Sabbath, that
the law of Moses be not broken, are you angry at me because I have healed a man
wholly in the Sabbath? Judge not according to the face, but judge just
judgment.

Certain therefore of Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom thy seek to kill: And
behold, he speaks openly, and they say nothing to him. Have the Princes known
indeed that this is Christ? But this man we know whence he is, But when Christ
comes, no man knows whence he is. Jesus therefore cried in the Temple,
teaching and saying, Both me you do know, and whence I am you know; and of my
self I am not come. But he is true that sent me, whom you know not. I know him,
because I am of him, and he sent me. They sought therefore to apprehend him,
and no man laid hands upon him because his hour was not yet come. But of the
multitude many believed in him.

Moralities.
1. IT appears by this Gospel that Jesus was judged according to apparences,
not according to truth. It is one of the greatest confusions which is deeply
rooted in the life of man, that every thing is full of painting, and instead of
taking it off with a sponge, we foment it, and make our illusions voluntary.
The Prophet Isay advises us to use our judgment, as men do leaven to season
bread. All the objects presented to our imaginations, which we esteem are
fading, if we do not add some heavenly vigor to help our judgment.

2. To judge according to apparences is agreat want both of judgment and
courage. The first makes us prefer vanity before truth; the second gives that
to silk and golden clothes, which is properly due to virtue: We adore painted
coals and certain dark sumes covered outwardly with snow; But if we did know
how many great miseries and what beastly ordure is hidden unde cloth of gold,
silk, and scarlet, we would complain of our eyes for being so far without
reason. It is a kind of Apostasy and rebellion against Gods providence, to
judge without calling God to be a president in our counsel; or to take in hand
any humane inventions without the assistance of his Spirit.

3. God is pleased to lodge pearls within cockles; and bestows his treasures of
wisdom and virtue, many times upon persons, who have the most unfashionable
outsides, to countercheck humane wisdom. He makes his orator of those who are
speechless; and numbers of frogs and flies to overthrow mighty armies. He
makes Kings out of shepherds, and serves himself of things which are not, as if
they were. The most pleasing Sacrifice which he receives upon earth, is from
the humble; and when we despise those, we divert the honors of God. We offer
Sacrifice to the worlds opinion, like the Sages of Egypt; who did light candles
and burn incense to Crocodiles. The Jews lost their faith to follow
apparences: and there is no shorter way to Apostasy then to adore the world and
neglect God.

4. An ill opinion make folks many times pass a rash judgment: They mount
into Gods chair to judge the hearts of men: The chaste Doves are used like
Ravens, and Ravens like Swans. Opinion puts false spectacles upon our eyes,
which make faults seem virtues, and virtues crimes. Yet nevertheless we should
think that virtuous persons will not conceive an ill suspicion of their
neighbor without a very sure ground: St. John Climachus says, fire is no more
contrary to water, then rash judgment is to the state of repentance. It is a
certain sign, that we do not see our own sins, when we seek curiously after
the least defects of our neighbor. If we would but once enter into our selves,
we should be so busy to lament our own lives, that we should not have time to
censure those of others.

Aspirations.
O Judge most redoubtable, who do plant thy throne within the heart of man; who
judge the greatest Monarchs, without leaving them power to appeal; Thy
judgments are secret and impenetrable: That which shines to our eyes like a
Diamond, ^s like a contemptible worm in thy balance. That which we value as a
Star, thou judge to be a cole. We have just so much greatness, virtue, and
happiness, as we have by entrance into thy heart. And he whom thou esteemest,
needs not the judgment of mortal man. No innocent is justified, nor guilty
person condemned without thee, and therefore I will from henceforth judge only
according to thee. I will lay down all ^y: affections, and take thine, so far
as I shall be able; and I will account nothing great but what shall be so in
thy esteem.

The Gospel upon Wednesday the fourth week in Lent, S. John 9.
Of the blind man cured by clay and spittle.
ANd Jesus passing by, saw a blind man from his Nativity: and his Disciples
asked him, Rabbi, Who has sinned, this man or his parents, that he should be
born blind? Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned; nor his parents; but
that the works of God may be manifested in him. I must work the works of him
that sent me whiles it is day, the night comes when no man can work. As long
as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. When he had said these
things he spit on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and spread the clay
upon his eyes, and said to him, Go, wash in the Pool of Siloe, which is
interpreted, sent. He went therefore and washed, and he came seeing.

Therefore the neighbors, and they which had seen him before, that he was a
beggar, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? Others said, that this is
he. But others no, not so, but he is like him. But he said, That I am he. They
said therefore to him, How were thine eyes opened? He answered, that man that
is called Jesus, made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said to me. Go to the
Pool of Siloe, and wash: and I went and washed, and saw. And they said to him,
Where is he? He says, I know not. They bring him that had been blind to the
Pharisees. And it was the Sabbath when Jesus made the clay, and opened his
eyes.

Again therefore the Pharisees asked him, how he saw. But he said to them, he
put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and I see. Certain therefore of the
Pharisees said, This man is not of God, that keeps not the Sabbath. But
others said, How can a man that is a sinner do these signs? And there was a
schism among them. They say therefore to the blind again, Thou, what say
thou of him that opened thine eyes? And he said, that he is a Prophet. The Jews
therefore did not believe of him, that he had been blind, and saw, until they
called the Parents of him that saw, and asked them, saying; Is this your son,
whom you say that he was born blind? how then does he now see? His Parents
answered them, and said, We know that this is our Son, and that he was born
blind: but how he now sees we know not, or who has opened his eyes we know
not, ask himself, he is of age, let himself speak of himself. These things his
parents sa^d, because they feared the Jews: For the Jews had now conspired,
that if any man should confess him to be Christ, he should be put out of the
Synagogue. Therefore did his Parents say, that he is of age, ask himself. They
therefore again called the man that had been blind, and said to him, Give glory
to God, we know that this man is a sinner.

He therefore said to them, Whether he be a sinner, I know not; one thing I
know, that whereas I was blind, now I see. They said therefore to him, What did
he to thee? How did he open thine eyes? He answered them. I have now told you,
and ye have heard, why will you hear it again* will you also become his
Disciples? They reviled him therefore, and said, be thou his Disciple; bu^ we
are the Disciples of Moses: we know that to Moses God did speak: but this man
we know not whence he is. The man answered and said to them, For in this it is
mavelous, that you know not whence he is, and he has opened mine eyes. And
we know that sianers God does not hear. But if a man be a server of God and do
the will of him, him he hears. From the beginning of the world it has not
been heard, that any man has opened the eyes of one born blind; unless this
man were of God, he could not do any thing. They answered and said to him, T^ou
wast wholly born, in sins, and do thou teach us? And they did cast him
forth.

Jesus heard that they c^st him forth, and when he had found him, he said to
him, Do thou believe in the Son of God? He answered and said, Who is the
Lord, that I may believe in him? And Jesus said to him, Both thou have seen
him, and he that talks with thee, he it is. But he said, I believe Lord: and
falling down, he adored him.

Moralities.
1. JEsus the Father of all brightness (who walked accompanied with his twelve
Apostles, as the Sun does with the hours of the day) gives eyes to a blind man,
and does it by clay and spittle: to teach us, that none has power to do works
above nature, but he that was the Author of it On the other side, a blind man
becomes a King over persons of the clearest light: and being restored to light,
he renders again the same, to the first fountain from whence it came. He makes
himself an Advocate to plead for the chiefest truth, and of a poor beggar
becomes a confessor; and after he had deplored his misery at the Temple gate,
teaches all mankind the estate of its own felicities. We should (in imitation
of him) love the light by adoring the fountain of it, and behave our selves as
witnesses and defenders of the truth.

2. God is a light, and by his light draws all unto him: he makes a break of
day by his grace in this life, which becomes afterward a perfect day for all
eternity, But many lose themselves in this world, some for want of light, some
by a false light, and some by having too much light.

3. Those lose themselves for want of light, who are not all instructed in
the faith and maxims of Christian Religion; and those instead of approaching
near the light, love their own darkness. They hate the light of their
salvation, as the shadovv of death: and think that if you give them eyes to see
their blindness, you take away their life. If they seem Christians, they yet
have nothing but the name and the appearance, the book of Jesus is shut from
them, or if they make a show to read, they may name the letters, but never can
produce one right good word.

4. Others destroy themselves by false lights, who being wedded to their own
opinions, and adoring the Chimeraes of their spirit; think themselves full of
knowledge, just and happy; that the Sun rises only for them, and that all the
rest of the world is in darkness; they conceive they have the fairest stars for
conductors; but at the end of their career they find (too late) that this
pretended light, was but an Ignis fatuus, which led them to a precipice of
eternal flames. It is the worst of all follies to be wise in our own eye sight,
and the worst of all temptations is, for a man to be a devil to himself.

5. Those ruin themselves with too much light, who have all Gods law by heart,
but never have any heart to that law. They know the Scriptures, all learning
and sciences: they understand every thing but themselves: they can find spots
in the Sun; they can give new names to the stars; they persuade themselves, that
God is all that they apprehend: But after all this heap of knowledge, they are
found to be like the Sages of Pharaoh: and can produce nothing but blood and
frogs: They embroil and trouble the world; they stain their own lives; and at
their deaths leave nothing to continue but the memory of their sins. It would
be more expedient for them (rather then have such light) to carry fi^e,
wherewith to be burning in the love of God, and not to swell and burst with
that kind of knowledge. All learning which is not joined with a good life, is
like a picture in the air, which has no table to make it subsist. It is not
sufficient to be elevated in spirit (like the Prophets) except a man do enter
into some perfect imitation of their virtues.

Aspirations.
O Fountain of all brightness, before whom night can have no vail, who see
the day spring out of thy bosom, to spread it self over all nature, will thou
have no pity upon my blindness? will there be no medicine for my eyes which
have so often grown dull and heavy with earthly humors. O Lord I want light,
being always so blind to my own sins. So many years are past, wherein I have
dwelt with my self, and yet know not what I am. Self-love makes me sometimes
apprehend imaginary virtues in great, and see all my crimes in little. I too
often believe my own judgment, and adore my own opinions, as gods, and
goddesses, and if thou send me any light I make so ill use of it, that I dazzle
my self, even in the brightness of thy day; making little or no profit of that
which would be so much to my advantage, if I were so happy as to know it. But
henceforth I will have no eyes but for thee: I will only contemplate thee (O
life of all beauties) and draw all the powers of my soul into my eyes, that I
may the better apprehend the mystery of thy bounties. O cast upon me one beam
of thy grace so powerful that it may never forsake me till I may see the day
of thy glory.

The Gospel upon Thursday, the fourth week in Lent, St Luke the 7.
Of the Widows Son raised from death to life at Naim by our Savior.
ANd it came to pass afterward he went into a City that is called Naim, and
there w^nt with him his Disciples, and a very great multitude: And when he came
nigh to the gate of the City, behold a dead man was carried forth, the only Son
of his Mother: and she was a Widow, and a great mu^^itude of the City with her
whom when our Lord had seen, being moved with mercy upon her, he said to her,
Weep not. And he came near, and touched the Cossin: And they that carried it
stood still: and he said, Young man, I say to thee, Arise, And he that was dead
sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to his Mother: and fear took them
all; and they magnified God, saying, That a great Prophet is risen among us:
and that God has visited his People And this saying went forth into all Iewry
of him, and into all the Country about.

Moralities.
JEsus met at the Gates of Naim, (which is interp^eted the Town of Beauties) a
young man carried to burial, to show us that neither beauty nor youth are freed
from the Laws of death. We fear death, and there is almost nothing more
immortal; here below every thing dies, but death it self. We see him always in
the Gospells, we touch him every day by our experiences, and yet neither the
Gospells make us sufficiently faithful, nor our experiences well advised.

2. If we behold death by his natural face, he seems a little strange to us,
because we have not seen him well acted. We lay upon him sithes, bows and
arrows; we put upon him ugly antic faces, we compass him round about with
terrors and illusions, of all which he never so much as thought. It is a
profound sleep in which Nature lets it self fail insensibly, when she is tired
with the disquiets of this life. It is a cessation of all those services which
the soul renders to the flesh. It is an execution of Gods will, and a decree
common to all the world. To be disquieted and drawn by the ears, o pay a debt
which so many millions of men (of all conditions) have paid before us, is to do
as a frog that would swim against a sharp stream of a forcible tor^ent. We have
been as it were dead to so many ages which went before us; we die piecemeal
every day; we assay death so often in our sleep; discreet men expect him, fools
despise him, and the most disdainful persons must entertain him. Shall we not
know and endeavor to do that one thing well, which being once well
performed, will give us life for ever? Me thinks it is rather a gift of God to
die soon, then to stay late amongst the occasions of sin.

3. It is not death, but a wicked life we have cause to fear. That only lies
heavy, and both troubles us, and keeps us from understanding and tasting the
svveets of death. He that can die to so many little dead and dying things
(which make us die every day by our unvvillingness to forsake the (shall find
that death is nothing to him. But we would fain (in death) carry the world
with us upon our shoulders to the grave; and that is a thing we cannot do. We
would avoid the judgment of a just God, and that is a thing which we should
not so much as think. Let us clear our accounts before we die, let us take
order for our soul by repentance, and a moderate care of our bodies burial:
Let us order our goods by a good and charitable testament, with a discreet
direction for the poor, for our children and kindred, to be executed by fit
persons. Let us put our selves into the protection of the divine providence,
with a most perfect confidence; and how can we then fear death, being in the
arms of life

Aspirations
O Jesus, fountain of all lives, in whose bosom all things are living; Jesus,
the fruit of the dead, who have destroyed the kingdom of death; why should we
fear a path, which thou have so terrified with thy steps; honored with thy
blood, and sanctified by thy conquests? Shall we never die to so many dying
things? All is dead here for us, and we have no life, if we do not seek it from
thy heart. What should I care for death though he come with all those grim,
hideous and antic faces, which men put upon him, for when I see him through
thy wounds, thy blood, and thy venerable death, I find he has no sting at all.
If I shall walk in the shadow of death, and a thousand terrors shall conspire
against me on every side to disturb my quiet, I will fear nothing, being placed
in the arms of thy providence. O my sweet Master, do but once touch the winding
sheet of my body, which holds down my soul so often within the sleep of death
and sin. Command me to arise and speak, and then the light of thy morning shall
never set: my discourses shall be always of thy praises, and my life shall be
only a contemplation of thy beautiful countenance.

The Gospel upon Friday the fourth week in Lent, S. John 11.
Of the raising of Lazarus from death.
ANd there was a certain sickman, Lazarus of bethania, of the Town of Mary and
Martha her sister. (And Mary was she that anointed our Lord with ointment, and
wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick,) his sisters
therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick. And
Jesus hearing, said to them, This sickness is not to death, but for the glory
of God, that the Son may be glorified by it. And Jesus loved Martha and her
sister Marie, and Lazarus. As he heard therefore that he was sick, then he
tarried in the same place two days: Then after this he says to his Disciples,
Let us go into Iewry again. The Disciples say to him, Rabbi, now the Jews
sought to stone thee, and go thou thither again? Jesus answered, Are there
not twelve hours of the day? If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not,
because he sees the light of this world: but if he walk in the night, he
stumbleth, because the light is not in him. These things he said: and after
this he says to them, Lazarus our friend sleeps; but I go that I may raise
him from sleep. His Disciples therefore said, Lord, if he sleep, he shall be
safe. But Jesus spoke of his death, and they thought that he spoke of the
sleeping of sleep. Then therefore Jesus said to them plainly, Lazarus is dead,
and I am glad for your sake, that you may believe, because I was not there: but
let us go to him. Thomas therefore who called Didymus, said to his
condisciples, Let us also go, to die with him. Jesus therefore came, and found
him now, having been four days in the grave. And Bethania was nigh to
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs. And many of the Jews were come to Martha
and Mary to comfort them concerning their brother. Martha therefore when she
heard that Jesus was come, went to meet him: but Mary sat at home. Martha
therefore said to Jesus, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not
died. But now also I know, that what things soever thou shall ask of God, God
will give thee. Jesus says to her, Thy brother shall rise again. Martha says
to him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection in the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me,
although he be dead, shall live. And every one that lives and believes in me,
shall not die for ever. Believe thou this? She said to him, Yea, Lord, I have
believed that thou art Christ the Son of God, that art come into this world.

Moralities.
1. OUr Savior Jesus makes here a strong assault upon death, to cure our
infirmities at the cost of his dearest friends; He suffered Lazarus, whom he
loved tenderly, to fall into a violent sickness, to teach us, that the bodies
of Gods favorites are not free from infirmities; and that, to make men Saints,
they must not enjoy too much health. A soul is never more worthy to be a house
for God, then when she raises up the greatness of her courage, the body being
cast down with sickness. A soul which suffers is a sacred thing. All the world
did touch our Savior before his Passion; The throng of people pressed upon
him, but after his death he would not be touched by S. Mary Maudlin, because he
was consecrated by his dolors.

2. The good sisters dispatch a messenger, not to a strange God, as they do
who seek for health by remedies, which are a thousand times worse then the
disease: But they addressed themselves to the living God; the God of life and
death, to drive away death. And to recover life, they were content only to show
the wou^d to the faithful friendship of the Physician. Without prescribing any
remedies: for that is better left to his providence, then committed to our
passion.

3. He deferres his cure to raise from death. The delay of Gods favors, is not
always a refusal, but sometimes a double liberality, the vows of good men are
paid with usury: It was expedient that Lazarus should die, that he might
triumph over death, in the triumph of Jesus Christ. It is here that we should
always raise high our thoughts, by considering our glory in the state of
resurrection; he would have us believe it, not only as it is a lesson of
Nature imprinted above the skies, upon the plants or elements of the world, and
as a doctrine which many ancient Philosophers had by the light of nature; but
also as a belief which is fast joined to the faith we have in the Divine
providence, which keeps our bodies in trust under its seal within the bosom of
the earth, so that no prescription of time can make laws to restrain his power,
having passed his word, and raised up Lazarus who was but as one grain of seed
in respect of all posterity.

4. Jesus wept over Lazarus, thereby to weep over us all. Our evils were
lamentable, and could never sufficiently be deplored, without opening a
fountain of tears within heaven, and within the eyes of the Son of God. This is
justly the river which comes from that place of all pleasure to water Paradise.
How could those heavenly tears come from any other then the place of all
delight, since they issued from a brain and from eyes which were united to the
divinity? And how should they not water Paradise since for so many ages they
have flowed over the Church for producing the fruits of justice. The balm of
Egypt could not grow without water of that well Which was commonly called the
fountain of Jesus: because the blessed Virgin had there washed the clothes of
her dear Son: And we have no Odor of virtue, nor good conversation, which is
not directly barren) except it be endued with the merit of our Saviors tears.

Aspirations.
O Eyes of my Savior from whence the sun receives his clearest light: fair
eyes which only deserve eternal joys and delights. Why should you this day
be moistened with tears? Thou did give me (O only love of my heart) the
blood of thy soul before thou shedst that of thy body. There are so many things
to make me weep and I feel them so little, that if thy tears do not weep for
me, I shall always be miserable. Water then (O my sweet Master) the
barrenness of my soul from that fountain of blessing, which I have opened
within thine eyes and heart: I have opened it by my sins, and let it I beseech
thee bless me by thine infinite mercies.

The Gospel upon Saturday the fourth week in Lent, S. John 8.
Upon our Saviors words, I am the light of the world.
AGain therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world, he
that follows me, walks not in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
The Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou give testimony of thy self, thy
testimony is not true. Jesus answered and said to them although I do give
testimony of my self, my testimony is true; because I know whence I came, and
whether I go: but you know not whence I came, or whether I go. You judge
according to the flesh, I do not judge any man. And if I do judge, my
judgment is true, because I am not alone, but I and he that sent me, the
Father. And in your Law it is written, that the testimony of two men is true. I
am he that give testimony of my self: and he that sent me, the Father, gives
testimony of me. They said therefore to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus
answered, Neither me do you know, nor my Father: if you did know me, perhaps
you might know my Father also. These words Jesus spoke in the Treasury,
teaching in the Temple, and no man apprehended him, because his hour was not
yet come.

Moralities.
1. THere is in the blessed Trinity a communicating light, to which nothing is
communicated: another light which is communicative and communicated: and a
third light which is communicated, but not communicating. The first is the
heavenly Father, who gives but takes nothing. The second is that of the Son,
who takes from his Father and gives to the Holy Ghost all that can be given.
The third is the Holy Ghost which receives equally from the Father and the Son,
and does produce nothing in the Trinity. But Jesus illuminating from all
eternity, this state (for ever to be adored) did vouchsafe to descend into the
Country of our darkness, to scatter it by his brightness. It is he that has
thrown down the Crocodiles and Bars from profane Altars; who has broken so
many Idols; who has overthrown so many Temples of the adulterers and murdering
gods, to plant the honors of his heavenly Father. He has invested the world
during so many ages, with the shining of his face. He does not cease to give
light, nor to kindle in our hearts many inspirations, which are like so many
stars to conduct us to the fountain of all our happiness. You are very blind
if you do not see this, and much more miserable if you despise it.

2. It is most dangerous to do as the Jews did, to speak every day to the
light, and yet love their own darkness. Screech-owls find holes and nights to
keep themselves from day, which they cannot abide. But he that flies from the
face of God, where can he find darkness enough to hide himself? When he shall
be within the gulf of sin, his own conscience will light up a thousand torches
to see his punishments. It is the worst of all mischiefs, to pay for the
contempt of the fountain of light by suffering eternal darkness:

3. Let us behold the conversation of Jesus Christ as a sea mark, stickt all
over with lights: his life gives testimony of his Sanctity: his miracles
publish his power; his law declares his infinite wisdom, his Sanctity gives us
an example to imitate, his power gives the strength of Authority, to make him
the more readily obeyed; and from his wisdom faith is given us to regulate and
govern our belief.

Aspirations.
O My Lord Jesus, the spirit of all beauties, and the most visible of all
lights, what do the eyes of my soul, if they be not always busied in the
contemplation of thy brightness. When I find thou art departed from me,
methinks I am buried within my self, and that my soul is nothing else, but a
Sepulcher of terrors, phantomes and deaths; But when thou returnest by thy
visits and consolations, I am cheerfully revived, and my heart leaps in thy
presence, as a child rejoiceth at sight of his dear nurse. O Light of lights,
which do illuminate man coming into this world, I will contemplate thee at
the Sunrising above all creatures. I will follow thee with mine eyes all the
day long, and I will not leave thee at Sun setting, for there is nothing can be
in value near like thee. It belongs only to thee (O Sun of my soul) to arise
at all hours and to give light at midnight, as well as at noonday.

The Gospel upon Passion-Sunday, S. John the 8.
Upon these words, Who can accuse me of sin.
WHich of you shall argue me of sin? If I say the verity, why do you not
believe me? He that is of God, hears the words of God: therefore you hear
not, because you are not of God. The Jews therefore answered, and said to him,
Do not we say well that thou ari^a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Jesus answered,
I have no Devil: but I do honor my Father, and you have disshonoured me. But I
seek not mine own glory. There is that seeks and judges. Amen, Amen, I say
to you, if any man keep my word, he shall not see death for ever. The Jews
therefore said, now we have known that thou have a Devil. Abraham is dead, and
the Prophe^s, and thou say, if any man keep my word, he shall not taste death
for ever. Why, art thou greater then our Father Abraham who is dead? and the
Prophets are dead. Whom do thou make thy self? Jesus answered. if I do
glor^fie my self, my glory is nothing. It is my Father that glorifieth me, whom
you say that he is your God, and you have not known him, but I know him. And if
I shall say that I know him not, I shall be like to you, a lier: but I do know
him and do keep his word. Abraham your Father rejoiced that he might see my
day, and he saw and was glad. The Jews therefore said to him, Thou have not yet
fifty years, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said to them, Amen, Amen, I say
to you, before that Abraham was made, I am. They took stones therefore to cast
at him. But Jesus hid himself, and went out of the Temple.

Moralities.
1. THe Savior of the world being resolved to suffer death as the Priest of
his own sacrifice, and sacrifice of his Priesthood; shows that it is an effect
of his mercy, and not a suffering for any fault. He does advance the standard
of the Cross (which was the punishment of guilty persons) but he brought with
him innocence, which is the mark of Saints: he honors it with his dolours,
and sacrifices it with his blood, to glorify it in the estimation of all the
just. He is without spot, and capable to take out all stains, by his infinite
sanctity: and yet he suffered as a sinner, to blot out all our sins; It is in
this suffering he would have us all imitate him. He does not require us to make
a heaven, nor stars, nor to enlarge the sea, or to make the earth firm; but to
make our selves holy as he is holy (according to our capacity.) And this we may
gain by his favor, which he has by his own nature. No man is worthy to suffer
with Jesus, who does not purify himself by the sufferings of Jesus. If we
suffer in sin, we carry the cross of the bad thief. We must carry the Cross
of Jesus, and consecrate our tribulations by our own virtues.

2. It is said that the venomous serpent called a Basilisk (which kills both
men and beasts by his pestilent breath) kills himself when he sees a looking
glass, by the very reflection of his own poison. The Jews do here the very
same; They come about this great mirror of sanctity, which carried all the
glory of the living God; he casts his beams upon them; but envy the mother of
murder (which kills it self only by the rays of golden arrows) makes them
dart out venomous words to dishonor him: yet his incomparable virtue kills
them, without losing any of his own brightness; to teach us, that the beauty
of innocence is the best buckler against all slanders. Though it seem to be
tarnished for a time, yet her brightness will thereby become more lively: for
it is a star which the blackest vail of night cannot darken.

3. Abraham did rejoice at this day of God, two thousand years before it was
manifested to the world: All the Patriarks did long after it; and did
anticipate their felicities by the purity of their thoughts. This blessed day
has been reserved for us, and yet many of us despise it. We so much love the
day of man, that by the force of too much love to it, we forget the love of
God. We should, and must contemn those perishing days of worldly honors and
pleasures which are covered with eternal night, that we may partake the
eternity of that beautiful day which shall never have evening.

Aspirations.
O God of purity, in whose presence the Angels (ravished with admiration) do
cover their faces with their wings, and have no sweeter ecstasies then the
admiration of thy beauty: The stars are not pure enough before thy redoubted
Majesty. The Sun beholds thee as the tr^e Author of his light. Thou only
can purify all humane kind, by a sanctity which spreads it self over all
ages. Alas, I am confounded to see my sinful soul so often dyed black with so
many stains, and beastly ordures, before those most pure beams of thy glory.
Wash, O wash again out all which displeases thee. Regenerate in my heart a
Spirit that shall be wordly thy self. How shall I follow thee to m^unt Calvary,
if I be pursued with so many ill habits, which I have often detested before
thine eyes? How can I go in company with the first and greatest of all Saints,
drawing after me so many sins? The increase of my offenses would multiply thy
crosses: I will therefore do my best to drown all my imperfections within thy
blood. I will procure light to my nights (by that bright and beautiful day
which Abraham saw) from that glorious day which took beginning from thy Cross.
I will no more care for the day of man, that I may the better apply my self to
the day of God.

The Gospel upon Monday the fifth week in Lent, St. John 7.
Jesus said to the Pharisees, You shall seek and not find me: and he that is
thirsty let him come to me.
ANd the Princes and Pharisees sent Ministers to apprehend him. Jesus therefore
said to them: Yet a little time am I with you, and I go to him that sent me:
you seek me, and shall not find, and where I am you cannot come. The Jews
therefore said among themselves, whether will this man go, that we shall not
find him? will he go into the dispersion of the Gentiles, and teach the
Gentiles: what is this saying, that he has said? You shall seek me, and shall
not find: and where I am, you cannot come.

And in the last, the great day of the festivity, Jesus stood, and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes in
me, as the Scripture says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.
(And this he said of the Spirit that they should receive, which believed in him

Moralities.
1. TAke for your comfort this excellent word of our Savior: he that is
thirsty, and desires in this world to thirst after God, let him come unto me,
and he shall quench his thirst at the chiefest fountain. S. Augustine says, we
are all here as David was in the desert of Idumea: our life is a perpetual
alteration which will never be settled while we live. If we be weary we desire
rest, and if we rest over long, our bed becomes troublesome, though it should
be all of^oses. Then again, we thirst to be in action and business, which also
in a short time tires us, and puts us into another ^lteration; and that carries
us again to a desire to do nothing. All our life goes like Penelopies web,
what one hour effects, the next destroys. We do sufficiently perceive that we
are not well in this world? It is a large bed, but very troublesome, wherein
every man stirs and tumbles himself up and down, but no man can here attain to
his perfect happiness.

2. This shows us plainly that we are made for God, and that we should thirst
after divine things, if we desire true contentment. There is no default in him,
because all that can be desired is there, and yet there is no superfluity,
because there can be nothing beyond him. There only we abound without
necessity, we are assured without fear, and glorious without change. And it is
there only where we find all our sa isfactions perfectly accomplished. For to
speak truth, contentment consists in four principal things; which are, to
have a contenting object; to have a heart capable to apprehe^d it; to feel a
strong inclination to it, and to enter into an absolute full possession of^.
Now God has provided for all this by his infinite bounty. He will not have us
affect any other object of pleasure but his own He is God, and therefore can
have nothing but God for his satisfaction, and intends graciously that we shall
have the same. He will have us thirst after him, and quench our thirst within
himself: and to this, our soul is singularly disposed; for as God is a Spirit,
so is our soul only spi itual. We have so strong an inclination to love God,
that even our vices themselves (without thinking what they do) love somewhat of
God. For if pride affect greatness, their can be nothing so great as the
Monarch of it. If luxury love pleasure, God contains all pure delights in his
bosom: and this which I say may be verified of all sins whatsoever. If the
presence of a right object, and the enjoining be wanting, we have nothing so
present as God. St. Paul says we are all within him, within him we live, and
within him we have the fountain of all our motions: we see him through all his
creatures until he take off the vail, and so let us see him and taste of his
Glory.

3 A true and perfect way to make us thirst after God, is to forsake the
burning thirst which we have after bodily and worldly goods: Our soul and flesh
go in the several scales of a balance, the rising of one, pulls down the
other: It is a having two wives, for us to think we can place all our delights
in God, and withal enjoy all worldly contentments. A man must have a
conscience free from earthly matters, to receive the infusion of grace; we must
pass by Cavalry, before we can come to Tabor; and first taste gall with Jesus,
before we can taste that honeycomb, which he took after his resurrection.

Aspirations.
O God, true God of my salvation, My heart which feels it self moved with an
affectionate zeal, thinks always upon thee, and in thinking, finds an earnest
thirst after thy beauties, which heats my veins. My soul is all consumed, and I
find that my flesh it self insensibly follows the violence of my spirit. I am
here as within the deserts of Aff^ica, in a barren world, the drought whereof
makes it a direct habitation for dragons. O my God, I am tormented with this
flame, and yet I cherish it more then my self. Will there be no good Lazarus
found to dip the end of his finger within the fountain of the highest heaven, a
little to alay the burning of my thirst, Do not tell me (O my dear Spouse) that
there is a great Chaos between thee and me; Thou have already passed it in
coming to me by thy bounty: and wilt not thou lift me up then by thy mercy?

The Gospel upon Tuesday the fifth week in Lent, S. John 7.
Jesus went not into Iewry, because the Jews had a purpose to take away his
life.
AFter these things Jesus walked into Galilee: for he would not walk into
Iewry, because the Jews sought to kill him. And the festival day of the Jews
Scenopegia was at hand. And his brethren said to him, Pass from hence and go
into Iewry, that thy Disciples also may see thy works which thou do. For no
man does any thing in secret, and seeks himself to be in public: if thou do
these things, manifest thy self to the world: for neither did his brethren
believe in him: Jesus therefore says to them? My time is not yet come: but
your time is always ready. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates,
because I give testimony of it that the works thereof are evil. Go you up to
this festival day, I go not up to this festival day; because my time is not
yet accomplished.

When he had said these things himself ta^ied in Galilee: But after his
brethren were gone up, then he also went up to the festival day, not openly
but as it were in secret. The Jews therefore sought him in the festival day,
and said, Where is he? And there was much murmuring in the multitude of him:
For certain said, that he is good. And others said No, but he seduceth the
multitudes: yet no man spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews.

Moralities.
1. Jesus hides himself in this Gospel (as the Sun within a cloud) to show
himself at his own time: to teach us that all the secrets of our life
consists in well concealing and well discovering our selves. He did conceal
the life which he took from nature when he might have been born a perfect man
as well as Adam, and yet did he hide himself in the hay of a base Stable. He
concealeth his life of Grace, dissembling under silence so many great and
divine virtues, as if he had locked up the stars underlock and key, as holy Job
says. He keeps secret his life of Glory retaining for thirty three years the
light of his soul, which should without intermission have glorified and cast a
divine brightness upon his body. But when he concealed himself the stars
discovered him at his birth; the Sun at his death: all the Elements did then
confess him, and all creatures gave testimony of his divinity.

2. We should be well known of God, if we did not so curiously inquire into the
knowledge of the world. Vanity at this day opens all her gates to manifest
diverse men to the world, who should otherwise be buried in obscurity and
darkness. It makes some appear by the ^uxurious excess of their apparel, as
so many sale creatures, whose heads (being high and co^ly dressed up) go to the
market of idle love. Others by the riches and pomps of the world, others by
honors and dignities, others by the spirit of industry, and others by the
deeds of arms and policy. Every one sets out himself to be seen and esteemed in
the world. It seems that life is made for nothing but to be showed, and that
we should always live, for that which makes us die. We are a kind of walking
spirits which return late to our lodgings: But yet nevertheless giving our
selves so continually to the world methinks we should at least stay with our
selves every day one short hour. It is said that the Pelican hides her eggs,
and that they must be stolen from her, to make them disclose: But vanity is an
egg which all the world hatcheth under her wings, and none are willing to
forsake it.

3. If it be needful to show your self to the world, be then known by your
virtues, which are characters of the divinity. Let men know you by your good
examples which are the seeds of eternity, and of all fair actions. You must be
known by your alms and bounty, which are the steps with God left imprinted in
this world. If you must rise to honors and dignities, take them as instruments
of holiness: and be not powerful, but to be more obliged to do good by so
being.

Aspirations.
O God which did conceal thy self; how comes it about that I desire so much to
be seen, and make my self known to the world? What can I discover if I show
that which I am, but only sin, vanity, misery, and inconstancy, which make the
four elements of my life? To what serves this itch of seeing, but only to
receive into our eyes the seeds of curiosity? Why do we cover to be so much
seen, but to expose our selves to vanity, and to carry a Torch in a blast of
wind? Alas (O Merciful Lord) I have very long lived for my self, and for the
eyes of the world, when shall I begin to live for thee? Shall I never see those
happy moments of my life which will receive light only from the day of thy
face? Let me (O most beloved of my heart) be bind to all the world, so that I
may have eyes for thee. If the condition of my estate must needs show me to the
world, let it be to give it part of thy light, without receiving any part of
that darkness which covers it. Let me be in the world to do good, but let me
dwell in thee, as within the fountain of all goodness.

The Gospel upon Wednesday the fifth week in Lent, Saint John the 10.
The Jews said, If thou be the Messiah, tell us plainly.
ANd the Dedication was in Jerusalem, and it was winter: and Jesus walked in
the Temple in Solomon's Porch. The Jews therefore compassed him round about, and
said to him, How long do thou bold our soul in suspense? If thou be Christ,
tell us openly. Jesus answered them, I speak to you, and you believe not. The
works that I do in the Name of my Father, they give testimony of me. But you do
not believe, because you are not of my sheep. My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me, and I give them life everlasting, and they shall
not perish for ever, and no man shall pluck them out of my hand. My Father,
that which he has given me, is greater then all, and no man can pluck them out
of the hand of my Father. I and the Father are one.

The Jews took up stones to stone him. Jesus answered them, Many good works I
have showed you from my Father, for which of these works do you stone me? The
Jews answered him, For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and
because thou being as man, make thy self God. Jesus answered them: is it not
written in your Law, that I said, you are Gods? if he called them Gods to whom
the word of God was made, and the Scripture cannot be broken: whom the Father
has sanctified and sent into the world, say you, That thou blasphemest,
because I said, I am the Son of God? if I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not But if I do, and if you will not believe the works, that you
may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.

Moralities.
1. THe Woolfs encompasse the good Shepherd, counterfeiting Lambs, to draw
truth out of his mouth which they would persecute. They resembled a certain
Plant which carries the name and shape of a Lamb, but has a contrary
substance and different qualities, for it is ravenous as a wolf and devours all
the herbs which grow about it. So are there many who do insinuate themselves
into the freindship of good men, by fair (but counterfeit) respects, to the end
that afterward they may be made the object of their cruelty. Those men look
after the Messiah in the Porch of Solomon, as Herod sought after him in the
manger, not to adore, but to kill him. Their mouth carries honey when their
heart hatcheth poison: but nothing is unknown to God from whom hell it self
has not darkness enough to hide it self.

2. Jesus knows his flock, and his flock reciprocally knows him, and in that
consists all our happiness, to know God, and to be known of him. The chiefest
of all wisdom is to know him, and to be known by him, and to be written in the
Book of life, which is the last and chiefest of all felicities It is true, that
he knows all things by the knowledge of a clear intelligence; which serves the
wicked only to discover plainly their crimes: where as he knows the just by a
science of favor and approbation, which indeed is eternal predestination. If
we be unknown to God we must make our selves known to him by some good virtue,
which does not depend only upon us. The first beam is of prevenient grace, and
our vocation to Christianity which is part of our predestination, and is not at
all within our power. We have not been elected, because we have believed in
God, by our own forces; but we believe, because we have been elected. The first
knowledge comes purely from God, but it is in us by his grace to pursue this
first light, and to advance our predestination to glory, by forcing our selves
to know him perfectly, who has known us so liberally.

3. Jesus will not be known singly by his words, but by his works. Our words
must agree with our good actions, as the needle of a clock agrees with the
springs, When we have heard, or read some good doctrine; that Sermon, or
reading, must pass into our manners. It is surely a strange thing, that many
employ that leisure to know much, and yet will not spend some considerable
time, to make themselves good Christians. We must be Philosophers more by
imitating the example of God, then by any curious enquiry of his greatness.
Our Christianity teaches us, that we should be more knowing and skillful in
the practice of our life, then of our tongue; and that we are rather made to
perform great actions, then to speak them. We must have a special care that
our hands do not give our mouth the lie. What can we gain (in the judgment of
God) by being like those tres, which have a fair outside, garnished with
leaves, yet good for nothing but to give a shadow, and to make a little noise
when the wind blows? God requires of us fruit, since he is the father of all
fertility, and nothing is barren in the land of the living.

Aspirations.
O My God, I know thee, because thou was first pleased to know me; Thou have
known me by thy goodness, and I will do my best to know thee, that I may
obtain all happiness. O that I might know that my name is written in the book
of life, and also know the life which I may possess within the heart of Jesus,
in which so many lives do live. O how should I then find my spirit ravished in
those beautiful Ideas of glory? Fix thine eyes on me (O Lord) and thou shall
thereby bring me to the fountain of all happiness. The Father has given me to
thee, and I am the conquest of thy precious blood; Suffer not a soul to be
taken away from the, which has cost thee so many sweats and sufferings. I am
thine by so many titles, that I will be no more mine own, but only to have the
right of renouncing that which I am, and to establish what shall be thine in
this little kingdom of my heart.

The Gospel upon Thursday the fifth week in Lent, S. John 7.
Upon S. Mary Magdalens washing our Saviors feet in the Pharise^ house
ANd one of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him. And he being entered into
the house of the Pharisee, he sat down to meat. And behold, a woman that was
in the City, a sinner, as she knew that he set down in the Pharisees house,
she brought an Alabaster box of ointment; and standing behind, beside his
feet, she began to water his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment. And the
Pharisee that had bid him, seeing it, spoke within himself, saying. This man if
he were a Prophet, would know certes who and what manner of woman she is which
touches him, that she is a sinner. And Jesus answering said to him, Simon, I
have somewhat to say unto thee. But he said, Master, say. A certain creditour
had two debtors, own did ow five hundred pence, and the other fifty: they
having not wherewith to pay, he forgave both, whether therefore does love him
more? Simon answering said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave more. But he
said to him, Thou have judged rightly. And turning to the woman, he said unto
Simon, Do thou see this woman? I entered into thy house, water to my feet
thou did not give: but she with tears has watered my feet, and with her
hairs has wiped them. Kiss thou gave me not; but she, since I came in, has
not ceased to kiss my feet. With oil thou did not anoint my head: but she
with ointment has anointed my feet. For the which I say to thee, many sins are
forgiven her, because she has loved much. But to whom less is forgiven, he
loves less. And he said to her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And they that
sat together at the table, began to say within themselves, Who is this that
also forgiveth sins? And he said to the woman, Thy faith has made thee safe,
Go in peace.

Moralities.
1. SAint Mary Magdalen is under the feet of Jesus Christ, as is that work of
Saphires (mentioned in Exodus) under the feet of God. It is a work wrought by
the right hand of the Highest, the wonder of women, the most happy of all
lovers; who made profit of sin, which destroys all; who sanctified that love,
which so little knew the way to any sanctity. This is the fountain mentioned in
the Book of Hester, in the vision of Mardocheus; A fountain which became a
River, and after changes it self into the Sun, which gives beams and showers at
one instant. She is a fountain at the Pharisees table, she is a ^iver in her
solitary grove she is a Sun both in Paradise, and in that great exaltation,
wherein the Catholic Church now beholds her. Being now in glory, she does not
yet forbear to open fountains of tears, (by imitation of her) within the souls
of repentant sinners, of whom incessantly she procures the conversion. Happy is
that heart which is pierced with the imitation of her virtues, thereby to gain
some part of her crowns.

2. Every thing is admirable in her conversion: A sinner wounded with love,
cures her self by love. She changes the fire of Babylon, into that of
Jerusalem. She plucks out of her wound the venomous dart of worldly love, to
make large room for the arrows of Jesus which pierce her heart; and at an
instant make a harmony of heavenly passions within the bottom of her soul. She
holds the wound dearer then life, and goes straight to her conqueror, to
desire death, or increase of love.

3. She appears most ingenious in her affections, to provide no water wherewith
to wash her Masters feet, since she could draw it so fitly out of her own eyes.
This was the water which Jesus did thirst after, when he asked of the Samaritan
woman some to drink; But the poor woman was so astonished, that she forsook her
pitcher, and forgot that which Jesus asked. Now the holy Magdalen brings her
eyes to the Pharisees table, as two vessels full of crystal water, which was
of that pu^e stream which comes from the holy Lamb. Heaven is wont to water
the earth, but here the earth waters Heaven. A soul w ich was before black, and
burnt up with the fi e of concupiscence, provides a fountain for the King of
highest Heaven. She draws tears from her sins, to make them become the joys of
Paradise.

4. She sanctifies all that which was esteemed most profane. Her hairs, which
were the nets wherein so many captive souls did sigh under the yoke of wanton
love, are now (as the ensigns and standards of wicked Cupid) trampled under
the feet of her Conqueror. Those kisses, which carried the poison of a
luxurious p^ssio^ in her hear^, do now breath from her nothing but the
delicac^^s of chastity. Her pleasing odours which were before vowed to
sensuality, are now become the s^veetest exhalations from that Amber oil which
brings an odoriferous perfume to Jesus Christ. She brings with her Aromatic
spices, to burn her self at the mountain of her Sun, who makes himself her
Priest, her Advocate and Brideman.

5. She had gained the great jubilee, and was assured of it by the word of the
eternal Bishop; and yet duting all the rest of h^^ life, she practiced upon
her self a sanctified revenge, and her penance never ends, but with her life;
to confound our coldness, who know so little what it is to bewail a sin. She
is as timorous in the assurance of her pardon, as we are secure at the approach
of Gods justice. No body could be so patient, and so constant in her love, but
she, that had a holy emulation toward heavenly charity. It is her perseverance
which draws to the earth a perfect copy of that life (without limit) which the
blessed souls enjoy in heaven It is she alone to whom eternity was then given,
because she had power to offer repentant frailty to eternity it self.

Aspirations Upon Saint Mary Magdalens great Repentance.
O Jesus, my Conqueror, and my Sovereign Bishop, thou art pleased to be
satisfied of thy unworthy servant; but I am not yet content with my self. No,
no, my life and penance shall end together, since I have lost that which should
never have been separated from my body, before the separation of my soul. And
since I cannot enter chaste into my grave, I will now go repentant into an
obscure and savage Cave, where the sun shall shine no more upon a head so
sinful as mine. Mine eyes (O mine eyes) who have first received that fire
which has so passionately devoured my soul, I will make you imitate the pond
of Hesebon, and sooner shall those two fountains be dried up which serve the
stream of Jordan, then you shall want water to vvash the steps of your
Concupiscences. I will have that neck (which has suffered it self to be
embraced by unlawful Arms) held under the yoke of him that has overcome me,
and so happily subjected me to his empire. These arms and hands which have been
the chains of wanton embracements, shall henceforth for ever be lifted up to
Heaven in prayer^, and they shall have no other Altars but the feet of my Lord
and Master, if I dare think my self worthy to kiss them. This mouth which has
been the gate of unchastity, shall now become a temple of Gods praises. And
this heart which has been a burning furnace of worldly love, shall be a
burning lamp of holy affections, before God; and shall have no other oil to
maintain it, but that water which shall be drawn from mine eyes. O my God since
I have so betrayed my heart, abused my youth, spent prodigally thy Treasures,
and made crowns to Baal out of thy silver; since I have forsaken thee who art
eternal, unchangeable and incomparable Goodness, (without whom all other goods
are nothing to sollow a wanton fire, which has brought me to the brim of an
everlasting precipice; where shall I and sufficient tears to wash my offenses?
where shall I find enough parts of my body to be continually offered up as the
sacrifice o my repentance? I would m^ke my life immortal, to have my pains so
lasting, and if thy mercy will not let me be the object of thy vengeance, let
me at least serve for a sacrifice at thy Altars.

The Gospel upon Friday the fifth week in Lent, St. John 11.
The Jews said, What shall we do; for this man does many miracles.
THe chief Priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said,
What shall we do? for this man does many signs: if we let him alone so, all
will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away our place and
Nation. But one of them named Ca^phas, being the high Priest of that year, said
to them, You know nothing, neither do you consider that it is expedient for us,
that one man die for the people, and the whole Nation perish not. And this he
said not of himself, but being the high Priest of that year, he prophesied that
Jesus should die for the Nation: and not only for the Nation, but to gather in
one the children of God that were dispersed. From that day therefore they
devised to kill him. Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but
he went into the Country beside the Desert, unto a City that is called Ephrem,
and there he abode with his Disciples.

Moralities.
ONe of the greatest Tragedies acted in the life of man, which makes curious
persons to question, wise men to wonder, good men to groan, and the wicked to
rejoice; is to see an innocent man oppressed by color of justice. Now Jesus
being resolved to espouse our miseries, as far as they can reach, was pleased
to pass through those rigours and formalities of the wicked, colored with a
pretext of equity. He is not here condemned by a mean people without
consideration, without power, without formality of process: But by these chief
Priests and principal men of that Nation assembled in Council; they informed
themselves, they reason, and conclude his death. The Lions of Solomon's throne,
did anciently bear certain Writs of the Law, to signify that it was to be
handled by courageous and clear seeing Judges. But here Foxes got it into their
hands, and did manage it by crafty deceits and wickedness. Alas we are far
from the Laws of God, when we cannot abide the least word spoken against our
reputation. We are troubled to suffer for innocence, as if it were a greater
honor to suffer for a direct offense. Shall we never think that the triumph of
virtue consists in well doing, and (thereby) sometimes receiving harm even from
those who are esteemed good men?

2. There are some difficulties in affairs where truth is shut up as within a
cloud. Wise men can hardly find out where the point lies, but God does so order
it that falsehood leaves always certain marks by which it may be known; and the
beauty of truth, is ever like that lake of Afric, which early or late
discovers all that is cast into it, and makes all impostures plainly appear,
when we think they are most conceald. And this appears by the proceeding of
Caiphas, who chose to condemn Christ, for those things which were the certain
tokens that he was the true Messiah. He concluded his death by reason of his
miracles, and those gave him authority as to the prince of Isfe. A troubled
spirit makes darts of every thing (which it can) to fight against reason, and
kills it self, not suspecting its own poison.

3. The Devil publishes Jesus for the true Messiah and so does likewise
Caiphas prophecy the same. It is not always a certain mark of goodness, to
speak that which is good, but it is an assurance of virtue to avoid that which
is ill. There are many from whom good works do escape, while they both think
and do ill. Truth makes use of their tongues, when Devils command their hearts.
It is this which makes us see our Saviors Empire, and the extent of his
conquests, which is not limited by time, he being already entered into possesson
of eternity: and it is not bounded by place, because it contains all Immensity.
Night has no power to cover it, because it is light it self; It cannot be shut
up in any deceitful shadow, because it scatters and discovers all falsehood: It
cannot be comprehended within our senses because it exceeds their capacity; and
it is present in all places being omnipotent and eternal in all time.

Aspirations.
O Jesus, Father of all blessed unions, who have suffered death to unite all
the children of God together, who are scattered over all the countries of the
world; will thou have no pity of my heart, so many times torn in pieces, and
strayed among a great multitude of objects, which estrange and draw me from the
first of all unities? My soul melts through all the Gates of my senses, by
running after so many creatures which do kindle covetousness, but never serve
to refresh or cool the heat of it. Draw me (O Lord) from the great throng of so
many exterior things, that I may retire into my own heart, and from thence
arise to thine, where I may find that peace, which thou have cimented fast with
thy most precious blood. When shall I see the first beams of that liberty,
which thou grantest to thy Children? When shall my thoughts return from
wandering in those barren regions, where thou art not acknowledged? When shall
I be reunited, and so purified by thy favors, that they may celebrate
continual days of feast in my soul? I am already there in desire, and shall
be there in presence, when by help of thine infinite grace and mercy, I can be
wholly thine.

The Gospel upon Saturday, the fifth week in Lent, S. John 12.
The chief Priests thought to kill Lazarus, because the miracle upon him made
many follow Jesus.
But the chief Priests devised to kill. Lazarus also, because many for him of
the Jews went away, and believed in Jesus.

And on the morrow a great multitude that was come to a festival day, when they
had heard that Jesus comes to Jerusalem, they took the boughs of Palms, and
went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the
name of our Lord, the King of Israel. And Jesus found a young Ass, and sat
upon it, as it is written. Fear not daughter of Sion: behold thy King comes
sitting upon an Asses colt. These things his Disciples did not know at the
first: but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had
been written of him, and these things they did to him. The multitude therefore
gave testimony, which was with him when he called Lazarus out of the grave, and
raised him from the dead. For therefore all the multitude came to meet him,
because they heard that he had done this sign. The Pharisees therefore said
among themselves, Do you see that we prevail nothing? Behold, the whole world
is gone after him.

And there were certain Gentiles of them that came up to adore in the Festival
day. These therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and
desired him, saying, Sir, we are desirous to see Jesus. Philip comes and
tells Andrew. Again, Andrew and ^hilip told Jesus: but Jesus answered them,
saying, The hour is come that the Son of man shall be glorified. Amen, Amen, I
say to you, Unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground, die, it self
remains alone: but if it die, it brings much fruit. He that loves his
life, shall lose it: and he that hates his life in this world, does keep it to
life everlasting. If any man minister to me let him follow me: and where I am
there also shall my minister be. If any man minister to me, my Father will
honor him.

Moralities.
1. ADmire here the ecstasies of our sweet Savior! He is ravished by the object
of his death, and is transported by the Idea of his sufferings. The trumpet of
heaven sou^ded in the voice which was heard by this great multitude. He
encourages himself to his combat; he looks confidently upon the Cross, as the
fountain of his glories, and planted his elevation upon the lowest abasements.
Shall not we love this Cross, which Jesus has cherished as his Spouse? He
gave up his soul in the arms of it to conquer our souls. We shall never be
worthy of him, till we bear the Ensigns of his war and the ornaments of his
peace. Every thing is Paradise to him, that knows how to love the Cross: and
every thing is hell to those, who fly from it; and no body flies it, but shall
find it. It is the gate of our mortality, whether we must all come, though we
turn our backs to it.

2. What a great secret it is, to hate our soul that we may love it; to hate it
for a time, that we may love it for all eternity; to punish it in this life, to
give it thereby a perpetual rest in that to come; to despise it that we may
honor it: To handle it roughly, that it may be perfectly established in all
delights? And yet this is the way which all just men have passed to arrive at
the chiefest point of their rest. They have resembled the Flowers de-Luce,
which weep for a time, and out of their own tears produce seeds which renew
their beauties. The salt sea for them becomes a flourishing field, as it did to
the people of God when they came forth of the chains of Egypt. The cloud which
appeared to the Prophet Ezekiel, carried with it winds and storms, but it was
environd with a golden circle, to teach us that the storms of affliction which
happen to Gods children, are encompassed with brightness and smiling felicity.
They must rot as a grain of wheat, that they may bud out and flourish in the
ear. They must abide the diversity of times, and endure the Sithe and Flail;
They must be ground in a mill, and pass by water and fire, before they can be
made bread pleasing to Jesus Christ. Our losses are our advantages; we lose
nothing but to gain by it; we humble and abase our selves to be exalted, we
despoil our selves to be better clothed, and we mortify our selves to be
revived. O what a grain of wheat is Jesus Christ, who has past all these
trialls, to make the height of all heavenly glories bud out of his infinite
sufferings.

Aspirations.
O God, I have that passionate desire which these strangers had to see Jesus. I
do not ask it of Philip, nor shall Philip have cause to ask Andrew. My Jesus,
I ask it of thy self, thou art beautiful even in the way of the Cross; Thou
did show thy self courageous in the Abyss of thy pains: thou art admirable in
the contempt of death. The heavenly Trumpet has already sounded for thee, and
cheerfulness gives wings to carry thee to this great combat, where death and
life sight singly together: which makes life die for a time, and death live for
ever. I will forsake my very soul to follow thee in this Agony, and find my
life in thy death, as thou have extinguished death in thy life.

The Gospel upon Palm Sunday, S. Matthew 21.
Our Savior came in triumph to Jerusalem a little before his Passion.
ANd when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto mount
Olivet, then Jesus sent two Disciples, saying to them, Go ye into the town that
is against you, and immediately you shall find an Ass tied, and a colt with
her: loose them and bring them to me. And if any man shall say ought unto you,
say ye, That our Lord has need of them, and forthwith he will let them go.
And this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
saying, Say ye to the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes to thee, mock,
and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt the foal of her that is used to the yoke.
And the Disciples going, did as Jesus commanded them, and they brought the
Ass, and the Colt, and laid their garments upon them, and made him to sit
thereon. And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way: and others
did cut boughs from the trees, and strewed them in the way, and the multitudes
that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of
David, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Moralities.
1. OUr Savior goes to his death in triumph: he appears to be a King, but a
King of Hearts, who requires nothing of us but our selves, only to make us
happy and contented in him. He triumphs before the victory, because non but he
could be sure of the future certainty of his happiness. But he watered his
triumphs with tears, to weep for our joys, which where to proceed out of his
sadness. It is related by an ancient Orator that when Constantine made his
entry into great Britany, (where he was born) the people received him with so
great applause, that they killed the Sails and Oars of the Vessel which
brought him and were ready to pave the streets with their bodies, for him to
tread on. If they did so for a mortal man, what should we not do for an eternal
God, who comes to buy us with his precious blood, and demands entrance into our
hearts, only to give us Paradise.

2. He walks toward his Cross, amongst the cries of favor and joy, to teach
us with what cheerfulness we should conform our selves to abide our own
sufferings; imitating the Apostles, who received their first reproaches as Manna
from Heaven. He would have us prepared and resolved always to suffer death
patiently; whether it be a death which raises up our spirit to forsake
sensuality, ot a natural death. Whatsoever it be, we should embrace it as the
day which must bring us to our lodging after a troublesome pilgrimage. Does it
not appear plainly, that those who are loath to forsake the world, are like
herbs put into an earthen pot amongst straw and dung, and yet would be
unwilling to come forth of it. The forniture of out worldly lodging grows
rotten, the roof is ready to fall upon our heads, the foundation shakes under
our feet, and we fear that day, which (if we our selves will) shall be the
^orning of our eternal happiness. It is not death, but only the opinion of
it which is terrible, and every man considers it according to the disposition
of his own spirit.

3. The Palm branches which we carry in our hands, require from us the
renewing of a life purified and cleansed in the blood of the holy Lamb. In the
beginning of lent we take upon our heads the ashes of Palm branches, to teach
us that we do then, enter (as it were) into the Sepulcher of repentance: But
now we carry green bows, to make us know that now we come out of the tomb of
Ashes, to enter again into the strength of doing good works, in imitation of
the trees which having been covered with snow, and buried in the sharpness
of vvinter, do again begin to bud in the Spring time.

4. The garments spread under the feet of Jesus declare, that all our temporal
goods should be employed tovvard his glory; and that we must forsake our
affections to all things which perish, that we may be partakers of his
kingdom. No man can stand firm that is delighted with movable things. He that
is subject to vvorldly affections binds himself to a wheel which turns about
continually. Jesus accepted this triumph only to despise it: he reserved the
honor of it in his own hands, to drovvn it in the flood of his tears, and in
the sea of his precious blood. If you be rich and wealthy do not publish it
vainly, but let the poor feel it. You must live amongst all the greatness and
jollity of this world, as a man whose only business must be to go to God.

Aspirations.
O Sovereign King of hearts, after whom all chaste loves do languish, I am
filled with joy to see t^ee walk amongst the cries of joy, and the palms and
g^rments of thy admirers, which served for carpets. I am ravished wi h thy
onours and the delights of thy glory, and I applaud thy triumphs. Alas, that
all the earth is not obedient to thy laws, and that the tongues of a^l people
do not make one voice to acknowledge thee sole Monarch of heaven and earth
Triumph at least in the hearts of thy faithful servants (O my magnificent
Master) make a triumphall Ark composed of hearts; Put fire to it with thy
adored hand; Send out one spark of that heat which t^ou came to spread upon
the earth. Let every thing burn for thee, and consume it self in thy love. I do
irrevocably bind my heart to the magnificence of thy triump^, and I love better
to be thy slave, then to be saluted king of the whole world.

The Gospel upon Monday in holy week S. John 12.
Saint Mary Magdalen anointed our Saviors feet with precious ointment: at
which Judas repined.
JEsus therefore six days before the Pasche, came to Bethaenia, where Lazarus
was, that had been dead, whom Jesus raised: and they made him a supper there
and Martha ministered but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with
him Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of right Spikenard, precious, and
anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was
filled of the odor of the Ointment. One therefore of his Disciples, Judas
Iscariot, he that was to betray him, said, Why was not this ointment sold for
three hundred pence, and given to the poor? And he said this, not because he
cared for the poor, but because he wa^ a thi^f^ and having the purse, carried
the things that were put in it. Jesus therefore said, Let her alone that she
may keep it for the day of my burial: for the poor you have always with you,
but me you shall not have always A great multitude therefore of the Jews know
that he was there: and they come, not for Jesus only, but that they might see
Lazarus whom he raised from the dead.

Moralities.
1. LAzarus being raised from his grave converseth familiarly with Jesus, and
to preserve the life which he had newly received, he ties himself continually
to the fountain of lives: to teach us that since we have begun to make a strong
conversion from sin to grace, we must not be out of the sight of God: we must
live with him, and of him; with him, by applying our spirit, our prayers, our
fervor, our passionate sighs toward him: and live of him by often receiving
the blessed Sacrament. Happy they (says the Angel in the Apocalypse) who are
invited to the wedding supper of the Lamb. But note that he who invites us to
this feast, stands upright amids the sun, to signify that we should be as pure
as the beams of light, when we come unto the most holy Sacrament. Lazarus did
eat bread with his Lord, but (to speak with St. Augustine) he did not then eat
the bread of our Lord. And yet this great favor is reserved for you when you
are admitted to that heavenly banquet, where God makes himself meat, to give you
an Antep^st of his Immortality.

2. God will have us acknowledge his benefits by the faithfulness of our
services. St. Peter's Mother in law, as soon as she was healed of her Fever,
presently served her Physician. And observe that Martha served the Author of
life, who had redeemed her brother from the power of death. The faithful Mary
who had shed tears, gave what she had mo t precious, and observes no measure in
the worth, because Jesus cannot be valued. Cleopatra's pearl (estimated to be
worth two hundred thousand crowns) which she made her friend swallow at a
Banquet, this holy woman thought too base; She melts her heart in a sacred
Limbeck of love, and distills it out by her eyes. And Jesus makes so great
account of her waters and perfumes, that he would suffer no body to wash his
feet when he instituted the blessed Sacrament, as not being willing to deface
the sacred characters of his sacred Lover.

3. Judas murmures and covers his villainous passion of Avarice under the color
of Charity, and mercy toward the poor. And just so do many cover their vices
with a specious show of virtue. The proud man would be thought Magnanimous; the
prodigal would pass for liberal, the covetous for a good husband; the
brainsick rash man, would be reputed courageous; the glutton, a hospitable good
fellow; Sloth puts on the face of quietness, timorousness of wisdom,
impudence of boldness, insolence of liberty, and over confident or saucy
prating, would be taken for eloquence. Many men (for their own particular
interests) borrow some colors of the public good, and very many actions both
unjust and unreasonable take upon them a semblance of piety. Saint Ireneus
says, that many give water colored with sleckt whitelime or plaster, instead
of milk. A farse is a French Iig wherein the faces of all the actours are
whited over with meal.
And all their life is but a farse where Blackamores are whited over with meal.
Poor truth suffers much amongst these couesnages; But you must take notice that
in the end, wicked and dissembling Judas did burst and show his damned soul
stark naked. Yet some think fairly to cover foul intentions, who must needs
know well that Hypocrisy has no vail to cousen death.

Aspirations.
I See no altars in all the world more amiable then the feet of our Savior; I
will go by his steps to find his feet; and by the excellencies of the best of
men, I will go find out the God of gods. Those feet are admirable and St. John
has well described them to be made of metal burning in a furnace, they are
feet of metal by their constancy, and feet of fire by the enflamed affections
of their Master. Let Ind^s murmr at it what he will; but if I had a sea of
sweet odours, and odoriferous perfumes, I would empty them all upon an object
so worthy of love. Give, O mine eyes) Give at least tears to this precious
Holocaust, which goes to sacrifice it self for satisfaction of your libidinous
concupiscences. Wash it with your waters before it wash you with its blood. O
my soul seek not after excrements of thy head to dry it: Thy hairs are thy
thoughts, which must only think of him, who thought so kindly and passionately
of thee on the day of his Eternity.

The Gospel upon Monday Thursday, S. John the 13.
Of our Saviors washing the feet of his Apostles
ANd before the festival day of the Pasch^, Jesus knowing that his hour was
come, that he should pass out of this world to his Father: whereas he had
loved his that were in the world, unto the end he loved them. And when supper
was done, whereas the devil now had put into the heart of Judas Iscariot the
son of Simon to betray him, knowing that the Father gave him all things into
his hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God: he rises from supper,
and lays aside his garments, and having taken a towell, girded himself. After
that he put water into a basin, and began to wash thee feet of his Disciples,
and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girded. He comes therefore
to Simon Peter; and Peter says to him. Lord, do thou wash my feet? Jesus
answered and said to him, That which I do, thou know not now, hereafter thou
shall know. Peter says to him, Thou shall not wash my feet for ever. Jesus
answered him, if I wash thee not, thou shall not have part with me. Simon Peter
says to him, Lord, not only my feet, but also hands and head. Jesus says to
him, He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, but is clean wholly:
and you are clean, but not all; for he knew who he was that would betray him,
therefore he said, You are not clean all.

Therefore after he had washed their feet, and taken his garments, being set
down, again he said to them, Know you what I have done to you? You call me
Master, and Lord, and you say well, for I am so. If then I have washed your
feet, Lord and Master, you also ought to wash one another feet. For I have
given you an example, that as I have done to you so, you do also

Moralities.
1. JEsus loves his servants for an end, and till the full accomplishment of
that end. The world loves his creatures with a love which tends to
concupisence; but that is not the end for which they were made or should be
loved. There is a very great difference between them: for the love of worldy
men, plays the Tyrant in the world; snatching and turning all things from the
true scope and intention for which they were made by God, diverting them to
profane uses, by turbulent and forcible ways. The world pleases it self to
set up Idols every where to make it self adored in them as chief Sovereign. It
makes use of the Sun to light his crimes; of the fatness of the earth to
fatten his pleasure, of apparel for his luxury, of all metals to kindle
Avarice, and of the purest beauties to serve sensuality. And if by chance it
love any creature, with a wellwishing love, and as it ought to be loved, that
is not permanent. The wind is not more inconstant, nor a calm at Sea more
unfaithful, then worldly friendship. For sometimes it begins with Fire, and
ends in Ice. It is made as between a pot and a glass, and is broken sooner
then a glass. The ancient Almans tried their children in the Rhine, but true
friendship is tried in a sea of Tribulation. It is only Jesus (the preserver
and restorer of all things) who loves us from Eternity to Eternity. We must
follow the sacred steps of his examples to reduce our selves to the final
point of our happiness.

2. The water a first was a mild element, which served the Majesty of God, as a
floting Charior, since (as the Scripture says) his Spirit was carried upon the
waters, from whence he drew the seeds which produced all the world. But after man
had sinned, like a supr^me Judge he made use of the gentlest things to be the
Instruments of our punishments. The water which carried the divine mercies, was
chosen at the deluge, to drown all ^ankind. Now at this time Jesus sanctified
it by his sacred touch: He took the Basin, which being in his hands, became
greater and more full of Majesty, then all the Ocean. Our spots, which eternity
could not wash clean, are taken away at Baptism by one only drop of water
sanct fied by his blessing. He prevents the bath of his blood, by the bath of
an element: which he does expressly before his institution of the blessed
Sacrament to teach us, what purity of life, of heart, of faith, of in ention
and affections we must bring to the holy Eucharist. It is necessary to chase
away all strange gods (which are sins and passions) before we receive the God
of Israel: we must wash our selves in the waters of repentance, and change our
attire by a new conversation. It is too much for us to give flesh for flesh the
body of a miserable man for that of Jesus Christ? The consideration of our sins
should bring up the blood of blushing in our cheeks, since they were the only
cause why he shed his most precious blood upon the Cross for us. Alas, the
heavens are not pure before his most pure spirit, which purifies all nature:
Then how can we go to him, with so many voluntary stains and deformities; Is
it not to cast flowers upon a dunghill, and to drive Swine to a clear fountain,
when we will go to Jesus (the Author of innocence) carrying with us the steps
and spots of our heinous sins?

3. Jesus would not only take upon himself the form of man, but that also of a
base servant, as saint paul says. It was the office of slaves to carry water
to wash bodies; which made David say that Moab should be the Basin of his hope,
expressing thereby, that he would humble the Moabites so low, that they should
serve only to bring water to wash unclean houses. Alas, who would have said
that the Messiah was come amongst us to execute the office of a Moabite? What
force has conquered him, what arms have brought him under, but only love?
How can we then become proud, and burn incense to that Idol called point of
honor, when we see how our God humbled himself in this action? Observe with
what preparation the Evangelist said that his heavenly Father had put all into
his hands: that he came from God, and went to God; and yet instead of taking
the worlds Scepter, he takes a Basin and humbles himself to the most servile
offices. And if the waters of this Basin cannot burst in us, the foul
imposthume of vanity, we must expect no other remedy, but the eternal flames of
hell fire.

Aspirations.
O King of Lovers, and Master of all holy Loves, Thou love for an end, and
till the accomplishment of that end. It appertains only to thee to teach the
Art of loving well, since thou have practiced it so admirably. Thou art none of
those delicate friends, who only make love to beauties, to gold, and silk; thou
love our very poverty, and our miseries; because they serve for objects of
thy charity. Let proud Michol laugh (while she list) to see my dear David made
as a water bearer; I honor him as much in that posture, as I would, sitting
upon the throne of all the world. I look upon him holding this Basin, as upon
him that holds the vast Seas in his hands. O my merciful Jesus, I beseech thee
wash; wash again, and make clean my most sinful soul. Be it as black as hell,
being in thy hands, it may become more white then that Dove (with silver wings)
of which the Prophet speaks. I go, I run to the fountains; I burn with love
amongst thy purifying waters. I desire affectionately to humble my self, but I
know not where to find so low a place as thine, when thou wast humbled before
Judas, to wash his traitors feet.

Upon the Garden of Mount Olivet.
Moralities.
1. JEsus enters into a Garden to expiate the sin committed in a Garden by the
first man. The first Adam stole the fruit, and the second is ordained to make
satisfaction. It is a strange thing, that he chose the places of our delights,
for suffering his pains; and never looked upon our most dainty sweets, but to
draw out of them most bitter sorrows. Gardens are made for recreations, but our
Savior finds there only desolation. The Olives which are tokens of Peace,
denounce War unto him. The plants there do groan; the flowers are but flowers
of death, and those fountains are but fountains of sweat and blood. He that
shall study well this Garden, must needs be ashamed of all his pleasant
Gardens; and will forsake those refined curiosities of Tulips, to make his
heart become another manner of Garden, where Jesus should be planted as the
only tree of life, which brings forth the most perfect fruits of justice.

2. It was there that the greatest Champion of the world undertook so great
combats, which began with sweat and blood, but ended with the loss of his
life. There were three marvelous agonies, of God and Death; of Joy and Sorrow;
of the Soul and Flesh of Jesus. God and Death were two incompatible things;
since God is the first, and the most universal of all lives, who banisheth from
him all the operations of death, and yet his love finds means to unite them
together for our redemption.

The joy of beatitude was a fruition of all celestial delights, whereunto
nothing which displeased could have access; and yet Jesus suffered sorrow, to
give him a mortal blow even in the Sanctuary of his Divinity. He afflicted
himself for us, because we knew not what it was to afflict our selves for him,
and he descended by our st^ps to the very anguishes of death, to make us rise
by his death to the greatest joys of life.

To be short, there was a great duel between the affectionate love, and the
virginal flesh of Jesus. His soul did naturally love a body which was so
obedient; and his body followed wholly the inclinations of his soul: There was
so perfect an agreement between these two parties; that their separation must
needs be most dolorous. Yet Jesus would have it so, and sign the decree by
sweating blood. And as if it had been too little to weep for our sins with
two eyes, he suffered as many eyes as he had veins, to be made in his body, to
shed for us tears of his own blood.

3. Observe here how this soul of Jesus amongst those great anguishes,
continued always constant, like the needle of a Sea-compass in a storm: He
prays, he exhorts, be orders, he reproves, and he encourages; he is like the
heavens, which (amongst so many motions and agitations) lose no part of their
measure or proportion. Nature and obedience make great convulsions in his
heart; but he remains constantly obedient to the will of his heavenly Father:
he tears himself from himself, to make himself a voluntary sacrifice for death,
amongst all his inclinations to life; to teach us that principal lesson of
Christianity, which is to desire only what God will, and to execute all the
decrees of his divine providence, as our chiefest helps to obtain perfection.

Aspirations.
O Beauteous garden of Olives, which from henceforth shall be the most
delicious objects of my heart. I will lose my self in thy walks I will be lost
with God, that I may never be lost. I will breath only thy air, since it is
made noble by the sighs of my dear Master. I will gather thy flowers, since
Jesus has marked them with his blood. I will wash my self in those fountains
since they are sanctified by the sweat of my Jesus. I will have no other joy
but the sorrow of the Son of God, nor any other will but his. O my sweet
Savior, Master and teacher of all humane kind, will thou be abridged of thine
own will (which was so reasonable and pure) to give me an example of mortifying
my passions, and shall I (before thy face) retain any wicked or disordinate
appetites? Is it possible I should desire to be Lord of my self (who am so bad
a Master) when I see the Author of all goodness separate himself from himself,
only to make me and all mankind partakers of his merits?

Of the apprehension of Jesus.
IN that obscure and dolorous night, wherein our Savior was apprehended, three
sorts of darknesses were cast; upon the Jews, upon Judas, and upon S. Peter: A
darkness of obduration upon the hearts of the Jews; a darkness of ungrateful
malignity upon Judas; and a darkness of infirmity upon Saint Peter. Was there
ever any blindness like that of the Jews, who sought for the shining sun with
lighted torches, without knowing him by so many beams of power which shined
from him? They are stricken down with the voice of the Son of God, as with
lightning; and they rise again upon the earth to arm themselves against
heaven. They bind his hands to take away the use of his forces, but they could
not stop the course of his bounties. To show that he is totally good, he is
good and charitable even amongst his merciless executioners, and he lost all he
had (savng his Godhead) only to gain patience.

When Saint Peter stroke the high Priests servant, the patience of our Lord
Jesus received the blow, and had no patience till he was healed. If goodness
did show forth any one beam in the Garden, modesty sent forth another in the
house of Annas, when his face was stricken by a servile hand, his mouth opened
it self as a Temple from whence nothing came but sweetness and light. The God
of Truth speaks to Caiphas, and they spit upon his brightness, and cover
that face which must discover heaven for us. The mirror of Angels is tarnisht
with the spittle of infernal mouths, and wounded by most sacrilegious hands,
without any disturbance of his constancy. That was invincible by his virtue,
as the wilfulness of the Jews stood unmovable by their obduration. There are
souls which after they have filled the earth with crimes, expect no cure of
their discases, but by the hell of the reprobate.

2. The second darkness appears by the black passion of Judas, who falls down
into hell with his eyes open; and after he had fold his soul, sold Jesus, and
both all he had, and all he was, to buy an infamous halter to hang himself. A
soul become passionate with wanton love, with ambition or avarice, is banished
into it self, as into a direct hell, and delivered to her own passion as to the
Furies. The Poets Hydra had but seven heads, but the spirit of Avarice (S. John
Climacus says) has ten thousand. The conversation of Jesus, which was so full
of infinite attractions, could never win the spirit of Judas, when it was once
bewitched with covetousness. The tinkling of silver kept him from rightly
understanding Jesus. He makes use of the most holy things to betray Holiness it
self. He employes the kiss of peace to begin war. He carries poison in his
heart, and honey in his mouth: he puts on the spirit of Jesus to betray him.
This shows us plainly, that covetous and traitorous persons are farthest from
God, and nearest to the Devils.

The third power of darkness appeared in the infirmity of Saint Peter, who
after so many protestations of fidelity, for fear of death, renounced the
Author of life. One of the Ancients said, the greatest frailty of Humanity
was, that the wisest men were not infallibly wise at all times. And all men are
astonished to see, that the greatest spirits (being left to themselves) become
barren, and suffer eclipses which give example to the wisest, and terror to
all the world. God has suffered the fall of St. Peter to make us have in
^orrour all presumption of our own forces; and to teach us that over great
assurance is often times mother of an approaching danger. Besides, it seems he
would by this example, consecrate the virtue of repentance in this fault of
him, whom he chose to be head of his Church; to make us see, that there is no
dignity so high, nor holiness so eminent, which does not ow Tribute to the
mercy of God.

Aspirations.
Upon Saint Peter's tears.
IT is most true (says Saint Peter) that a proud felicity has always reeling
feet. Thou which did defy the gates of hell, have yielded thy self to the
voice of a simple woman. All those conquests which thou did promise to thy
self, are become the trophies of so weak a hand. Return to the combat, and
since she has triumphed over thee, do thou at least triumph over thy self.
Alas? I am afraid even to behold the place of my fall, and the weak snares of a
simple woman appear to me as boisterous chains. Yet what can he fear who is
resolute to die? If thou find death amongst those Massacres, thou should
rather embrace then decline it: For what can it do but make thee companion of
life it self? Our soul is yet too foul to be a sacrifice for God; let us first
wash it with tears. I fell down before the fire, and I will rise by water. I
have walked upon the sea to come to Jesus, and I will now return to him by the
way of my tears. I will speak now only by my tears, since I have lately talked
so wickedly with my mouth. Since that which should open to speak Oracles for
the Church, has been employed to commit foul treason; since we have nothing
left free to us, but sighs and groans let us make use of the last liberty which
is left us and when all is spent return to the mercy of Jesus, which all the
sins of the world can never evacuate. I will from henceforth be a perpetual
example to the Church by my fall, and rising again from death; for the comfort
of sinners; and the fault of one night shall be lamented by me all the days of
my life,

Moralities upon the Pretorian or Judgment Hall.
1. IN the passion of our Savior all things are divine, and it seems they go
as high as they could be raised by that Sovereign power joined with extreme
love. Jesus the most supreme and redoubted judge, who will come in his great
Majesty to judge the world, fire and lightning streaming from his face, and all
things trembling under his feet, was pleased at this time to be judged as a
criminal person. Every thing is most admirable in this judgment: The accusers
speak nothing of those things, which they had resolved in their counsels, but
all spoke against their consciences. As soon as they are heard, they are
condemned; justice for saketh them, and they are wholly possessed with rage.
Pilate before he gave judgment upon Jesus, pronounced it against himself: for
after he had so many times declared him innocent, he could not give judgment
without protesting himself to be unjust. The silence of Jesus is more admired
by this Infidel, then the eloquence of all the world; and truth without
speaking one word triumphs over falsehood. A Pagan Lady (the wife of Pilate)
is more knowing then all the Laws: more religious then the Priests, more
zealous then the Apostles, more courageous then the men of Arms: when she
sleeps, Jesus is in her sleep: when she talks Jesus is upon her tongue; if
she write, Jesus i^ under her pen: her letter defended him at the judgment
Hall, when all the world condemned him; she calls him holy, when they used
him like a theif: She makes her husband wash his hands before he touched that
blood, the high price of which she proclaimed. She was a Roman Lady by Nation,
called Claudia Pr^cula, and it was very fit she should defend this Jesus, who
was to plant the seat of his Church in Rome, All this while Jesus does good
amongst so many evils: He had caused a place to be bought newly for the burial
of Pilgrims at the price of his blood? he reconciles Herod and Pilate, by the
loss of his life. He sets Barrabas at liberty, by the loss of his honor: he
speaks not one word to him that had killed Saint John the Baptist, who was the
voice. And the other to revenge himself (without thinking what he did) showed
him as a king. He appears before Pilate as the king of dolours, that he might
become for us the king of glories. But what a horror is it to consider that in
this judgment, he was used like a slave, like a sorcerer, like an accursed
sacrifice? Slavery made him subject to be whipped, the crown of thorns was
given only to Enchanters and that made him appear as a Sorcerer: And so many
curses pronounced against him, made him as the dismissive. Goat mentioned in
Leviticus, which was a miserable beast, upon which they cast all their
execrations, before they sent it to die in the desert. He that binds the
shovvers in clouds to make them water the earth, is bound and drawn like a
criminal person: He that holds the vast seas in his sist, and ballanceth
heaven with his fingers, is stricken by servile hands. He that enamels the
bosom of the earth with a rare and pleasing diversity of flowers, is most
ignominiously crowned with a crown of thorns. O hideous prodigies which took
away from us the light of the Sun, and covered the Moon with a sorrowful
darkness. Behold what a Garland of flowers he has taken upon his head to
expiate the sins of both Sexes. It was made of briers and thorns, which the
earth of our flesh had sowed for us, and which the virtue of his Cross took
away. All the pricks of death were thrust upon this prodigious patience, which
planted her throne upon the head of our Lord. Consider how the Son of God would
be used for our sins, while we live in delicacies? and one little offensive
word goes to our hearts; to which though he that spoke it gave the swiftness
of wings, yet we keep it so shut up in our hearts, that it gets leaden
heels, which make it continue there fixed.

Aspirations.
ALas, what do I see here? a crown of thorns grafted upon a man of thorns: A
man of dolours who burns between two fires, the one of love, the other of
tribulation; both which do inflame and devour him equally, and yet never can
consume him. O thou the most pure of all beauties, where have my sins placed
thee? Thou art no more a man, but a bloody skin taken from the teeth of Tigers
and Leopards. Alas, what a spectacle is this to dispoil this silk Ego sum
vermis and non ho^o, Psalm. 21.
worm which at this day attires our Churches and Altars? How could they make
those men (who looked upon thy chaste body) strike and disfigure it? O white
Alabaster, how have thou been so changed into scarlet? Every stroke has made a
wound, and every wound a fountain of blood. And yet so many fountains of thy so
precious blood, cannot draw from me one tear. But O sacred Nightingale of the
Cross, who has put thee within these thorns, to make so great harmonies only
by thy silence? O holy thorns I do do not ask you where are your roses. I know
well they are the blood of Jesus, and I am not ignorant that all roses would be
thorns, if they had any feeling of that which you have. Jesus carried them upon
his head, but I will bear them at my heart: and thou (O Jesus) shall be the
object of my present dolours that thou may after be the fountain of my
everlasting joys.

Moralities for Good Friday upon the death of Jesus Christ.
MOunt Calvary is a mavelous Scaffold, where the chiefest Monarch of all the
world, loses his life, to restore our salvation which was lost, and where he
makes the Sun to be eclipsed over his head, and stones to be cloven under his
feet; to teach us by insensible creatures, the feeling which we should have of
his sufferings.

This is the school where Jesus teaches that great Lesson, which is the way to
do well: and we cannot better learn it then by his examples, since he was
pleased to make himself passible and motal, to overcome our passions, and to be
the Author of our immortality.

The qualities of a good death may be reduced to three points: of which the
first is to have a right conformity to the will of God, for the manner, the
hour and circumstances of our death.

The second is to forsake as well the affections, as the presence of all
creatures of this base world.

The third is to unite our selves to God by the practice of great virtues,
which will serve as steps to glory.

Now these three conditions are to be seen in the death of the Prince of Glory
upon mount Calvry; which we will take as the purest Idea's, whereby to regulate
our passage out of this world.

1. COnsider in the first place, that every man living has a natural
inclination to life, because it has some kind of divinity in it. We love it
when it smileth upon us, as if it were our Paradise; and if it be troublesome,
yet we strive to retain it, though it be accompanied with very great miseries.
And if we must needs forsake this miserable body, we then desire to leave it by
some gentle and easy death. This make thus plainly see the generosity of our
Savior, who being Master of life and death, and having it in his power to
choose that manner of death which would be least hideous, (being of it self full
enough of horror) yet nevertheless, to conform himself to the will of his
heavenly Father, and to confound our delicacies: he would needs leave his life
by the most dolorous and ignominious which was to be found amongst all the
deaths of the whole world. The Cross amongst the Gentiles was a punishment for
slaves, and the most desperate persons of the whole world. The Cross amongst
the Hebrews was accursed: It was the ordinary curse which the most incapable
and most malicious mouths did pronounce against their greatest enemies, The
death of a crucified man, was the most continual, languishings and tearing of
a soul from the body, with most excessive violence and agony. And yet the
eternal wisdom chose this kind of punishment, and drank all the sorrows of a
cup so bitter. He should have died upon some Trophee, and breathed out his last
amongst flowers, and left his soul in a moment: and if he must needs have felt
death, to have had the least sense of it that might be. But he would try the
rigor of all greatest sufferings: he would fall to the very bottom of
dishonor: and (having ever spared from himself all the pleasures of this life)
to make his death complete, he would spare none of those infinite dolours. The
devout Simon of Cassia asks o^r Savior, going toward mount Calvary, saying,
O Lord, whether go you with the extreme weight of this dry and barten piece of
wood? Whether do you carry it, and why? Where do you mean to set it? Upon mount
Cavalry? That place is most wild and stony: How will you plant it? Who shall
water it? Jesus answers, I bear upon my shoulders a piece of wood, which must
conquer him, who must make a far greater conquest by the same piece of wood: I
carry it to mount Calvary, to plant it by my death, and water it with my
blood. This wood which I bear, must bear me, to bear the salvation of all the
world, and to draw all after me. And then (O faithful soul) wilt not thou
suffer some confusion, at thine own delica^ies? to be so fearful of death by
an ordinary disease, in a Down bed, amongst such necessary services such
favorable helps, co^solations and kindnesses of friends so sensible of thy
condition? We bemoan and complain our selves of heat, cold, distaste, of
disquiet, of grief: Let us allow some of this to Nature; yet must it be
confessed, that we lament out selves very much: because we have never known how
we should lament a Jesus Christ crucified. Let us die as it shall please the
divine providence: If death come when we are old, it it a haven: If in youth,
it is a direct benefit antedated: If by sickness, it is the nature of our
bodies: If by external violence, it is yet always the decree of Heaven. It is
no matter how many deaths there are, we are sure there can be but one for us.

2. Consider farther, the second condition of a good death, which consists in
the forsaking of all creatures, and you shall find it most punctually observed
by our Savior at the time of his death. Ferrara, a great Di^vine, who has
written a book of the hidden Word, touches twelve things abandoned by our
Savior.

1. His apparel leaving himself naked. 2. The marks of his dignity. 3. The
College of his Apostles. 4. The sweetness of all comfort 5. His own proper
will. 6. The authority of virtuos. 7. The power of An Angels 8. The perfect
joys of his soul. 9. The proper charity of his body. 10. The honors due to
him. 11. His own skin. 12. All his blood.
Now do but consider his abandoning the principal of those things how bitter it
was. First, the abandoning of nearest and most faithful friends, is able to
afflict any heart; Behold him forsaken by all his so well beloved disciples, of
whom he had made choice (amongst all mortal men) to be the depositaries of his
doctrine, of his life, of his blood. If Judas be at the mystery of his
passion, it is to betray him. If Saint Peter be there assisting, it is to deny
him: If his sorrowful mother stand at the foot of the cross, it is to increase
the grief of her Son; and after he had been so ill handled by his cruel
executioners, to crucify him again by the hands of Love. The courageous Mother
to triumph over her self by a magnanimous constancy, was present at the
execution of her dear Son. She fixed her eyes upon all his wounds, to engrave
them deep in her heart. She opened her soul wide to receive that sharp piercing
sword with which she was threatened by that venerable old Simeon at her
purification: And Jesus who saw her so afflicted for his sake, felt himself
doubly crucified, upon the wood of the Cross, and the heart of his deat Mother.
We know it by experience that when we love one tenderly, his afflictions and
disgraces will trouble us more then our own, because he living in us by an
affectionate life, we live in him by a life of reason and election. Jesus lived
and reposed in the heart of his blessed Mother, as upon a throne of love, and
as within a Paradise of his most holy delights. This heart was before as a bed
covered with flowers: But this same heart (on the day of his passion) became
like a scastold hanged with mourning, whereupon our Savior entered, to be
tormented and crucified upon the Cross of love, which was the Cross of his
Mother. This admirable Merchant, who descended from heaven to acomplish the
business of all ages; (who took upon him our miseries to give us felicities)
was plunged within a sea of blood; and this so precious shipwrak, there
remained one only inestimable pearl (which was his divine mother) and yet he
abandons her, and gives her into the hands of his Disciple. After he had
forsaken those nearest to him, see what he does with his body; Jesus did so
abandon it (a little before his death) that not being content only to deliver
it as a prey to sorrow, but he suffered to be exposed naked to the view of the
world And amongst his sharpest dolours (after he had been refused the drink
which they gave to malefactors to strengthen them in their torments) he took
for himself vinegar and gall. O what a spectacle was it to see a body torn in
pieces which rested it self upon its own wounds, which was dying every moment,
but could not die, because that life distilled by drops? What Martyr did ever
endure in a body so sensible and delicate, having an imagination so lively, and
in such piercing dolours mixed with so few comforts? And what Martyr did suffer
for all the sins of the whole world as he did, proportioning his torments
according to the fruits which were to proceed from his cross? Perhaps, O
faithful soul, thou look for a man's body in thy Jesus, but thou find
nothing but the appearance of one, crusted over with gore blood: Thou seek
for limbs, and find nothing but vvounds: Thou look for a Jesus which
appeared glorious upon mount Thabor, as upon a Throne of Majesty, with all the
ensigns of his glory, and thou find only a skin all bloody fastened to a
cross between two thieves. And if the consideration of this cannot bring
drops of blood from thy heart, it must be more insensible then a di^mond.

3. To conclude, observe the third quality of a good death which will declare
it self by the exercise of great and heroic virtues. Consider that
incomparable mildness which has astonished all ages, has encouraged all
virtues, has condemned all revenges, has instructed all Schools and crowned
all good actions: He was raised upon the cross, when his dolours were most
sharp and piercing: when his wounds did open on all sides, when his precious
blood shed upon the earth, and moistened it in great abundance; when he saw his
poor clothes torn in pieces, and yet bloody in the hands of those who crucified
him. He considered the extreme malice of that cruel people, how those which
could not wound him with iron, pierced him with the points of their accursed
tongues. He could quickly have made sire com down from heaven upon those
rebellious heads. And yet forgetting all his pains to remember his mercies, he
opened his mouth, and the first word he spoke was in the favor of his
enemies, to negotiate their reconciliation, before his soul departed. The
learned Cardinal Hugues admiring the excessive charity of our Savior toward
his enemies, applies excellent well that which is spoken of the Sun in
Ecclesiasticus. He brings news to all the world at his rising, and at noonday
he burns the earth, and heats those furnaces of Nature, which make it produce
all her fruits.

So Jesus the Sun of the intelligible world, did manifest himself at his
Nativity, as in the morning. But the Cross was his bed at noon, from whence
came those burning streams of Love, which inflames the hearts of all blessed
persons, who are like furnaces of that eternal fire which burns in holy Sion.

On the other part admire that great magnanimity which held him so long upon
the Cross, as upon a Throne of honor and power when he bestowed Paradise upon
a man that was his companion in suffering. I cannot tell whether in this action
we should more admire the good fortune of the good theif, or the greatness of
Jesus. The happiness of the good theif, who is drawn for a cut throat to
prison; from prison to the judgment hall; from thence to the Cross; and
thence goes to Paradise, without needing any other gate but the heart of Jesus.

On the other side, what can be more admirable then to see a man crucified, to
do that act, which must be performed by the living God, when the world shall
end? To save some, to make others reprobate, and to judge from the height of
his Cross, as if he sat upon the chiefest throne of all Monarchs.

But we must needs affirm that the virtue of patience in this, holds a chief
place, and teaches very admirable lessons. He endures the torments of the body,
and the pains of the spirit, in all the faculties of his soul, in all the parts
of his virgin flesh; and by the cruelty and multiplicity of his wounds, they
all become one only wound, from the sole of his foot, to the top of his head.

His delicate body suffers most innocently, and all, by most ingrate and
hypocritical persons, who would color their vengeance with an appearance of
holiness. He suffers without any comfort at all, and (which is more) without
bemoaning himself; he suffers whatsoever they would or could lay upon him, to
the very last gasp of his life. Heaven wears mourning upon the Cross; all the
Citizens of heaven weep over his torments; the earth quakes; the stones rend
themselves; sepulchers open; the dead arise: Only Jesus dies unmovable upon
this throne of patience.

To conclude, who would not be astonished at the tranquillity of his spirit,
and amongst those great convulsions of the world which moved round about the
Cross, amongst such bloody dolours, insolent cries, and insupportable
blasphemies, how he remained upon the Cross, as in a Sanctuary at the foot of
an Altar; bleeding, weeping, and praying, to mingle his prayers with his blood
and tears. I do now understand why the Wise man said, He planted Isles within
the Abyss; since that, in so great a gulf of afflictions, he showed such a
serenity of spirit; thereby making a Paradise for his Father (amongst so great
pains) by the sweet perfume of his virtues. After he had prayed for his
enemies, given a promise of Paradise to the good thief, and recommended his
mother to his Disciple, he shut up his eyes from all humane things,
entertaining himself only with prayers and sighs to his heavenly Father. O
that at the time of our deaths we could imitate the death of Jesus, and then we
should be sure to find the streams of life.

Aspirations.
O Spectacles of horror, but Abyss of goodness and mercy. I feel my heart
divided by horror, pity, hate, love, execration and adoration. But my
admiration and being ravished, carries me beyond my self. Is this then that
bloody sacrifice which has been expected from all ages? This hidden mystery,
this profound knowledge of the Cross; this dolorous Jesus, which makes the
honorable amends between heaven and earth, to the eternal Father, for
expiation of the sins of humane kind.

Alas poor Lord, thou had but one life, and I see a thousand instruments of
death, which have taken it away. Was there need of opening so many bloody
doors, to let out thine innocent soul? Could it not part from thy body without
making (on all sides) so many wounds? which after they have served for the
objects of men's cruelty, serve now for those of thy mercy? O my Jesus, I know
not to whom I speak, for I do no more know thee in the state thou now art; or
if I do, it is only by thy miseries, because they are so excessive, that there
was need of a God to suffer what thou have endured. I look upon thy disfigured
countenance, to find some part of thy resemblance, and yet can find none but
that of thy love. Alas, O beautiful head, which do carry all the glory of
the highest heaven divide with me this dolorous Crown of Thorns; they were my
sins which sowed them, and it is thy pleasure that thine innocence should
mow them, Give me, O Sacred mouth, give me that Gall which I see upon thy lips:
suffer me to sprinkle all my pleasures with it, since after a long continuance,
it did shut up and conclude all thy dolours. Give me, O Sacred hands, and
adored feet, the Nails which have pierced you: love binds you fast enough to
the Cross without them. But do thou, O Lord, hold me fast to thy self, by the
chains of thine immense charity.

O Lance, cruel Lance, why did thou open that most precious side? thou did
think perhaps to find there the Sons life, and yet thou foundest nothing but
the Mothers heart: But without so much as thinking what thou did, in playing
the murderer, thou have made a sepulcher, wherein I will from henceforth bury
my soul. When I behold these wounds of my dear Savior, I do acknowledge the
strokes of my own hand. I will therefore likewise engrave there my repentance:
I will write my conversion with an eternal Character. And if I must live, I
will never breathe any other life, but that only, which shall be produced from
the death of my Jesus crucified.

The Gospel for Easter Day, S. Mark the 16.
ANd when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalen, and Mary of James, and Salome
bought spices, that coming they might anoint Jesus. And very early the first of
the Sabbaths, they come to the Monument: the Sun being now risen. And they say
one to another, who shall roll us back the stone from the door of the Monument?
And looking, they saw the stone rolled back. For it was very great. And entering
into the Monument, they saw a young man sitting on the right hand, covered with
a white Robe: and they were astonished. Who says to them, Be not dismayed, you
seek Jesus of Nazareth that was crucified: he is risen, he is not here, behold
the place where they laid him. But go, tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he
goes before you into Galilee: there shall you see him, as he told you.

Moralities.
1. THe Sepulcher of Jesus becomes a fountain of life which carries, in power,
all the glories of the highest heaven. Our Savior rises from thence, as day
out of the East, and appears as triumphant, in the ornaments of his beauties,
as he had been humbled, by the excess of his mercies. The rage of the Jews
loses here its power, death his sting, Satan his kingdom, the Tomb his
corruption, and hell his conquest. Mortality is destroyed, life is illuminated;
all is drowned in one day of glory, which comes from the glorious light of our
Redeemer. It is now (says Tertullian) that he is revested with his Robe of
honor, and is acknowledged as the eternal Priest, for all eternity. It is now
(says Saint Gregory Nazianzen) that he reassembles humane kind (which was
scattered so many years by the sin of one man) and places it between the Arms
of his Divinity. This is the Masterpiece of his profound humility; and I dare
boldly affirm) says S. Ambrose) that God had lost the whole world, if this
Sacred virtue which he made so clearly shine in his beloved Son, had not put
him into possession of his Conquests. We should all languish after this
Triumphant state of the Resurrection, which will make an end of all our pains,
and make our Crowns everlasting.

2. Let us love our Jesus as the Mary's did, that, with them, we may be
honored with his visits. Their love is indesatigable, courageous and
insatiable. They had all the day walked round about the Judgment Hall, Mount
Calvary, the Cross, and the Sepulcher. They were not wearied with all that:
And night had no sleep to shut up their eyes, They forsake the Image of death,
which is sleep, to find death it self, and never looked after any bed, except
the Sepulcher of their Master; They travel amongst darkness, pikes, lances,
the affrights of Arms, and of the night, nothing makes them afraid. If there
appear a difficulty to remove the stones, love gives them arms. They spare
nothing for their Master and Savior: They are above Nichodemus and Joseph,
they have more equisite perfumes, for they are ready to melt and distill their
hearts upon the Tomb of their Master. O faithful lovers, seek no more for the
living amongst the dead: That cannot die for love, which is the root of life.

3. The Angel in form of a young man (covered with a white Robe) shows us that
all is young and white in immortality. The Resurrection has no old age: it is
an age, which can neither grow, nor diminish These holy Mary's, enter alive
into the Sepulcher, where they thought to find death, but they learn news of
the chiefest lives. Their faith there confirmed, their piety satisfied, there
is promises assured, and their love receives consolation.

Aspirations.
I Do not this day look toward the East, O my Jesus, I consider the Sepulcher,
it is from thence this fair Sun is risen. O that thou appearest amiable, dear
spouse of my soul. Thy head which was covered with thorns, is now ^rowned wi^h
a Diadem of Stars, and L^ghts, and all the glory of the highest Heaven rests
upon it. Thine eyes which were eclipsed in blo^d, have enlightened them with
fires and delicious brightness, which mel^ my heart: T^y feet and hands, so
far as I can see, are enameld with Rubies, which after they have been the
objects of men's cruelty, are now become eternal marks of thy bounty. O Jesus,
no more my wounded, but my glorified Jesus, where am I? what do I? I see, I
fly, I swound, I die, I revive my self with thee. I do beseech thee, my most
Sacred Jesus, by the most triumphant of thy glories, let me no more fall into
the image of death, not into those appetites of smoke and earth which have so
many times buried the light of my soul. What have I to do with the illusions of
this world? I am for Heaven, for Glory, and for the resurrection, which I will
now make bud out of my thoughts, that I may hereafter possess them with a full
fruition.

The Gospel upon Monday the Easter week, St. Luke the 24.
ANd behold, two of them went the same day into a Town which was the space of
sixty f^rlongs, from Jerusalem, named Emmans. And they talked betwixt
themselves of all those things that had chanced. And it came to pass, while
they talked and reasoned with themselves, Jesus also himself approaching went
with them, but their eyes were held that they might not know him. And he said
to them, what are these communications that you confer one with another
walking, and are sad? And one whose name was Cleophas, answering, said to him,
Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things that have
been done in it, these days? To whom he said, what things? And they said,
concerning Jesus of Nazareth who was a man, a Prophet, mighty in work and word
before God and all the people. And how our chief Priests and Princes delivered
him into condemnation of death, and crucified him. But we hoped that it was he
that should redeem Israel: And now besides all this, to day is the third day
since these things were done. But certain women also of ours, made us afraid;
who before it was light, were at the Monument, and not finding his body, came
saying, that they saw a vision also of Angels, who say that he is alive. And
certain men of ours went to the Monument; and they found it so as the women
said, but him they found not. And he said to them, O foolish, and slow of heart
to believe in all things which the Prophets have spoken Ought not Christ to
have suffered these things, and so enter into his glory? And beginning from
Moses and all the Prophets, he did interpret to them in all the Scriptures the
things that were concerning him. And they drew nigh to the Town whether they
went; and he made semblance to go further. And they forced him, saying, tarry
with us, because it is toward night, and the day is now far spent, and he went
in with them. And ic^ came to pass, while he sat at the Table with them, he
took bread, and blessed, and brake, and did reach to them. And their eyes were
opened, and they knew him: and he vanished out of their sight. And they said
one to the other, was not our heart burning in us, whilst he spoke in the way,
and opened unto us the Scriptures? And rising up the same hour they went back
into Jerusalem; and they found the Eleven gathered together, and those that
were with them, saying, that our Lord is risen ind ed, and has appeared to
Simon. And they told the things that were done in the way, and how they knew
him in the breaking of bread.

Moralities.
1. IT is a strange thing, that God is always with us, and we are so little
with him. We have our being, our moving, our life from him: he carries us in
his arms, he keeps us as a Nurse does her dear child; and yet all this while we
scarce know what he is, and use him so often as a stranger. He is in our being,
and yet we keep him far from our heart, as a dead man who is quite forgotten.
And yet En^ch walked with him, and for that he was taken from the conversation
of men, and reserved for Paradise. To speak truth, our soul should always be
languishing after her Jesus, and count it a kind of Adultery to be separated
from him, so much as by thought. Let us learn a little to talk with him; we
commonly have that in our tongue which we keep in our heart. Let us sweeten the
sadness of our pilgrimage, by the contemplation of his beauties. Let us look
upon him as God and man; the God of gods the Man of men; our great Savior and
Prophet, powerful both in word and work; for if his word be thunder, his life
is a lightning. He has been here doing good to all the world; and suffering
hurt from all the world; doing good without reward, and enduring evil without
impatience. We all pass here as Torrents into valleys; the only question is
of our passing well: whether we look on worldly goods as on waters which pass
under a bridge, and as upon the furniture of an Inn which is none of ours. If
we be imbarqued in the Vessel of life, let us not amuse our selves to gather
Cockles upon the shore; but so, that we may always have our eyes fixed upon
Paradise,

2. Two things do hinder those Pilgrims from knowing Jesus as they should. The
one is, their eyes are dazeled; and the other is the little account they make
of the Cross, which drives them into a mistrust of the Resurrection. And this
is it which crosses us all our life, and so often diverts us from the point of
our happiness. Our eyes are dazzled with false lights of the world, they are
darkened with so many mists and vapors of our own appetites and passions, that
we cannot see the goods of heaven in the brightest of their day. Worldly chains
have a certain effective vigor and pleasure, which is only pa nted, but they
have a most certain sorrow, and a most uncertain contentment: They have a
painful labor, and a timorous rest: A possession full of misery, and void of
all beatitude. If we had our eyes well opened, to penetrate and see what it is,
we should then say of all the most ravishing objects of the world, How senseless
was I when I courted you? O deceitful world, thou did appear great to me,
when I saw thee not as thou art: But so soon as I did see thee rightly, I did
then cease to see thee: for thou wast no more to me but just nothing. We run in
full career after all that pleases our sense, and the Cross, which is so much
preached to us, is much more upon our Altars, then in our hearts. We will not
know, that the throne of Mount Calvary, is the path way to heaven; and as this
truth wanders from our hearts, Jesus departs from our eyes. Let us at least
pray Jesus to stay with us, for it is late in our hearts, and the night is far
advanced, by our want of true light. We shall not know Jesus by discourse, but
by seeding him in the persons of his poor, since he gives the continual
nourishment of his body.

Aspirations.
O Only Pilgrim of the world, and first dweller in the heart of thy heavenly
Father, what a pilgrimage have thou made, descending from heaven to earth, and
yet without forsaking heaven? Thou have marked thy steps by thy conquests: made
visible thy way by thine own light, thou have watered it with thy precious
blood, and paved it with thy wounds. O what a goodly thing it is to walk with
thee, when thou openest thy sacred mouth, as the opening of a temple, to
discover the beauties and mysteries of it. O that it is most pleasing to
understand that mouth, which distills so much honey through lips of Roses. But
wherefore (My good Lord) art thou pleased to hide thy self from a soul which
languishes after thee? Take away the vail from mine eyes, and suffer thy self
to be seen in the vesture of thy heavenly beauties, If I must bear the Cross,
and pass by the throne of mount Calvary, to come to Heaven, I most humbly
submit to thy divine pleasure that I may possess all that thou art.

The Gospel upon Tuesday in Easter week, S. Luke the 24.
ANd whiles they spoke these things, Jesus stood in the midst of them, and he
says to them, Peace be to you, It is I, fear not. But they being troubled and
frighted, imagined they saw a Spirit. And he says to them, Why are you
troubled, and cogitations arise in your hearts? See my hands and my feet, that
it is I my self, handle, and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you
see me to have. And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
But they yet not believing, and marvelling for joy, he said, Have you here any
thing to be eaten? But they offered him a piece of fish broiled, and a honey
comb. And when he had eaten before them, taking the remains, he gave to them,
And he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you when I was yet
with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which are written in the Law
of Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, of me. Then he opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. And he said to them,
That so it is written, and so it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
from the dead the third day, and penance to be preached in his Name, and
remission of sins unto all Nations.

Moralities.
1. WE think sometimes that Jesus is far from us, when he is in the midst of
our heart: he watches over us, and stretches out his divine hands for our
protection. Let us live always as if we were actually in his presence, before
his eyes, and in his bosom. An ancient Tradition does observe, that after our
Lords Ascension, the Apostles did never eat together, but they left the first
napkin, for their good Master conceiving that according to his promise, he was
always with them: Let us accustom our selves to this exercise of Gods
presence: It is a happy necessity to make us do well, to believe and apprehend
that our Judge is always present. I frespect make him formidable, love will
teach us that he is the Father of all sweetness. There can be no greater
comfort in this world, then to be present in heart and body with that which we
love best.

2. Jesus is taken by his Apostles for a Spirit, because after the Resurrection
he pierced the vvalls, and appeared suddenly as Spirits do. Saint Paul also
says, in the second to the Corinthians, that now we do no more know Christ
according to the flesh, that is to say, by the passions of a mortal body, as
Saint Epiphanius does expound it. We must make little use of our bodies to
converse with our Jesus, who has taken upon him the rare qualities of a
spirit. We must raise our selves above our senses when we go to the Father of
light, and the Creaton^ of sense. He teaches us the life of Spirits, and
commerce of Angels, and makes assayes of our immortality, by a body now
immortal. Why are we so tied to our sense, and glued to the earth? Must we
suffer our selves to enter into a kingdom of death, when we are told of the
resurr^ction of him, who is the Author of all lives?

3. Admire the condescending and bounties of our Lord to his dear Disciples. He
that was entered into the kingdom of spirits, and immortal conversation,
suffers his feet and hands to be touched, to prove in him the reality of a true
body. He eats in presence of his Apostles, though he was not in more estate to
digest meat, then the Sun is to digest vapors. He did no more nourish himself
with our corruptible meats, then the Stars do by the vapors of the earth. And
yet he took them to confirm our belief, and to make us familiar with him. It is
the act of great and generous spirits to abase themselves, and condescend to
their inferiors. So David being anointed King, and inspired as a Prophet, does
not show his person terrible in the height of his great glory, but still
retained the mildness of a Shepherd. So Jesus the true Son of David (by his
condscending to us) has consecrated a certain degree, whereby we my ascend to
heaven. Are not we ashamed that we have so little humility or respect to our
inferiors, but are always so full of ourselves; since our Lord sitting in his
throne of Glory and Majesty, does yet abase himself to the actions of our
mortal life? Let it be seen by our hands whether we be res^scitated, by doing
good works, and giving liberal alms: Let it appear by our feet that they
follow the paths of the most holy persons. Let it be seen by our nourishment
(which should be most of honey.) that is of that celestial sweetness which is
extracted from prayer. And if we seem to refuse fish, let us at least remain in
the eleme^t of piety, as fishes in water

Aspirations.
THy love is most tender, and thy cares most generous (O mild Savior.) Amongst
all the Torrents of thy Passion, thou have not tasted the water of
forgetfulness. Thou returnest to thy children as a Nightingle to her little
nest: Thou do comfort them with thy visits, and make them familar with thy
glorious life. Thou eatest of a honey comb by just right, having first tasted
the bitter gall of that unmercifull cross. It is thus, that our sorrows should
be turned into sweets. Thou must always be most welcome to me in my troubles,
for I know well that thou only can pacify and give them remedy. I will
govern my self toward thee as to the sire: too much near familarity will burn
us; and the want of it will let us freez: I will eat honey with thee in the
blessed Sacrament; I know that many there do chew, but few receive thee
worthily. Make me O Lord) I beseech thee, capable of those, which here on earth
shall be the true Antepasts to our future glory.

The Gospel upon Low Sunday. Saint John the 20.
THerefore when it was late that day the first of the Sabbaths, and the doors
where shut, where the Disciples were gathered together for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, Peace be to you. And
when he had said this, he showed them his hands and side. The Disciples
therefore were glad when they saw our Lord He said therefore to them again,
Peace be to you. As my Father has sent me I also do send you. When he had said
this, he breathed upon them, and he said to them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost;
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose you shall
retain, they are retained. But Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called
Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came: the other Disciples therefore said
to him, We have seen our Lord. But he said to them, Unless I see in his hands
the print of the nails, and put my finger into the place of the nails, and put
my hand into his side, I will not believe.

And after eight days, again his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them.
Jesus comes, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be
to you. Then he says to Thomas, Put in thy finger hither, and see my hands,
and bring hither thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not incredulous, but
faithful. Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God: Jesus says to
him, Because thou have seen me, Thomas, thou have believed: Blessed are they
that have not seen, and have believed.

Moralities.
1. JEsus the Father of all blessed harmonies (after so many combats) makes a
general peace in all nature. He pacifieth Limbo, taking the holy Fathers out
of darkness, to enjoy an eternal light, and sending the damned to the bottom
of hell. He pacifies the earth, making it from thenceforth to breathe the air
of his mercies. He pacifieth his Apostles, by delivering them from that
profound sadness, which they conceived by the imaginary loss of their dear
Master. He pacifieth Heaven, by sweetning the sharpness of his heavenly
Father, quenching by his wounds, the fire which was kindled of his just anger.
Every thing smileth upon this grear Peacemaker: Nature leaves her mourning,
and puts on her robes of cheerfulness, to congratulate with him his great
and admirable conquests. It is in him that the heavenly Father (by a singular
delight) has poured out the fullness of all Graces, to make us an eternal
dwelling, and to reconcile all in him and by him; pacifying by his blood from
the Cross, all that is upon earth and in heaven. This is our Iosuah of whom the
Scripture speaks that he clears all difference, and appeaseth all battles. No
stroke of any hammer or other iron, was heard at the building of Solomon's
Temple; and behold the Church (which is the Temple of the living God) does
edify souls with a mavelous tranquillity.

2. The Sun is not so well set forth by his beams, as our Savior is
magnificently adorned, with his wounds. Those are the Characters which he has
engraved upon his flesh, after a hundred ingenious fashions. The Ladies count
their pearls and diamonds, but our Savior counts his wounds, in the highest
attire of his Magnificences. It is from thence, that the beauty of his body,
takes a new state of glory, and our faith in the resurrection is confirmed:
that the good, fill themselves with hope, Miscreants with terror, and Martyrs
find wherewith to inflame their courage. These divine wounds open themselves
as so many mouths, to plead our cause before the Celestial Father. Our Savior
Jesus never spoke better for us, then by the voice of his precious Blood. Great
enquity has been made for those mountains of mirth and franking cence which
Solomon promises in the Canticles, but now we have found them in the wounds of
Jesus. It is from thence that there comes forth a million of sanctified
exhalations of sweetness, of peace and propitiation as from an eternal
sanctuary. A man may say they are like the Carbuncle which melts the wax upon
which it is imprinted, for they melt our hears by a most profitable impression.
At this sight the eternal Father calmes his countenance, and the sword of his
justice returns into the sheath. Shall not we be worthy of all misery if we
do arm these wounds against us, which are so effectual in our behalf? And if
this blood of our Abel (after it has reconciled his cruel executioners)
should find just matter to condemn us for our ingratitudes? John the second
King of Portugal had made a secret vow, never to refuse any thing which should
be asked of him in the virtue of our Saviors wounds; which made him give all
his silver vessels to a poor gentleman that had found out the word. And why
should not we give our selves to God, who both buyeth and requires us by the
wounds of Jesus?

3. Jesus inspireth the sacred breath of his mouth upon his Apostles, as upon
the first fruits of Christianity: to repair the first breath, and respiration
of lives, which the Author of our ^ace did so miserably lose. If we can obtain
a part of this, we shall be like the wheels of Ezekiels mysterious chariot,
which are filled with the spirit of life. That great Divine called Mathias
Vie^na, said, that light was the substance of colors, and the Spirit of Jesus
is the same of all our virtues. If we live of his flesh, there is great reason
we should be animated by his Spirit. Happy a 1000. times are they, who are
possessed with the Spirit of Jesus, which is to their spirit as the apple of
the eye. Saint Thomas was deprived of this amorous communication, by reason of
his incredulity. He would see with his eyes, and feel with his hands, that
which should rather be comprehended by faith: which is an eye blessedly blind:
which knows all within its own blindness, and is also at hand, which
remaining on earth, goes to find God in Heaven.

Aspirations.
GReat Peacemaker of the world, who by the effusion of thy precious blood,
have pacified the wars of forty ages, which went before thy death. This word
of peace has cost thee many battails, many sweats and labors, to ciment this
agreement of Heaven and earth, of sense and reason, of God and man. Behold thou
art at this present like the Dove of Noah's Ark, thou have escaped a great
deluge of passions, and many torrents of dolours thrown headlong upon one
another. Thou bring us the green Olive branch, to be the mark of thy
eternal aliances. What? Shall my soul be so audacious and disordered as to
talk to thee of war, when thou speak to her of peace; To offer thee a weapon
when thou offerest her the Articles of her reconciliation, signed with thy
precious blood? Oh, what earth could open wide enough her bosom to swallow me,
if I should live like a little Abiron, with a hand armed against Heaven, which
pours out for me nothing but flowers and roses? Reign (O my sweet Savior)
within all the conquered powers of my soul, and within my heart, as a conquest
which thou have gotten by so many titles. I will swear upon thy wounds, which
after they have been the monuments of thy fidelity, shall be the adored Altars
of my vows and sacrifices. I will promise thereupon, inviolable fidelity to thy
service. I will live no more but for thee since thou have killed my death in thy
life, and make my life flourish within thy triumphant Resurrection.

FINIS

