A SERMON Preached in a Country-Audience On the late Day of Fasting and Prayer,
JANUARY 30. By a Priest of the Church of England.

(...).

Orig. contra Celsum lib. 8. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and
his ears are open unto their cry.

Psalm. 34.15. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St
Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

IMPRIMATVR,

Feb. 20. 1678/9. Guil. Sill.

A SERMON Preached in a Country-Audience On the late Day of Fasting and Prayer,
JANUARY 30.
1 TIMOTHY li. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men:

For Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.


I Know no time more seasonable to recommend to you this great and general Duty
of Prayer, Prayer for our selves and others, Prayer for the whole body of the
Nation, prayer for all men, than upon this day of Solemn public Fasting and
Prayer.

I know no time more seasonable to recommend to you the especial duty of Prayer
for Kings and Magistrates, than upon this day which gives us so sorrowful a
remembrance of the fatal fall of the best of Princes, and therein too evident a
proof of the great dangers that even such are exposed to, and consequently of
the great need they stand in of our Prayers. And I know no words more proper to
mind you of the duty of Prayer in general, or of this particular duty of
Praying for Kings and Governors, than these of our Apostle: which contain a
fatherly admonition of Paul, the aged, to his Son Timothy, That in the
oversight of his Diocese he would take special care that solemn-Prayers be duly
put up to Almighty God in the several assemblies of Christians.

1. For all Men, not only for Believers, but for Infidels; not only for Friends
and Relations, but for Enemies and Persecutors.

2. For Men of Place and power, for Kings and all that are in authority. After
which,

3. He propounds a motive to procure Prayers for such especially, viz. that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; That holiness
and righteousness may be so encouraged and promoted by the religious care and
zeal of those that are in authority, Isa. 32.17.
that we may enjoy the fruit of righteousness, which is peace, and the effect
of righteousness which is quietness and assurance for ever.

I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions
and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

These several words, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, are generally
understood to signify several sorts of Prayer; The first (...), deprecations of
evil, whether of sin, or punishment. The second (...), petitions for all those
good things which respect either this present life, or that which is to come.
The third (...) Intercessions or Praying for other Men. To be sure under them
with that other of Thanksgiving our Apostle comprehends all kinds of Prayer,
which he would have used in its proper place, for its proper ends and purposes.

We need not distinguish nicely of the different sense of each word, because
the Apostle might well use three words of the same, or very near the same
signification, the more thoroughly to commend to us, and the more earnestly to
press upon us, the necessity and benefit of devout, fervent, and constant
Prayer: I exhort therefore that supplications, prayers, intercessions be made,
and I exhort it before all other things as the principal duty of Religion,
which is to take place of all the rest. I exhort to it first of all, etc.

In my discourse upon this subject I shall speak,

1. Of the duty of Praying for all Men.

2. Of our particular obligation to pray for Kings, and Magistrates.

3. I shall make use of the motive in the Text, together with some others, to
enforce this expression of our Loyalty, by praying for the King and his
Ministers.

1. It is a Christian duty to Pray for all Men, for all sorts and conditions of
Men; for Heathen and Jewish Infidels, as well as for believing Christians; for
all, that err and are seduced, as well as for those that are sound in the
Faith; for our enemies and persecutors as well as for our friends and
relations; We are to pray for the conversion of the one, as well as the
confirmation of the other; for reconcilement to our Enemies, as well as for the
continuance of amity with our Friends.

St. Chrysostom upon this place laments not only the narrowness, and
contraction, of this charitable devotion, but also the total defect of it in
many Men, and the contrary vice in some: Some upon all occasions pray against,
and curse their Neighbors, wishing evil may befall them; others think they do
very well, if they pray for their friends and acquaintance, for those that have
done them good, (...).
or are like to do so. The first sort pray like Heathens, the second but like
Jews at best. (...). Let us learn to pray like Christians, not only forgiving
our enemies, but beseeching God to forgive them too; That we may say with the
Apostles, Being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer it, being desamed
we entreat, (...), 1 Cor. 4.12.
We endeavor to pacify them by mild and soft answers, say some Interpreters;
we pray to God for them, we beg that he would pardon them, and turn their
hearts, say others. The good Christian practices both: He is gentle toward
all men, and prays for those who despightfully use him and persecute him.

This is the Glory and excellency of the Christian Spirit, by this it bore up
and maintained its reputation and renown, when the world was most bent to blast
and destroy it; By this it got ground of the Heathen Philosophy, made its way
through all the opposition of Arms, and Arts, and took possession of Greece and
Rome, the most powerful and the most learned parts of the world. For nothing
ever gained a greater esteem, or procured better entertainment for the Gospel
of our Savior, than the patient sufferings of its primitive professors, and
their unparalleled kindness to their most malicious and bloody Persecutors; and
it has been observed throughout all ages, that Patience, Prayers and Tears
have been the Churches most serviceable weapons.

Great professors of Religion, it is true, have conquered by other Arms; but
these alone make Religion it self victorious; These keep the Crown upon its
head, maintain its Royalties, uphold its Honor and Dignity in the World; These
set Christ upon his throne indeed, and establish his Kingdom in the hearts of
Men. And what did ever more shake and weaken the interest of Religion, than the
zealous endeavors of high pretenders to promote it by violence and force of
Arms? When instead of Exhortations to Supplication, Prayer and Intercession, We
have heard of nothing, but curse ye Meroz, and to your tents O Israel: nothing
but encouragement to Mutiny, instigations to Sedition, and beatings up for
Rebellion, and all this under the color of Religion, and a goodly talk of
Reformation; but how much this tended to the scandal and real damage of
Religion, to the planting and watering of Infidelity and Atheism, we ought this
day especially to consider and bewail: And in our sad review of the calamities
of the late Civil War, nothing ought to afflict us more, than the impairing of
the credit of Religion thereby; though thanks be to God there is no just reason
that this should in the least touch or blemish the Honor of the Protestant
Religion; for we know now too well whence the Doctrines come of Rebelling
against, of deposing and murdering of Kings; we know the Plot of this days
bloody Tragedy was laid at Rome, and acted by the Sects of their making among
our selves.

As in the murder of King Joash, of which we read, 2 Chronicles. 24.26. we are given
to understand that none of the Professors of the true Religion had any hand in
it; None of the Israelites, but Zabad the Ammonite, and Jehozabad the Moabite:
So we may say of the crying wickedness of this day, No true Protestant had any
thing to do in it, none but the Agents and Emissaries of Rome; none but a
faction influenced by Jesuitical principles. But this by the way.

I proceed to suggest some motives to this duty of praying for all men, and
particularly for our Enemies, those who are thought least to deserve it.

We are to pray for all Men,

Membra sumus magni corporis, Natura nos cognatos secit. Seneca.
1. Because we all partake of the same common nature, and are Brethren of the
same Heavenly Father, who of one blood has made all the nations of the earth,
and still does protect and preserve them by a gracious and careful providence.

2. All Men have an interest in the Redemption of the common Savior of the
World, they are bought with the same inestimable price, the precious blood of
the Son of God, who would have all men be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth, as it follows a little after my Text, and again verse 6. Who gave
himself a ransom for all: So that the Rich and the Poor, the little and the
mighty ones of the Earth meet together, and God is not only the Creator, but
the Redeemer of them all.

3. All Men stand in need of Prayers, and are capable of receiving benefit by
them; and therefore we are not to withhold this charity, especially considering,

4. That hereby we may do a great deal of good at a very cheap rate, at little
or no cost and expense. No Men have Estates to relieve all; Some Men's will
allow them to give Alms; but to few; Others have little or nothing to spare for
any; But there is no Man so poor, but he may express this charity, not only to
some, but to all men. Simplicius.
Paupertas impensae impedimentum, voluntatis non item. Poverty indeed does
disable our Beneficence, the bounty of the hand; but not our Benevolence, the
bounty of the heart, our good will and our good wishes. By them the Poor may
relieve the Rich; the mean and low ones, the high and mighty of the Earth; by
them we may do good to those whose faces we never saw, and whose complaints we
never heard; Our Prayers are under no confinement, they can visit the
distressed afar off, as well as those that are near, and by them our charity
may embrace all the World. Who would not be a Benefactor when so little goes to
make him one? Who would not be forward to oblige all mankind when he may do it
so easily?

I know some will be apt to complain, that praying for enemies, for the
spightful and cruel, for such whose malice is levelled against our Persons and
our Religion, is a hard saying: but to facilitate this duty, let such consider,

1. That herein we imitate, and are made like to our Heavenly Father, in whom
alone goodness is perfect. (...) etc. Chrysostom.
How is he every day blasphemed and dishonored? provoked sometimes by
Believers, as well as Infidels, both in word and deed? What does he do
hereupon? Does he presently extinguish the light of the Sun, and arrest the
Moon in its course, dash the Heavens in pieces, and tear up the foundations of
the Earth? Does he dry up the Sea, and stop the running of the Springs? Does he
mix and confound the Air and the other Elements? None of all this; but
contrariwise he causes his Sun to arise; he gives rain and fruitful seasons;
he produces nourishment out of the Earth, for blasphemers, ungrateful wicked
Men, and persecutors, and that not for one two or three days, but throughout
the whole course of their lives; Let us go and do likewise so far as humane
frailty will permit. We cannot make the Sun arise upon the World, but we may by
our Prayers derive somewhat of Gods infinite goodness upon it; we cannot give
rain, but we may forbear pouring out curses; we cannot give food perhaps to our
enemy when he hungers, yet we may forbear revenge and injury. If we can do him
no other real good, still we may pray for him, and by this, we shall in some
degree, resemble our Father which is in Heaven.

2. We hereby conform to the pattern, as well as to the precepts of our blessed
Lord and Master, who was not provoked to any impatience under his sufferings by
the highest affronts and indignities that were put upon him, or to any
expression of ill will toward those that inflicted them; He was led as a lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so opened he not
his mouth, more than to pray for those that crucified him, Father forgive them
for they know not what they do. This humility, and condescension of kindness
was the height of his Glory: and truly it is the singular excellency and
perfection of his Religion, as has been already intimated, that it instructs
us to imitate this charity of his. For your further encouragement I might set
before you the examples not only of the fortitude and patience, but of the
admirable charity of many holy Martyrs in several ages of the Church. But I
shall at this time only point you to the great Martyr of this day, and it is
very observable what high degrees of this truly Christian Charity warmed his
Royal heart, how full he was of compassion toward his most cruel, and deadly
enemies, not only praying for them upon the scaffold, but in his Closet
devotions: Thou who made thy Son a Savior to many that Crucified him, O let
the voice of his blood be heard for my murderers, louder than the cry of mine
against them.

After all this some perhaps may ignorantly allege that of our blessed
Savior, John 17.9. for a dispensation in this case, if not for a contrary
practice, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me. But we are not by these words to understand that our Savior did
wholly leave wicked men out of his prayers, but he preferred his Apostles and
faithful servants before them, these were nearest his heart, and peculiarly
dear to him: and as there are degrees in Gods kindness, so may and ought there
to be in our prayers; whilst we pray for all men, we are to pray more
especially for some.

1. For our kindred, near relations and intimate friends. With what ardency,
and transports of zeal Moses and St. Paul prayed for such, we read Exodus 32.31,
32. Romans 9.3.

2. For the Church of God, for the whole congregation of Christian people. The
City of Jerusalem was heretofore honored above all the Cities of the world, by
Gods placing his name there, and by that solemn worship, which was there
performed to him, when the Tribes came up thither thrice a year, etc. Upon
which account it was a Type of the true Church, and the whole company of Gods
faithful people are called, Zach. 12.1 Heb. 12.22.
the house of Jacob, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. The Heavenly Jerusalem.
And therefore they were to pray for the Church under this title, Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, Psalm 122.6, 7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity
within thy Palaces, etc. The Lord would not have them hold their peace, Isa.
62.6, 7.
for Jerusalems sake, nor give him any rest till he made it a praise in the
earth. And it was a most fervent and pathetical Prayer, Dan. 9.16.
that of Daniel's, O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, let thine anger
and fury be turned away from thy City Jerusalem thy holy Mountain, because for
the sins and the iniquity of our Fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a
reproach to all that are about us.

And doubtless we under the Gospel, have all reason to own the same or greater
obligations, to pray for the Peace and prosperity of the Church of God; and if
we are not wholly devoid of the spirit of Christianity, we shall express a
sympathy with our fellow members, rejoicing with those that rejoice, and
weeping with those that weep, praying most affectionately for those of the same
holy communion with our selves, that God would be pleased to confirm them in
his truth, keep them sound in the faith, succor them by his grace, defend them
by his power, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. Epes. 1.3, 4.
deliver them from every evil work, and preserve them to his heavenly Kingdom.

For this, among others, we have the example of our Apostle praying for the
Churches, Col. 4.3. 1 These. 5.25.
as well as desiring their prayers for himself upon all occasions, particularly
when he foresaw that he should meet with, enemies in Judea, Romans 15.30, 31.
This is left upon record, as an honorable testimony of Epaphras his zeal for
the Church and people of God, That he labored fervently for them in prayer,
Col. 4. 12, 13.
that they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.

Obj. But it may be objected against this part of our discourse, that there is
no such need of praying for the Church, because God has undertaken to secure
it, promising, Mat. 16.18.
That the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Answ. It is true, Christ's Church shall never totally fail, but no particular
Churches ever had a Patent of perpetual preservation: The decays and ruins of
the Eastern Churches are a deplorable instance of the contrary, and what has
been done to one Church, may certainly be done to another; what has been done
in Asia, may be done in Europe. Nor is that Church exempt which calls her
self the Mother and Queen of the rest; but as she is fallen already in a sad
degree from her first love, from her truth and purity, so may she soon be cast
down from her pomp and glory. And indeed when we consider her Apostasy from
the Primitive Faith, in many particulars, we understand what great need there
was, of that early caution of the Apostle, Be not high minded, but fear. Romans
11.20.
But to say no more of that now. All Gods promises of not failing and forsaking
his people are made with this reserve, that they do not wilfuly depart from
him. As the Prophet said unto Asa, The Lord is with you, while you are with
him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; 2 Chronicles. 15.20.
but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. In which respect, without naming
any others at present, we see there is great reason that in our prayers and
supplications for all men we intercede especially for the Church of God, in
some such words as those of the Prophet, Spare thy people, Joel 2.17.
O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach.

3. We must pray more especially for that part of the Church of God among our
selves, because a natural, and a civil added to the Christian relation,
strengthens our obligation to this duty. Psalm. 122.7.
For my brethren and companions sake I will now say Peace be within thee. We
that are united in the same civil, as well as religious interests, must needs
suffer, or prosper together, and therefore ought to unite in mutual
intercessions, to pray most affectionately, for one another and the whole body
of the kingdom, Jere. 14.9. Zach. 2.5. Psalm. 147.3.
That the God by whose name we are called would not leave us, but be a wall of
fire round about us, and the glory in the midst of us, that he would strengthen
the bars of Sions gates, and bless all her children within her; That he would
protect his ordinances, maintain his truths among us, and continue his gracious
presence with us; that he would preserve the beauty and stability of religious
government, that errors and heresies may not infest the Church, nor injustice,
treachery, rebellion, disorder the State; but that the Tabernacle and the
Tribunals, religion and policy may mutally support and adorn each other; That
our Jerusalem may be a City compacted and at union within it self, that we may
not by any trifling or peevish differences among our selves open a breach for
the common enemy to enter in at, but that we may stand fast in one-spirit,
Phil. 1.27.
and with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel, that we may
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints; that by all
honest and orderly endeavors we may join together to defend and promote the
religion of Christ and his Apostles, the religion of the first and purest ages,
the religion which the Church of Rome has so grossly corrupted, the religion
which the Church of England, with others, has so happily reformed, the
religion which the blood of so many Martyrs in the days of our Grandfathers
bore witness to, the present established religion of our Country, known to the
world by a name which I hope we shall never be afraid or ashamed to own; The
Protestant Religion. For the flourishing of this religion, for unity and love
among all its professors we ought earnestly and importunately to pray;
Especially at this time, this difficult and dangerous time, now when those who
have so long envied our Churches prosperity, are so deeply engaged to extirpate
and destroy it; seeing their dissembled enmity can no longer conceal it self,
but breaks out in rage and violence, seeing their malice is already blooded,
the courage of their cruelty heightened by success, and every day ready to fly
in the face of all that shall oppose them. In this time of our fear and
distress, every man ought to stand upon his guard, and if we are allowed no
other weapons of defense, or opposition, yet not to fail to lift up holy hands
in prayer to cry mightily unto God, to implore his help when all other fails.
Now the Clouds follow after the rain, and new Storms gather every day, and Men's
hearts generally fail them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming on the earth.

It concerns us I say now if ever to pray like Men at Sea, like men in a
Tempest (to whom a little Religion will supply a great devotion) That God would
be pleased to keep the Ark of his Church still above water, support a sinking
State, calm all our fears, and comfort our hearts with a blessed prospect of
peace and settlement. That he may do so, I say again it concerns us to pray
with the poor distressed Mariners in Jonah, Jonah 1.14.
We beseech thee O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish; yea it concerns us
to awake our secure Neighbors and Friends, that either are not apprehensive of
their danger or mindful of their remedy, as the Ship-master did Jonah in the
midst of that dreadful storm, What meanest thou O sleeper, arise and call upon
thy God, if so be that God will think upon us that we perish not. Times of fear
and trouble are, or should be times of prayer and passionate importunity, Isa.
26.16.
Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they have poured out a prayer when
thy chastning was upon them. In their afflictions they will seek me early.
Those are very graceless wretches indeed who will not go to God for help, when
they need it so much; those that do not pray heartily at such a time, it is to
be feared that at other times they pray not at all. But to encourage our selves
in this duty let us consider, how acceptable our Prayers are unto God at such
times, and how beneficial to our selves.

1. How acceptable they are to God, as appears by that in the Psalms, Psalm.
50.15. James 5.13.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee: by St. James's
prescription, Is any afflicted? let him pray. Gods power and providence is more
acknowledged, and his goodness more esteemed in a Deliverance than in a
Preservation.

2. Consider how advantageous it will be to our selves; Our strength and help
lies not in our own counsels, in our Purses, our Policies, our Armies at Land,
or our Fleet at Sea; Prove. 21.31.
but the name of the Lord is the only strong tower for Persons or States to fly
unto; It is not in the battle, Jerem. 9.23.
the horse or rider, but safety comes from God. It is not in the State, the
wise man, nor the rich man, Hos. 13.10.
nor the mighty man, but judgment and kindness come from God. When Israel had
destroyed her self, in God alone was her help, and he promises to be her King.
Psalm. 46.1.
God is a present help in trouble, our extremity is the opportunity of the
Divine Mercy. This David found, Psalm. 18.6.
in my distress did I call upon the Lord and cried unto my God: and he heard my
voice out of his Temple. Jerem. 26.19.
This Hezehiah found, did he not fear, and besought the Lord, and the Lord
repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them. This Nehemiah,
Daniel, Jonah, and many others have found, they cried unto the Lord in their
troubles, and he delivered them out of their distresses. Neither is there any
reason at all, that we should doubt of the like good effect, if we pray to the
same God, in the same condition, and with the same affections, as they did. I
have not time to show you particularly, and at large, how your Prayers must be
qualified, if you expect they should be successful, I shall only mind you, That
God hears not sinners, that if you regard iniquity in your hearts, live in
the allowance of any Sin, God will not hear you for your selves, much less for
others. In such a case we only presume upon God's favor, but do indeed provoke
his displeasure, while we continue impenitent and unreformed: we affront his
Majesty by our unhallowed sacrifices, Prove. 15.8.
The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to him; to such he says, when ye
spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you, yea, Isa. 1.15.
when ye make many prayers I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. That
our Prayers therefore may be effectual, we must see that our repentance be
sincere, humbly acknowledging our wickedness and the iniquity of our Fathers,
our unthankfulness for mercies, for our peace and plenty, our civil and
religious privileges, our discontents, dissatisfactions, and disobedience
under the best Governors, The most execrable crime, the barbarous murder which
has stained the memory of this day, the guilt and blemish whereof we ought to
endeavor to wash off, if possible, with the tears of godly sorrow. In vain may
we hope to see better days unless we can heartily lament the sin of this, the
sins of all our days past, and reform our present miscarriages, those
abominable vices which are inconsistent with any Religion, and therefore the
greater reproach to ours, which not only pretends more to holiness, but gives
the strictest rules of life, not selling indulgences at any rate, not granting
Absolutions to any who do not as well forsake as confess their-sins, nor
allowing any Penances short of the mortification of their Lusts.

We cannot reasonably expect any good return of our Prayers, unless they be
attended with hearty resolutions of amendment of life; It is not Fasting and
Prayer, Alms and Prayer, Tears and Prayer, but Prayer and Holiness, Prayer and
a general Reformation that will avail. Repentance is the best argument to move
God to Mercy, and a holy life is a continual intercession. Beloved, if our
hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21, 22.
and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. It is good counsel for us,
to be sure, which Zophar gave Job. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away,
and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. Job 11.14.
For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, thou shall be steadfast, and
shall not fear. There will be no fear, no danger where there is no guilt.
Nothing but our sins can alienate us from the favor and the protection of the
Almighty; nothing else can defeat our Prayers, infatuate our counsels, weaken
our endeavors, give courage and success to our adversaries. If our Religion
have better effects upon us than theirs has upon them; if it make us more
righteous, more sober, more godly, more charitable, more peaceable, more loyal,
than theirs does them, if it exceed theirs as much in its efficacy, as it does
in its principles, God will then easily be entreated for us, he will be sure
then to be on our side, and we need not fear what man can do unto us. We need
not fear the subtilty, or the strength of our Enemies, but we may hope upon
good grounds, that the same Almighty Savior, who delivered this Kingdom and
Church from that formidable and as it seemed invincible Armado in 88. That he
that blew up the deep design of the Powder Plotters, and by a miraculous
discovery did then preserve our King, our Princes, Nobles, and the whole
Parliament, and with them our Liberties and Religion, from a dreadful
destruction; That he that has so often disappointed the confidence, defeated
the counsels, laid open the most secret Plots of our Romish adversaries against
the lives of our Protestant Rulers, and the Being of our Protestant Religion;
That he that brought order out of the greatest confusion of a Civil War, and a
lawless Government, he that so powerfully and graciously restored our present
Sovereign, recovered our State and Church from their desolate ruins, and has,
by a no less wonderful providence, lately preserved our King from so many
devilish conspiracies against his Crown and Life: I say we have good reason to
hope that the God who has hitherto delivered us, will still do so, in our
greatest fears and perplexities; if we turn from our evil ways by repentance,
and turn unto him by earnest, and fervent Prayer. He will not cast off his
people, Psalm. 94.14.
nor forsake his inheritance.

Thus have I showed you, that in our general Prayers for all Men, we are under
an especial obligation to pray for the Church and Country whereof we are a
part; and I have directed you how to pray, how to ask, so that you may obtain:
I must proceed to show you in the next place, that as you are to pray for the
whole body of the Kingdom, so more especially for the Head and Governor of it,
for the King as supreme, and all Magistrates under him, and this my Text exacts
of me. I exhort first of all that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men for Kings and all that are in authority,
whether they be good or bad; for the good, that God would be pleased to confirm
and prosper them in their virtuous proceedings, and keep their hearts sound in
his Statutes; for the bad, That he in whose hands are the hearts of Kings to
turn them whithersoever he will, would convert and reform them by a mighty
grace, that he would pardon their sins, that he would subdue them to his
obedience, overruled them by his power, and restrain them from acting any thing
either to their own, or the public detriment. The Kings, whom the first
Christians were to pray thus for, were not only Heathens, without the Church,
but bitter Enemies to it, and bloody persecutors of it, for Idolatry, Cruelty,
and Tyranny, humani generis portenta, the Monsters, the Prodigies of their
time, and kind; yet these wicked Kings and Emperors must be prayed for, much
more Christian Princes, the nursing Fathers of the Church; much more our own
King in whose life and welfare we are so nearly concerned. Let us pray heartily
for him, what we pray every day for him, that he may always incline to Gods
will, and walk in his way; beseeching Him also, by whom Kings reign, to
establish his Throne, defend his person, direct his Counsels, and show him the
things that belong to his own peace, and the peace and security of his people.
I shall give you some reasons and motives to enforce this duty.

1. Such as are more general, to move us to pray for all Kings at all times.

2. Such as more particularly should stir us up to pray for our own King at
this time.

I begin with the first.

1. One great motive to pray for Kings and all in Authority, is the motive in
my Text, viz. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. The whole Kingdom share in the well-doing and prosperity, and also in
the miscarriages and misfortunes, of a Prince; He is the light of his Israel,
if he be quenched, nay if he be but clouded, or eclipsed, what darkness and
confusion, what discomfort and horror presently overwhelms the whole State! As
the Sun, and Stars, are ordained in nature to give vigor and life to Trees,
Plants and other sublunary creatures; so is the face and countenance of
Authority sanctified by God for the cherishing and quickening, for the
strengthing and refreshing, all the seeds of piety and religion, that are by
our ministry sown in the hearts of men. Their laws, their protection and their
example have an influence upon godliness as well as honesty; The power and
Jurisdiction of Christian Princes reaching the Church as well as the State. And
however Mariana and other Jesuits have determined, ut nihil Princeps de
religione statuat, Mariana cap. 10.
excluding Kings from all Ecclesiastical government, and making St. Peter's
pretended successor, the Pope, sole Monarch here; yet if the high Priest had
arrogated so much in David's time, He himself had not ordered the courses and
attendance of the Levites as we read he did 1 Chronicles. 9.22, 23. nor in Hezekiahs
time, 2 Chronicles. 30.
who himself appointed the services of the Priests and Levites, and gave
special order by Royal Edict, for the celebration of the great Passover, and
that too at an unusual time. Yea it might easily be showed that the Sovereigns
among all people, not only Christians, but Heathens, have both claimed and
exercised power over religious persons, and in religious causes as well as
others. Arist. Polit. l. 7. c. 8.
The great Philosopher tells us that the first and principal thing in a
Commonwealth is (...) a care of religion; and in the Scriptures we find not
only the Kings of Israel, such as Moses, Josuah, David, Solomon, Asa,
Jehosapaht, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. but the King of Babylon, and Darius the
Persian, publishing their Edicts to and fro about the worship of their false
Gods, and of the true God also. Neither did the Emperors by submitting to
Christianity suffer any diminution in this part of their Royalty; witness
Constantine, who honored Bishops very highly, and yet he reserved to himself
the power of purging the Church from Idolatry, and establishing the worship of
God, Enseb. l. 2. de vit. Constant. c. 1. Theod. l. 5.20.
by his own Imperial Edicts. Witness Jovinian, and Theodosius, who by their own
immediate Acts, restored and reformed the pure religion, which Julian and
Valens had so much corrupted, and destroyed: Witness Justinian, Novel. Constit.
131.
who established the Code of the Universal Church, consisting of the Canons of
the four first General, and five ancient Provincial Councils, and commanded
them to be kept as Laws. I cannot stay here to give more instances of this
nature, seeing what has been said already does sufficiently show that Kings
and Magistrates have a great influence upon the Church, upon our living
godlily, and therefore are to be prayed for as such who may and do contribute
very much either to the destruction, or to the defense of the Faith, the true
Religion. I need not tell you what a necessary dependence all the civil
interests of a Nation have upon their Head and Governor; nor have I time to
show you what glory the honor of a Prince reflects upon his people, what
protection and security they have in his power, his Wisdom, his vigilance and
his goodness; I can only tell you, that his good is a common good, and
therefore to be prayed for as well for our own sake as his, that we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. That is the first
motive to pray for Kings, because the general safety, peace, prosperity, and
piety of a Nation depends so much upon them. A further encouragement to this
duty,

2. In a second place may be this, viz. That the prayers and piety of Subjects
do very much contribute to the procuring and preserving of good Kings and
Magistrates. As for the iniquity and irreligion of a people God many times
justly deprives them of a good Prince by suffering him to fall into sin and
mischief, which was the case of the incomparable Josiah: 2 Kings 23.25.
So by religion and righteousness is a Nation exalted, and a Throne
established. If the wicked be taken from before the King, his Throne shall be
established in righteousness. Prove. 25.5.
If the prayers of single persons are so prevalent for themselves and their
friends, what great things may we expect from the united devotions of many good
men in behalf of a person whose good redounds to many, and whose happiness is a
public benefit? As you have heard.

If prayer in such a case do not move God, to convert a King from all sin, and
make him do all the good which is in his power; yet we may hope it will, at
leastwise, obtain that restraining grace for him which will keep him from being
worse, and hinder him from doing that evil to himself or the public which
before he was inclined to.

We are apt to impute the ill management of things and the evils that ensue
thereupon, to the weakness or wickedness of Kings, which perhaps may more
justly be charged upon the sins, the profaneness and indevotion of the subject,
which very often provokes God to withdraw his guidance and direction, his grace
and assistance from Princes, giving them up to be swayed by ill counsel, to be
overpowered by temptation, to be drawn by their own lusts and passions to
commit such folly and wickedness, as becomes a plague, and a scourge, to a
sinful people.

Psalm 106.32.
For the peoples sake it went ill with Moses when he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips. David's sin in numbering the people was but a judgment executed on them
for their own wickedness, 2 Samuel 24.1.
The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, (for their sins no doubt)
and he moved David against them to say, Go number Israel and Judah.

To instance in the case which was too much our own, It was the peoples sin,
and not his surely, which provoked God to deliver up the best of Kings into the
hands of bloody and deceitful men, to be abused and vilified, and afterward
murdered by them; If his good subjects had spent as much time in serious
prayer for him as those hypocritical Traitors did in their mock devotions, we
might happily have enjoyed him longer.

3. We are to pray for Kings, because it is the only way the generality can do
them service in. Those that cannot help them by their counsel, nor their
Purses, may by their prayers. This way the charity and kindness of the poorest
Cottage may visit and relieve the Court it self, and the greatest King may be
indebted for his preservation, his life, his health, the success of his
affairs, to the prayers of his meanest Vassal.

4. Christian prudence directs, and Christian charity inclines us to pray most
for such as most need it. Now there are none in many respects more indigent and
necessitous than the greatest Princes and Potentates, none that need prayers
and intercessions more than they, and that 1. In respect of their great duties,
2. Their manifold temptations, 3. Their numerous enemies, some in one way, and
some in another, projecting against them.

1. Their duties are great and difficult; It is a very hard matter to rule
well; a great deal of Wisdom, a great deal of study and care, of strength and
industry is required to make a good Governor. The Master or Ruler of a Family,
a little Commonwealth, as Aristotle calls it, has a great deal more to do, a
great many more solicitous thoughts about him, a great many more troublesome
businesses upon his hands, than one of a single, though a dependent, capacity
ordinarily has. The Governor then of a Kingdom which contains not only many
Families, but many Corporations and Cities, will find the cares and troubles of
provision and protection to increase and multiply proportionably.

Epicurus, who would by no means deny the being of a God, yet disowned his
providence, and he did it with some show of complement and civility, pretending
that it must needs be a great interruption of his ease and tranquillity to
concern himself in the government of the World, the ordering, guiding,
controuling, disposing of things so much below himself. In this indeed he
bewraies a very erroneous, a very unworthy conception of the Supreme Ruler of
the World, as if the ways and actions of the most perfect Being were subject to
the same streights, confinements, and fatigues, as ours are; whereas his wisdom
knows all things without so much as the labor of discourse, and his power can
do all things without Stratagem, or contrivance. But the Gods of the Earth,
it is true, Kings and Magistrates, who in many things not only represent, but
resemble the God of Heaven, in this are very unlike him. They do not attain
their Wisdom without diligent search, experience and observation, nor employ
either it or their power without much toil and disturbance. And how great
soever the wisdom and power, the skill and activity of some Kings may be to
facilitate and lighten the duties and burden of their Empire, we know to whose
blessing they are indebted both for the one and the other, 2 Samuel 22.40.
even to that God who gave Solomon an understanding heart to judge his people,
and girded David with strength to battle, to subdue those under him, who rose
up against him.

Now seeing these great blessings of Heaven are obtained, and continued to
Kings ordinarily by Prayer; therefore, in this respect, they need our prayers
more than any others do. They do so also,

2. In respect of their temptations; their infirmities being the same with
other Men's; their checks and restraints less powerful, their miscarriages of a
public influence: The Devil the great enemy of all good will ply all his
advantages against them; the World lays all her baits before them, shows them
all her glory at once, she will not let them want any supplies for their
luxury, any instruments for oppression and cruelty, any furniture for Pride and
Vanity, nor any flatterers to color and extenuate their Vices, and show them
only the fair side of themselves. Seeing then they are easily betrayed into
sin, they must needs want great supplies and succors of the Divine Grace, to
repel their temptations, to secure their innocence, or to pardon their errors
and exorbitances, and consequently many prayers to obtain this Grace, to help
them in their need.

3. They are surrounded with many enemies, and exposed to many dangers: The
height of their glory raises as much envy as admiration, and makes them more
obnoxious to the fury and violence of every storm: How many ambitious and
aspiring minds seek to greaten themselves by their diminution? How many
discontented spirits, Sons of Belial, impatient of the Yoke, are trying all
ways to throw off their rule, and if they cannot advance themselves, to bring
them down and lay all level? How many desperate Fortunes hope to repair
themselves by a Kingdoms downfall?

We our selves have seen all this sadly exemplified, and we can make no
defense, for the future, equal to the danger, without engaging his help by our
prayers, who gives salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144.10
and shows mercy to his anointed.

5. We are obliged to be more instant and importunate in our prayers for Kings,
because this is the most lawful, and righteous way of remedying what is amiss
in them, and of redressing our grievances; if we suffer by them, we are not
allowed to lift up our hand against them though it be in the maintenance of our
own right. Gods guard secures them, more than their own: Touch not mine
anointed. 1 Chronicles. 16.22.
Though David himself had a fair Title to the Crown, yet his heart smote him
but for cutting off the skirt of Saul's garment, and we know afterward he
caused the poor Amalekite to be smitten to death for having a hand in his
blood, though he could not so properly be said to kill, 2 Samuel 1.
as to dispatch him, or in our ordinary way of speaking to put him out of his
pain, which in some cases would rather have been interpreted a kindness, than a
cruelty; but this he did, no doubt to show how sacred and inviolate the persons
and lives of Sovereign Princes ought to be. Nay we are not allowed so much as
to lift up our tongues against them in any murmurous complaints. Where the word
of a King is, Eccles. 8.4.
there is power, and who shall say to him what do thou? It is not only
intolerable insolence, but impiety in some cases to tell them of their faults.
Job 34.18.
Is it fit, says Elihu, to say to a King thou art wicked, and to Princes ye
are ungodly? And as we must not speak evil to them, so neither must we speak it
of them behind their backs. We must not reproach the footsteps of Gods
anointed, Psalm. 89.51. Exodus 22.28.
nor speak evil of the ruler of our people. Nay the prohibition reaches
further still, and does not only restrain us from expressing our dislikes of
them and their government, but from conceiving if possible, at least wise from
harboring or cherishing any ill opinion of them in our own breasts. Eccles.
10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

They are accountable to God and to none but him for their misdemeanors; those
who arraign them at any other Bar invade the Divine Authority and do encroach
upon Gods Prerogative as well as the Kings, by a bold and daring impiety: But
it concerns us therefore the more to have recourse to God, to seek relief from
him by prayer, humbly beseeching him to give the King his judgments, to guide
and direct him in all his ways, Isa. 60.17.
to make his Officers peace and his exactours righteousness; and this we must
pray too with submission to Gods will, and patiently waiting for his help,
rejoicing the mean while in the testimony of our consciences, that we have used
no indirect means to help our selves.

I have propounded these arguments, in stead of many more, to show the
reasonableness of this Christian duty of praying for Kings and all that are in
Authority: I shall now only add this to what has hitherto been spoken in a
more general way, viz. That our present circumstances are such as do furnish
some peculiar motives to this duty of praying for our own King: As first of all,

1. The great danger that he is in.

2. The great need we have at this time of his fatherly care and prudent
conduct.

1. We cannot but apprehend him to be in great danger; because those pernicious
designs, against his regal person and government, seem yet to be but in part
discovered; because his enemies are such as pretend they have Right and
Religion on their side, A power to dispose of the Crowns and Lives of Princes,
to absolve Subjects from all Oaths of Allegiance, to make Rebellion and Treason
not only Lawful, but Meritorious: We must needs, I say, have very sad and
serious apprehensions of the Kings danger, when we consider that he is
encompassed with such Malignant enemies, whose Craft and Policy envenoms their
Cruelty, whose very Religion is more formidable than Pagan impiety, and their
Church in the worst sense terrible as an army with Banners. It concerns us
therefore most heartily to commend him to his Almighty and gracious protection,
Psalm. 18.50. Psalm. 33.10.
who gives great deliverances to his Kings, who disappointeth the devices of
the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise; whose eyes are
upon the ways of man and he sees all his goings; Job 34.21. Psalm. 132.2.
before whom Hell is naked and destruction has no covering: humbly beseeching
him to bring to light the hidden works of darkness, Psalm. 10.2.
and to take the wicked in the devices that they have imagined; to cloth all
his enemies with shame, and to grant that upon his own head his Crown may long
remain, and flourish.

2. We have a great deal of reason to pray for our King at this time; because
we never stood in more need of a wise and Religious Prince, to feed us
according to the integrity of his heart, Psalm. 78.72.
and to guide us by the skilfulness of his hands, to search out a matter; to
dive into the depth of our enemies treachery, to see through their pretenses,
and to frustrate the counsels of wicked and malicious Men; to distinguish
between his truly Loyal, Honest, peaceable Subjects, and those who only flatter
with their lips whilst War and Malice is in their Hearts; to weigh counsels,
and actions, and to proceed in such methods of Policy, as are most likely to
secure the great interests of Church and State. The Characters, which in
Scripture are given of Kings and Magistrates, show us what great blessings they
are to a Nation in times of fear and perplexity, of distress and calamity. They
are called the shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9. Ezekiel. 31.17. Judges 20.2. Isa.
19.13. Isa. 44.28. 2 Samuel 14.15. Job 29.15.
the arms of a people to bear them up, and lead them. The corners of a State,
Pastors, Angels, Fathers. All which speak them our Guides, our Guardians, our
Strength, and Safety, as well as our Crown and Glory: Wherefore in these
dangerous and threatening times, now so many have openly declared their ill will
to this our Sion; so many Tobiahs and Sanballats malign our Peace and
Prosperity; so many Zeha's and Zalmunna's are ready to take to themselves the
houses of God in possession, we cannot but in some measure be sensible of the
great blessing of a Protestant King, of one who tenders our Religious, no less
than our Civil interests, and has hitherto been a nursing Father, as well to
the Church, as to the State; and consequently me must needs apprehend that we
have a great deal of reason to pray for the life and welfare of such a King,
for Gods gracious Providence over him, and for the continuance of his fatherly
care over us; that he may be blessed with such Councillors, and we with such
Magistrates under him, as may always be zealous for the rights of God and
Caesar, as may study to secure the Kings just power and dominion by
countenancing, encouraging, and advancing that Holy Christian Faith, which
produces Love, Peace, and Good Will among Men; which teaches us to be meek
and good natured, to be gentle and kindly affectionated one toward another; to
be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready
to every good work.

I need not say much of our present exigencies, we cannot but perceive them;
and I am as unwilling to raise causeless jealousies, as to contribute any thing
to a careless and irreligious security. I only suggest this, that if Kings have
a great influence upon our Peace and Tranquillity, the practice of Honesty and
Piety, (as you have heard they have) that there is more cause than ordinary
that we should pray heartily for our King in these sinful and dangerous times,
that God of his infinite goodness and mercy would save both him and us out of
the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our lives; that glory may dwell in our
land, and all nations may call us blessed.

And seeing God has already been pleased to do great things for us whereof we
are glad, we must not wholly pass by that part of my Text which calls for our
gratitude, our giving of thanks, but offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, as
well as of prayer, blessing God for the experience we have had of his goodness
and patience in sparing us hitherto, and for those signal pledges he has been
pleased to give us of his favorable inclination toward us, of his
unwillingness to cast off his people and forsake his inheritance, Psalm. 94.14.
which he has done by dispersing many of the clouds which have gathered very
thick over us, and often threatened us with an imminent destruction; by
lightning our darkness and shining upon us in so many intervals of mercy, by
warning us so graciously of our danger, by making those Plots visible and
apparent, which were thought too subtle to be discerned, and relieving our
incredulity with so many repeated and convincing evidences, thereby preparing
us wither to avoid or to bear the stroke; insomuch, that if we will not, with a
careless and obstinate stupidity, put the evil day far from us, or meet our
ruin, we may fairly escape it; Whereas God might justly have surprised us in
our security, and overwhelmed us in a sudden and inevitable calamity, Whosoever is
wise and will observe these things, Psalm. 107.43.
even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

I have not time to specify the circumstances of Gods great goodness to us, in
discovering so much of the late horrid Conspiracy against the Sacred life of
our Second Charles, and against that Holy Religion which is at once the Support
and Glory of his Empire. I shall only exhort you to magnify the name of our
good God, who is worthy to be praised, O give thanks to the Lord, for he is
good, for his mercy endures for ever. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who
only does wondrous things: 1 Chronicles. 16.34. Psalm. 72.18, 19. Psalm. 106.48.
and blessed be his glorious name, for ever; and let the whole earth be filled
with his glory. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to
everlasting, and let all the people say Amen.

FINIS.

