VINDICIAE VINDICIARVM, OR A further manifestation of M. J. C. his
contradictions, instanced in Vindiciae Clavium, BEING A Rejoinder to his Reply
(to some few of those many Contradictions) in his last Book, called, The Way of
Congregationall Churches Cleared, Part. 2.

By D. C.

JAMES 1.8. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.

Veritas simplex, error multiplex. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher
Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in Pauls-Church-yard, 1651.

VINDICIAE VINDICIARVM. CHAPTER I.
SECTION I. Of the Church to which Christ committed the power of the Keys.
THe Question between us in this first Section, was concerning the meaning of
those words, The Kingdom of heaven, in Mat. 16.19. and consequently, What
Church it was to which the Keys were by Christ committed. For the finding out
whereof I proceeded by a distinction, It the Kingdom of heaven did there
signify the Church; it must either be taken 1. Of the Invisible Church of true
believers, opposed to Reprobates. 2. The Catholic visible Church opposed to
Heathens; or (as you in answering the first question page 2. of Keys) to the
World. 3. Or a particular Congregation. Give me leave I pray to be now little
more exact in stating the question, by enquiring what is the sense of those
words, and the terms of the question. 1. What is meant by the Kingdom of
Heaven. 1. Of glory. 2. Of grace. 3. Of both.



1. What is meant by the Kingdom of heaven, whereof the Keys are here given to
Peter. The Kingdom of heaven in Scripture usage, signifies, either 1. The
Kingdom of glory (as frequently) or 2. The Kingdom of grace, as in some places,
grace being the beginning of or first step into that Kingdom of glory, Or 3. It
signifies both the Kingdom of grace and glory. And we are both agreed, that in
this text it signifies both: My first words in Vind. Clav. grant it, and you
affirm it; [By the Kingdom of heaven here, is meant, both the Kingdom of grace,
which is the Church, and the Kingdom of glory which is in the highest heavens.]
And you give a very good reason for it; [For (say you) Christ giving to Peter
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, conveyeth therewith not only this power to
bind on earth (that is, in the Church on earth, for he gave him no power at
all to bind in the world; the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world) but he
gives him also this privilege, That what he bound on earth should be bound in
heaven: And heaven being distinguished from the Church on earth, must needs be
meant of the kingdom of glory.] Let this be remembered against anon.

2. What that Church is to whom the Keys are committed.
2. The Kingdom of heaven, signifying the Church (and that both in heaven and
earth (both triumphant and militant) for what he calls in the 19. verse The
Kingdom of heaven, he calls in the 18, verse, his Church.) We must enquire what
Church, or what part of his Church it is to which the Keys are given: This
Question (I confess) is needless, in respect to the Text it self; For it
says nothing at all of giving the Keys to the Church, but of giving to Peter
the Keys of the Church, called by the name of the Kingdom of heaven, which is
worth your observation. For it is your importunity rather that has caused this
question, who have arrogated the Keys out of the hands of Peter, to whom Christ
in this text gave them, and given them to the Church, that is (incongruously)
to the Kingdom of heaven: but of his more anon: We shall therefore follow you
(rather then the Text) and consider, what is meant here by the Church: Church
is taken Ecclesiastically for, 1. The whole Church, either 1. The invisible
Catholic Church.
It is taken in the Ecclesiastical use (for I pass by the civil) in many
senses: briefly thus.

1. For the whole Church, called commonly by the name of the Catholic Church,
and that in a double notion:

1. The Invisible Catholic Church, the whole number of the Elect, in heaven
and earth, in all places and times: so it is commonly understood, Ephesians. 5.23,
25, 26, 27, 32. Col. 1.18. etc.

2. 2. The visible Catholic Church.
The Catholic visible Church containing the whole multitude of professors of
Religion, elect or hypocrites, in this world, as opposed to the Church of the
Jews, or to the men of the world: So it is taken Act. 5.11. and 8.3. at least
as contra-distinguished to a particular Congregation.

2. 2. For some parts of the Church in combination, 1. A particular
Congregation, and that a Church 1. Political.
For some parts of the Church, to whom is attributed the name of the whole,
from their Assembling together in different combinations: And then it is taken,

1. For a particular Congregation, or particular Saints, assembled together;
and this again is by some distinguished into

1. Political or Organicall, consisting of Officers and Members, as the
Integrall parts thereof; and those Congregations being members of the Catholic
visible Church, as Integrall parts thereof. The texts are obvious where it is
so taken.

2. Entitive 2. Entitive.
(as they call it) or Essential, consisting only of a company of Saints
combined by consent, without any Officers: So the Reverend M. Hooker and others
use to speak. But (that I may note it by the way) to me, This Entitive Church
(so called) seems rather to be a notion, never existing, but in men's fancy, in
the Resolution or Analysis of a Church into its materials, or else it is very
improperly called a Church: To my observation and understanding hitherto, there
is not in Scripture such an Entitive Church to be found, gathered, and existing
without any Officers. That place Act. 15.4.22. produced by the learned and
judicious M. Hudson, in his vind. page 3. where he says [Church is taken for
the members as distinct from Officers, ] does not hold out a Church Entitive,
without any Officers (for that had Officers) but only distinguishes the
Integrall parts of that Church, into Officers and members: The sense is no more
but this, either it means, The Apostles and Elders, with the rest of the Church
members; or (if the Church was then distinguished into diverse Congregations) it
takes in all the Congregations as the whole Church: for so the words are
expressed verse. 22. the whole Church: And your self call that which we call the
Catholic visible Church, by the name of the whole Church; when you say here
page 5. [The whole Church (or which is all one, the Catholic Church) may be
visible in her singular members] However it appears not, that then there was
any Entitive Church, existing without Officers. That other Text, Act. 14.23.
seems rather to imply it [And when they had ordained them Elders in every
Church ] as if there had been Churches gathered and existing without any
Officers. But the sense of the place may be this, when they had gathered and
settled Churches, of Elders and members, both at once; So soon as there were
members enough to make a Church, they ordained them Elders, and made them a
political Church: If not so, yet the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, were Officers
to them, before; Catholic Officers to them as yet members only of the
Catholic Church; and now they being to depart ordained them Elders in their
stead, and made them particular political Churches. If those members were not
confederate by consent (whereof the Scripture says nothing) they themselves
say, they were not a Church, but only Materials of a Church, and so members of
the Catholic Church only, or of none. I shall say something more to this in
another place; I prescribe not to any man's judgment, but submit it to
consideration, and proceed.

2. The Officers of the Church.
2. As a Congregation is called a Church, as before; so sometimes the Officers
not only distinguished, but as separated into a Court, are called the Church:
Our Savior alluding to that custom amongst the Jews; and not relating to a
Congregationall Church not yet known, nor yet in being: And now the question
returns upon us, To what Church of all these, the keys were committed. Some say
one thing, some another: you say, to the particular Congregation, which we
shall consider, when we have added that,

3. How the Keys are given to the Church, whether
3. It is to be considered in this question, when the Keys are said to be given
to the Church (which is never said expressly in Scripture) how they are
understood to be given to the Church. Whether 1. Objective, 1. Objective.
that the Church is the object of the exercise of the Keys, that is, they are
given for the good and benefit of the Church: Or 2. Subjective, 2. Subjective.
that the Church is the Subject Recipient, to employ and exercise the Keys: and
this, either immediately by her self, in whole, or in part, without Officers: or
mediatly by her Officers: that is, whether the Church be the next and first
subject of the Keys, to convey them, or any part of them to her Officers; Or
that she is said to be the remote subject, as including the Officers, to whom
primarily and immediately Christ has committed the Keys for the good of the
Church; as sight is immediately entrusted with the eyes, for the good and
benefit of the whole body. And if it should happen that any power of the Keys
should appear to be given to the Church as distinct from her Officers; whether
it belong first to the Catholic visible Church, or to a particular
Congregation. The Question then is clearly this [Whether the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven be given subjective to the Church-Catholike in her Officers,
on the particular Congregation without (or with) her Officers.]

And now we shall consider what you resolve, upon this question; Thus you
assert. [The Church to which the Lord Jesus committed the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, Matthew. 16.29. is caetus Fidelium, commonly called a particular
visible Church, etc. To which I answered (not as an Avenger, there is not the
least color of that, but as an Assertor, giving also my reasons) Of all the
rest, this is the most improbable sense of our Saviors words, if by the
Kingdom of Heaven, on earth, he means that Church of which he spoke in verse.
18. But that was either the Catholic visible Church; or rather the Invisible
mystical Church, etc. That one, or both of these (for by my word rather, I do
not exclude the other) is meant, and that primarily, is to me still most
probable; upon these reasons.

1. This being the first time, that the Church ( my Church, the evangelical
Church is named, it is not probable, that our Savior, would intend it only of
a particular Congregation, but of the Catholic Church; for that is primarily
Christ's Church, and that is properly built upon the rock; and against that the
gates of hell shall never prevail; whereas, (as I say afterward) particular
Churches may fail, and have failed. There is far more color for a particular
Church to be meant. Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church: because excommunication is
executed in a particular Church first, and consequently in the Catholic
Church: but there is not any shadow for it in the text in hand. Did Christ
mean, I will build my Church, that is, a particular Church only, upon this
rock, and not rather the Catholic Church, and the particular secondarily, as a
member thereof? It may be a question between the Invisible, and Visible
Catholic Church, which is meant there, (as after,) but none, till of late, so
much as made the question, betwixt the Catholic and particular Church.

2. Peter, was an Apostle, and had given to him the Keys of the Catholic
Church, not of any particular Church; for he (and so his fellow-Apostles) were
never Pastors of any particular Church: therefore, it seems more reasonable,
that the Catholic Church is there meant. They had habitually the Keys of
particular Churches, in the Catholic; as Pastors have habitually the Keys of
the Catholic Church, in a particular: They were actually Elders of the whole
Church; as Pastors are actually Elders of a particular Church.

3. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Church, are given to
Peter, as distinguished from the Church, therefore they are not there given to
the Church. As if a Lord should say to him whom he constitutes his Steward, I
give to thee the Keys of the Family, to open and shut the doors of the House;
could the servants, or children, or any for them, conclude from this grant, the
Keys were given to the Family? was Peter the Church to whom the Keys of the
Church were given? And therefore, as distrusting this sense of this Scripture,
you say, (as you had said of the other Apostles and Elders) [The Church or
Congregation of professed believers received that portion also of Church Power,
The Keys page 5.
which belonged unto them, if not there, (that is, in this text in hand) yet
elsewhere.] Not here for certain; whether elsewhere or no, shall be tried
hereafter. It is not a reasonable construction of this text, to say, I give to
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, of the Church: and to mean, I
give to the Church, the Keys of the Church. I said therefore, (and I think
truly,) that of all the rest this is the most improbable sense of our Saviors
words; that it is a particular Church, to which the Keys were given, Matthew.
26.19. It must then be taken of the Catholic Church, either Invisible, or
Visible, or none.

But you are pleased to take away the subject of this question, denying any
Catholic visible Church: [For (say you) I do not read, that the Scripture any
where, acknowledges a Catholic visible Church at all.] It is supposed by very
Judicious Divines, that you may read of it often in Scripture, and in this
place for one. It cannot be denied, but the Church, is often put for the whole
multitude of believers, whether in truth, or in show only: Acts 8.3. Saul made
havoc of the Church: and Acts 12.1. etc. It was not any particular Church, but
any of any Churches, any of that way, Acts 9.2. which must needs signify the
Church indefinetely as opposed to the world, not any particular Church: Nor was
it the Catholic Invisible Church that they persecuted, as such; for they could
not know them to be such: Therefore it must be the Catholic Visible Church.
Besides, your self unawares confess it, in the following words; [Though the
whole Church, (or which is all one, the Catholic Church) may be visible, in
her singular members, etc.] Is not this to confess a Catholic visible Church?
But (say you) [So they are not a Church: or though it may be visible in the
several particular Congregations, yet none of them is Catholic.] I hope you
do not imagine, that any is so simple, to think that the whole Church can be
seen at once; D. A. said well, Ecclesia non est tota simul visibilis: The
Church (he means the Catholic Church) is not all visible at once or at one
view: then it were more then visibilis, even visa: not visible so much as seen;
I know you observe the difference::But if the whole Church be visible in her
members, whether in the particular persons, or particular Congregations, is not
the whole visible, though not visa, seen at once? No more is the whole world
visible, but in its parts, yet the world is visible: No more is a Congregation
of many persons visible, that is, seen at once; yet you will not say but the
whole is visible. True, but then none of those particular Congregations are
Catholic. [The Catholic Church, is not visible as a Church, and the Church
that is visible, is not Catholic.] But 1. If there be a Catholic Church,
(which you suppose here in these words.) 2. If that Church be visible in its
parts, the singular members, which you also grant. 3. If the particular
Congregations, as parts, be also visible, as Churches. 4. If the whole Church
be made up of chose particular Churches which are visible: must not the whole,
or (which is all one) the Catholic Church be visible? and then the whole
Church that is visible, in its parts, is also Catholic: and the Catholic
Church is visible in its parts: And is it not then true, that there is a
Catholic visible Church? It might be added, that a particular Church, is not
visible as a Church; but as a company of men assembled; for the form of the
Church (which you say is the Covenant) is not visible. And once more you seem
to yield the Catholic visible Church, when you say, [Though all of them (the
particular Congregations) may be called a Catholic Church, or general
Assembly, if they were met together.] Only you add, [Yet I would be loath to
say, that Christ gives the power of the Keys (all Ecclesiastical power into
their hands.] I should indeed be loath to say so; for I do not yet believe, that
our Savior in that Text did give the power of the Keys to the Church at all,
whether particular or Catholic, but to Peter, to the Officers for the Church.
To thee (Peter) I give the Keys of the Church. etc.

Yet the question upon that Text is not resolved; whether by Church is meant
the Catholic visible or invisible Church] seeing it is not to be taken for a
particular Church] And to this you say, That I [distrusting the meaning to be
of the Catholic visible Church, expound it rather to be meant of the Invisible
mystical Church] But 1. By my word [rather] I did not exclude the Catholic
visible Church: though I was swayed by the reason annexed, to incline to that
sense; Because that Church only is built on the rock, and against that, the
gates of hell shall never prevail, whereas particular Churches may fail. And I
am not alone in this Exposition. 2. Visible and invisible, do not specifically
difference Churches, but are (as your self say, somewhere) but adjuncts of the
same Church: whereupon it may be true of both, that, by the Kingdom of heaven,
that is, the Church, ver. 18. may be meant both these, as included in the same
Church: the invisible in the visible: But of which our Savior understood it,
is worth enquiry: Upon second thoughts (not excluding the invisible) I incline
now to think he meant is of the Catholic visible Church. The Reverend M.
Hooker confesses himself inclined that way, by some passages of M. Rutherford,
to take it of the visible Church; (though he deny a Catholic visible Church,
as well as you) by the force and conviction of this Argument. [That Church is
here meant, which is built upon the Rock Christ, by the visible confession of
Peter; But the invisible Church is not built by a visible profession, such as
Peter's was: The proposition is made good by the meaning of the words: Thou have
made a confession of my self a rock, and upon my self so confessed, will I
build my Church.] I must ingeniously confess, I am not convinced by this
argument. For the Invisible Church is also built upon that rock by a visible
profession, such as Peter's was: The invisible Church is the same Church, or the
same members, with the visible; and are all built upon the same rock by the
same profession of faith; True believers and false make the same profession of
faith, and the Elect are visible members of the Church, though as they are
elect they are invisible: visible and invisible are in themselves opposite, but
not in several respects, they may predicated of the same subject; That which I
observe from him is this, he acknowledges and argues, that the visible Church
is here meant: the question is whether the Catholic or particular visible
Church is there intended: For the Catholic visible much has been said
already; and now I add from his confession; [Upon my self so confessed, will I
build my Church.] what? only a particular Church, and not rather the whole
Church? yea, rather the latter; for the reason objected against the particular
Church; because against the visible Church particular the gates of hell have
prevailed: he answers, [The visible Church is attended in a double respect:
Ibid p. 2. 7.
either as this or that particular Congregation, or else as a Church
universal, existing in the particulars: and in this latter sense it is taken
in this place, and then it is a sure and confessed truth, That the visible
Church does not fail.] If now it be taken in the latter sense in this place,
for the Church universal, existing in the particulars, then it is meant of the
Catholic visible Church, not of a particular visible Church. See more in M.
Hookers Survey p. 217. If I may now declare my judgment, take it thus: Upon
this rock, that is, my self thus confessed, or this confession of my self, [To
be the Christ the Son of the living God.] will I build my (Evangellicall)
Church: The Church before Christ's coming was built upon the same foundation,
with this difference, They professed the Messiah to come, The seed of the woman
to break the serpents head, was the foundation of their faith from the
beginning, till Abraham's time: After that, this was laid as the foundation [ In
thy seed shall all the nations be blessed, etc.] But the Christian or
Evangelical Church is built upon this Gospel-foundation or Truth Truth [That
this particular person Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that Messiah which
was to come.] So the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.29. Is not this the Christ? and
verse. 42. ["We know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.]
In like manner the Eunuch, Act. 8.37. ["If thou beleevest, thou may; And he
answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.] And upon
this rock, or Jesus Christ, so confessed, was every particular Women also as
well as men.
member converted, built, and consequently the Church: What Church? a
particular Congregation? yes, secondarily, as a part of the whole visible
Church, but primarily, the whole Church of the New Testament, and that I take
to be especially the sense of the word Church, in this Text, though (as I said)
not excluding the Invisible Church.

And herein your self seem to agree with me, when you say, [Indeed true it is,
that Peter and other Preachers of the Gospel have received such a power of the
Keys, to open to believers a door into the invisible Church, etc] But then, the
invisible Church cannot be excluded from one part of the meaning of the kingdom
of heaven, whereof Peter received the Keys: and consequently the Church to
which the Lord Jesus committed the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 16.19.
is not only caetus fidelium, commonly called a particular Church (if at all)
which was your assertion. And once more, it may be said, that the visible
Catholic Church cannot be excluded from one part of the meaning of the Kingdom
of heaven, in that Text, for the reason which you give also; Because there is a
power of the Keys to open a door to professed believers, into the Catholic
visible Church, as well as into a particular visible Church. But be it meant of
the invisible or visible Catholic Church, or of a particular visible Church,
it is manifest, that in this Text the Keys are not given to the Church; but the
Keys of the Church are given to Peter, contra-distinguished, as an Officer,
from the Church.

But you object, [Certain it is, that when by the power of the Keys a believer
is received into the invisible Church, he can never be shut again out of that
Church: but the Keys here given to Peter, have power to shut out of the Kingdom
of heaven even the same persons: And therefore the the Kingdom of heaven is not
meant only of the invisible Church.] I pray Sir, should not your conclusion be
from those premises [Therefore the Kingdom of heaven is not meant at all of the
invisible Church:] which yet you have asserted, to be part of the meaning:And
did you not from the beginning say, that by was meant the Kingdom of grace and
glory: And does not the Text say, that Peter has keys given him, as well to
shut out the Kingdom of heavens, as open the door thereof? [Whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: If so; then your proposition is
not true, That a believer received into the Invisible Church, can never be sent
again out of that Church: Your self say, a little below, page 8. of this second
part. [It may truly be said, whosoever is bound or loosed in any one particular
Church, is also bound in the Kingdom of glory ] and is not that, as much as to
be shut out of the Invisible Church? You cannot but know, that the judgment of
Divines is, that if a true believer, be excommunicated, for some crime, he is
for a time suspended from the Kingdom of Heaven, See M. Hookers Survey part. 1.
p. 204. S^ct. Visible Saints.
and so in a sense put out of the Invisible Church; and if it were possible for
him to die unrepenting, he might perish; and the text it self seems to justify
it, when it says, [whatsoever is bound on earth, shall be bound in heaven]

And now shall consider what you say to the reasons for my etc. To which you
answer; [It is not true that the Invisible Church only, built upon a rock. For
particular Churches are built upon a rock also: built they are upon Divine
Institution, and Christ is laid for the foundation of them, etc.] Before I
answer, I must distinguish of those words [built upon a rock;] which not
observed, cause confusion in this present business: Two things are here
enquirable: 1. What is meant by the Rock? It may be taken 1. For Christ
himself, the tried and sure foundation, (as he is elsewhere called,) and so it
may be understood, Matthew. 7.24. [built his house upon a rock,] opposed there to
the sand. 2. For Christ confessed to be the Son of God, and the Messiah; as
he was by Peter professed to be; [upon my self so confessed, will I build my
Church] as Mr. Hooker expounds it above. 2. What it is to be built upon the
rock? Vide D. Ames. Medul. lib. 1. c. 5.^. s. 11.
It is, either by internal union, with Christ, as the rock and foundation; or
by external profession; as your self insinuate to me the distinction, page 7.
when you say, [if they degenerate, they were never founded upon Christ, but in
an outward form.] And now, I shall ingeniously acknowledge my self not distinct
enough, when I said, [It is the Invisible Church, which is built upon the rock,
etc.] and do confess my self beholden to Mr. Ruth. and Mr. Hooker, for this
light; and now see, that the visible Church also, is built upon the rock. Only
I differ from Mr. Hooker in this, that be by visible Church, means only, a
particular Church, but I, the Catholic visible Church, as was discoursed
above. But now, upon the former distinctions. I answer, That if you take the
Rock for Christ himself, and the building on him, See part. 2. pa, 24. your own
words, It is readily, etc.
for Internal union with him; then the Invisible Church only, is built upon
the rock, and against that the gates of hell shall never prevail. But if you
understand the Rock, to be that confession of Peter, or rather Christ, so
confessed, as he was by Peter; and the building on that foundation, for an
external profession, or (in your words) in an outward form: Then I say, the
visible Church is so founded upon the rock: But then I add, that it must not
be restrained to a particular Church (against which the gates of hell have
prevailed, which contradicts our Saviors promise) but declared to the
Catholic visible Church (existing in the particulars, as M. Hooker said)
against which the gates of hell (what ever they be) shall never prevail. And
now I consider what you say, [It is not true, etc. for particular Churches are
built upon a rock also:] But then Sir, I pray, how will you (without a
distinction) answer the Text, which says, the gates of hell shall never
prevail against that Church which is built on the rock? You say [Built they are
upon divine institution, etc.] But I suppose you do but elude and not answer
here: Is it all one to be built upon the rock, and upon divine institution?
Then particular Churches should not fail: for those that are built upon a rock
shall never fail: Particular Churches are built upon a rock also; True, so far
as they are true believers: Others of them are expressly said to be built upon
the sand; yet are they built upon Christ's institution: Suppose a particular
Church, consisting of all hypocrites, (it is possible to be so) having all
external Ordinances; will you say, those are built upon the rock Christ? or
will you say, they are no Churches of Christ, because they are not built upon
Christ as a rock or foundation? Neither of these can you say, not the latter,
for they are built upon the Institution of Christ not the former, for
hypocrites have not Christ for their foundation, but are built upon the sand.
Hear your own words, page 40. [If the profession of the doctrine of faith be
true, though the grace of faith in the professor be uncertain, and may be
hypocritical, and so false, yet we dare not deny the nature and power of a
Church to such.] But say I again, such are not founded upon the rock Christ,
though they be upon his Institution: Therefore Institution and rock, are not
both one. But you confute your self, when you say [Christ is not the head of
that Church, whereof he is not the foundation, and where he is the foundation,
he is also the rock:] Now (say I) Christ is not the head of hypocrites,
therefore not the foundation, nor the rock for (as you add) Christ is not a
sandy foundation: yet are they built upon the Institution of Christ; and may
and do fail, which they could not if they were built upon Christ a rock: But
say you [What then? so may the true disciples of Christ fail (in respect of
bodily subsistence) and yet the gates of hell never prevail against them,] Did
Christ mean in regard of bodily subsistence, that the gates of hell should not
prevail against the Church? Do not some particular Churches fail in regard of
the truth it self, and the gates of hell prevail against the souls of all their
members? yet Christ says, they shall not prevail against the Church built upon
the rock. Or rather did he not mean it of the Catholic visible Church, in this
sense; that he will ever have a Church in one place or other? yes, say you [God
may remove the Candlestick, that is, his particular Church, yet he will have
ever some or other particular Churches visible, in one place or other.] That
is, say I, God will have ever a Catholic visible Church, existing in the
particulars: and so (says M. Hooker) visible Church does nor fail. Yet you go
on to say, [Those Churches that were founded upon Christ, and built upon that
rock, neither failed nor fell away.] But (I assume) those Churches that were
founded upon his Institution, fell away and failed, therefore they were not
built upon the rock. You add again [If the posterity of a holy Church do
degenerate, they were never founded upon Christ, but in an outward form] True,
say I, yet they as well as their predecessors were built upon Christ's
Institution. Therefore to be built upon divine Institution merely, is not the
same, as to be built on a rock: And so you have eluded, not answered the
argument.

I have but one thing more to say to your Testimonies from Mr. Whit. Junius,
and D. Ames: You say, [They dispute Catholic visible Church, but maintain the
Catholic Church to be invisible] But 1. The Church Catholic of I which those
Divines speak, against Papists, is not the same with ours in this Dispute: They
intend it of the Church of the Elect, of all ages and times, which is the
Catholic Church mentioned in the Creed, as the object of our faith, not of our
sense: but we take it in the second sense delivered in the beginning, for the
whole multitude of believers, or professors of the Gospel in all places of the
world at once; And the parts of this Church whether particular members or
particular Congregations being visible, the whole (or which is all one, the
Catholic Church) must needs be visible. D. Ames. Med. lib. 1. cap. 31. sect.
7. cap. 32. sect. 1.
And D. Ames by name, having defined this Church to be Caetus hominum
vocatorum, fidelium, vel caetus eorum qui sunt in Christo, etc, Of this same
Church (which cannot be only the particular Church, he says, it is visibilis
in suis partibus: and in the former chapter, Sect. last, Ecclesia nunquam plane
desinit esse visibilis: The Church Catholic (of that he spoke) never wholly
cease to be visible. 2. The Catholic Church which they dispute against, is
in the Romish sense, a Catholic Roman Church, animated by the Pope as an
head, and by Catholic Officers actually, in a subordination, as a Political
body: But this we deny as well as they. We take it only for the whole multitude
of believers, distinguished into several Congregations, which all make up one
body, whereof Christ alone is the Head. Survey part. 1. page 15, 16. O^ which
Christ is an Head by political government.
We shall take it in M. Hookers words, [The Church is the visible kingdom of
Christ, in which he reigns by the Scepter of his Word and Ordinances, and
execution of discipline,] which visible kingdom of Christ, is the whole Church,
or (which is all one) the Catholic Church, visible in her members.

And now I come to my second Reason, or (as you call it) Mat. 16.19.) is not
contra-distinguished to a particular Congregation, but to the general visible
Church on earth. You answer 1. [There is not any particular Church on earth,
but may be, upon just occasion contra-ditinguished from the kingdom of glory]
It may be so, but very improperly, and with respect to the whole Church on
earth: But what is this to the Text or Objection? The question is not, what may
be elsewhere, but what is the meaning in this Text: It says not, whatever thou
shall bind in a particular Congregation, but in earth, that is, the visible
Church on earth, as contra-distinguished to the world here, See the Keys page
2. s. 1.
and the kingdom of glory above: And besides, he that is bound in any
particular Church, is bound in all the Churches on earth; and so the
distinction of heaven and earth respects the whole Church, rather then any
particular Church. 2. And this your second Answer implies, [You did not, mean
it in any one single Congregation on earth, but generally and indefinitely in
every particular Church on earth; for every Apostle had transcendent power in
every particular Church on earth.] But 1. why may you not say as well
["generally in the whole Catholic Church on earth.] seeing Peter received
power to bind and loose, in the whole Church primarily (being an Apostle) and
secondarily in particular Congregations? 2. If Peter as an Apostle received
such power in the whole Church, what is that to Elders and Believers; to
challenge power of the Keys from this Text, in all particular Congregations?
Sure, they have not transcendent power indefinitely, much less generally, in
every particular Church on earth. 3. How did Peter receive the Keys in every
particular Church indefinitely? As an Apostle, or as an Elder, or as a
believer? Not as an Apostle or Elder; that you denied in the way? Not as a
Believer, for if they have any power in the Keys, it is in the particular
Congregation. Whence I conclude, by Kingdom of heaven there, is not meant a
particular, but the Catholic visible Church, as contra-distinguished to the
Kingdom of glory.

Peter was one, but Peter was not a member of a particular Congregation; for
there was none such then extant. You are pleased to jeer me with your Logic;
and tell me [there is a fallacy in such arguing, to be left to Sophisters, or
used, when I will refresh my wit with young scholars:] But I pray Sir, where
lies the fallacy? The major is your own, the minor cannot be denied; Peter was
not a member of a particular Congregation. The proof of this last Proposition
is, because there was none extant at that time: This is also true, and partly
confessed by your self, where then lies the fallacy? [The Copula does
connotate; Time, which it ought not to do, etc.] You instance in a Sophism; fit
indeed for young scholars: But nothing parallel to my arguing: And your other
Argument from resurrection is far wide: you say [The Proposition is true,
because the subject and praedicate have true connection in the nature of the
thing though not in the present order of time.] But so it is not in my arguing;
For Peter was not at any time a member of a particular Congregation, neither
then nor afterward: There was then no fallacy or sophism in my arguing; The
weakness was in the proof; For whereas I said, Peter was not a member of a
particular Congregation, because there was none extant at that time; I should
have said, Peter, being an Apostle, was never a member of a particular
Congregation; Therefore the Church there mean could not be a particular
Congregation

Peter received the Keys, was such, whereto an offended brother might tell an
offense, and have it censured; but that was never done in a Church of Saints,
without Officers, etc. [This (say you) is another passage of Sophistry: Here
are quatuor termini in this Syllogism: might tell an offense, and did tell an
offense, make two different Mediums.] Make you the Syllogism right as you would
have it; you make the minor thus, [But the Church of Saints without Officers
was not such, to whom an offended brother might tell an offense, and have it
censured.] And this you deny. But I shall prove it thus. 1. From the judgment
of your brethren here, who say, [The brethren cannot proceed to any public
censures without Officers:] Therefore it is to no purpose to tell an offense to
a Church of believers without Officers. 2. From your self, who expressly say:
[Excommunication is one of the highest Acts of Rule, and therefore cannot be
performed, but by some Rulers: The Keys page 16.
] though I confess, you flatly contradict your self in the way, page 101. And
now my Syllogism may easily be defended and cleared from a Sophism, by adding
the minor more explicitly, thus, [But a Church of Saints without Officers, is
not such a Church:] This is proved by what I say, That was never done in a
Church of Saints, without Officers; that is, no example can be brought from
Scripture or History, of such a practice, where a Church of Saints without
Officers did censure an offense; Therefore the Church of Corinth (which you
instance in) was not such a Church, for it had Officers, who (as I said) might
authoritatively censure offenders. [What of that? (say you) if a Church of
Saints without Officers, have power from Christ to elect Officers, then also to
admit members; And if to admit without Officers, then to exclude them without
Officers:] Surely, whatever mine was, this is a fallacy and a Sophism, called
petitio principij: For you know, we deny, that a Church of Saints without
Officers, have power to elect, that is, ordain and make Officers, and you ought
not to beg it. And what mean you by power to admit members? Admission of
members is either at their first conversion, which is done by baptism, and so
your self say, None but Officers can admit, for none but Officers can baptize;
or it is at the removal of a member from one Church to another, to admit into
the communion of another Church; but this, either is no part of the power of
the Keys, or if it be, it belongs to a Church with Officers. Nay, your argument
will recoil upon your self, It is the same power to open and shut, to admit and
exclude; But a Church of Saints without Officers cannot exclude or shut out,
therefore nor can they admit or open. The minor is your own a little above, and
your brethrens also: [ Excommunication being an Act of Rule, cannot be
performed but by some Rulers.]

And here I desire you to take notice, That a great g^ound of your mistakes,
lies in the misapplication or attribution of the power of the Keys to the
brethren, to elect, that is, to make and ordain their own Officers; making
election the principal, and ordination but a circumstance or solemnity, not
necessary by the Institution of Christ, to belong to the Officers. Indeed, it
seems to follow rationally, They that may ordain their own Officers, may
de-ordain them, or cast them out; for it is the same power instituere and
destituere, as you say: And then if the brethren may ordain and de-ordain their
Officers, much more may they admit or exclude members. But me thinks the
Antecedent is to be denied, and we prove it thus: They that may ordain Officers
to such employments, may in case of necessity at least formally themselves
perform them: But you constantly deny, The Way, page 44. and then par 2. p. 3.
Par. 2. page 33.
that any but Officers can administer Sacraments: The major is also your own
Assertion, in this last book of yours thus you speak [I confess, I do not well
understand how a man in case of necessity has any virtuall power to this or
that Act, but he has also a formal power to do such an Act in that case of
Necessity.] But (I assume) the brethren in a case of Necessity (say you) have a
virtuall power to ordain their Officers, who can do those Acts, administer
Sacraments, etc. therefore in that Necessity, when they have no Officers, they
have a formal power to administer Sacraments. Nor can I see any reason why
those that may ordain Officers, and administer censures without Officers, may
not also administer Sacraments. For to administer Sacraments is one of the
lowest acts of a Minister, certainly less then preaching [Christ sent me not
to baptize but to preach the Gospel, Par. ^. page 81.
] q. d. that was the chiefest part of his errand, says M. Hooker. And
Excommunication (and so admission of Officers by Election) is one of the
highest acts of Rule, (say you:) But you allow your brethren to preach, and to
elect, and cast out Officers; therefore they may as well if not better be
allowed to administer Sacraments; which yet you do deny. How Independent indeed
is your way? how inconsistent your doctrines? I wish you would at last consider
it.

I said in the fifth place, The Church to which the Keys are given, are said
(by you) to be such as do all of them meet in one place, for the administration
of the Ordinances of Christ. But the Ordinances of Christ are not to be found,
much less administered in a Church of believers without Officers: Therefore. To
this you answer thus, [The truth is, though the Ordinances may not all of them
be administered in a Church of believers without Officers, as authoritative
dispensing of the Word and censures, and ministration of Sacraments: yet some
Ordinances may be found and administered there:] But Sir, 1. Did not you intend
it of all Ordinances, that they may and must be administered in a Church of
believers? Did you not define a Church to be a company of believers met
together to enjoy all Ordinances? 2. I said (all) the Ordinances are not to be
found in a Church of believers without Officers, you first take no notice of
that, but say, though all may not be administered there: and then confess, Some
of them cannot be found and administered there: Surely those that cannot be
found there (as some cannot) cannot be administered there: But (say I) in that
Church to which the Keys were given, all Ordinances (which are the Keys) may be
found and administered. Therefore that Church and yours are not the same: 3.
What are those Some Ordinances which may be found there? [1. Two or three to
meet together, and pray, and admonish one another, etc.] But are two or three a
Church? You say somewhere 7. are the least number. And may not any two or three
believers, not in your Church Order, no members of any particular Church, meet
and pray, etc? have they then the power of the Keys? Is not reading of the word
also an Ordinance of Christ, and singing of Psalms, etc. Are these also part of
the power of the Keys? [2. It is an Ordinance of Christ to elect Officers, for
this is the power and privilege of the Church of Brethren] Let me use your own
words to me in this paragraph [This latter proposition is left naked and
unguarded without proof, and is but an ipse dixit, etc.] for you know we deny
it. And suppose those were Ordinances, and part of tho power of the Keys, yet
they are not the Ordinances that I intended, viz. administration of Sacraments
and censures; These you have confessed (though you again deny it) are not to be
found or administered in a Church without Officers; They are not capable of
administration o^ S craments without Offi- p 20, there.
[The truth is (your own words) the Ordinances of Christ may not all of them be
administered in a Church without Officer?, as authoritative dispensing of the
word and censures, and ministration of Sacraments:] what need I prove my latter
proposition when you confess it? But you have an help for this: [If a Church
of believers may supply themselves with Officers, when they want them ( which
you know we deny, unless you mean they may procure them elsewhere) and if
Officers and brethren have all ordinary Church Power (which we also deny to the
brethren) and so all Ordinances of Christ, which are ordinarily administered,
found there, then what hinders, but that a Church of believers has in it, as
some Ordinances formally, so all radically and virtually, and the same
administered, and administrable amongst, them?) This discourse is a mere
begging, of the question first, and then a varying of it; A begging in that you
take for granted, that the Brethren have a power in the Keys, eitheir formally
or radically; and that because they have a power to elect their own Officers;
If by Election you mean the Creation or making of Officers, we deny then any
such power: If you mean a designation or choice of a fit person, to be ordained
by other Officers, that is no power of the Keys; which your self say [are the
Ordinances of Christ, The Keys. p. 2.
as the preaching of the Word, and administering of the Seals and censures,] You
also vary the question, by putting in two words; first, ordinarily administered,
whenas I spoke of all Ordinances ordinary, as those mentioned, or
extraordinary, as Synods, which your self acknowledge an Ordinance of God; and
I think will not say it may be administered in a particular Church of believers,
without or with Officers. Secondly, You shuffle in another word Administrable
amongst them; whereas the question was of Ordinances administered; They are not
all to be found, much less administered in such a Church: But all Ordinances,
ordinary and extraordinary, are both administrable and administered in the
Church, to which the Keys were given; therefore that and yours is not the same;
and that and not yours is understood in that Text.

I said further; If the Keys were committed to the Church, objective for the
use of the Church (but that is not to the purpose) or subjective, and then you
fall into the extreme of Brownists, etc. To this you answer, [I meant it indeed
subjective, though not excluding objective: The particular Church receives the
power of the Keys, both subjective to it self, and objective, for it self:] But
I reply, and ask, what you mean by Subjective, to it self? and of what Church
you intend it, whether Entitive, (as you speak) consisting only of believers
without Officers, or political with Officers? If you mean that the Church
Entitive of believers without Officers is the subject of the Keys, then they
have not only virtually but also formally received the Keys, and may administer
all Ordinances without Officers (which yet you deny) for Peter here received
them all formally, and you say, as a believer; then (say I) believers not only
in a Church jointly, but even singly have received all the power of the Keys
formally, and may administer them without any Officers, which is worse then
Brownism. But I have distingu^shed above, when the Church is said to receive
the Keys subjective it may be meant, either immediately her self, without
Officers; or mediatly by and in her Officers; and I illustrated it by the body
natural; As sight is immediately trusted with the eye, as the next subject of
it; but mediatly with the body. In the first sense, you cannot say, the Church
is the immediate subject of the Keys^ for then she might immediately administer
them all without Officers (as I said) In the latter sense, it is nothing to
your purpose, for then, as fight is entrusted with the eye, first for the good
of the body, so the Keys are entrusted with the Officers for the good of the
Church: Par 2. page 22.
The body is not first entrusted with sight to convey it to the eye, nor are
the Keys committed first to the Church, to convey them to the Officers. You say
afterward [If Christ have given them (Pastors, etc.) to the Church, the Church
is the Recipient subject of them. As if the eye be given to the body, the body
is the recipient subject of it.] All this is true, in a sense, The Officers are
given to the Church as the immediate recipient subject of them: But is our
Question of the Officers, or of the Keys? We say, the Keys are given to the
Church both objective for its good, with reference to the brethren; and
subjective with reference to the Officers: yea, subjective to the Church as the
subject of the Officers, that is, mediatly; but not subjective as the immediate
subject of the Keys: Your comparison was ill laid; you should have instanced in
the sight (that resembles the Keys) not in the Eye it self: The body is the
immediate subject of the eye: but the eye, of the sight. So the Church is the
immediate subject of the Pastors, etc. but the Pastors are the immediate
subject of the Keys. And this (as I have often said) is evident in the Text in
hand; For Christ does not say [I give to the Church the power of the Keys, or
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven that is, of it self) but I give to thee Peter
the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, that is, of the Church:] not the least
color here, of giving the Keys to the Church. Ibid. page 23. Materials of a
Church, etc. page 27. See page ^0, When the proposition, etc.
But I desire you will consider your inconstancy, and the inconsistency of your
assertions. You say presently after the last words cited, [Pastors, etc. are
given to the Church as integrall parts of the Church, as the Church is Totum
Integrale,] Then say I, they are not given to the Church as mere adjuncts, nor
does the Church receive them, as the subject of them. And that upon your own
reason [For integrall parts are intrinsecall and essential to a Totum
Integrale, and not extrinsecall, as the object is to a thing.] Integrall parts
are not subjects and adjuncts one to another.

But you say [When I wrote that proposition (in the first words of the Way) it
was not then in my mind to understand any other, but a Congregation of
believers with Officers; For I spoke of such a Church whereof Peter was one,
and he was an Officer.] 1. Whatever was in your mind, I know not, but the
words hold out rather a Congregation of believers without Officers (and so that
acute and judicious M. Ruth. understood you, The Way. p. 1.
as well as I) For you say there, [The Church to which Christ has committed
the Keys of the Kingdom, the power of binding and loosing, the Tables and Seals
of his Covenant, and (mark that) the Officers and Censures of the Church, is a
communion of Saints, etc.] But can the Officers be committed to the Church with
Officers? And do not you commonly distinguish Saints or believers from
Officers? When you said, Pastors are given to the Church, and the Church is the
recipient subject of them, must not the Church be taken then for a company of
Saints without Officers? 2. In your present defense, you understand it all
along of a Church without Officers, or I understand you not. 3. When you add
[That you spoke of such a Church whereof Peter was one and he was an Officer,]
You vary the sense and words of the proposition. For there you say, [The Church
to which Christ committed the power, etc. was a company of such (as whereof
Peter was one) believers professing that faith, etc.] Mark that, one believer,
not one Officer; And elsewhere you say, the were Keys committed to Peter, not
as an Apostle or Elder, that is, not as an Officer but as a believer. How these
things agree, I see not: Yet you will defend it (granting that sense) [They
have received some part of the Keys formally, etc.] Of which we have spoken
before, and refer you thither. Only I shall observe your similitude for
illustration of your assertion: [The stock of the vine (growing from the root)
has not immediate power to bring forth grapes, yet has power to produce
branches which do bring forth grapes: So the body of the Church of believers,
though they have not immediate power of rule, authoritatively to dispense the
Word, or to administer Sacraments at all, yet they have a power to produce such
Officers as may perform the same.] But I fear your similitudes do deceive you.
Do the Brethren immediately give that power to the Officers, which they have not
formally in themselves? Epist. to Keys, page 3.
Did not the Officers receive their power immediately from Christ or his
Apostles, who had that power formally in themselves? Have not your Praefacers
to the Keys, told us, that your self lay this fundamental Maxim, [That look
whatever power or right any of the possessours and subjects thereof may have,
they have it each alike immediately (in respect of a mediation of delegation or
dependence on each other) from Christ, and so are each the first subjects of
that power which is allotted to them?] But now you make the Officers to depend
immediately upon the Church of believers; and to derive their power from them by
mediation or delegation, as the branches derive their being and virtue to
produce grapes, from the stock of the Vine. Which if it be not to jump with the
Brownists, who place all power radically and originally in the Church of
believers, and make the Officers derive it as their servants immediatfy from
them; I must profess I understand nothing in this controversy: Survey part.
1. p. 195. prop. 4.
Does not M. Hooker make the Church of believers the first subject of all
Church power? and do not the Brownists just so? whereas you (sometimes at least
in the judgment of your brethren here, as before) make two first subjects of
the power of the Keys and each to have it immediately from Christ: I desire you
would consider whom M. Hooker meant in those words [That conceit is more wide
from the mark, etc. ] page 195. sect. 2. It is strange that all this while you
should agree no better.

Kingdom of heaven, but a particular Congregation of believers is never called
so: being but a member of it, etc. You answer, [It is not material, whether it
be called so or no, it is enough it is called a Church, yea, as distinguished
from Church Officers, Acts 25.22, Supra, page 7.
23. etc.] I gave the sense and rosolution of that Text before; The sum is this,
it does not hold a Church of believers, as existing without Officers; for that
Church had Officers: but only distinguishes the Integrall parts (as your self
call them above) of that Church into Officers and members;] [The Apostles,
Elders, and whole Church; ver. 22.] that is, the brethren or believers, ver.
23. assembled together, ver. 25. which is no more then if he had said, the
whole Church, consisting of Apostles, Elders, and Brethren. But you must
remember that you are disputing the power of the Keys to be given to a Church
believers without Officers and you bring an instance of a Church that had
Officers: Show (if you can) a Church of believers, existing without Officers,
which took upon them the name of a Church, or the tide of the Kingdom of
heaven. I yet believe, wherever the Church is called the Kingdom of heaven, in
Scripture, it is meant of the whole Church, not of any particular Congregation.
Your own Texts produced do hold out as much, Mat. 20.1. It is called a
vineyard, which signifies either the state of the Gospel, or the whole visible
Church; If he had meant it of particular Churches, he would have rather said,
into his vineyards; for all those Officers could not be hired for one
particular Church: You say, ["It was into this or that particular Church
respectively] true, with respect to the whole visible Church, which is but one.
A man that has a large vineyard, hires servants to work, in several places or
parts of that vineyard; but this or that part is not called a vineyard, but
with respect to the whole, they are all hired to labor in his vineyard. Or
what if that Parable be rather understood of particular persons, then
particular Congregations? God calls all Christians into his Church, and sets
them to work; Some come in at one hour, some at another; they that come first,
think they deserve more, then they that come in late, at the eleventh hour:
Christ would intimate, that God is free, and his grace free to do what he will
with his own; and there is no merit at all; Many are called but few are chosen:
But your Exposition restrains the parable only to Officers, as distinct from
the Church of believers. The like my be said of your second Text, Mat. 25.1, 2.
It is not meant as an a description of the estate of each particular Church, as
you strain, rather then interpret it: but of every particular professing
Christian, whereof some have lamps of profession, but no oil of true grace;
others have both: And the scope of the parable is intimated in the (...) or
application, ver. 23. [Watch ye therefore (every one of you) for you know not
the day nor hour when the Son of man comes,] Your next of Luke 17.21. is wider
from the mark, [The Kingdom of God "is within you,] that is, either the Messiah
whom you seek as absent, is now among you, as Beza, or the power of the Gospel
is within you or upon you. Those other of Rev. 1.6. and 1 Pet. 2.9. are as much
mistaken, if applied to a particular Congregation. All the faithful are Kings
and Priests, and all together, are a Kingdom of Priests, both Officers and
believers. I suppose you will not apply this either only to the Officers, or
only to believers, but to both singly and jointly, and respectively to the
whole Church.

To conclude this whole first Section, I added, a particular Congregation is
but a member or Corporation of that kingdom: and it were as improper to call a
Congregation Christ's kingdom, as to call London the kingdom of England, You
answer, [Every similar part of a similar body does properly partake both in the
name and nature of the whole; Every part of water is water, etc. and such a
part of such a body is a particular visible Church.But such is not the state of
London, etc. ] You said a little above [It was not in your mind to understand
any other particular Congregation, but one furnished with Officers:] But then
if you will speak properly and strictly, you cannot say, that a particular
Congregation of Officers and believers is a similar part of a similar body; for
it is a d^ssimilar body consisting of dissimilar parts: and so London, and it,
agree in state; and that Church can no more properly be called the Kingdom of
heaven, then London the kingdom of England. Again, if you will (to help your
self out of this Labyrinth) understand it of a particuar Church without
Officers, you fall into another gulf as bad as the former. For if particular
Congregations consisting of similar parts (of believers only) may be called
Kingdoms, as they are called Churches, then it will fairly follow, that every
particular member of that similar body, may be called not only a Church, but a
Kingdom too; because every similar part of a similar body (it is your own
reason) does properly partake in the Name and Nature of the whole: So then, as
every drop of water is water, so every member of such a Church, is a Church;
and of such a Kingdom, is a Kingdom. Your following of metaphors and Parables
too far, is guilty of these miscarriages; as I elsewhere often show; where I
also show how a particular Church consisting of Officers and believers, may, in
a candid sense be said to be a similar body, to which I refer you.

SECT. II. What the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are.
IF in opening what the Keys of the kingdom of heaven be, it was not your
intent to enumerate them all distinctly and particularly, (as you here say)
Surely you intended not the business you had in hand, when you were purposely
engaged to answer this Question. What are the Keys of this Kingdom? would not
any Reader expect (from an Expositor, of that text) a full and perfect
enumeration of the Keys? what, and how many they are? Had you said only thus
[The Keys are the Ordinances which Christ has instituted to be administered in
his Church.] You might afterward have referred them (as you say) to their
several subjects. But when you add [As the preaching of the Word, as also the
administration of the Seals and Censures;] Would not any Reader take it for a
full distribution of the Keys? And when you add [By the opening and applying
of these both the gates of the Church here, and of heaven hereafter are opened
or shut to the sons of men.] Would not any man think, these were all the Keys
necessary, and alsufficient for those ends on earth and in heaven?

But (say you) [In instancing these, I supposed no man would be of so narrow
apprehension, as not to conceive those things to be included, without which
these cannot duly be performed. As vocation unto such administrations, and
some who have power from Christ to give such a vocation.] But I pray Sir, are
these any part of the Keys themselves? If a Steward be trusted with the Keys of
the Family (as Peter with the Keys of the Church:) there must be doors and
locks, and servants to be let in, or shut out; but are those any part of the
Keys? Mend your distribution of the Keys; and will you say, The Keys are
vocation, and some that have power to give such a vocation? We (such is the
narrowness of our apprehension) think your distribution afore-given, is full
enough; nor can we tell (pardon our dullness) how you can mend it, but you will
make it worse. We have been accustomed so long to that ancient distribution of
Clavis Scientiae (which you call preaching of the Word) and Clavis potestatis
(which you call Administration of Seals and Censures) that we wonder at your
new pick-locks, presented to the world, as Keys of the kingdom of heaven. And I
yet think, your new distribution labor under so many Incongruities (as Vind.
Clav. has given you to understand, though you are not pleased to take notice
of them, or to vindicate them,] that it is far worse then the old one, so long
received in the Churches of Christ. I had thought to have added your own words
(appliable enough to your new distribution) in end of Sect. 3. page 6. of the
Keys, but I forbear.

It seems to me (though you insinuate the contrary) to be of great weight for
the expediting of many controversies about the Keys, and your new Way, to know
what those Keys be, and what Ordinances they include. Is not one main
controversy betwixt you and us, about the nature and extent of the Keys, and
who are the Key-bearers? which cannot be decided, unless we know what be those
Keys. But let us hear your new definition of the Keys: Keys of the kingdom of
heaven are spiritual powers, to dispense the Treasures of his Kingdom, etc.]
Is not this almost the same with that before, Keys are the Ordinances of Christ
to be administered in his Church, for opening and shutting the gates of the
Church here, and of heaven hereafter? But what mean you by spiritual powers?
you mean [Spirituall callings and spiritual gifts fitting for them, enabling
to some spiritual Acts, for these are Ordinances.] I pray Sir, is every
spiritual calling, and every spiritual gift fitting for them, a Key intended
in the text to be given to Peter? callings and gifts help to dispense the Keys,
but they are no Keys: But they are Ordinances? Be it so, is every Ordinance a
Key? The Deacons office is an Ordinance (and the Widows too, say you) and
spiritual gifts are requisite to fit for that calling; but is a Deacon or his
office a Key? and a Key given to Peter in that Text? Prayer and singing are
Ordinances, but who ever numbered them among the Keys? Well, what are the
Treasures dispensed by those powers or Keys? [I mean by them (say you) the
Word, Seals, and censures, etc.] Before you said the preaching of the word, and
Administration of the Seals and Censures, were these Keys: and now you call
them the Treasurers to be dispensed by the Keys: What incongruity is here? Now
let us hear your Distribution of the Keys, according to this your definition: [
Keys, spiritual powers, are either the Key of Knowledge or Faith (both one
with you) or the Key of Order: The Key of Order is either the Key of power, or
the Key of Authority or Rule:] Is not this an accurate distribution? The
spiritual powers are either Keys of power or of Authority? And is not the Key
of knowledge a key of order, an Ordinance peculiar to some order or office of
men? what confusion is here? In a word, your new definition of the Keys better
fits the Key-bearers then the Keys themselves, ver. 9. A Pastor or Teacher is a
spiritual power given by Christ to his Church, to dispense the Treasures of
his kingdom, etc. And your own Exposition fits it better: By spiritual powers
is meant, spiritual callings: such is the calling of a Pastor: and spiritual
gifts are requisite for the fitting of them to spiritual Acts: But no man ever
said, that a Pastor was a Key, but a Steward to dispense the Keys. New ways
must coin new notions and distinctions, to make them as amiable, as strange.
But the old way is the good way.

1. And now you come to animadvert upon my animadversions; 1 I said you
confuted your scope in the whole book, which is to give the people a share in
the government of the Church: This you peremptorily deny to be your scope, and
say I mistake your meaning. Let your Praefacers speak first, Praef. to Keys,
page 3.
[His scope is to demonstrate a distinct and several state, and interest of
power, in matters of common concernment, vouchsafed to each of these (the
Officers and people) and dispersed among both, by charter from the Lord: as in
some corporate Towns, the Aldermen as Rulers, and a Common Counsel a body of
the people.] which that it amounts to a share in the Ruling power, is
demonstrated in my Vind. Clav. in answer to that preface, and in the Tract it
self; But you take no notice of it. Next, let your own books speak; wherein you
often give the brethren without Officers power to ordain Officers, and to
censure them all without Officers; which if they be not the highest acts of
Rule, and so the brethren have the greatest share in the government, I shall
still profess my Ignorance in this controversy. And upon my observation, you
deny them power in nothing, but administration of Sacraments: You allow them
power in jurisdiction, by giving them power in admission and ejection of
members and Officers: You allow them liberty in preaching the Word, only not
ordinarily, nor so authoritatively as to Pastor or Teacher: what can you give
them more but administration of Sacraments; and that being less an Act of
Rule, then the former, you may go on, and grant them that too, or they will
take it, and so they do.

I said, in prosecution of my charge, of your confuting the scope of your book,
If the Keys be the Ordinances of Christ, (there by you specified) preaching and
administration of Sacraments and Censures, they are given for the Church of
believers, objective, but are never in Scripture, or all antiquity said to be
given to the Church subjective: You are pleased to deride me, as if I had not
read all Antiquity, which I profess I have not (though in this particular
controversy it is easy to find what Antiquity has said) or had forgotten
what is recorded by the most ancient Antiquity, for the space of the first
three hundred years: But of that you vouchsafe not to give me any account, how
pertinent soever to our present business, but refer me to that account you
have given M. Baily; to whom (in way of requital, not of revenge) I shall
refer you to wait for your unswer.

But you say [what power you give to the Church of believers subjective, you
allege Scriptures for it, which when Vindex takes in hand to evade them, you
shall return him an answer.] You did allege Scripture, and the Assertor (not
Avenger) did in their place answer them (not evaded them, as you phrase it) and
expected your reply; but I perceive he may go seek it, for you never come at
the place, where it is handled; though you promise here, and once or twice
more, you would do it; but either evaded it, or forgot it, of which more anon.

It sounds very ill (I said) at first hearing to say, that the brethren have
any power in the Keys, or Ordinances of preaching, or administering Seals or
Censures: you answer, ( If those, preaching the Word, and administering Seals,
were all the Ordinances, and no more, I say true, it would sound ill at first,
at second, and third hearing too, to say, The people have any power to exercise
these Ordinances, ] etc.But 1. Why do you leave out Censures, which not only I
put in, but your self also, in defining the Keys? Does it not sound ill, at
first second, and third hearing, to all reformed Churches (but your own and
such like) that the people have any power, yea, the greatest power to exercise
censures? For they can censure all their Officers, but all their Officers
without them cannot censure them, nor any one of them: It is indeed no
unpleasant sound to you, or your people: yea, it would sound very ill and harsh
to you, at least to your people, to hear, That they have no power in the Keys
mentioned, preaching and administering of Seals and Censures. But if those Keys
were given to Peter, they were given to him, either as an Elder, and then the
people have nothing to do with them at all, one or other: Or as a Believer, but
then they may as well exercise the Ordinances of preaching and administering
Seals, as exercise and administer the Ordinance of Censures.

But you go on, by way of Recrimination (I say not by way of Revenge) with an
argument, ad hominem [You marvel it should sound so ill (to allow the people a
power in censures) to them whose ears have been wonted long, to hear of
suspensions and Excommunications, by Chancellors and Commissaries, who
generally are no Ministers, etc.] Truly Sir, this touches not me, who have as
well thought it to sound ill, at first or second hearing, that Chancellors,
etc. no Ministers, should suspend and excommunicate, as I now think it harsh to
hear, this power is allowed to, and practiced by the people. Though people may
perhaps be the better men, yet not so well authorized, as some Chancellors and
Commissaries (for some of them were Ministers) who had more color of Authority
to suspend, etc. then your people have, who are quite out of office. But you
wonder more that I that could allege all Antiquity, should think it to sound
ill [Who know what reverend Testimony, ancient Tertullian gives of the
Brethrens power, etc. and what Cyprian gives to the people, etc.] I had thought
to let you wait for your answer, from M. Baily; but seeing you are pleased to
vouchsafe me the Testimonies, I shall anticipate his answer in the mean time.
1. For Tertullians, I find you cite him not at all to M. Baily, as if then you
took it to be of no great strength. What says Tertullian? Quum probi, cum boni
coeunt, etc. [When honest, good, godly, chaste people, meet together, it is not
to be called a faction, but a Court.] What is this to power of the people in
censures? Unless you beg it hence, that the word Curia signifies a Court?
But I pray, what mention is here of Officers at all? Did the people at that
time censure alone without their Officers? You will hardly prove that: or are
not Officers good and honest men? Or do good men never meet but in a Court to
censure? As for Cyprian you leave me in the dark, to go look what he says; or
to turn back to what you say to M. Baily: I shall consider the place, and his
Testimonies. In the first, you clearly to my understanding confute your own way
of Ordination of Ministers: Thus Cyprian speaks [As they have received from the
Apostles, so they hold it, that for the orderly celebration of Ordination, all
the neighbor Bishops of the same Province, where a Minister is to be ordained,
come together to that people, etc. Of Sabinus he says, this Office was put
upon him by the suffrage of the whole brotherhood, and by the judgment of all
the Pastors present, etc. and so hands were imposed on him.] I pray, do you
gather all the neighbor Bishops or Pastors of the Province, where a Minister
is to be ordained? Do those Pastors impose hands upon him? yet these, Cyprian
says, they received from the Apostles. True it is, the Minister was chosen in
the presence of the people, and good reason, as to whom his life is best known:
But the judgment of his abilities was in the Pastors; as also the Imposition
of hands. But the people had their Suffrage; that is nothing, but some
rational consent, or some manifestation of their approbation, not any
authoritative vote, or ordination. See the Way. pa. 41. and 58.
But this is not the new way of Ordination; for you allow the brotherhood,
suffrage, consent, judgment and imposition of hands too, upon their Officers.
This you never received from the Apostles. Another Testimony is this: [The
people fearing God, etc. have chiefly the power of choosing worthy Ministers,
and refusing the unworthy.] But power of election of one Minister, rather then
another, and rejection of an unworthy Minister, is not denied the people of
God: That Election is but their consent or approbation of such a Minister, as
the Pastors in their judgment, think fit and worthy: and Rejection is but
withdrawing communion from one unworthy, and judged fit to be excommunicated.
But this we say is no part of the power of the keys, we doubt not but pious and
godly women should have this liberty or privilege to except against known
unworthy persons, and to withdraw communion from them; yet surely, you will not
allow them power in the Keys. When Cyprian says [All things shall be examined,
you being present and judging,] He means not a judgment of Authority, but of
discretion. And the last place, [I determined to do nothing without your
counsel and consent,] declares his meaning fully to be for consent, not
Authority: And so those times give no express lineaments of Congregationall
discipline. Show us in any Antiquity of Scripture or story, that the people had
power without Officers to create or ordain Officers, to impose hands upon them,
or to censure all their Officers; or you say nothing to the present
controversy.

2. When you had said [The Keys convey not Sovereign power, but stewardly,] I
inferred, that this clearly excludes the people, for they have no stewardly or
ministerial power over themselves (I might have added, much less over their
Officers,) You answer by a question, ["As if the people were not Stewards of
the grace of God given to them? etc.] But truly Sir, this is no better then a
fine elusion. To take Stewards in a larger sense then I intended it. Stewards
to me are Officers, and can the people be Stewards over their Stewards? Your
self say, page 28. [It implies a contradiction, that the Church should be its
own Officer, for the very term of Officer implies subordination.] So say I, it
implies a contradiction, that the Church should be its own Steward; And again,
p. 30. [We acknowledge (say you) that a company of professing believers,
destitute of Officers, are not Stewards by office, etc.] Then (say I) you
answer equivocally; taking the word in another sense, then it is commonly taken
in this controversy [Let a man esteem of us as Stewards of the mysteries of
God, 1 Cor. 4.1.] Did not the Apostle there mean it only of Officers? Nor will
the Apostle Peter help you out: 1 Pet. 4.10.
For either he takes Stewards in the strict sense for Officers, with reference
to the 11. verse. Or in the large sense, for any Dispensers of any kind of
gifts, as the referring it to the 9. verse seems to carry it. Now we take the
word in one sense, and you in another, and so you answer nothing, but misleade
your Reader, while you evade.

Yet you go on; ["If they have received any gift of grace, they are either
Stewards of it, or Lords.] Apply this to women, yea, to Infidels; If they have
received any gift or grace they are either Stewards of it, or Lords: Lords they
are not; what are they else, Stewards? they are your own words. But we answer,
it is not any gift that we are speaking of, but the gift of the Keys; that is
your first evasion: And then we say, they are neither Stewards nor Lords, in
our sense of Stewards, but members of the family, in subordination to the Lords
and Stewards; having nothing to do with the Keys at all. But, say you,
[Election of Officers is a public gift, and that must be dispensed publicly,]
Grant Election of Officers to be a public gift, and yield it to the people,
yet (say we) it is no part of the gift of the Keys. Lastly, when you say [the
people are not as Lords, to elect whom they list, but as Stewards and Ministers
to Christ, etc.] either you make them Officers, or you do prevaricate all
along his Paragraph, and that I think you do.

And the like you do in the word (calling) which I said should be taken of some
special calling or Office, which would exclude the people from having an
office in the Church, or any power of the Keys. You say, [There is no reason
for that, if special denote a specification of a calling, distinct from other
members of the Church: but if it only signify a distinct state or order, from
such as are not members; so it is true, every member has a special calling
from such as are not yet received as members of a particular Church.] But, Sir,
you cannot well understand it otherwise then I do, when you speak of a special
calling, in such, as to whom the Keys are given, with a power to open and shut
the gates of heaven, that is, the Church. For I suppose every member of the
Church particular has not such a special calling, or such power of the Keys,
to open and shut the gates of heaven: as women and children for example: yet
have they in your sense a special calling, state, or order in the Church; as
was more fully said in Vind. Clav. And surely in this controversy special
calling, and office, have ever been taken for the same thing, not for state, or
place, or order, at large. Believers not yet members of a particular Church,
have a distinct calling, in your sense, from Infidels, a state, place, order,
in the visible Catholic Church: yea, if they be men, they have as good a
state, order, etc. in a particular Church, as your women and children have, in
regard of any power of the Keys.

Yet you say, [Every member of a particular Church has a calling to put forth
some acts of power of his own Church, which members of another Church have not
there:] Had you not said (His) I would have asked what acts of power women may
put forth in their particular Church; yet certainly women may put forth some
acts of power in their own Church; or else their calling, state, place, order,
is very mean and contemptible. There is no member of the body natural, not the
least, but it has in your notion, a function, action, office, in the body, a
power to put forth some acts in its own body, which it cannot do in another
body, nor the members of another body in its body. The question is not of some
acts of power, but some acts of power of the Keys; which is an office power.
But say you still, [Every member of the body of a particular Church (women and
all say I) has some function and action, or (as the new Translation) Office in
the body: To. 12.4, 5. All the members have not the same office; which
implies, they all of them have some office, though not the same.] Truly Sir,
this is but a prevarication: Fos 1. By body there, is not meant a particular
Church, but the whole Church: [We, being many, are one body in Christ, and
every one members one of another,] Paul puts in himself, and he was no member
of the Church of Rome, in your sense, 2. When they render the word (...),
office, they either mean it largely, and not for a special office, as we take
it, or strictly, and then it relates to the Officers of the Church only, as the
following verses may seem to insinuate, ["whether Prophecy or Ministry, etc.]
where your self and others, do find all the Officers of the Church: and so
taken, it is nothing to your purpose, but rather against you.

When I said, you added that explication [whether it be their office, or place,
and order in the Church,] to steal in the interest of the people, in some share
of the Keys: you answer, [It is not stealth but justice to give to every man
his own: the Psalmist foretold it in a new song, Psa. 159.9. Such honor have
all his Saints, etc.] But you must first prove it their own, and that that Text
is so to be understood; or else it is as well sacrilege or stealth (taking it
from the right owners) if the Lord has not given them this honor: as it is to
deny it, or take it from them, if the Lord has given it to them.

Lastly, (and so you will have done with me) you conclude, [It is not every
place or order in the Church, that gives power to receive the Ordinances, much
less, power themselves to to dispense Ordinances: as children and women, etc.]
This is very true: yet you asserted before: [Every member of a particular
Church has a calling to put forth some Acts of power, in his own Church, etc.]
Then say I, women and children, for they are members too: yea, we think, except
but that of speaking in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. expressly
forbidden, and we do not find any one thing granted by Christ (in respect of
the power of the Keys) to men, the common members of the Church, that women may
not be allowed to act; as I often told you, in Vind. Clav. 1. Women (widows at
least, who contribute maintenance) may have some power in choosing (that is in
your sense) ordaining Officers. 2. To propound just exceptions against such as
offer themselves to be admitted. 3. To admonish in case of private scandal. 4.
To judge with a judgment of discretion; you sometimes allow the brethren no
more, Keys, page ^4. They may tell the Church, they may consent and concur
with the Elders at least passively. 5. To withdraw from one excommunicate, etc.
as was suggested to you elsewhere. And now before I conclude, I shall set
before you an observation of your inconstancy, in assigning the first subject
of the power of the Keys; The Keys were given, 1. To Peter, as an Apostle, as
an Elder, and as a believer. 2. To Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder,
but as a believer; and consequently to all believers. 3. Not to believers as
believers, but as making public confession of their faith, before the Lord and
their brethren: The way cleared, part, 2. page 39. and public profession of
their obedience of the faith, to the Lord Jesus, in the public Ordinances of
his worship, page 40. 4. Not to believers as believers, but as believers
covenanting, and fitly capable according to Christ's appointment; M. Hooker
Surv. par. 1. page 203. Or as you here; it is not every place, or order in the
Church that gives power to receive or dispense Ordinances; as not that place
or order of children and women, etc. Whereas when first you began, you
asserted, The Keys were given to Peter as a believer, and so by your own
argument, a quatenus tale, to all believers, as believers; you are forced to
make several distinctions, to help it out; That position that needs so many
distinctions, gives strong suspicion it is not the truth. And now I shall
conclude this second Section with your own words, [Let every soul enjoy such
privileges and liberties, as the Lord has given him (or her) in their place
and order, and neither effect nor attempt more.] Happy had it been for the
Church of God, if this had been done. The Keys p. 6.
I shall but mind you of what I suggested to you in Vind. Clav. page 13. in
your own words; I pray you seriously consider, [Whether by this sacrilegious
breach of order, investing the people with a Key of power, even above those
Elders that labor in the word and doctrine, to open and shut the doors against
them ( p. 9. of Keys) (which is the breaking of the files and ranks in an Army)
Satan is not like again to rout and ruin a great part of the liberty and power
of Church Officers, and the purity of the Churches, and of all the Ordinances
of Christ in them.

SECT. III.
I now expected, you should have gone on, with Vind. Clav. and have vindicated
your book and self, from those other many wickednesses and contradictions,
charged (I still think) justly upon you: But you fairly (if you do not rather
in way of Revenge,) shake hands with me, or rather slightly shake me off, and
never meet again. And this is the more remarkable, because you promise at least
three times (with attestation of the name of God twice at least) page 15. and
page 16. and again, page 19 a further consideration of them. In the first place
thus, [when Vindex takes in hand to evade the Scriptures alleged, I shall
return him (God willing) further answer:] In the second place thus again, [What
reason there is for their (the Brethrens) power in Church Censures, we shall
further consider (God willing) in its place.] To which places you never come
near; Is not this to take Gods Name in vain? And new in the third Section you
promise, though you undertake those two Reverend Antagonists, M. B. and M.
Ruth. [Yet by the way, not to neglect what personal exceptions Vindex has
taken at your self;] But reading over the following discourse, I find not that
you do so much as take any notice of me, or your threefold engagement; but as
if Vindex were some contemptible person, that deserved to be slighted, as his
best answer; you neglect all his; I shall only say, "Et si ego dignus hac
contumelia vel maxim,
"At tu indignus, qui faceres tamen,


Who both are charged with so many contradictions, which (for your own honor)
it concerned you to answer; and also have charged your self three times to give
a further answer. Besides this, there were seven Chapters in Vind. Clav.
wherein you were not a little concerned to give (if not me) the world
satisfaction: and you are pleased to answer (if you have answered) but to one,
and but to two Sections of three in that chapter, which is a slighting and
contempt of an adversary, not usually heard of. And now, I leave it to the
Judicious Reader to resolve, who deserves best, Adversarius litis, non personae.
and most justly, the name and title of Vindex or Avenger. Yet you give some
reason of this slighting and neglect: for so you say, [I conceive it loss of
time and labor, to argue the question with Vindex alone, whose exceptions so
far as they concern the point in controversy, are but collections out of the
writings of others; who have more distinctly and elaborately disputed the
cause:] I pray Sir, why do you conceive it loss of time and labor to argue
this Question with me? Do you mean, your answers would be so unsatisfying (as
the former now will appear to be) as that the time and labor would be ill
spent? Your Reader will think so, if you answer no better to that remaining,
then to what is gone before, And why do you say this Question? as if there were
no more betwixt us then this, But I most of all admire why you should say, my
exc^ptions are but collections out of the writings of others: I believe the
Reader will find my exceptions are Collections of contradictions, out of your
own writings, more then out of others. And I can sincerely profess, I
consulted with none, or very few books of this controversy, but comparing your
books one with another, my own reason and judgment suggested to me those
contradictions in them, that left me altogether unsatisfied in your way, and at
this day, I am left so still; if not more confirmed; that the Independent way
is not the way of God, that is so inconsistent with the Scriptures, and with it
self.

That others have more elaborately disputed this cause, I shall easily yield;
but I think I may truly say without vanity, none have more distinctly
discovered the weaknesses of your proofs, and your contradictions to your
selves, in holding out your Way, then I have done. Nor am I at all troubled
that you choose rather to consider what has been written by Learned and
Reverend M. Rutherford and M. Baily (though you sere M. Baily as you do me,
never name him more in all your following discourse) had you but made good your
promises, to consider also what I had said, to vindicate your self from your
contradictions, and to clear the truth in question. But seeing you are pleased
so to neglect me, I hope you will not be troubled if I conceive it loss of
time and labor to follow you any further; and consider what Learned and
Reverend M. Hooker has elaborately written in this controversy Only give me
leave to present you with a Scheme of your remaining contradictions, or
contrarieties at least noted in Vind. Clav. out of your own books: and then
leave you to your choice, whether you will reconcile them or confess them.

A Scheme of Contradictions and Contrarieties in the Independent way.
1. THe Keys were given to Peter as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a believer.
So the sense most fill, The Keys, page 4.

It appears, that Christ gave the Keys to the fraternity with the Presbytery,
Ib. See also the Way cleared, par. 2. page 22.

1. The power of the Keys is given to Peter not as an Apostle, nor as as Elder,
but as a professed believer, The way page 27.

1. Peter received no^ the Keys merely as a believer, but as a believe
publicly professing hi^ faith, etc. The Way cleared, par. 2. f. 39.

Not believers as believers, but as believers covenanting, and fitly capable
according to Christ appointment, M. Hooker Surv. par. 1. p. 203.

2. The Keys are given to the Church of believers The Way, p. 1. that is a
combination of faithful men: as M. Hooker.

2. The Key of knowledge belongs to all, the faithful, whether joined to any
particular Church or no. The Keys, page 11.

2. The Key of Knowledge is given not only to the Church, but to some before
they ente^ into the Church, The Keys, p. 11.

3. The Key of order is common to all the members of the Church, Keys p. 8.
Then (say we) to women and children.

3. It is not every place or order in the Church that gives power to receive
Ordinances, much less to dispense them, as children and women, Way cleared,
par. 2. page 19.

4. Ordination is a work of Rule, The way, p. 49.

Ordination and jurisdiction (both acts of Rule) pertain indifferently to all
the Presbysers. Ib. 49.

4. As for election and Ordination of Officers, etc. these things they (the
brethren) may do (if need be) without Officers: The way p. 45. 101.

4. Ordination is not an Act of supreme jurisdidiction, but of order rather: in
H. Survey part. 2.75.

5. The Key of authority or Rule is committed to the Elders of the Church, and
so the Act of Rule, is the proper Act of their Office, The Keys p. 20.

The people discerning and approving the justice of the censure, give consent
and obedience to the Will and Rule of Christ, The Keys page 15. 37. 41.

The brethren stand in an order, even an orderly subjection according to the
order of the Gospel, p. 11.

5. In case the Officers do err and commit offense, they shall be governed by
the whole body of the brethren. The Way, page 100.

The Church exercises several acts of authority over the Elders, The way p.
101.

The people have some stock of power and Authority in government of the Church,
the Keys, page 36.

They rule the Church by appointing their own Officers, Ib. p. 16.

6. Excommunication is one of the highest Acts of Rule, and therefore cannot be
performed but by some Rulers, the Keys p. 16.

The Church cannot excommunicate the whole presbytery, because they have not
received from Christ an office of Rule, without their Officers, Ibid.

No act of the peoples power does properly bind, unless the authority of the
Presbytery join with it, Ibid. 36.

6. If all their Officers were sound culpable, either in heretical doctrine,
or scandalous crime, the Church has lawful Authority to proceed to censure of
them all, The Way, p. 45.

In case of offense given by an Elder or whole Eldership together, the Church
has authority to require satisfaction, and if they give it not, to proceed to
censure, Ibid. p. 101.

6. Excommunication is not an act of power of office, but of judgment: nor an
act of highest rule, but of supreme judgment seated in the fraternity, Survey
par. 3. p. 45.

As a Church of brethren cannot proceed to any public censures without Elders:
so nor the Elders without concurrence of the people, etc. Pref. to the Keys,
page 4.

7. It was a sacrilegious breach of order, that Commissaries and Chancellors,
wanting the key of Order (no Ministers) have been invested with jurisdiction,
yea, and more then ministerial authority, above those Elders, who labor in the
word and doctrine, The Keys, p, 6.

7. There is a Key of power given to the Church (with the Elders) as to open a
door of entrance to the Ministers calling, so to shut the door of entrance
against them in some cases, etc. The Keys, page 9. yea, to censure all their
Elders (without Elders) the way p. 45. etc. as before.

8. We are far from allowing that sacrilegious usurpation of the Ministers
office, practiced in some places, that private Christians ordinarily take upon
them to preach the Gospel publicly, The Keys, page 6.

8. This is ordinarily practiced in old England, and allowed by the Independent
brethren. Yea, they being but in the notion of gifted brethren: no Ministers to
other Congregations, do it ordinarily themselves.

9. A particular Church of Saints, professing the faith (that is, members
without Officers) is the first subject of all the Church Offices, with all
their spiritual gifts and power, The Keys, p. 31.

9. As the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven be diverse, so are the subjects to whom
they are committed diverse, The Keys. p. 11.

The Apostle were the first subject of Apostolical power, Ib. p. 32.

A Synod is the first subject of that power whereby error is convinced and
condemned, etc. ib. p. 47.

9. The power of the Keys belongs firstly to a Congregation of Covenanting
believers. Surv. part. 1. page 219.

The power of the Keys is in the Church of believers, as in the first subject,
Ib. p. 195.

That con^^^^ is wide, to make one first subject of this power, and yet others
to share in this power, not by means of that; for this is to speak daggers and
contradictions. Ibid.

10. Pastor and flock are Relates: and so he is a Pastor to none but his own
Congregation. This is the common Tenet.

10. The members of any Church we admit to the Lords Table (if they bring
Letters Testimonial) and their children to Baptism, The Way, p. 68. The Keys
17.

10. Administration of Sacraments is a Ministerial act, and what authority
has a Pastor to do it, or they to receive it from him, to whom he is no
Pastor? M. H. Survey part. 2.64, 65.

Pastors and Teachers might pray and preach in other Churches beside their own,
but not administer Seals and censures, Bartlets model. p. 63.

11. We receive the Sacrament of the Lords supper (say the same of Baptism) as
a Seal of communion, not only with the Lord Jesus in our own Churches but in
all Churches of the Saints, The Keys, p. 17. See Def. of 9. pos. p. 133, 134.

11. Baptism, (and so the other Sacrament) seals up the external communion,
with a particular Church, etc. M. H. Survey par. 3. page 27. and he disputes
against it, is to, the Catholic Church.

12. It is an act of the Elders power and authority, to examine, whether
Officers or members, before they be received of the Church, The Keys, page 21.

12. As for admission, election, ordination of officers, admission, and
shutting out of members, these things the brethren may do without Officers, The
Way 45. 101.

13. Ordination is then complete, when the people have chosen him, and the
Presbytery has laid their hands on him, The Keys, p. 37.

13. But if the Church want a Presbytery, for want of Elders, they want a
warrant to repair to the Presbytery of another Church, to impose hands upon
their elect Elders, The Way, page 50.

14. Paul and Barnabas were ordained to that office (of Apostleship) by the
Imposition of hands of some Officers or members of the Church: The Way, p. 45.

14. In Act. 13.2, 3. There is no Ordination to office at all: for the Apostles
had their office before. M. H. Survey part. 2. p. 83.

This was not to put a new office upon them, but to confirm their sending to
the Gentiles, Ib. p. 60.

14. This was done in a particular Church, The Keys, p. 29.

The Officers of one Church did what as done in an ordinary way, Surv. par. 2.
83. Then it follows (by M. C. his doctrine) that the Apostles who were Officers
of all Churches, were ordained in a particular Church: or that Officers of one
Church may be ordained in another Church, which he said was unwarrantable, The
Way, p. 50.

15. What if the whole Presbytery offend? The readiest course is, to bring the
matter to a Synod. The Keys, p. 43.

15. There is a readier and nearer way: The brethren may censure them all, The
Way, p. 45. If the Congregation be found faithful and willing to remove an
offense by due censure, why should the offense be called up to more public
judicature? etc. Keys p. 42.

16. It belongs to the civil Magistrate to establish pure Religion, in
doctrine, worship, and government: partly by civil punishments upon the wilful
opposers and disturbers of the same. The Keys p. 50.

16. Yet the Brethren here call for or tolerate toleration of all opinions, and
deny the Magistrate power to punish any pretending conscience: Bartlets Model.
128.

16. See M. Bartl. Model p. 25. contra.

17. Visible Saints, though they be hypocrites inwardly, are the matter of a
visible Church, M. H. Sur. par. 1. p. 14, 15.

17. You say, Saints in outward profession is the matter of a Congregational
Church: We judge that real Saints uttering in discourse the breathings of the
holy Spirit, and experiences of conversion, witnessed in a stricter
conversation, to be the matter, D. Holmes Ep. to Way cleared, p. 4,

17. M. Bartlet speaks something this language, Can there ba ability for
spiritual and holy services, where the spirit is not yet given? Can there be
communion between light and darkness? can they edify one another in the
faith, that have not yet the work of faith wrought in them? Mod. p. 57. See
more p. 103.

18. The form of the visible Church is the Covenant, either explicit or
implicit; and the latter is sometimes fully sufficient: M. H. Sur. par. 1. page
47, 48. and others.

18. You say an implicit uniting, viz. a walking and communicating with you is
a sufficient evidencing of the Form: we say, their solemn confession of their
faith, and express open covenanting with the Lord, to walk with such a body of
Saints, in all the ways of Christ, etc. to be the manifest form, D. Holm. Ib.

18. It is not general profession will serve the turn, but there must be a
peculiar engagement, and appropriation to this or that particular body: M. H.
Sur. p. 63. yet he said, an implicit covenant was sufficient.

19. We crave leave of the Reverend Author of the Keys, to declare, that we
assent not to all expressions, or all and every assertion in it: As in these
particulars.

1. About prophesying by gifted brethren.

2. That the Assembly Act. 15. was a formal Synod.

3. That the Apostles acted in it as ordinary Elders. Praef. to the Keys, p. 6.

19. We do in this Epistle certify our assent unto the way of the Churches in
New England: saving that we do not yet fully close with some expressions, in
the book, before some of which (ten at least, belike there are more) we minded
to note a star in the Margent. This we could not but say and do (pace tanti
Authoris) or we could not assent. Ep. to the Way, p. 2. f.

19. Yet they are angry, we call for a fuller Declaration of themselves, Ep. to
the Way, p. 1. and Ep. to Way cleared, p. 2.

20. It is generally asserted by them, that one Church has not power to
censure another.

20. A Synod has power to determine to withdraw communion from them, if they
cannot heal them. The Keys, p. 25.

20. A sentence of Non-communion denounced against whole Churches. Apol. Nar.
p. 18, 19.

If a sentence denounced, it is a censure.

21. We say, Instituted privileges and ordinances do not immediately flow from
spiritual union and relation to Christ and his members, etc. Def. or 9.
portions. p. 76.

He must come at them in a right order, i. e. the party must be a member pf a
particular Congregation Surv. par. 2. p. 65.

21. Then it follows, that Hearing the Word preached, Singing of Psalms and
Baptism, belong not to any but to such as are members of a particular
Congregation.

And yet they say, ordinary hearing is no sign of a Churchmember. Sur. par. 1.
p. 18.

21. A person has his first right to a Sacrament (and so to other Ordinances)
because he has an interest in the Covenant of the Gospel, Survey par. 2. 65.




