THE Nature and Kinds OF SIMONY DISCUSSED.

Wherein it is Argued, Whether Letting an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to a
Lay-Surrogate, under a Yearly Pension reserved out of the Profits, be reducible
to that Head.

And a Sentence in a Cause depending about it near Six Years in the Court of
Arches, is Examined.

By J. CAWLEY, D. D. Archdeacon of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THAT this Cause has been carried on by the united Councels and Interests of
many of Doctors Commons, needs no proof; the whole management of it declares
it, and the Doctor, who is promoter of that Office, owns it; who has been true
to his Trust, and left nothing unattempted that might advantage his
Prosecution, and depress his Adversary; and this for Six Years together, by all
the Tricks and Quirks, and Hardships that ever were put upon any Man, since the
First erection of Doctors Commons, to this Day. And all to make a mere Mistake
a great Crime, and by Art and Chicanry to advance it, both in its Nature and
Punishment, ten fold higher than any Law of Christendom ever yet accounted it.

To effect this, there were frequent Cabals, and standing Counsel for the
Promoter to have recourse to, when his own Skill was deficient, as it has
often been in this Cause. Almost all the great Ministers, both in Church and
State, have been courted, and gained, to countenance the Proceedings; those
especially of the Popish Interest or Persuasion, who have advanced and
cherished the Prosecution in several Instances; As by procuring Patents from
the King, and Bishop of Lincoln, to the Promoter and his Assigns, by denying
Prohibitions, often prayed in the Courts at Westminster, upon suggestion that
the Cause was censured by virtue of Papal Canons, never devised, used, nor
received in this Nation; by hindering a review, and by contriving to exclude
the Constitutions in Lyndwood, which are the Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Nation, from being admitted to rule in this Case, (although there are Three
positive and express about this very Matter) because the Punishments they
inflict were not sharp enough to answer the ends of the Promoter, and his
Associates. Which was done, by some, to make a fair way for the Popish
Religion, by admitting First all their Canons; and by others, to introduce an
Arbitrary Power over the Fortunes and Reputations of all the Clergy. Some
perhaps were led thereinto by mere mistake in the Canons, cited and alleged by
the Promoter and his Counsel, which are such that they make all the Clergymen
in the World in one Instance or other Simonical, In Actor 8. 21.
as Marlerate observes, Secundum hanc rationem, vix in toto Papatu, reperietur
sacerdos, qui non sit Simoniacus. And he says, Papistae crimen Simoniae ad
otiosos suos proventus trahunt; according to the Papal Canons account of
Simony, not one in all the Popes Territories can be guiltless, -- and they make
it serve to bring in a revenue to their Sloth.

At the Informations in this Cause, any Word that could be found in the whole
Body of the Canon Law was urged, and improved against me, and allowed for as
good Law as if it had been at Rome it self; all the Riff-raff and Trumpery of
that Pedlar's-pack was exposed, as if Popery had been then fully Established
and Triumphant; and every clause of the Romish Laws had been as much our Own,
as is Magna Charta. And when I urged to be censured by Canons devised and made
in England, the motion was rejected as impertinent, although it is well known
such practice incurs a Praemunire; and it is an unaccountable thing, That any
should receive a Canon made at Lateran and Tours, and reject our own Provincial
Constitutions enacted in the Kingdom, and by all the Clergy of it. A thing, I
dare say, never before attempted in this Realm; at least in so high a degree as
in this Case.

These Canons then that are said to have censured this Fact for Simony are all
Foreign, Duck de usu and aut. jur. Jus Belgarum, etc. Edictum Phil. 2. Gerson.
Epistolae Ecclesiasticae.
and a part of those which Luther caused to be publicly burnt at Wittemberg;
and whereof whole Books are to this Day rejected in France and Germany, and all
received no where but in the Popes own Territories. Canons whereof one says,
Fo^sterus de jure can. quatenus recipiend. in Praefat.
Fateor multa supposititia, spurca, fictitia, hiulca, falsa, ex jure civili,
vel perperam intellecto* vel fraudulenter applicato, pro tyrannide sua
stabilienda, distorta, ludicra, ridicula, vesana, nec non, quod rei caput est,
impia, blasphema, nefaria, tyrannica, corruptelis repleta, sacrilega, crimen
majestatis contra eum, and perduellionis spirantia; Et quis trucis istius
lernae singula capita, vel fando narrare, vel pro dignitate tractare possit?
Popery its principles and pos. page 35.
The Bishop of Lincoln gives the Sense of all in his Treatise, 1679. The Canon
Law that Sink of Forgeries, Impiety and Disloyalty! For I scarce know any Book
wherein are more forged Writings, (under good Names sometimes) for bad
Purposes, or more impious Doctrines and Positions owned and authorized for Law;
-- or any Book which has more Seditious and Rebellious Principles of
Disloyalty. An the Bishop of Down and Connor calls it, Duct. dub. l. 3. c. 4.
reg. 16.
And intolerable heap; Such burdens on Men's Consciences* which they can never
reckon, never tell over, never know, never understand. -- And it represents the
Happiness of Christendom that they are not obliged to such Laws, -- whereof the
Cardinal of Cusa says, Infinite Numbers were rejected when newly made; Alex.
3. Gr. 9. Bon. 8. Clem. 5. John 22.
and were all enacted by the worst Popes, Persons Bloody and Ambitious,
Traitors to their Princes, and Butchers of Christendom.

And yet even the severest of these Canons do not Decree this Fact to be
Simony, nor place it under that Title, nor punish as Simony, or with more than
Monition for the first time, or at most Suspension. So Alexander the Third
commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury no otherwise to censure the Archdeacons
of Coventry, for some sorts of Simony, Extra de paenis c. licet.
being not against Divine but Humane Law only, but by admonishing them to
desist.

If therefore any shall wonder how this Fact came to be called Simony in the
Arches, and then the Sentence to be confirmed by the Delegates, I shall give a
short Answer. That it was never argued on my part in the Arches, because the
nullities in the Proceedings were so gross on the Promoters part, that my
Counsel advised me to rely on them in an Appeal, which I brought; which
nullities I must have waved if I had joined issue; so the Promoter had a
Sentence Secundum Petita, as he desired, and that was, That it was Simony in
hac Part. And for the Delegates when it is known, that half of them were of
the Commons, and so my Prosecutors, and the very Persons who put the Promoter
upon the project; and that either the Promoter or his Agents had privily, and
very subtly, insinuated to the Delegates, a most wicked, and most false and
scandalous Report, that I bought my Archdeaconry; telling many particulars and
circumstances of it, (every Tittle and Word whereof was a most horrible
untruth, and without any shadow or color, but maliciously and designedly
suggested, and devised by themselves to prejudice my Cause) all which was done
so clandestinely, that I never heard of it till Two Days before the Hearing. I
leave all Men to judge what Impressions these things might make, even on good
Men, and what effect they might have to make them mistake or bias them in
their judgment; which whether pronounced according to the Ecclesiastical Laws
or not, I now leave all that will to judge, after I have observed that they
differed in their Opinions about it; and one so dissatisfied that he went away,
and set down the Agreement between Dr. Howell and my self, upon which the whole
is grounded. Viz.

Feb. 5. 1675.
MEmorandum, That the Day and Year above Written Dr. Cawley, Archdeacon of
Lincoln, did Consent and Promise, to Make and Constitute Dr. Howell,
(Chancellor of the Diocese of Lincoln) his General Surrogate, for the
Officiality of the Archdeaconry of Lincoln. And the said Dr. Howell, does
promise to pay unto him 75 Pound per Annum out of the Dues and Profits of that
Officiality.

Accordingly I Sealed a Patent ( Durante Bene-placito) to avoid the
inconveniences of concurrency in the Jurisdiction, which he had with me as
Commissary to the Bishop; which would be attended with many Grievances, and was
complained of in the late Wars, by a Petition to the Parliament. Had I kept it
in my own Hands I had made much more of the Fees; but what I did was not for
Gain, but to quiet the Jurisdiction, and to prevent Quarrels, and Contests,
which ensue upon double Citations, and other Process, and are inevitable when
the Power is in two Hands. Ubi principale quaefitum non est Pecunia non est
Simonia, say^ Navar* etc.
And I only add Dr. Howell Executed the Office honestly and uncorruptly as ever
Man did; and for his Learning he has Witnesses enough through the Nation; and
both of us thought what we did was as justifiable as it was expedient; wherein
though we might be deceived, yet I believe, I am not, when I think it not
Simony, being countenanced by the following Authorities (besides Valentia, etc.
not made use of at present) but one of which ( Paulus Laymannus) was produced
at the Hearing; and by the Reasons herein urged, many whereof were then but
either cursorily mentioned or not insisted on for want of Time, or their
cogency not duly weighed; the Case also being abstruse and unusual, it having
never before, for ought appears, been heard in England.

J. Cawley.

The Case.
An Archdeacon granted to the Chancellor of the Diocese, a Layman, a
Surrogation of his Jurisdiction Durante Bene-placito, the Archdeacon reserving
to himself a Pension out of the Profit.
Qu. Whether it be Simony.
IN the Roman Church almost every thing is made Criminal, not because they
intend to punish it, but to gain by it: And the Spiritual Fisher draws all into
his Nets; not to separate the Bad from the Good, but equally to make
Merchandise of both.

Hence it is, That that Church abounds so much in Canons Decrees, in Decretals
and Extravagants, Bulls and other Constitutions; as if she would even prevent
Vice by so many Sanctions, that lie, as it were, in ambush to intercept it.

However, her Cunning is greater than her Care; and the frequent and continued
Violations of those Canons is so generally Connived at, that it makes good what
has been long observed; Where there are most Laws, is the least Reformation.

For in that place of Spiritual Traffic, no Man is Punished but he who cannot
Pay. And it is good Law, Qui non habeat in crumena, luet in corpore: And Soto
confesses it was so in his Time, De Jur. l 9. Art. 2. in fine.
Nunc vero temporis super his omnibus facile dispensatur, speaking of Simony
and the Punishments of it: A Dispensation is seldom denied, if you will come up
to the price; and so those Injunctions that else would be intolerable, are
become easy.

Upon which bottom it is accountable, why the Canons of that See make above an
Hundred things Simony, that were never taken so to be, or so Decreed in the
Church of England; nor is there Precept or Practice to bring them under that
odious Denomination with us; our Church being too sincere to lay Snares for her
Sons, designing by all she Enacts to reform, not rob Delinquents.

So many are the Branches of that Corrupt Tree of Simony amongst the Romanists,
Vide Redoanum per totum. de Simonia.
that were but half of them admitted to be so by us, I may safely affirm, That
there is no Clergy Man of what Rank or Degree soever, let him be never so
Conscientious and Wary, but has tasted that forbidden Fruit, in one Instance
or other. Forbid indeed, but not as the Fruit in Paradise was, by God, but by
the Serpentine Craft of the Factors for Rome.

Soto contends that his Church has such a Power, De Jur. lib. 9. Tit. Simonia.
page 759.
and he knew her pretensions as well as any, being of the Tridentine
Conventicle; Ecclesia potest quempiam actum in vitio Simoniae constituere, non
quod sit proprie Simonia, sed quia paena Simoniae vindicatur. And we find but
few of that Persuasion, who durst speak what they knew in this Matter, though
it would prove a great ease to many Men's Consciences who have thought
themselves Guilty of that Crime, and so became uneasy, perhaps all their
lives, (though they were Innocent, both in Fact and Intention) deeming that
Simony which was not so, and that they had infringed a Divine or Natural Law,
when the Crime was only against a Papal Humane invention, made only to ensnare
Men's Consciences, and so get Money to release them; calling that Simony which
was not so in its own Nature, but made so to enhance the Dispensation, or the
Pardon.

Of this Durandus, Durand. in Did. 4. 25. qu. n. 5.
however, complains, and says, That all that which the Church of Rome calls
Simony, if it be not against Divine or Natural Law, is not Simony, but
Disobedience; His Words are these, Si ergo sola est humana prohibitio, ne hoc
aut illud vendas, inobedientia erit non parere, non autem Simonia. And amongst
others gives this Reason, Simonia (...) est Spiritualis v^^^itio; Ecclesia
autem non potest rerum natural (...)faci^^^ Spirituale quod ^ea non e^a^ De
Jure and Just. Tit. de Sim.
And Petrus de Arrag^nid professes he is of the same Judgment, though he
dislikes Durandus his Arguments.

What they are I shall not now examine, but observe that our Church is of the
Opinion of that Great Schoolman and Canonist Durandus, Therefore few of those
things are censured as Simonaical by our Laws, either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, or are they counted and reckoned as such, by any Writers upon that
Subject since the Reformation, and our Delivery from the Foreign Jurisdiction
and Tyranny, in Discipline as well as Doctrine, of that Church, that makes
Traffic of her Censures, and Merchandise of Men's Souls.

This is enough to take away the odious Name and Imputation of Simony, from the
Fact we Discourse of; viz. That it is no breach of a Divine or Natural Law, but
of a Pontificial Constitution only, and malum prohibitum, not prohibitum quia
malum, as the Gloss distinguishes, and so not truly and properly Simony, Extra.
ne prael. vices. cap. Quoniam.
but called so (...)* and might have as well, or better have been called
Dissimulation, as the Canon of Tours does, or ambitus as the Romans did, or
Corruption as the Stat. of Ed. VI. forbiding the selling some Offices does, or
Heresy as the Canonists call it, or Covetousness as the Constitutions do,
Navar. Tract. 2. Vol. cap. 23. de 7 Pecc. Capital.
or Pride as Navarre seems to do treating of it largely under that Head; any of
those it is, as much as Simony, for which I have the Opinion of one of the best
Canonists and Civilians in England, among many others, who will have it Crimen
innominatum.

Accordingly the Church of England esteems it, who is so tender a Mother, that
though she is careful to correct Crimes, yet she is too merciful and just to
extend them, and is very far her self, whatever some of her mistaken Sons have
done, from giving a Name to any Crime that is more Execrable than its Nature.
This were to make a Man an Offender by a Word only, which is as bad as for one,
if not much worse, and is so contrary to the Rules and Equity of the Christian
Religion, that it transgresses the Common Rules and the Laws of Pagans and
Infidels. It is indeed the true practice of the Primitive Barbarity against
Christians, to cloth them with the Skins of Beasts, and then furiously set on
them, a sort of Men as greedy and voracious amongst us, as those Tigers and
Lions the Innocent were, under that disguise, exposed to amongst them: Only
with this difference, that one sort raged against Men's Lives, and these prey
upon their Goods. Thus in Rome any thing is made Heresy, that their Estates
may be Confiscate to the Papal Treasury, and will it not be as great Iniquity
to do the same thing, though in another Instance, and so subject our Fortunes
and Reputations to the Interest or Malice of Promoters, who hunt for the sake
of the Skin, though they pretend it is (in their own Style) ne crimina maneant
impunita? But I have some reason to hope, That these Papers may give some
Light, if not Conviction, in a Cause never but once Argued or Censured in this
Nation; and whereof the Voluminous Decisions of the Rota's throughout all
Christendom are wholly silent: Which I shall do in this Method,

1. Show that it is not Simony by the Pontificial Canons, to grant a
Surrogation of the Archidiaconal Jurisdiction to the Chancellor of that
Diocese, being a Layman ( Durante Bene-placito) the Archdeacon reserving a
Yearly Cens, or part out of the Profits to himself. 2. That it is not Simony by
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Injunctions, or Canons of the Church of
England. Nor, 3. By the Temporal Statutes or Laws of this Kingdom.
It Is now confessed by the Adversaries to this Case and their Council, That the
Decrees of the Canon Law have nothing to do with the Matter, they Enacting only
against buying outright Benefices, or buying Orders, and so buying a Jus
Spirituale, which is Simony; and wherein they make the formality of that Crime
to consist.

The Seeds materiae therefore is in the Decretals, Lib. 5. Tit. 4. Vices i.e.
Jurisdictiones. Gloss.
Ne praelati vices suas, vel Ecclesias, sub annuo censu concedant. Where there
are Two Canons, both made by Pope Alex. III. about this Matter, but especially
the last. The First was in the Council of Lateran; Praeterea quoniam quidam in
quibusdam partibus sub pretio statuuntur, qui Decani vocantur, and pro certa
pecuniae quantitate, Episcopalem Jurisdictionem excercent; praesenti decreto
statuimus, ut qui de caetero hoc praesumpserit, officio suo privetur, and
Episcopus conferendi hoc officium potestatem amittat.This Cannon, it seems, was
not full enough, for it named none but the Bishops; and being Penal, could not
regularly be extended to Archdeacons; therefore, under the same Papacy, the
Council of Tours decreed thus. Quoniam in quibusdam partibus Decani quidam vel
Archipresbyteri, ad agendas vices Episcoporum seu Archidiaconorum, and
terminandas causas Ecclesiasticas, sub annuo pretio statuuntur; quod ad
Sacerdotum gravamen, and subversionem judiciorum, non est dubium redundare, id
ulterius fieri prohibemus: Quod si quis de caetero fecerit, removeatur a clero,
Episcopus autem, qui hac justinuerit, and Ecclesiasticam Jurisdictionem sua
patitur dissimulatione perverti, districtione Canonica percellatur.

There is Simony, say the Canonists, and the Gloss on the Decrees, by a Divine
and Natural Law; and another kind by the Pontificial Laws only, and had not
been Simony unless those Laws had made it, or called it so; of which latter
kind the Casuists and Canonists make selling Ecclesiastical Offices, with the
Canonical Title by Institution, etc. Vendere Officia non est contra jus divinum
Soto de Jur. cap. De Sim. So Rodoan. de Sim. per totum.
And if selling Offices be not Malum in se, much less is letting it during
Pleasure, the Archdeacon keeping the Jus Canonicum and Spirituale to himself.

To make which good, I shall, in the first place, take notice of the Custom the
Bishops have in many Diocesses to let out their Jurisdictions (among other
things) to their Archdeacons, under a Yearly Pension, according to the Ancient
Usage of the Bishops of Lincoln, a Copy whereof, taken out of the Register, is
here inserted. Praestent Archidiaoni praedicto Episcopo juramentum obedientiae
and fidelitatis ratione exterioris Jurisdictionis, etc. In summis seq. sc.

Archid. Lincoln. 100. Marc. Northant. 54 l. 0 s. 0 d. Bucks. 20. 0. 0.
Leicester. 29. 6. 8. Bedford. 14. 0. 0. Huntingdon. 28. 0. 0. Stow. 20. 0. 0.

Extract. e novo Registro Compilato 1440.

Jurisdiction exterior then is an humane Institution, and the letting it out a
breach only of a pontificial, or other Ecclesiastical Canon, not any Divine
Law; And so the crime is become Ten fold, nay an Hundred fold less than else it
had been. For it is now indeed only a Sin of disobedience, and not Simony, as
Durandus has resolved. And upon this account it is, That the Popes have given
leave by their Bulls to the Bishops to let out their Jurisdictions for a yearly
Rent, it being in its own nature but a Transgression of their own Laws, which
they may dispense with at pleasure, which they neither could nor durst have
done, De Jur. Tit. de Sim. l. 9.
says Soto, had it been a breach of a Divine Law, and so malum in se.

It is not then real Simony, nor is called so, or so reputed by the Canon Law,
as the Case is now Stated, being to a Layman. When the Decretals of Alex. III.
before cited, forbid Letting and make it penal, They restrain it to Spiritual
Persons, Clerks in Orders, Deans or Archpriests; Neither was it feasible then
to let the Exercise of Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical to any other.

To let to a Layman, is like Ploughing with an Ox and Ass together, nay they
reckon it Sacriledg in them, and it is wholly impracticable, unless they had
particular, and express License from the Pope, or some Privilege, or Indult
from that See. De Sim. pars 2. c. 9 n. 4. Id. pars 1. c. 28. n. 8.
Nullum jus Spirituale cadit in Laicum, praeter patronatus and jus sepulturae,
says Redoanus. Et nulla consuetudo potest reddere laicos capaces Spiritualis
Jurisdictionis, says he again. Laymen cannot be capable of Spiritual
Jurisdiction, and no custom can make them so: And so Panormitan, though the
custom be immemorial. In cap. Mess^n de elect. not. 3. Lup. 9. 6. n. 2. Lyud.
So Joans ^up. in his Treatise of the Liberties of the Church. And so Lyndwood
in an entire constitution throughout, and it is the common Opinion, insomuch
that a Layman cannot prescribe for such Offices. Red. de Sim. pars 2. c. 36. n.
5.
And it is an Argument with the Canonists, That if an Ecclesiastical Office is
not Spiritual, it cannot be Simony to Let it for that very Reason. Abbas upon
this Title, Ne prael. vices, thus glosses, Quod Jurisdictio Episcopalis non
potest pretio vendi, est enim quid Spirituale; Not. 1.
And again, it cannot be sold, Maxim cum Jurisdictio^ sit Spiritualis; And
again, Ego hoc intelligo, quando Jurisdictio ista habit aliquid Spiritualitatis
annexum, alias judicaretur ut esset temporalis, and non Spirutualis, licet
talis Jurisdictio recipiatur ab Ecclesiastica persona: And in these Cases he
calls it, Turpe Lucrum, and not Simony, and so does Pope Inn. IV. In Ne prael.
vices.
the greatest Canonist of them all. And the Gloss speaks expressly the same
thing, Si aliquid exigat, Extra Ne prael. vices c. Quoniam v. precio.
Simoniam committere videtur, Maxim cum Jurisdictio sit Spiritualis; So that
if it be not Spiritual the Gloss grants it to be no Simony.

If then this Office be such as has been used to be exercised by Laymen, and
not by Clerks, it cannot be Simony to Let it, according to the Laws and
constitutions of this Kingdom, because there is nothing Spiritual that passes
in the Patent, the Lessee being incapable of a Spiritual Administration by the
Canon Law, and consequently it cannot be an offense against those Canons, which
are directed against Spiritual Persons only, as are the Deans and Archpriests
mentioned in the Canon of Tours.

And so tender is the Roman Church in this point, That they counted it throwing
sacred things to Dogs, to let a Layman have an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction:
Neither are Laics permitted so much as to dispute about Religion, under pain
of Excommunication, and being guilty of a Mortal Sin, Lib. 5. Tit. de haeret.
Consil. 29. n. and v. 8.
says Navar; Nay, though never so Learned; No not in Spain says he, where the
Clergy are not very well qualified to hold Arguments about it themselves.

According to this limitation the Interpreters proceed in their comments on the
Canon Law, making it Simony to sell Offices exercised by Clergymen, Fell. in
cap. consulere. de Sim. Tit. 3. n. 7.
as Felinus says, who was Auditor of the Rota. And the Gloss is his Authority,
Glos. q. 3. ad huc. v. qui claudi tostia.
Alij dicant quod tunc est Simonia emere aliquam Administrationem
Ecclesiasticam, cum aliquid Spirituale habet annexum, vel talis est quae per
clericum tantum consuevit exerceri, and ratione Officii; Quod magis credo.
Where the Gloss rejects the Opinions of those who would make Simony extend to
other Circumstances and Persons; and is a Key to open every Ward and difficulty
in our Question, and gives the most genuine and rational distinction between
buying Orders or Benefices, and buying some Ecclesiastical Offices. None but
Clerks can purchase the two first, and they have Benefices Ratione Officii,
quatenus Clerks, but a Layman who has no Relation to Orders, and has not so
much as a capacity of any thing that is Spiritual, unless perhaps an Advouson,
as Lyndwood says the English have by special privilege, or of Jus
sepulturae, may have and may exercise some Ecclesiastical Offices or
Administrations, upon which ground it is most rational that if one be, yet the
other should not be esteemed Simony.

Several other Glosses also afford us the same restrictions of Simony, to
convince that this is the true notion of it, when the Law speaks closely and
distinctly. Sed alii non ita late extendunt Simoniam, 1 Qu. 3. Salvator. v.
judicem.
inhaerentes consuetudini generali-Dicunt enim, Quod tunc tantum est Simonia in
empta Administratione, si talis est quae habeat aliquid Spiritualitatis sibi
annexum, alias non. If there were no other Gloss, but this alone, to clear the
present doubt, this were enough, considering of how great Authority the Glosses
are: It Is consuetudo generalis the common custom, says Gratian, to restrain
Simony in buying Offices to this point; If the Office cannot be exercised
without a Spiritual Power it is Simony, else not. Yet to clear it the Gloss adds
in the same place, Treating of the very Office of an Archdeacon, Gloss. v.
Subjecto vero.
amongst many other mentioned in that Canon called Salvator, Quidam autem
intelligant hoc totum de clericis, in quibus dicitur Simoniacum hujusmodi
Officia emere. It Is Simony for Clerks to buy these Ecclesiastical Offices; And
of Clerks only all that large and strict Canon against selling and buying them
is to be understood. By which we have clearly gained this point without any
possibility of reply or contradiction, That the Canon Law esteems it then only
Simony to buy Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, when they are sold not to Laymen
but Men in Orders.

Redoanus, Redoan. pars 3 c. 23. n. 16.
who alone about Simony, is thought fit to be inserted in the Tractatus
illustrium, (except two or three Leaves of Caraffa) thus concludes about the
Offices in the Canon Salvator, by Authority of the Gloss upon that Canon.
Having discust some wild and extravagant notions of Simony, in buying the
Offices there mentioned, speaks more closely thus, Ray, inhaerens consuetudini,
probabilius limitat, quando Administratio habet annexum aliquid
Spiritualitatis-vel consuevit exerceri per Clericum solum-unde says Redoanus
Ulde. addit quod Advocatus, Castaldus, (which are Ecclesiastical Offices) and
judex potest esse Taicus and consequenter nihil habens Spiritualitatis. V.
Simonia.
So S^^^^a Sylv* in the same Words and upon the same Authority. Zab. in
consule^e de Sim.
And Cardinal Zabarel makes an Objection about the Office, which is
Vicedominatus (not when it is taken for the Chancellor, as Panormitan does, in
Ne prael* vices.) That it is an Office merely Laycal, De quo non cadit Simonia,
(though it be Ecclesiastical) and his solution shows his Opinion, Quod dicit
textus de vicedomino, intellige cum habeat aliquid Spirituale annexum.

Gratian proves, 1 Qu. 3. Si quis.
That he who buys any thing that is Ecclesiastical, buys also together with it
the right of Exercising it, and so Pope Paschasius has decreed Neutrum
invenditum relinquit: And it is Simony if he gets it by the privilege of his
Orders, for then he is presumed to buy the very Orders also, since they and the
Benefice are concomitant, and he becomes capable of one by virtue, only, of the
other; Alio autem tempore, emere non est peccatum, says the Gloss. So that
these authorities make it evident, That the essence of Simony consists in this,
that something is purchased by the privilege of Orders, or to exercise his
Orders about: This then excludes those who buy such Offices as we treat of,
since they are Laymen. 4 Sent. Did. 25.
He who takes Money, says Aquinas, for the use of a Spiritual Power,
intelligeretur vendere usum Spiritualis gratiae, and therefore it is reputed
Simony. But where there is no Spiritual Power, and no Supernatural Grace made
of in the Exercise and Administration of the Purchase, the Crime is of another
Nature, and comes no nearer Simony than Advowtry.

Panormitan is of the same mind, In cap. extirpandae. qui vero de prael. Red.
c. 29. n. 19. pars. 1.
as Redounus Collects from him. Est Simonia, si potestas aut dignitas habeat in
se administrationem, and exercitium Spiritualis Jurisdictionis, and
Administrationis, quale est absolvere, confiteri sacerdoti and praelato, seu
judicts, a sententia excommunicationis and sim. If there be a truly Spiritual
Power conferred and used, then it is Simony, not else.

Cardinal de Turrecremata on Salvator, Pars. 2. 1 q. 3. Salvator.
the Canon so often mentioned, says, the common Opinion is, That if the
Offices mentioned there have a Spirituality annexed, it is Simony to sell them,
else not: And he adds so is the Custom, and so says the Archidiaconus; In 1 q.
hujus quaestionis.
and so the Cardinal says, that Canon is to be understood according to Inn. 4.
In Ne prael* vices.
who mentions several Ecclesiastical Offices which is not Simony to Purchase,
because they are Temporal.

And Victorian says, Vict. Relat. c. de Sim. n. 16.
He does find among the Ancients, as Altissiodorensis and Aquinas, that it is
Simony to sell such Offices, and cites the Archdeacon of Bononia, affirming so
also, If they have not the care of Souls annexed.

By all these Authorities and Reasons it is evident, That if the Jurisdiction
that is let out under a Yearly Payment, has not concomitant to it a Power of
Order or the Keys, which renders none capable of them but Clergymen, it is not
Simony. To all I shall add the Judgment of Two or Three of the Neotericks, that
it may appear that as this has been the old received Practice and Opinion of
the Canon Lawyers, it is so still. The First shall be,

Layman upon the same Canon Salvator (of which, Theol. Moralis l. 6. tr. 10. de
Sim. c. 6. n. 63.
I again mind the Reader, an Archdeacon is one there named) thus speaks; Though
the said Offices are purely Temporal, and their Acts and Objects Temporal,
therefore neither Divine nor Natural Law makes it Simony to sell them; because
they have a kind of remote habitude and reference to a Spiritual and
Supernatural end, and are instituted by virtue of a Power given by Christ to
his Church; therefore to keep a decorum in the Church, and to avoid
Inconveniences that would ensue if such Offices were sold, the Canons have
forbid it tanquam Simonia, as Caietan, Victoria, Panormitan, and Suarez
acknowledge, and he proceeds thus, Quamvis aliqui negant ejusmodi Officia, si
spiritualem functionem non habent; and in laitum etiam cadere possint, materiam
Simoniae esse. Videre est apud Innocentium c. I. Ne prael. and Sylo. v. Simonia
q. 13. dicto 7. then he subjoyns, Illud vero certum est, licet ipsa Officia,
secundum probabiliorem and sacris cannonibus conformiorem sententiam vendi non
possint, ipsas tamen Officiorum functiones, (the exact Case) utpote mere
temporales, sine ulla Simoniae suspicione, aestimari, and pro mercede, seu
pretio proprie dicto, vendi, vel potius locari posse, sicuti notavit Suarez.
Where is as clear a resolution as any Words can contain, that it is not Simony,
nor any color of Simony, to let out a Surrogation reserving part of the
Profits, even though the Patentee were a Clergyman.

Martin Bona^ina, Tract. de Sim. qu. 3.
Doctor of both Laws, and Count of the Empire, 1 Qu. 3.
a great Canonist and Casuist, rekons-up the species of Simony, and says, That
the Decrees in the Canon Si quis, prohibiting selling Ecclesiastical Offices,
intends only Spiritual: And proceeds to enquire whether selling the Functiones,
i. e. a Surrogation or Deputation of an Ecclesiastical Judge, mentioned with
many others, in the Canon Salvator, 1 Qu. 3. Salvator.
be any sort of Simony, at least malum prohibitum, and so Ecclesiastical
Simony, but concludes negatively; Quia sunt opera mere corporalia, and pretio
aestimabilia, nec jure Ecclesiastico vendi prohibentur, quanquam ipsa Officia
vendi prohibeantur. And in Qu. 17. He enquires whether it be Simony, to give
Money for Acts of exterior Jurisdiction, and denies it; because he who buys it
Exercises no Spiritual Jurisdiction. Ut sic, sed quatenus continet Politicam,
and Temporalem.

Lessius says, Inst. Moral. pars. 3. l. 12. c. 14. in fine.
Officia vero (...) per laicos exert^^o solunt vendere simoniacum non est,
quanquam turpe esse videatur tale lucrim, praeser^im si Officio coniuncta sit
Jurisdictio; and he there speaks of the Offices in the Canon Salvator, so
frequently here cited.

Here is then the Case, A Jurisdiction granted to all Layman, who could not
exercise the Spiritual part of it, if any such had been because not in Orders,
and so there could be no Simony in the Lessor or Lessee, because the
Jurisdiction was wholly Temporal, the Object Temporal, the Subject Temporal
also.

Wherein that I be more clear and instructive I shall consider, what kind of
Power this is that is invested in a Layman by such a Patent.

According to Bellarmine, Ecclesiastical Power is either of Order or
Jurisdiction, That of Order is to persuade or incite the willing, by the word
and Sacraments, instructions and persuasions and is Sacerdotal, the same which
all Priests have.

The other is a Power of Jurisdiction, which though Bellarmine and others
divide into Internal and External, I see no ground for the Dichotomy, and can
find nothing Internal but what belongs to Order only, which is jure divino;
only some part of this Power of Jurisdiction is reserved to Bishops only, and
the rest communicable others, by them or the Law.

If any will be more critical, and find out some Acts of Internal Power besides
that of Order, yet that used in Christian Courts and consistories, wherein Men
are compelled to their Duties by Process and censures, Andrews, Bilson,
Burhill, Tompson, Carlton, Sanderson, etc.
must be merely External, and is so acknowledged to be by most Writers, and
fully evinced by our own Writers about the Kings Supremacy against Bellarmine
and Becanus etc. Of this sort is the Power delegated by an Archdeacon to a
Layman, as Dr. Cosens recounts it. Tab. 2.
The Archdeacons Office is to take care the Churches and their utensils be
repaired, and to reform excesses in the Clergy, to acquaint the ordinary with
what is amiss, and induct Clerks to Benefices; and for Jurisdiction it is
according to usage. To keep Courts of Instance and Office, and grant Wills and
Administrations. So he.

In all which there is no Spiritual Act included; And nothing to be done that
requires the use of the Keys, or flows from the Power of Order. But all these
mentioned, the Church Wardens, or the promoters, or the Court Leet, or a Layman
may exercise as well as the Clergy, if they are legally deputed to it, nay, a
Woman as Gerson speaks, and the Abbesses and Prioresses do at this Day.

As for Visitations, The Surrogate only sends to the Clergy to meet at such a
place where presentiments are taken, and excesses enquired after, which are
merely Temporal Acts, though the Persons enquired of be some of them Spiritual.
Therefore when Redoanus and any other Canonists make Visitations (in their
large sense and acceptance or abuse rather of the word) Spiritual, it is
because the Archdeacon is bound to Preach and give Spiritual Instructions to
his Clergy* and others, as the pontificial forms for Visitations, of which
there are very many extant, do enjoin, from which part a Layman is excluded.

As for Excommunication and Absolution, it is well known that Laymen do not use
them but leave them to the Clergy, and though they are decreed by one, they are
pronounced and made valid by the other. And how great complaints there have
been in this Nation of the contrary usage is well known, and that the Canons of
40, which show the sense of the Church though they were not Confirmed, utterly
debar Laymen from any such Power. Neither can I hear that at this present any
Layman throughout England takes upon him to Excommunicate without one in
Orders to assist him; And I am sure if he cannot bind, he cannot loose. For
ejus est solvere cujus est ligare.

Those censures indeed are Spiritual when used in foro interno, In margarita
Bald. Loco Repert. Innoc. 4. Super Decretal. Excommunicare and suspendere est
jurisdictionis, non autem est de cura animarum. Ita notat Host. in c. dudum de
elect. Lib. 5. c. 7. de Romans pontif. Page 41. 48. Pars 2. c. 4. De supr. pot.
Laica. fol. 39. Lib. 2. c. 1. Cap. 2. p. 12.
binding and loosing the Penitent, upon Confession and Repentance, and so are
part of the Sacerdotal Power, persuasive not compulsive; But when exercised in
foro contentioso they are granted by Bellarmine himself, to be Temporal and
coactive, and it is amply proved by Bishop Carlton in his Book of Jurisdiction,
and by Bishop Andrews in his Tortura Torti; Potestas Excommunicationis pertinet
ad Jurisdictionem fori exterioris. Marsilius Patavinus in his Defensor Pacis
who Writ 1324, is positively for it; Ab Officio principatus, sive contentiosae
Jurisdictionis, regiminis, seu coactivi judicii cujuslibet in hoc saeculo,
Christus seipsum, and Apostolos exclusit, and excludere voluit. Which Jacobus
de Almain approves, reciting this passage of Marsilius.

The Archbishop of Spalato is express Potestatem Ecclesiae propriam totam esse
mere Spiritualem. And says, That St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, Bernard and
Ferus, agree in this, Ab Ecclesiastico Rectore potestatem omnem imperatoriam,
coactivam, executivam auferunt. Nor can it be otherwise, for if it were jure
divino, it must rest in themselves, to whom it was imparted, and could not be
delegated and invested on others, as Jurisdictions daily are.

I shall trouble the Reader with but Two or Three Authorities more, and one is
Franciscus de plateae, among the Tractatus illustrium, De inter dicto cap. 2.
n. 5.
Nota tamen secundum Gul. quod cum paenae non sint extendendae, and ille qui
Simoniace suscipit aliquem ordinem sit suspensus quoad ea quae sunt ordinis non
tamen est suspensus quoad ea quae sunt jurisdictionis; unde si alias habeat
Jurisdictionem, and tune habet, and potest suspendere, Excommunicare, and ab
Excommunicatione absolvere, and hujusmodi. Covaracias says the same, and so
does Navarrus. The highest sort of Simony is buying Orders, and a Clerk is ipso
facto suspended for it, yet however, though he be suspended from exercising or
using his Orders, he shall, and may exercise Jurisdiction, if he has any. And
it is most certain, and the communis opinio, that no Simony soever shall hinder
the convict from exercising his Jurisdiction, as visiting, censuring,
reforming, correcting canonically, or keeping Courts, because the Jurisdiction
is not by virtue of his Orders, nor is it used by virtue of them, being not a
Divine but Humane Institution, therefore executing the power of Jurisdiction
shall never make him irregular, as Navar and Covaracias and Infinite besides of
the Canonists Observe. Which demonstrates that their Opinion is, that
Jurisdiction is not Spiritual, and from any supernatural Power; And so
transaction about it cannot be Simoniacal. This is the plain consequence and
deduction from that passage of Platea, etc. Which yet they seldom own in
express terms.

For this is the Palladium of the Romish Church, to make all they can
Spiritual, In suo p. 461.
at least call it so. Of this Grotius complained in his Oration at Amsterdam,
Restituta est imperii Romani dignitas sub alio titulo, nempe Hierarchiae and
potestatis Spiritualis. She contends to make every Cause Spiritual, that so she
may retain it, and upon that pretense stamps a Nolimetangere upon all Matters
that have any relation objective, or Subjective to Religion. This is her Diana,
and by this Fraud she gets her Livelihood, and has enlarged her Phylacteries,
and made it Sacrilege for Temporal Princes to incroach upon her; for all she
touches is Holy, and is not to be devoured by Dogs. By this she has erected a
Monarchy, and in the midst of Christian Kingdoms maintains a Power, greater
then she leaves to the Princes themselves; and all by confounding the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, Temporal and Spiritual, and engrossing both
Powers to themselves, of this Father Paul gives us a full and excellent
account. Constantine made a Decree, Hist. of Council of Trent. l. 4.
that if either party litigant (in Temporal Causes) demanded the Episcopal
Judgment, the Cause should be immediately remitted him. Here the Tribunal of
the Bishops began to be a common pleading place, having execution done by the
Ministry of the Magistrate, and to gain the Name of Episcopal Jurisdiction,
Episcopal Audience, and such like. The Emperor Valens did enlarge it, who 365.
gave the Bishops the care over all the Prizes of vendible things. -- St.
Augustine complained how troublesome it was to him. -- Arcadius and Honorius
restrained their Jurisdiction to Causes of Religion. -- Justinian assigned them
the Causes of Religion, Ecclesiastical faults of the Clergy, and diverse
voluntary Jurisdictions also over the Laity. -- The Bishops became Counselors
to the Princes in the Western Empire; and, by the mixture of Spiritual and
Temporal Charges, caused their Jurisdictions to increase exceedingly. He shows
largely how they increased their Power over the Clergy and Laity, pretending
the Cause was Ecclesiastical or mixed, and so leaving nothing to the Secular,
appropriated all to themselves; -- making all devolve to themselves, if the
Magistrate will not, or neglect to do justice. This might be tolerable -- but
not staying here, they added, that neither the Magistrate, nor the Prince
himself, can meddle in any of these Causes, which the Clergy had appropriated,
because Spiritual; and of Spiritual things the Laics are incapable -- Though
adopted by the Heavenly Father, called Sons of God, Brothers of Christ,
partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven, made worthy of Divine Grace, of Baptism,
and the Communion of the Flesh of Christ. What other Spiritual things are there
besides these? -- It Is false that causes appropriated to the Episcopal
Judicature, are Spiritual. For all are either delicts or contracts, which
considering the qualities, given by the Holy Scripture to Spiritual things, are
as far from being such, an Earth is from Heaven.

Upon the Spiritual Power given by Christ to the Church to bind and loose, and
upon the Institution of St. Paul to compose contentions between Christians,
without going to the Tribunal of Infidels, in much time, and by many degrees a
temporal Tribunal has been built, more remarkable than ever was any in the
World, and in the midst of every civil Government, another Instituted, not
depending on the public; which is such a kind of Commonwealth, as not one, of
as many as have Written of Governments, would have imagined could subsist, etc.
Thus far that Incomparable Historian Carolus Molinaeus in his Commentary upon
the Edict of Hen. Page 158.
2. against the Breves and abuses of the Court of Rome, says, all Divines
exclaim against the Canonists for confounding Carnal and Temporal with
Spiritual, and by a pretense of dependency and connection making them all one,
and cites Gerson, complaining how much the Church has suffered by it, more
than can be declared. For when ye take off the vizor and speak properly,
Spiritual things are Gods Grace, his Word and the virtue of it, and the
Sacraments are Spiritual, not essentially, but causally or rather
instrumentally: So that Tithes and Church Revenues are Temporal, not Spiritual,
but devoted to Spiritual Administrations. Lib. 2 de Sacramentis.
And Hugo de Sto Victore 300 Years before has said as much.

However so Zealous are the panders of Rome, to maintain her Grandeur so falsely
gotten, that many of their Canonists make the very Office of Emperor, King, --
Prefect of a City, and all Civil Magistrates to have a Spiritual Power, and it
shall be Simony to give Money for them, or any depending on them. In ne prael.
vices.
Quia omnis potestas est a Deo says Hostiensis. Nor can a Man buy so much as
the Clerk of the Markets-place without that imputation. And Gratian makes it
Simony to give money for the Porters place in a Church and proves it from Mal.
1. 10. Who is there even among ye that would shut the Doors for naught? or the
Sutlers or Butlers, Qu. 3. Sed ad huc.
and the Gloss adds, the Bell-ringer or any other Office, ( cujuscunque
alterius rei) let us suppose the Candle lighter and the Chimney Sweeper, and
the Trencher Scraper they are all Spiritual, in the same sense we commonly call
a Tithe Pig a Spiritual Pig, though he be the worst of the whole litter, thus
have these Monks played with Holy things, and exposed them to derision, and
taken off the esteem and reverence all Mankind are ready to pay to things truly
and really Spiritual, by obtruding such false lists of Spirituals on the World,
to keep up an usurped Jurisdiction over things Temporal.

If we have gained this point, That the exterior Jurisdiction of an Archdeacon
is not Spiritual, we may conclude it not Simony to let it out, reserving part
of the Profits. Against which nothing will lie, except the common definition of
Simony; Studiosa voluntas emendi vel vendendi Spiritualia, vel Spiritualibus
annexa. To which a short Reply will serve, 22 Qu. 100. Art. 4.
and that is Aquinas his, and Caietans upon him, who show, that this definition
fails when the Annexa Spiritualibus are not joined to the Spiritual, as that
they must necessarily be bought and sold together. Anciently the Canons say,
16. Q. 7. Decerminus. l. 8. c. 13. p. 5.
Ordination and Institution were the same; as Petrus de Marea, Archbishop of
Paris, affirms in his Concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii, and makes that the
ground of the Eleventh Canon of the Council of Chalcedon. His words are these,
Cum in illa aetate ordinatio sive (...), complecteretur electionem personae,
atque illius consecrationem per impositionem manuum, ipsanque in Ecclesia certa
institutionem. Here then, as he deduces, is a necessary connection, and the
Spiritual cannot be separated from the Temporal; quare omnia comprehendebantur
damnatione illa quae gratiam commercio exponebat. The Benefice and Orders went
together, and he who paid for one was a Purchaser of the other also. Of such
things the Canonists say, they are annexa concomitanter, He who buys one cannot
leave the other unbought, and it is real Simony. But when things are annexed to
a Spiritual, only Antecedently or Consequently, so as they may be separate and
one bought without the other, many times it is not Simony to give Money for
them: Otherwise neither Tithes could be Let, nor Glebe, nor Lands, nor Houses,
nor the Obventions of a Jurisdiction, nor could broken Consecrated Vessels be
sold, nor Advousons, nor Burying places. Therefore also Aquinas says, Things
may be annexed to Spirituals Two ways, either as depending on Spirituals, as a
Benefice which none can have but a Clerk, and such cannot be sold.

Secondly, As they are appointed, and set a part to Spiritual Uses, and such
may be sold: Which strengthens, as well as gives light, to this whole Tract; If
a Jurisdiction were so annexed to any Spiritual Office, that it could not be
separated from it, but that Supernatural, Spiritual Power, is requisite to the
exercise of it, then it would be Simony, because it must be supposed the Power
is bought also, (which is true Simony) but is nothing of, or to the present
Case; where the Jurisdiction that is let is Temporal, used by a Temporal
Person, and about Temporal Objects. And accordingly the Canons of Lateran and
Tours, prohibiting the letting out Jurisdictions of Bishops, or Archdeacons
speak of letting to Spiritual Persons, Deans and Archpresbyters, but of letting
to Laymen there is not any Prohibition in the Canon Law. And those Canons being
Penal, the more Penal they are, Lynd. de vita and hon. cler. c. exterior v.
pendulis.
the more they are to be restrained, and no extension shall be allowed to them
for Punishment, but for Favor only, as all know that know any thing either of
the Canon, or the Civil Law. Lyndwood is express, that Statutum paenale non
excedit limitationem in eo positam. And so Navar, Lib. 3. de Praeb. Consil. 13.
n. 3 and 4. Extra in 6. de temp. ordin. c. 1. v. Italiae. M. 6. de paenis v.
paenis. Lynd. de locat. and conduct. c. ut vere v. certis personis.
Paenae non sunt extendendae ad alium casum ex similitudine rationis, imo nec
ex identitate rationis omnimoda. So says Andraeas, in the Gloss, If the Laws
be Paenal suum scriptum casum non excedit. And in Paenis non arguimus ad
similia, quia paenae non excedunt proprium casum, says the Gloss on one of the
Rules of the Laws. And once more I shall cite Lyndwood for this, and so have
done, Regulare est quod Statutum maxim paenale loquens de persona vera, non
extenditur ad personam representatam. The Persons spoken of in the Canons,
being Deans and Archpresbyters; If a Jurisdiction be not let to one of them, by
all these Authorities the Lessor cannot be within the Purview of it; but
infinitely stronger is it, that these mentioned being all Clerks in Orders,
Laymen out of Orders shall not be included, but they who let to them absolved.

For, though it be Felony to steal a Horse, yet the same Statute cannot extend
to stealing a Mule, much less an Ass, though all are Beasts of Burden, and the
first a part of him; though the Immorality and Crime in stealing either of them
be not at all different.

To all which I shall add one thing more, That this Crime, whatever it is, yet
is not under the title of Simony in the Canon Law, but under the title
immediately following, which shows what Notion the Compilers of the Canon Law
had of it, and that they took it not to be Simony, though it had been exercised
by a Clerk, at least not such a Simony as the former title treated of, in the
rigorous and strict signification of the Word, but in a large extensive,
abusive signification only, as they may call any Crime they please by that
Name, as Soto before cited to that purpose, has observed; though indeed the
Canons never call this so, in any sense whatesoever, but clearly intend it for
another sort of Crime, by placing it under another sort of Head, which I may
very rationally infer, considering the accuracy and exactness, used by the
Compilers, in ranging every thing under its proper Head, by that showing to us
the true nature, and formal difference of every thing there treated of. And
this is so true and material, that Pope Greg. XIII. in his Breve before the
Body of the Canon Law, says Quae perperam posita erant, suis locis restituta,
etc. every thing is now restored to its proper place, to which place this Crime
is not restored, if it be Simony, which must argue either Neglect, or
Unskilfulness in the Compilers, Crimes not to be objected where Popes, and the
best Canonist in the World are so far concerned. And, indeed, who can believe
that in Forty six Chapters, which make up the Title Simony in the Decretals,
this should not have been inserted, if it had belonged to that Classis, rather
than have crept in under the next Title of Ne prael. vices, where there are in
all but Four Chapters; and that which is treated of in the last, no Man ever
called Simony; viz. Letting the Tithes to Farm for Seven Years, which yet must
be Simony, if the Gloss says true, which would make it a kind, or a sort of
Simony, something like it, though not it. Altera species Simoniae, That is
something the Canonists call so, though it be not so. For as the Church of Rome
Usurps a Power to make every thing Lawful, if she please, by her Dispensing
Power, which began at Rome, as Matthew. Paris says, though never so flagitious;
so does she, on the contrary, pretend the same Power to brand every Action with
an infamous Name, though it be in it self never so Innocent and Indifferent.

In this Case, It is Lawful say her Canonists for a Bishops, or an Archdeacons
Chancellor or Official to put in a Surrogate, it may be a Curate, or a
Vicar-choral, never Educated to the Law, and give him 10 lb a Year, or but a
Groat for an Oath, and no other Salary, as many have done who have these
Jurisdictions, and the Chancellors and Officials take all the rest; allowing
not a full Scandalous Tenth of the Profits to the Surrogate. But it shall not
be Lawful for an Archdeacon to make the Chancellor of the Diocese, or any other
well Qualified Learned Man, his Surrogate, the Archdeacon reserving to himself,
perhaps, not near half of the Profits, and so allowing the Surrogate a
plentiful, and honorable Sallary. Now let any Man Judge which of these two will
be tempted to Oppression and Extortion, he that executes the Office for 10 lb a
Year, or he who has 80 or an 100 lb. But still there is a Quirk and Nicety in
the Law, which improved by the Chicanry of the Practisers, and countenanced,
and even promoted by a whole Community of the profession, can make Black White,
and White Black, and find error where there is no fault, and make that Criminal
which most furthered the administration of Justice; whereas their own
scandalous, and scanty, both Salaries and Surrogates, shall never be called
into question. This is the true Case I now treat of; and it is, and has been
confessed at the hearing of this Cause, by the most violent in it, That there
is really, and indeed no difference at all between the Archdeacons giving a
Sallary to a Surrogate, or his reserving part to himself, only in one case the
Archdeacon receives the Profits and divides them; and in the other case the
Surrogate does it. The thing is all one, and comes to all one, and either way
the Archdeacon may have what he will himself, and let his Surrogate have what
part he assigns him. The Surrogate in either case may be tempted to Extortion
of Fees, because he has not the whole, yet that is the only reason in the
Canons why this we write of is forbid, and must be a very weak one, since they
permit what is as pernicious, or more than what they prohibit.

2. The Second head is, That it is not Simony by the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, Injunctions, or Canons of the Church of England.

A great part of which were Compiled, and Glossed on by Lyndwood, who follows
the Order of the Pontifical Decretals, making in all Five Books; in the the
last whereof is a Title of the same Name, and in the same place as in the
Decretals, called Ne praelati vices, wherein this Crime is treated of. So that
the Title of Simony, which just preceds this, has no more to do with it than
any other Title has; but in Lyndwood, as before in the Decretals, it is under
another Title, distinct from that of Simony, which strongly argues it to be a
distinct Crime.

Long before Lyndwood, Matt. Paris. and Spelman 2 vol. Council. in initio.
in the Reign of Hen. the First, a Council was held under Archbishop Anselm,
whose Second Canon is against Simony, and the Third is against letting
Jurisdictions to Farm, but that Canon calls it by no such Name as Simony, no
more than ranks it under that head.

In the Abortive Canons of Edw. the Sixth, there is not a Word about it, though
very much about Chancellors, etc. and their Jurisdictions.

The Canons of King James 1603, Can. 40.
injoyns an Oath against Simony at Institution to Benefices, and the Canon is
under the general head, Entitled, Ministers their Ordination, Function and
Charge. The whole Canon concerns Benefices which require a Canonical Title and
Institution, which is the very Definition of a Benefice in the Regulae juris,
Reg. juris in 6.
Beneficium Ecclesiasticum licite acquiri non potest sine institutione Canonica.

And Lyndwood explains what a Benefice is, De vita and hon. cler. c. hoc sacro
v. beneficiis.
Intelligo contineri appellatione Beneficii, Dignitates, personales praebendas,
and Ecclesias omnes, and alia quaecunque cum cura and sine cura, quae cum
titulo habentur, and Iustitutione Canonica. Neither is the Oath against Simony,
recittd in that 40 Canon, Administered by any, who understands his Duty, to
Officials or Commissaries, or any who act by Deputation. But there is another
enjoined, in Can. 127, 128, for these Officers, and indeed for all Judges
Ecclesiastical and their Surrogates; and consists of but Two Canons. 1. The
Quality and Oath of Judges. 2. The Quality of Surrogates. In the First, whereof
they are enjoined to take the Oath of Supremacy, and subscribe the 39 Articles,
and of dealing Justly and Uprightly in their Offices; all which the Surrogates
are equally obliged to by Can. 128. And this is all they are required to take:
So that if any other Oath be Administered to them, they may refuse it, and if
they do take any, it is voluntary, and they do more than is necessary, and the
imposer incurs a Praemunire, excercising Jurisdiction without Lawful Authority.

In the Repertorium, which Badius Ascensus made to Lyndwood, many sorts of
Simony are recounted, and even all that Badius could collect out of the
Constitutions, but this is not there counted for one, nor in his Tabul a
Rubricarum.

What the Church of England thought of it, we may judge by the Canons 1640,
which declare her sense, though the Canons are not genuine and binding, It Is
decreed in Can. 11. That no reward shall be taken for any Chancellors,
Commissaries, or Officials place, under the heaviest censures of the Church:
And that is Excommunition; but if it be true and real Simony, against Divine or
Natural Law, it were Deprivation. Now although the Offense mentioned in that
Canon be of a higher Nature, and far more odious than letting out a
Jurisdiction to Farm, or reserving part of the Profit to the Lessor, yet it is
not Deprivation, for Deprivation is no censure at all, and so cannot be meant
in that Canon. For all the Canonists agree, and it is communis opinio, Extra de
verb. sign. c. quaerenti. Videsis Saynum de censuris.
founded on the Decretal of Inn. III. That these things only and no more are
called censures, viz. Interdict, Excommunication and Suspension. Quaerenti quid
per censuram Ecclesiasticam debeat intelligi, Resp. Quod per eam, non solum
Interdicti, sed susp. and Excom. sententia valet intelligi.

Dr. Cosens (to whom for his Skill in the Canon Laws, every Man to this Day
pays a veneration, and who was Dean of the Arches) in his Tables, Tab. 7.
reckons no Simony but In Ordine sive gradu, and Beneficio, in Orders and
Benefice; thereby excluding this Fact. Burton, Melford, Hughs, Degg, Godolphin.
Nor is there any English Author extant, though some have writ large Treatises
of his Subject, and others Chapters of it, who ever mention this as Simony,
which both they and Dr. Cosens must needs have taken notice of, had they
esteemed it any species of it in the account of this Church.

It is also evident by the Punishments inflicted on it by the Constitutions of
our Church to be found in Lyndwood's Collections, that it is not judged Simony.
Lynd. Ne prael. vices lib. 5.
For in the Provincial Constitution of Archbishop Langton, the Punishment is
Suspension only, ab Officio, for a Year.

In the Legantine Constitution of Otho there is no Penalty annexed, Cap.
Ecclesias.
and so the Punishment can be but Admonition for the first time.

In the Constitution of Cardinal Othobone, Cap. Indign.
the punishment is to pay a third part of what the Lessor shall have received,
to the Fabric of the Metropolitical Church of Canterbury. Whereas if it were
Simony, it is notorious that the whole ought to be refunded, by all the Canons
of Christendom: Which I shall not trouble my self to prove, since no Canonist
denies it, for he who purchases Simonically buys nothing, he has no Title to
the profits, and therefore is never to be dispensed with, till he has restored
the whole. These Arguments I do but propound, because I would be brief, but if
any Man of Judgment will consider them, he will find them solid, and the
weakest of them of great weight to determine this Case. For if all the Clergy
of England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, and the Cardinal Legate, who presided
in the last Synod, and who was himself also afterward Pope, understood as much
as the least Canonist in Doctors Commons pretends to, they must have imposed
another sort of punishment upon this crime, if it had been Simony, and not have
let it escaped with so slight a censure, as only paying to the Cathedrial of
Canterbury, a third part of what was received. I shall only add, That the
Provincial Constitution says, it was a frequent thing in those Days to let
Jurisdictions to Farm, and so frequent that the Cardinal and Synod were afraid
to make Canons against it, least they should ensnare Men's Consciences, yet in
all the Realm is not to be found any sentence ever calling it Simony, or
punishing it as such. And if they had reputed it Simony, there needed no new
Decrees about it to punish it, for the Canon Laws might have done that, without
the help of these new Constitutions, which therefore we may conclude counted it
another crime, because they give it another punishment. It is therefore not
material what an interested partial promoter, or his abetters would make of it,
since it is so clearly resolved in that, and other Constitutions, in most
August and venerable Councels of all the Prelates of three Kingdoms, and by
Legatime Authority, not to be Simony, as appears by the Sanctions of their
Canons.

3. It is not Simony by the Statutes of this Realm. There is only one Statute
that takes any notice of letting to Farm Jurisdictions; And one more that gives
account what the Temporal Laws of this Land think to be Simony; The first
Statute is, that of 5, 6 Ed. 6. 16. Entitled, The penalty for buying and
selling some sort of Offices. And this is made for the avoiding corruption, as
the first Clause speaks. That letting out a Jurisdiction is comprehended in the
Statute is agreed by the Judges, but the Statute calls the fact Corruption,
not Simony.

The other is 31 Eliz. 6. Against taking reward for Election of Scholars, etc.
and for presentation of Benefices. By which Title I may Collect, this is not
included that I Treat about; And indeed no Man ever said it was, therefore I
shall not spend time about it. For the Statute concerns only buying Orders and
Benefices, and corrupt resignations.

And indeed so far are the Temporal Laws of the Realm, from making this fact to
be Simony, that whatever Name had been given it by the Pontificial Canons, or
by those of the Church of England, yet the Laws of the Land have Absolved it,
and acquitted it from being that sort of crime.

I shall at present avoid the Question, whether any thing can be Simony by the
Laws of this Land, that is not Declared so in that Statute of Queen Eliz. which
is made for the avoiding Simony and corruption, as the fourth Paragraph
Declares; Although I know, it is the Opinion of most of the Learned Lawyers, who
are positive in it, and maintain it by very strong Arguments, Reasons, and
Authority. But it is a matter too long to be discust here, and out of my
Province; and more than is necessary to my Subject in Hand.

It shall be sufficient to show, that whatsoever the Canons about this matter
had been before the Statutes of H. 8. and Reformation of Religion that soon
followed, and the Statutes thereupon, the nature of the crime, and the whole
current of the Laws about it are altered: So that had this Office been given to
a Clerk, and not to a Layman, yet, as the Laws of England now are, it could not
have been Simony, although the Lessee had exercised by virtue of his
Deputation, all those Functions, and that Jurisdiction which the Ancient Canons
called Spiritual.

For by many Statues made in the Reigns of H. 8. Ed. 6. and the Queen, those
Powers and Jurisdictions are made Temporal, and so no longer of that nature,
which could render the Contract about them liable to the imputation of Simony;
which cannot be committed but when that which is sold is Spiritual.

The 26 H. 8. 1. Gives the Kings of this Realm full Power and Authority, to
Visit, Redress, Repress, Reform, Order, Correct, Restrain, and amend all such
Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever they
be, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority, or Jurisdiction, ought, or may,
lawfully be Reformed, Repressed, Ordered, Redressed, Corrected, Restrained, or
Amended, -- any Usage, Custom, Foreign Laws, Foreign Authority, Prescription,
-- to the contrary notwithstanding.

Also the 37 H. 8. 17. Declares the same Power to be in the King, and to
exercise all manner of Jurisdictions, commonly called, Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, -- And that the Power the Pope claims, is directly repugnant to
your Majesty of Supreme Head of the Church, and Prerogative Royal, your Grace
being a Layman, -- and that the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. have no
manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by under, and from your Royal
Majesty, -- Some evil disposed Persons little regard the Proceedings and
censures Ecclesiastical, made by your Highness and Vicegerent, Officials,
Commissaries, Judges, and Visitors, being also Lay and Married Men, and think
them of little or none effect. Forasmuch as your Majesty -- has all Power by
Scripture to hear and determine all manner of Causes Ecclesiastical, and
correct Vice and Sin whatsoever; and to all such Persons as your Majesty shall
appoint thereunto, -- Be it Enacted, That Doctors of Law may lawfully execute
and exercise all manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, and all censures and
coertions, -- Albeit they be Lay or Married Men.

1. Ed. 6. 2. Affirms all Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal, is
derived and deducted from the King's Majesty, -- And all Courts Ecclesiastical
are kept by no other Power or Authority, either Foreign or within the Realm,
but by the Authority of his most Excellent Majesty.

All which Statutes, 1, 2 Phil. and Mariae. 8. Revived by Queen Eliz.
among many more, were repealed by Queen Mary, being contrary to the Doctrine
and Interest of the Romish Church, who holds for the most part all these
Jurisdictions to be of Divine Right, and their censures to be Sacerdotal, and
the Power Ecclesiastical to be, Ex sacrorum Canonum dispositione, as the Popish
Clergy speak in their submission to Cardinal* Episcopacy not prejudicial, etc.
Page 32.
Pool. But the Reformed Protestants speak quite otherwise, as Dr. Sanderson
does, who says of the Exterior Jurisdiction, it is not from God but from the
King, wholly and entirely from him, as the sole Fountain of all exterior
Jurisdiction, Spiritual or Temporal, and consequently not of Divine Right. So
says that Bishop; for indeed if these Jurisdictions were of Divine Right, they
could not be deputed to others, but the exercise must be limited to the Persons
alone in whom such a right is inherent. 25 H. 8 21.
One Statute therefore says well; They are called Spiritual, not that they are
so; it is Popery to Affirm it, and a virtual denying the Kings Supremacy, and
renouncing the Oath of it, and a Lopping from the Crown one of the principal
Branches of its Prerogative; pre-eminence in all Causes; Which the King can
never have, if exterior Jurisdiction be Spiritual, from God and the Pope, not
from the Crown. The Book (of an Anonymous Author) called, Episcopal
Inheritance, says it is a Popish Yenet to Affirm the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to be distinct from the Civil, which Bellarmine asserts to set the
Pope above Kings, and to exempt the Clergy from the secular Powers.

In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, 1 Eliz. 1.
this Power is Affirmed to be in the Crown, and it is Enacted, That all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority, for the Visitation of the
Ecclesiastical State, etc. Be united and annexed for ever to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm.

But the Canons Affirm it to be in the Pope as a Spiritual Head, and have
therefore called it a Spiritual Power, which being now by these Statutes,
reduced to its true Original, must be no longer Spiritual but Temporal, for the
King has it as a Layman, says the 37 H. 8. 17. And may invest Laymen with it,
who are no ways capable to give or receive it if it were Spiritual. So that
whatever it was heretofore, when it came from Rome, it is now Temporal, and a
part of the Kings Temporal Jurisdiction, as Impropriate Parsonages and
Vicarages become Temporal Things and Lay-fees, now they are appropriate to
Laymen, which before were Ecclesiastical and Spiritual: And so the nature of
such Jurisdictions, as of the Benefices, is altered with the alteration of the
Tenure. So it would have been Simony to have sold the Six and the Sixty Clerks
places in Chancery, when they were all Clergy Men, or the Advocates and
Proctors of the Commons, when they were all bound to be Clerks (which made
Altissiodorensis and Aquinus say, it was Simony for the Advocate to take Fees
for pleading) but now they are all Laymen, there is no color for such a
censure.

There is yet remaining one, and a very strong Argument, that letting a
Jurisdiction cannot be Simony by the Laws of England, In Ne prael. vices.
and it is this. Neither that Canon of Yours, nor that of Lateran, in the body
of the Canon Law, nor any Gloss nor Commentator upon them is Law with us in
England. It Is true that those Canons do not call it Simony, nor punish it as
Simony, but if they did, I Affirm, they are nothing to the Case, being not Law
in our Church, and so concerns us no more than the Laws of Coufutius, Dr.
Heylin, etc.
or Japan. It Is almost unaccountable what Interest those Men would serve, who
have contended earnestly that all the Popes Laws are in force with us. I know
none but that of Doctors Commons, who, if they had so large a Field to
expatiate in, would have all Men's Estates and Reputations in their own Power;
But it is most certain, that no part of the Canon Law is in force in England,
but what has been received and used here, not as the Popes Law, but as made
part of the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws by custom, usage and consent; Upon which
conditions the Laws of all France might have been ours, as well as those only
of Oleron* This is plain by our Statutes, 25 H. 8. 21. 1* Eliz. 1.
and it is a Praemunire to defend and maintain those Canons; or; that shall
directly or indirectly put in ure, or execute any thing for the Extolling,
Advancing, setting forth, maintenance or defense of any such pretended, or
usurped Jurisdiction, Power, Pre^eminence, or Authority, or any part thereof.
The Second Offense is Preminure by the Statute of that Queen. Now there cannot
be an higher Offense against both the Statutes cited in the Margen, than
introducing Foreign Canons, and judging the Causes of the King's Subjects by
them; utterly refusing to proceed by Canons made and used within the Realm, as
has been done in this Cause.

Mr. Bagshaw, Page 32.
in his Speech concerning the Praemunire, says, a Praemunire was against
Cardinal Wolsey, and he was attainted in it, though he had the King's
Commission for what he did; Mich. 21. Hen. 8. Banc. Roy.
Quia ipse intendebat antiquissimas Angliae leges subvertere and enervare,
universumque regnum Angliae legibus civilibus, and earundem legum Canonibus, in
perpetuum subjugare. And for this he forfeited all his Goods and Chattels to
the King; White Hall, Hampton Court, Christ Church, etc. If it were not for
these Statutes of Praemunire, there would be no quiet to the King's Subjects,
Id. Page 40.
as Chancellor Audely told Gardner Bishop of Winton.

Those Laws of the Pope we have no more to do with than his Religion, which yet
by a Corrupt Interest have been partly maintained, by those perhaps, who hope
his Power may sometime return where his Canons so much prevail.

It is indeed an unaccountable Boldness for any Judge to give sentence in a
Cause upon Popish Canons, never used or put in practice in England, as has
been done in this Case; but it must be remembered it was done when Popery began
to rule us, and he was most countenanced who could most cunningly introduce it
one, and that a very subtle Method, being to bring in force again all the
Pontificial Canons, which the Reformation had Abdicated. For this reason all
the Popish Judges, and those that were eminently Popishly affected, would never
consent to a Prohibition upon this suggestion, Though they granted a
Prohibition upon another suggestion.
though it was thrice attempted, That it was no Simony by any Law or Canon that
ever was used, or in force in England, though the suggestion be most certainly
true and relevant. That it is true, I affirm, because there never was any such
Cause before heard in England, nor any Sentence in it, no nor is there any
decision of this Cause to be found in any of the numerous Rotaes of all
Christendom. There is no instance before, neither in England, nor in the whole
World of any hearing wherein it has been judicially pronounced Simony.
Therefore the suggestion must be relevant, as may be seen by the Statutes
before cited; for those Canons on which the Sentence is grounded, are no Laws
in England. Suppose a Man was Libelled in the Court Christian for Heresy, they
will proceed because it is an Ecclesiastical Crime and give sentence; It is
true that by the 1 Eliz. if it be not such as has been declared Heresy by the
Four First General Councels they ought not, but the Court will not hear it;
Whether must the Client go, but to the Temporal Judges, who are to explain and
vindicate that Statute, and enquire whether it be Heresy within that Statute or
no, and whether the Canons about Heresy, by which the Court proceeds, do not
abate by virtue of that Statute? In this Case the Reverend Judges may, and let
me speak with humble submission, ought to enquire whether the Court do not
entrench upon the 25* H. 8. 21, etc. That Enacts no Canons shall be used but
what have been received, and if the Court Christian put in ure such Canons,
they are to be restrained, else these several Temporal Laws were made in vain,
that have abolished such Foreign Canons. It seems to me the strongest plea in
the World, to allege, That this Cause is pronounced to be Simony by Canons
that were never in force in England, or if they were, they are abrogate and
obsolete; and, of this I am sure, none but the Temporal Courts are the proper
Judges. For if the Court Christian be allowed to make use of what Pontificial
Laws they please, there is no Bishop or Clergyman whom they cannot deprive for
this very Crime, in Instances never yet heard of by Englishmen. Godolphin takes
notice how much Simony in England differs from that of Rome, and says,

The Canon Law, Repert Canon cap. of Simony.
in this point of Simony, is of far wider extent then the practice with us. He
enumerates Nine Cases, and concludes thus; with diverse other Questions in the
Canon Law relating to this subject, the solutions whereof are not of any moment
to us, who are out of the Pope's Diocese. I shall add some other Cases, out of
the Body of the Canon Law and Gloss, or approved Authors; few whereof are
Simony in England, though they are so at Rome, or Bononia: Viz.

Buying Relics, Holy Roods, Agnus Dei's, Holy Bread, or Water, Chrism,
Consecrated Beads and Candles, all Garments of the Mass-Priests, Corporals, and
other Vests of the Altar; Consecrated Clouts, Bells, Chalices or Crucifixes, if
you give more than the matter is worth. To become a Monk with hopes to be
Abbot. To hope for a Bishopric, or Benefice, or to promote any Affairs of the
Patron, in expectation of the next Advowson, or to get a promise of it. To
observe Canonical Hours, to get the Canonical Portion. To agree what Salary you
shall have for serving a Cure was Anciently Simony, if not still. To ask a
Benefice with Cure of Souls, for an unworthy Person, or for your self though
never so fit. To confer a Benefice upon condition the Clerk do you no mischief.
A Bishop so much as ask for a Bishopric. For a Divinity Reader, or Catechist
to take any thing of their Auditors, if the Lectures are endowed. To teach
School for reward, if the Master has a Prebend or Salary from the Church (as
they have, or ought in all Cities by the Canon Law.) To take Money for
Preaching Lectures or Sermons for a Neighbor Minister, or to preach to gain
Applause. To give Money to another to pray for you. For Favor or Affection to
reconcile a Penitent, or conceal his Crimes, or for hatred to repel him. To
present to a Benefice, as a recompense to a Clerks Merits, in many cases, is
Simony. To present Kindred or Familiars with any Respect thereto, or to gain
Honor or Repute. To purchase the next Advowson, or the Perpetuity, if you give
more then the Manor is worth without it. To found a Prebend, on condition that
you may retain it for your Life. To buy a Burial Place. To take Money for
Burials, Christnings, Marriages, or any of the Popish Sacraments that confer
Grace. To agree to Celebrate for you to morrow, if you will for me to day. To
say Mass, hear Confessions, give the Sacraments with intention to get by it. A
Bishop or Prebend to pay any thing for Installation; or Bishops to do Homage to
the King for their Bishoprics. To give Money to the Bishop or his Secretary
for Institution; which made The present Bishop of Sarum in his life.
Bishop Bedell write all his Instruments himself, and follow the Incumbents out
of his Doors, least they should give any thing to the Servants, etc. To give
Money, little or much, to the Patrons Servants to speak to their Master to
present. To promise a Bishop not to require a living of him when he Ordains
sine titulo. To give to a Patron Money to present, though he never does; or a
Clerk to give Bonds to resign. To give Money for Admission to a Religious
House, for a Fellowship in a College, or a place in a Lazer, or any Hospital,
for a Commandry of Malta, or Knight of Calatrava, or Alcantara, or any other
Religious Order, or to be keeper of the Sepulcher. To give any Entertainment
upon Admission or Installation. To buy any Place in Chancery, or Doctors
Commons when they were all Clerks, as Originally they were; or any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or Office when exercised by Clerks and Unmarried
Men, as Anciently they all were, but now it is not Simony; for as the Nature of
the Function is altered, so is the Nature of the Purchase. To advocate or plead
Ecclesiastical Causes for Money, was Simony heretofore say Altissiodorensis and
Aquinas, but not now. To make a Notary Public, in Ecclesiastical Matters, for
Money.

I shall add, upon the Authority of the Gloss, what I spoke of before. 1. 9. 3.
c. 1.
To buy the Porters place, or Bellringers, or Butlers, or Candle-lighters, or
the Grooms, or any other Office Ecclesiastical. Besides these, we find many
Nice enquiries in the Canonists about Simony; As whether one can be a Simonist
by making a Contract with God, or the Pope? Or by buying a Slave his Liberty,
that he may enter into Orders? Whether one can be Simonical without an
intention to commit it? Whether it be Simony to give Money if the Incumbent
should have had the Benefice, though he had given nothing? Whether to give one
Spiritual Thing for another? Whether Gehazi was a Simonist, who made no
compact, or took any thing of the Profit till after his Master was restored?
Whether to give Money to an Infidel on condition he be Baptized? Whether Clerks
may take Money for Spiritual Offices in Places where they are not bound to
officiate?

For what is Simony and what is not, is one of the most perplexed Questions in
the Canon Law. So Pius the Fourth thought it, when he revoked many Decrees of
his immediate Predecessor about it, though formed by 150 Cardinals, Bishops,
and Canonists, and approved by most Universities in Christendom, because he
adjudged them too rigorous.

And Felinus cites the Archdeacon of Florence, who says as much of Eugenius
and Martin the Fourth, and of one of the Urbans. For Ecclesiastical Simony
being but malum quia prohibitum, and only a Pontificial notion, The Popes might
correct their Breves as they saw occasion, and make that but Disobedience in
one Pontificat, which was Simony in another. Which had the Promoters of this
Cause well weighed, perhaps they would not have contended so fiercely to create
a new Crime, and Sect of Simonists unknown to all the Canonists of Christendom,
from Innocent the IV. to Fagnanus; and which is not to be found in any of the
Rotaes Counsils and Decisions extant, if the case be stated true according to
the Fact, which is, That the Jurisdiction was not sold, but let; and not to a
Clerk but a Layman.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 17. for Gratian read Seneca. ibid. l. 23. r. intelligunt. P. 9.
l. 6. Laical. ibid. l. 26. made use of. P. 10. l. 4. Victoria. P. 11. l. 5.
intend. P. 12. l. 24. add and Impropriators, etc. P. 13. l. 36. Covaruvias. P.
14. l. 8, 9. Covaruvias. P. 19. l. 11. Canonists.


