The Duty and Benefit of SUBMISSION to the Will of GOD in AFFLICTIONS.

Discovered in Two SERMONS Upon a special Occasion, At Stapleford in
LEICHESTERSHIRE.

By JOHN CAVE, Rector of COLDORTON in the same County; And Chaplain to the
LORD-BISHOP of DURHAM.

Iis qui erudiuntur Tolerantia succurrit, obj^ctis molestiis generose
resistens, atque efficiens ne animus concidat, sed pugnet and propulset Doloris
ictus.

Simpl. in Epicte^um. Quam pulch^um spectaculum Deo, cum Christianus cum dolor
congreditur, cum adversum Minas and Supplicia, and Tormenta componitur.

Minut. Fell. LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXII.

TO The Right Honorable and Truly Noble THE LORD and LADY SHERARD OF
STAPLEFORD.
Right Honorable;
THese two plain Sermons were composed and suited to serve a great and sad
Occasion of your Honors, reached at your Desires, heard with your good liking,
and most effectually commended by your diligent Observation and Christian
Practice of their Doctrine, and therefore in these Respects were justly your
own without the formality of a Dedication; and truly I designed them so
entirely for the Service of your Honorable Family, that their Preachingh had
been their only Publication, and they had continued Yours still in the
strictest Sense of Propriety, if an intimation of your Honor's Desires (which
to me carry the force of a Command) had not only allowed, but obliged me to
make them more common: and seeing the Cross is not only the Badg, but the
Burden of our Christianity, and you have so many Fellow Sufferers in the
World, I have reason to hope, that others may find the same Support and Comfort
by these seasonable Discourses, which through God's Blessing they have happily
afforded you.

And there being so many afflicting Circumstances (as it is generally known) in
your Case, your Patience and Submission will want no Advantage of Example, but
be able to speak more perswasively, and make more Converts than these weak
Sermons of mine, or the Oratory of more powerful Preachers.

Indeed when Death comes so near us, and makes so deep a Wound in Nature, we
need an extrordinary Assistance of Grace, the Benefit of Precept and Example
both, all the Helps which Philosophy, and Religion can furnish, lest we be
wearied and faint in our Minds. St. Hierom writes of one Paulina a Lady of a
steady and well-governed Temper in other Trials, who yet could not bear her
Childrens Death, without an immoderate and unseemly Resentment; but some
allowance may be fairly made to the Tenderness of her Sex, when we see Men who
have naturally a greater Constancy and Courage, wise Men, religious Men, ready
to fall by the same Stroke. Synesius the Bishop of Cyrene was so affected with
the Death of his Children, Epist. 16.
that in one of his Epistles, he complains that the Remembrance of it, like a
lingering Consumption, wasted him daily, that all the Pleasure of his Life died
with them; and at last, breaks out into this impatient Wailing; Let me live no
longer, or else forget that they are dead. Yea, how does the Heart of King
David, a Saint and a Soldier, melt into a more than a Womanish Softness, and
bewray its Weakness and Instability, in a Torrent of Tears, and impotent,
unmanly Plaints at the Death of one Absalom; Absalom a Traitor and a Rebel to
his King and Father; yet because a Son, still must be lamented in the highest
Strain of Passion.

My good Lord and Lady, you bewail a Son who had nothing of Absalom in him, but
his Beauty, who had all the Grace and sweetness of Courtesy, of a most obliging
Mind, Speech and Deportment, without any of the Guilt or Blemish of Flattery,
Affectation, or Design; who wanted no Accomplishment beseeming his Noble Birth
and Quality, but excelled in Piety to his God, and Reverence to his Parents,
and a towardly Compliance with the other Instructors and Governors of his
Youth, whereby he soon became the Delight and Ornament of a learned and
virtuous Society, Exeter College O^on.
dear to them as a Child, and honored by them as a Patron, and therefore wept
over as both, with a mixed Affection, but not so fond, as rational.

And indeed his obliging Qualifications procured him such a general Interest
and Esteem, that every one who knew him seemed to mourn all along for him, as
if the Loss had been only his without any Partner to share his Grief.

But I design not in this, In Mr. Laxton's Sermon, preached on the day of his
Interment.
so much a Character of his Worth, (which has been drawn already in better
Colors, and with more graceful Strokes, than my poor Stock, or Skill can
supply) as a just Commendation of your Honors singular Piety and Patience,
your deep sense of the Displeasure, and yet your meek and humble Submission to
the Will of the Father of Spirits, in taking from you a Son of so much Delight
and Hope, and that in the Prime and the Blosom of his Years, when he seemed to
be all Life and Vigor; a very severe and searching Trial.

Yet I who had the unhappy Honor to be admitted into the darkest Scene of your
Sorrow, and to see your Virtue surprised with a most dreadful Assault, soon
perceived it happily succored with such forces of Reason and Religion, as
assured an equal Conflict, if not a Victory.

And I know you have often blessed God, who by a wonderful Supply of his Grace
has maintained your Patience and Fortitude, and with the Temptation given a
way to escape, and secure your Innocence.

And I shall earnestly pray, that the God of all Consolation, would be pleased
still to suggest to you such Religious Considerations as may establish, and
increase your present Comfort, and lead you through all the obscure Passages of
this Veil of Tears, into the brightest Glories of Everlasting Light and Joy,
that the Belief of your dear Son's happy Translation, and the well-grounded
Expectation of your own, may mortify all your earthly Affections, make you
every day less concerned for what you enjoy, or suffer in this World; and that
the Felicities of Eternity, may render the good or evil things of Time very
indifferent to you. To these my Prayers, I shall upon all Occasions add my best
Endeavors to serve your Honors, in promoting your highest, your heavenly
Interest and Benefit, as becomes my Office and Obligations; there being no one
more truly sensible of your Honor's Great Favors, than is,

My Noble Lord and Lady, Your Honors most Faithful, Affectionate, and Obedient
Servant, JOHN CAVE.

Of Submission to the Will of God.
HEB. xii. ix. -- We have had Fathers of our Flesh which corrected us, and we
gave them Reverence; shall we not much rather be in Subjection to the Father of
Spirits, and live?


OUR Blessed Savior, who was himself, a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with
Grief, bequeathed a Legacy of Sufferings unto the Heirs of his Glory, and it is
through manifold Tribulations that we are to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
So that we are not only born to Trouble by the common condition of our Nature
(which like the Earth that the Lord has cursed, brings forth nothing but
Briers and Thorns) but also born again to it in the State of our Christianity,
and trained up in the School of Crosses and Afflictions, under the Discipline
of our heavenly Master. But he that has called us to suffer with and for
himself, has also given us the surest Supports, and the strongest
Consolations, in the most needful time of our Distress, by setting before us a
Joy unspeakable, and over-balancing our light Afflictions with a more exceeding
weight of Glory, exhorting us to Patience by his Precepts, and persuading us to
it by his Promises, but more especially instructing us therein by his own most
exemplary Submission and Resignation of Mind to the Will of his Father. And his
great Apostle, having in the foregoing Chapter, reckoned up in order several
eminent Patterns of Faith and Patience, in the beginning of this points, as
from those many Witnesses or Martyrs, to this one glorious and triumphant
Sufferer, Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; animating us by
the Example of his victorious Patience, to a passive Fortitude and Courage in
our sharpest fight of Afflictions, to an unwearied Perseverance in the roughest
ways of Virtue. Let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us;
looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; Verse. 1, 2.
who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
Shame. Look unto him, not only to admire, but to imitate the Resolution and
Invincibility of his Spirit, that you may not sink under the Cross which he
endured, nor be overwhelmed with the Shame which he despised; for to this very
end and purpose you are to consider him that endured such Contradiction of
Sinners against himself, Verse. 3.
lest you be wearied and faint in your Minds. Nay, consider how much less you
suffer then he did; his Soul was exceeding sorrowful unto Death: To Death,
which draws an everlasting Vail over all the Glories and Delights of this
World; but Joy and Comfort may again break through your closest Mourning. He
shed his precious Blood for you, you only shed Tears for your selves; tho you
labor under many Sorrows, and have more Sins to strive against, yet you have
not resisted unto Blood; yet you live still, Verse. 4.
and may outlive all your Afflictions, unless you make them mortal by your own
peevishness, which in themselves, or rather in the hand of your best Physician,
are only medicinal and healthful.

And he has told you as much, if you have not forgotten the Exhortation which
speaks unto you, as unto Children; Verse. 4.
and assures you of his fatherly Love and Tenderness, when he makes you smart
most under his correcting Hand: My Son, despise not thou the chastning of the
Lord; nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: Be not stubborn against him, nor
insensible of his Displeasure; for it is the chastning of the Lord, who has
power and right to punish: but yet be not too much dejected; for he speaks you,
and deals with you, not as Enemies, nor Servants, but as Children, and plainly
discovers his fatherly Tenderness even in these Exercises of his Lordly
Dominion, as it follows in the 6th, 7th, and 8th Verses of this Chapter; For
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives.
If ye endure chastning, God deals with you as with Sons; for what Son is he
whom the Father chastneth not? but if ye be without Chastisement, whereof all
are Partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons.

This Consideration, if any, methinks should ease our Hearts in Trouble, and
keep us from fainting under God's Rebukes, viz. that his Chastisements are the
Effects and Arguments of his Love and Good Will toward us, at leastwise if we
endure them as becomes Children, with a dutiful Regret for the Sins, the
Faults that procured them, and an humble Subjection to the Hand that inflicts
them.

And that it is our Interest, as well as our Christian Duty, so to do; our
Apostle further demonstrates by a very argumentative Comparison, in the words
of my Text, We have had Fathers of our Flesh, and we gave them Reverence; shall
we not much rather be in Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live?

We have had Fathers of our Flesh; that is, of our Body, which consists for the
most part of Flesh; or, Fathers of this Life, which we now live in the Flesh; a
Life exercised with fleshly Instruments, and maintained with fleshly Supplies;
these Fathers corrected and punished us as they saw occasion, sometimes
withholding their Favors, otherwhiles taking away our Toys and Vanities, the
Entertainments of our childish Affections; sometimes threatening, and
otherwhiles laying on the Rod, and we gave them Reverence; we did not only take
all patiently at present, but stood in awe of them for the future, honoring
their Authority, and fearing their Displeasure; How much rather shall we be in
Subjection unto the Father of Spirits? that is, the Father of our Souls, God's
immediate Offspring, or of our Spiritual Life, and all that appertains more
directly thereunto; Shall we not much rather be in Subjection to this heavenly
Father? who is infinitely more excellent in himself, in his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, who is the Author of our more noble part, the Soul, and upholds us in
a better Being, than that which we derive from our natural Parents, and designs
us a fruit and benefit of his Correction, beyond the Confines of this World, a
happy Immortality, after a troublesome dying Life, which is implied in the last
word of my Text, Live. Shall we not much rather be in Subjection to the Father
of Spirits, and live?

In the Words thus explained and paraphrased, we have.

1st, A Duty implied or supposed, the Submission of Children to their
particular Parents. 2dly, A Duty expressed, the Subjection of all Mankind, but
especially of Christians, to the Universal Father. 3dly, The Preference of this
Duty to the former. 1. In respect of the Excellency and Superiority of
Fatherhood. 2. In regard of the End and Benefit of his Discipline.

1st, We are taught the Duty of Children's Submission to their immediate and
proper Parents, viz. That they ought to own and honor their Authority, in
their Corrections, as well as in their Commands or Instructions. We had Fathers
of our Flesh, who corrected us, and we gave them Reverence; that is, we did
well so to do. 2dly, By an Argument at least a pari, from an Equality of
Comparison; we are taught that we ought to fear and honor our Common Father,
to be in Subjection to him, because he is a Father too. 3dly, By an Argument in
another respect a dispari, from the less to the greater; we are taught that we
ought to be more subject to him.
1. In regard of the Excellency and Superiority of his Nature, and his Relation
to us; Shall we not much rather be in Subjection unto the Father of Spirits?

2. In regard of the End and Benefit of his Discipline, which reaches beyond
the Interests of this present State, and gives Life and Happiness in another.
Shall we not rather be in Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live?

I begin to speak something very briefly upon the Duty supposed, viz.

I. That Children ought to submit to the Corrections of their natural Parents:
They must neither sturdily shake off, nor complain and droop too much under the
Yoke, but reverence their Authority in the harshest and most unpleasant
Exercises thereof, tempering Joy with Fear, and pious Sorrow into a true
Patience, and seemly Moderation of Spirit; equally bearing the Smiles and
Frowns of their comforting, and their chastning Love, and overcoming those
Evils by suffering, to which they might not oppose an active Force.

For the Law of Nature, and Nations, as well as the Law of God, in the fifth
Commandment, teach us the same that Ben-Sirach does, Ecclus. 3.2.
The Lord has given the Father Honor, or Power, over the Children, and has
confirmed the Authority of the Mother over the Sons; and therefore he exhorts,
Verse 8, Honor thy Father in thy Work, and in thy Word, and in omni Patientia,
as it is in the Vulgar Latin, in all Patience; that is, submit to his
Animadversions and Chastisements; and this the young Greek, that Plutarch
speaks of, was taught in Zeno's School, I have learned, says he, patiently to
bear my Father's Anger. And indeed the Anger of a Father being not only the
right of his Power and Place, but for the most part, the effect of his Love
too, Children are not to bear it only as a Burden, but to receive it as a
Blessing, as a means to secure that their filial Obedience and Reverence, to
which God has made so many, and so ample Promises of Good even in this Life.

And the same Reasons of Subjection will hold, if not improve, in reverence to
a more common Father, the Governor of a larger Family; yet in a sense the
Father of our Flesh too, and subordinate to the Father of Spirits, as having a
right to direct and rule our outward Deportment in order to a general Good, and
public Peace, though by a particular Grievance, or personal Distress
sometimes; I mean the Father of our Country, whom we must reverence even when
he corrects and rules with Rigor, and to whom we must be subject not only for
Wrath or Fear, but for Love and Interest, yea for Conscience sake, and by
virtue of our Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, who has placed us (only
with a reserve for his own Prerogative) under his Dominion and Jurisdiction.
But this minds me to proceed to the second Particular, viz. to show you,

II. That it is the Duty of all Mankind, especially of us Christians, to be in
Subjection to God the common Father, and chief of all the Tribes and Families.

Here I shall undertake to show you, 1. Wherein our Subjection to this Father
does consist. And then, 2. Confirm the Doctrine by Proof and Reason.

1. Touching the nature and extent of this Subjection, it must be of a vast
Latitude, not only exceeding broad, as God's Commandments, but as his
Corrections too, embracing every Law, and kissing every Rod of his, complying
with all the Ends of his Providence, so far as he is pleased to notify them to
us, being equally disposed to do, and suffer his Will, in one Instance as well
as another, without dispute or repining. But in my Text, it has respect to the
suffering part principally, if not only, to our bearing those Afflictious which
God sends sometimes to humble us for our Sins past, sometimes to check a
growing Vice, and otherwhile to prevent a future Vanity and Disorder of Life.
And I shall endeavor to show you briefly;

1. Wherein this Subjection does not consist. And, 2. Positively, wherein it
does.
1. It does not consist in choosing Affliction, or bringing Trouble upon our
selves, when we may fairly avoid it.

Nor, 2. In being insensible under it, when it lights upon us.

1. It does not consist in choosing Affliction, or expesing our selves to
unnecessary Danger and Trouble.

Estius indeed renders it actively, nonne subjiciemus nos ipsos? shall we not
subject our selves? But then the meaning will not be, that we should make, or
lay on, our own Burdens, but that we should bow and stoop to God's Impositions.
Seneca Epla. 62.
For Afflictions considered formally, in themselves, are Oppressions and
Distresses of Nature, and so evil; and it is only the Grace, Power, and
Providence of God, that brings good out of them, and makes them at any time
profitable to us.

And therefore Tormenta a me abesse velim, said the great Stoic himself, I am
not in love with Torments, I do not desire Crosses, Sed si sustinenda fuerint,
ut me in illis fortiter, animose, honest geram opiabo; but if they be imposed,
I will pray that I may bear them with an unbroken Spirit, and a becoming
Courage and Resolution. And questionless, though our Christian Religion best
enableth us to undergo and and overcome all outward Troubles, yet it furnishes
us, as well with Wisdom to decline them when we may, as with Strength and
Fortitude to encounter their most violent Assaults. A wise Man, says Soloman,
foresees a Danger, and will do his best to avoid it. Wherefore it was our
Blessed Savior's own Advice to his Disciples, Mat. 10.17, 23.
to be wise as Serpents in this sense, to keep out of harms way, and to beware
of Men that would deliver up to Counsels: yea further in the 23d Verse of that
Chapter, When they persecute them in one City, to flee to another. Prove. 17.17.
And Solomon had told the World long before, or rather recorded it among his
Proverbs, as a profitable Result of common Observation and Experience; A
prudent Man sees the Plague, and hides himself: but the foolish Man goes on
still and is punished. And again, Blessed is he that fears always, says the
same wise King; for Distrust is the Sinew of Wisdom, Et bonum est timere omnia
ut nihil timeamus; It is good to fear all things that we may fear nothing; that
is, a prudent Caution will set us (...), out of the reach and power of what we
fear. This Caution the Stoics called, (...), A prudent declining of any
hurtful thing. And although to some this seems a distrust of God's Providence;
yet our Apostle assures us it may be an Act of Faith, Heb. 11.23.
in the foregoing Chapter. By Faith Moses when he was born, was hid three
Months of his Parents, to escape the Fury of Pbaraoh.

We, who are at best but God's adopted Children, who are what we are merely by
his Grace, and of our selves have no Sufficiency, either to do or suffer as we
ought, may well pray with his natural and only begotten Son, that if it be
possible, the bitter Cup may pass from us.

It is true, since God has been often pleased to work that Good by Affliction,
which other mere gentle Methods would not effect, we ought to pray rather that
he should punish us here, than suffer us to perish hereafter. O Lord, correct
me, but with Judgment, not in thine Anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

We are not obliged to expose our selves rashly, as some well-meaning Sufferers
did in the Primitive Times; Senec. de benesic. l. 4. c. 22.
yet, as Seneca said of his wise and virtuous Man, Placebit illi ignis per quam
bona Fides collucebit; We need not fear those Flames which will illustrate our
Graces, nor shun that Fire which will consume our dross only.

In a word, as Affliction is an effect of God's Grace, and a means of improving
our own Virtue, we may meet it with Desire, and embrace it with Delight, but as
it is an Evil to Nature, and an Expression of God's Anger, we ought to avoid it
when we fairly may; and pray with David: Psalm. 38.1.
O Lord rebuke me not in thy Wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot Displeasure.
Nor,

2. Are we to be insensible of it, when God in his wise Providence brings it
upon us; Seveca.
Sensum enim Hominis nulla virtus exuit, said the Heathen: and the Christian
renders it thus; No Grace of God does abolish the Sentiments of Nature; yea
Stupidity or Stubbornness under the Rod, or, as our Apostle calls it, the
despising of the Chastnings of the Lord, proceeds not from the Perfection, but
the Depravation of our Natures. It was for this senslessness that God rebuked
the Israelites; Hos. 7.9.
Strangers have devoured his Strength, and he knows it not; they are in a
wasting Condition, but are not sensible of their Misery. The Prophet Jeremy
takes notice of the same evil disposition of Mind; Thou have stricken them,
Jer. 5.3.
but they have not sorrowed; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive Correction. They hardened their Hearts, and either contemned, or
disregarded God's Judgments, than which there cannot be a higher Affront to his
Majesty.

When Moses was a Suitor for his Sister Miriam, he received this Answer from
God; Numb. 12.14. If her Father had spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed
seven days? As if he had said, how much more should she be humbled, or ashamed
that I have testified my Displeasure against her.

It seems to be a higher degree of Impiety to turn God's Judgments, than his
Grace, into Wantonness; Isa. 26.11.
and therefore when the Hand of God is lifted up against a Nation, or a Family,
if they will not see, and be sensible of lighter Strokes, they shall see, as
the Prophet speaks, and be afraid of more cutting Calamities; God will add
Grief to their Sorrow, as he did unto Barachs, and make them faint under their
restless Sighings and Complaints. But let this suffice to show you negatively
wherein this Subjection to the Chastnings of our heavenly Father does not
consist.

I proceed now to show you positively, that it does consist,

1. In choosing Affliction and Misery of any kind rather than the least Sin.
Though we are not to seek the Cross; yet we are not to go out of God's way to
shunit: we must be content to suffer Persecution, rather than cease to live
godly and honestly, in this present World.

It was one of the gross Errors of those nominal Christians, the Gnostics,
that they might lawfully apostatize from the Truth in the time of danger, and
comply with the Jews for fear of Persecution; for we must cheerfully part with
our Peace, our Ease, our Estates, yea our very Lives, rather than protect and
secure them by any unlawful Practices, by any sinful Compliances, or
Oppositions, either denying the Truths, or resisting the Ordinance of God,
either deserting our Religion, or fighting in the defense of it under any false
Colors, or any lawless Conduct. We must suffer all that can befall us rather
than offend on either hand. For whosoever shall deny me before Men, Mark 10.33.
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven, says our Blessed
Savior. Romans 3.2.
And, Whosoever resists the Power, says our great Apostle, resists the
Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
We may understand the Sin of Rebellion, and the Christian Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, much better from this Text of Scripture, than from the Writings of
Bucchanan in the days of our Fathers, of J. Goodwin since, and of the late
Author of the Life of Julian: for here we are plainly taught that Disloyalty to
our King, is altogether inconsistent with Subjection to our God; that the
Powers of Earth, are the Ordinance of Heaven; and Disobedience to them, at
least actual Opposition against them, will certainly expose us to the
Punishments of Hell: Wherefore it has been the constant Practice of all good
Christians, where they could not escape the effects of their Prince's
Displeasure either by Obedience, or by Flight, then to bear them with
Submission, but never to repel, or prevent them by Force or Resistance.

Thus did the Primitive Christians under Heathen and Heretical Emperors: Thus
did the Waldenses under Popish Persecutors; our Grandfathers under the bloody,
fiery Reign of Queen Mary. Thus do our distressed Brethren of France at this
present time, and thus must we all do, if God see best to put us upon the same
Trials.

The Popish Priests and Jesuits have found out as many dishonest Arts of saving
themselves from just and legal Punishments, as of plotting Evil and Mischief
against others. I shall give you one remarkable Instance, and that is their
Practice of Equivocation and mental Reservation, using words of a double sense
to cloud and conceal the Truth, and reserving some words in their Mind wholly
to alter the sense of what they utter. As for Example, If you ask a Priest, Art
thou indeed a Priest; he will confidently and readily deny himself, and say, I
am no Priest, and if need be swear it also; reserving in his Mind, of Baal, or
of Apollo; which Speech and Reservation put together, make up an entire
Sentence, I am no Priest of Baal, or of Apollo. Again, they will endeavor to
cover Treason by saying they had no design against the Life of the King;
reserving in their Minds, of France. Such Lies, under other names, do they make
their Refuge in times of Danger.

If our blessed Savior, or the Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, had known and
approved this Doctrine, how easily might they have escaped those Troubles,
Torments, and Deaths which they endured? When our Lord was demanded, Whether he
was the Christ? how readily might he have answered, I am not, with this
Refervation, such as ye look for? and his Apostles and Martyrs when they were
questioned, Whether they were Christians? how eafily might they have replied,
we are not, reserving only in their Minds, such as ye slander us to be? but
they durst not practice these Shifts: nor must we shun Misery by running into
Sin, choosing Afflictions with the People of God, rather than all the Pleasures
and Prosperity of the wicked. But,

2. This Subjection consists in bearing Afflictions with Patience, not mourning
immoderately nor murmuring at all.

1. Not mourning immoderately. To be insensible of Evils, is not to be Men; to
be impatient under them, is not to be Christians.

Lugere amicos luctu moderato decet, etc. It was good and pious Counsel that of
Ben-Sirach; Let Tears fall upon the dead, Ecclus. 38.16, 17.
and use Lamentations as he is worthy. Jesus wept over his Friend Lazarus. The
Church lamented the Death of St. Stephen, and the Apostle Paul the dangerous
sickness of his Epaphroditus.

To laugh or look cheerfully at a Funeral, yea, not to drop some Tears upon the
Hearse of our deceased Friend, is a Breach of our Christian Behavior; yet
there must be a mean in this, Lachrymandum est, sed non plorandum, Sen. Ep. 63.
we must weep under our Father's Rod, but not complain of his Severity, which
is a further Instance of our Patience and Submission to God's Will. For,

2. We must not murmur at all: I was dumb, said David, Psalm. 39.9.
I opened not my Mouth, because thou did it: Whatever the voluntary, or
unwilling Instruments of my Trouble may be, I see thy Finger in their Hand, I
acknowledge thy Justice, and adore thy Wisdom and Goodness in all that I suffer,
either from the Unkindness, or Mistakes of Men; and therefore I will not repine
or complain so much as in a word of thy dealings with me; 1 Samuel 3.18.
Thou did it, and therefore I opened not my Mouth; and there was as much
Submission in Eli's and Job's Speeches, as in David's Silence; It is the Lord,
Job 1.21.
let him do whatsoever he will, said Eli, after he received the sad Prophecy of
his Family's Destruction. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Job 2.10.
blessed be the Name of the Lord, said Job.

He discovers more of this excellent Spirit, not only in bearing with his
Wife's Frowardness, but in his meek Expostulation with her, and declaring the
Equity of God's dealings with them both, in so general a Calamity: Shall we
receive Good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? To apply this
in a word to our selves; It is the same blessed Hand that distributes, and
smites, and we ought to adore it with equal Reverence and Affection, whether it
be opened wide in Bounty, or contracted close in Severity.

Beloved, we have had much more Experience of God's Goodness toward us in
giving us Prosperity, and a flow of Blessings, than we have had of his Anger,
in taking from us our Comforts, and adding to our Miseries. And shall we
receive Good at the Hand of God, (and so much Good as we have done) and shall
we not receive Evil? Shall we not patiently bear a little Affliction? not
repining at the sharpness of God's Discipline, but meekly kissing the Rod that
strikes us, humbly acknowledging the Equity of our Father's severest
Chastnings, that all his Ways are equal, and that in Righteousness he does
afflict us, that our own Ini quities have wrought Evil to us, and that the
Moths, which fret and consumeo ur Garments, have their Being and Nourishment
from them: which is another good Evidence of our Submission to the Divine
Disposals and Punishments.

3. Our Subjection in some Cases must show it self, not only by a Resignation,
and yielding up of our Wills to the Will of God, and by an owning all
Manifestations of his Justice, but by a Submission of our Understandings to his
infinite Wisdom, and resting satisfied in the most mysterious and hidden ways
of his Providence, such as his distressing the Virtuous, and prospering the
Ungodly.

There is a good reason why the provident Father, who would make a lasting
Conserve of the Roses and Violets, should cut, mangle and bruise them, though
the silly Child stand amazed at this Work; and, as the noble Mornay expresses
it, Floribus illis illachrymatur and ciulat, weeps over those Flowers, because
he would have them preserved for Poesies and Garlands. In like manner the
Dealings and Proceedings of Almighty God, even those which are most intricate
and involved, want not their reasonable Considerations to move and rest upon.
Though we who are Children in Understanding cannot find them out, yet we know
so much of our heavenly Father, as to be assured that his Judgments are
according to Truth, and that there is no Unrighteousness in him.

And therefore, that we are in Duty obliged to adore and submit to that hidden
Equity and Wisdom of his Proceedings which we cannot comprehend, and by this
humbling of our Reason, this confining of our Spirits within their proper
Sphere of Knowledge, we give a farther Testimony of our Subjection to the Father
of them, which yet is completed.

4. By Amendment of Life, by a careful avoiding and Reformation of these
Faults, which were most like to move our Father's Displeasure. This is it which
the Prophet Isaiah expresses by a turning unto him that smites us; Isa. 9.13.
this is it which the Prophet Micah intends, by hearing the Rod, Micah 6.9.
and him who has appointed it: Every Rod of God has a Voice, and comes to
reprove us for some Sin, or to instruct us in some Duty, and our Subjection to
it consists not only in a patient bearing of its smart, but in a towardly
learning its Lessons; learning to be less sensual, and more heavenly-minded;
less dejected with Adversity, and more humble in Prosperity; in a word, more
holy in all manner of Conversation: That though we may say with David, Before
we were afflicted we went astray; we may add with him also, but now have we
kept thy Word: making it appear, that God indeed has chastned us for our
Profit, Psalm. 119.67.
that we might be Partakers of his Holiness.

This is that worthy Fruit of Repentance which our blessed Savior, in the
third of St. Matthew, would have us to bring forth: This is the Work which God
expects from us when his Rod is shaken over us, or laid upon us in any sore
Calamity public or personal, even to consider our Ways, that is, our
Omissions, our Actions, our Passions, what we have done, and how we have
suffered, and to turn our feet to his Testimonies, as David speaks, (...).

Punishments, says Damascen, are the forced Offspring of willing Faults.

If we had the true conceit of our Duty toward God imprinted upon our Hearts,
and would we but add thereunto diligent Observation of our daily and hourly
Neglects thereof; every particular Cross would direct us to some particular
Sin, from which the Lord in Mercy would purge us.

And we then are subject and bear the Affliction as we ought to do; if by
searching our Hearts, examining our Ways, and considering the nature of it, we
endeavor to discover, and reform that particular Vice for which God seems to
rebuke and punish us.

It was a mark of Incorrigibleness and Ignominy in King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
Jer. 5.3.
that in the time of his Distress he sinned more and more; and this the Prophet
Jeremy laments as a greater Misery then the sorest Affliction in that People;
Thou have smitten them, Psalm. 107.3.
but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to
receive Correction; they have made their Faces harder than a Rock, they have
refused to return.

Whosoever is wise, Psalm. 94 12.
and will observe these things, whosoever will take warning by these Directions,
and these Examples, to repent of, and reform the Evils and Errors of their
Lives; They shall understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord, even under the
show of his Displeasure. That, as Tertullian speaks, Foelix cui Deus dignatur
irasci; or rather in David's Language, Blessed is the Man whom thou chastnest,
O Lord, and teach him in thy Law. But of this more hereafter.

I have said as much as the time, and the design of my Discourse would permit,
touching the nature of our Subjection to God's Chastnings. I go forward to show
more fully, (for I have done it in part already) that we ought to be so
subject, and why we ought to beso.

And, because this is a large Field, I shall confine my self both for Proof and
Reasons to the words of my Text, and the foregoing Verses of this Chapter; and
I doubt not but it will plainly appear that every Christian, every adopted
Child of God, as well as the proper Son, our blessed Savior, ought to learn
Obedience by the things which he suffers; and to show his Obedience as much, if
not more in that, than any other Instance, as he did.

It is the design of the Holy Ghost in a great part of this Chapter and that
foregoing, to establish this Doctrine, and commend it to our Practice. I shall
only suggest this to you for a further Confirmation and Commendation thereof,
viz. That the Chastnings and Afflictions, which the Apostle here has respect
unto, and which are to be born with so much Contentment, and Submission, were
of a peculiar and extraordinary nature, such as God has never yet tried any of
us withal, Persecutions and cruel Usages, the loss of Goods and good Name, as
we may infer from some Passages in the tenth Chapter of this Epistle, as Cruel
Mockings, no doubt, Scourgings, Bonds, Imprisonments, as those we read of in
the latter end of the eleventh Chapter, and all for Righteousness sake, for
believing in Jesus, and doing the Will of God: Persecutions only short, if
short at all, of those in the following Ages, when Children were snatched out
of the Arms of their pitiful Parents, their Brains dashed out against the
Stones before their Faces, their best Friends buried in Fires, or banished into
strange places.

Such as these were the Primitive Persecutions, such as these were the Losses,
Trials, Chastnings, the Apostle endeavors to fortify his Hebrews against, and
to support them under: And by how much the less and more gentle our Sufferings
are, so much the more patiently and submissively ought we to bear them. They
perhaps might have been better allowed to weep Blood, than we to shed Tears, in
regard of the greater smart and pressure of their Afflictions; and therefore, I
shall hope that the Doctrine of the Text, though applied more particularly to
their Cases, will have an equal, if not a more effectual Influence upon ours,
to administer Strength, Courage and Comfort to us, in the more ordinary
Calamities of our Lives, the milder Corrections of the Father of Spirits.

And now we come to consider the Reasons of this our Subjection.

1. The first of which is derived from the Equality of Comparison in my Text,
between our natural Parents and our spiritual Father: If we are to reverence
and submit to the one as such, we are to do so to both, and must be in
Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, because he is our Father.

It is an Argument which God himself uses by his Prophet Malachy, Mal. 1.6.
A Son honors his Father: if I then be a Father, where is mine Honor?
where is your child-like Deportment? your cheerful Submission to my Will? You
know,

1. That a Father has right and power to give Laws to, and inflict Penalties
on his own. 2. He has Kindness and Bowels to mitigate the Rigor of Law, and to
temper his Discipline according to the different Capacities and Infirmities of
his Children: When the Rod is in a Father's hand, Love and Compassion have the
Management of every Blow, and it is said of God, Psalm. 103.13.
that he pitieth us, as a Father pitieth his Son that serves him.
And as a tender Father pitieth the sick Child most, so does He most
commiserate us in our Distresses. He so pitieth us as to succor us in our
Troubles, and in his due time, when it is most for his Glory and our own Good,
to deliver us out of them; according to that gracious Promise, Psalm 91.15.
Psalm. 34.19.
I will be with thee in Trouble to deliver thee: Many are the Afflictions of
the Righteous, but God delivers himout of them all. This methinks should
persuade us to a patient bearing of Afflictions, because they are the
Chastnings of a Father.

The Hand of an Enemy poisons the Wound, but the Hand of a Father when it
strikes, drops Balsam; his very Rods are bound up in Silk and Softness, and he
only wounds that he may heal; he only lances and cuts, to let out that
Corruption which will not be carried off by any milder Method. But,

3. It is our Submission to his Corrections that makes it appear that he is
indeed our Father, and we his Children; our Subjection warrants and voucheth
our Sonship. Every Hypocrite will fawn upon God in Prosperity, serve him when
he can serve himself on him. It is the Property of the true Christian to adhere
to him when he suffers for so doing, and to trust in him as Job did, not only
when he makes an Hedge about us, but when he lays us waste, when he spoils us
of our Goods, our Friends, our Children, our Health, yea our own Lives.

For, as the Valor of a Soldier is best seen in the Battle, and the Skill of
a Pilot in a Tempest; Gubernatorem in tempestate, in acie militem intelligas.
Sen. de provident.
so the Fortitude and Patience of a Christian is best descerned in Tribulation.

Until the Storms and Winds came, the House built upon the Sand, seemed to
stand as firm and secure as that upon the Rock: and give me leave by way of
further Illustration, to tell you, Geranium noctu olens, Lichuis noctiflora.
That Christian Virtue resembles two remarkable Plants, which I have sometimes
taken special notice of, one of which casts a most fragrant strong Perfume in
the Night; and the other also (of no less contrary Complexion to its fellows,
as if it rejoiced at what they mourn for, the Sun's setting) is never seen to
blow and show its Flowers before the Evening. I am sure the true Christian's
Graces are most illustrious and conspicuous in the dark; yea, his Light arises
out of Darkness; and when the Sun of his outward Comforts is eclipsed or set,
his inward Worth and Glory breaks forth as the Noonday.

And suitable to our purpose, Lib. de Providentia prospera in plebem ac vilia
ingenia deveniunt; at Calamitates Terroresque mortalium sub jugum mittere,
proprium magni viri est. Ibid Sen. Ep. 13.
is what the Wisdom of that sage Heathen, Seneca, observed, Magnum exemplum
nisi mala fortuna non invenit, that none have been so eminently and exemplarily
virtuous, as those that have been signally unfortunate: and he instanceth in
Socrates, and declares that the Trial of his Constancy and Equanimity by a
violent suffering of Death, made him a truly great Man: Circuta magnum Socratem
fecit.

Affliction indeed is no certain sign of God's Favor and paternal Love; but
the willing Susception, and the cheerful bearing of the Cross, is the express
Condition and the peculiar Character of our Christianity, of our spiritual
Sonship or new Birth unto Righteousness. And therefore before those Errors and
Corruptions, which we properly call Popery, had invaded the Church, the Figure
of the Cross was assumed for the Badg of their Profession, and the Ensign of
their Spiritual Warfare, the Pledge of their constant adherence to a crucified
Savior, as it is used by us at this day in the Office of Baptism. Hence it is
that many good Men have petitioned for Crosses, as thinking them the necessary
Attestations of their Sonship, and means of Assimilation unto their Elder
Brother.

But we are under a stronger Obligation, still to be in Subjection to our
Father which is in Heaven; because,

4. He is not only the Father of our Flesh (for in and by him we live, move and
have our natural Being, and from his Blessing we derive all the Comforts of it)
but he is the Father of our Spirits too, and that by a more immediate
Generation: Upon which account he has,

1. A more absolute Dominion over us. And, 2. An infinitely more perfect Love
and Kindness for us than our natural Parents have. Which brings me to my third
and last Point, viz.
III. That we ought to be more subject unto him, than to them. How much rather
shall we be in Subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live?

How much rather shall we be in Subjection to him, 1. In regard of the
Excellency of his Nature, and the Absoluteness of his Dominion. 2. In regard of
the Excellency of his Nature, which is purely spiritual, nothing of Flesh or
Frailty in him; who is not only a Spirit, but the Father of Spirits, of Angels,
and the Souls of Men, the most noble and refined Beings; and therefore must
needs have an infinite Fullness (if I may so express it) and Perfection of
Spirit in himself, infinite Power, Wisdom, Justice and Mercy; and therefore the
highest degrees of Reverence, of Love and Fear, are due to his Supremacy of
Nature, and, as a consequent of this, to his right of Sovereignty, and rule
over us. Job 25.2. Mal. 1.6.
Dominion and Fear are with thee: Fear, as the result and tribute of Dominion.
If I be a Master, where is my Fear? Shall we not pay that Homage to the Father
of the whole Creation, to the Sovereign Master of all the World, which the
Subjects of Families and Kingdoms upon Earth yield willingly to their
respective Lords? Nay, shall not the degrees of our Obedience and Submission
bear some Proportion to the Pre-eminency of the Divine Power and Authority?

When the Question is put, Whom we should rather obey, or be in Subjection to,
the Fathers of our Flesh, Psalm. 76.12.
the Father of our Country, or the Father of our Spirits, who cuts off the
Spirit of Princes? St. Austin's Rule is a safe Direction, Non debet minor
Potestas irasci, si major praelata sit, and we must stand most in awe of him
that has the greatest Power and Right of Rule. And that God has so, will
easily appear:

1. Because his Dominion is Original, in and from himself; all other is
derivative, dependent and subordinate. Our Parents are his Children, and our
King his Subject; Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis; or, in the Psalmist
Phrase, he is terrible to the Kings of the Earth.

2. His Dominion is Absolute, no mixed, no limited Monarchy. Though we have a
saying, that the King rules us, and the Law guides him, yet the Supreme Lord is
not under any control, or any conduct either, but that of his own infinite
Wisdom and Goodness; he does both in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 99.5.
whatsoever pleases himself. and ought to please his Subjects too: But whether
it pleases us or no, God will assert his own Dominion; The Lord will still be
King, be the People never so impatient. It will therefore concern us as well in
point of Prudence, as of Duty, never to rebel against that Power which we
cannot subdue, but with an humble dereliction of our own Wills, to acquiesce in
his; or, in the Psalmist's Phrase, Psalm. 46.10.
to be still, and know that he is God, and will maintain his Prerogative.

3. His Dominion is universal, and he reigns over all, he is Lord of the whole
Creation, the great and little World, and of each part of Man, of the Soul and
Spirit, which is his Creature, or rather his Child, by a peculiar Participation
of his Nature.

1. He gives Laws to our Thoughts, Desires, and Affections, which are exempt
from Human Jurisdiction, and can punish their secret Disorders. For,

2. Such is his Sovereignty over the Spirit of Man, that he can break into the
Soul's last Resort, and strongest Hold, where no other Enemy can enter, and
wound where the longest Sword of Tyrannical Persecutors cannot reach: He can by
an invisible Dart, secret Arrow of his Indignation, shoot into the very Heart,
and give a Wound in the Spirit which none can bear; He can in an instant move
that sense of Guilt which will attach and arrest the Conscience, and make
Desolation a there, where our chief Support and Comforts dwell. The most
enraged, and malicious Persecutors can only kill that which would otherwise die
of it self: But there is no Man has Power over the Spirit, says Solomon.
Eccles. 8.8.
God alone is thus mighty in Strength, and who has hardened his Heart (says
Job) who has stood out, Job 9.4.
and rebelled against him, and prospered?

3. He has the Power of Life and Death, which the Fathers of our Flesh have
not. The Father's Power consists most especially in these two Points, in
punishing and chastizing the Children for their smaller Faults, and
disinheriting them at last if they prove incorrigible: but the Father of
Spirits has Potestatem vitae and necis, the Power of Life and Death over all
his Children, He brings to the Gates of Hell, Wisd. 16.13.
and he brings back again.

And this further obliges us to a patient bearing of his Will in our own
Sickness, our own darkest Walks in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and also
in the last departure of our dearest Friends and Relatives, because God is the
Father of Spirits, and takes no more from us, than what he first gave us.

And hereby we do but attain to some degrees of Abraham's Faith and Patience,
who was not more joyful at the Birth and Growth of his only Son, than ready to
give him again to God in his best Age.

4. He has the Power of the second, as well as of the first Death; Luke 12.15.
or, as our blessed Savior expresses it, when he has killed, has Power to
cast into Hell. Men after they have killed the Body, have no more that they can
do, and our Christian Faith and Hope will bear us up under all the Threatenings,
and Strokes of their Cruelty, and enable us to say with Comfort, what the poor
Lepers spoke in despair. If they kill us, we shall but die; but who knows the
Power of thine Anger, 2 Kings 7.4.
says David? who knows what degrees of Torment the Wrath of an incensed God
can kindle after Death? Temporal Judgments are to the wicked but the beginning
of Sorrows, or in St. Gregory Nazianzen's Expression, (...), the Smoke of the
Lord 's Anger in Hell are the Flames, and the unquenchable Fire of it.

Take the Ashes of the Furnace, Exodus 9.8.
says God to Moses, and cast them into the Air, and they shall be Sores and
Plagues upon them: such are all temporal Punishments (says the excellent
Bishop Brownrig) they are but the Ashes of the Furnace of Hell Fire, not to be
compared to those everlasting Torments. A patient bearing of those Afflictions
with which God chastens his Children and Servants in this Life, is one good way
to escape that Wrath, which he reserves for his Enemies in the next.

Thus have I showed you briefly what good reason we have to be subject to the
Father of Spirits, rather than to the Fathers of our Flesh, our natural or
civil Parents, in regard of the greater Absoluteness and Latitude of his
Dominion.

4. There is one thing more which advances God's Scepter, and awes us into a
lower Submission, and that is, the duration and continuance of his Dominion.
This seems to be implied in our Apostle's present Argument in the very next
Verse to my Text; They verily, (that is, the Fathers of our Flesh) for a few
days chastned us. Their's, if a severe, is but a short-lived Empire: But God
who shows Mercy to thousands, punishes also to the third and fourth
Generation; yea, His Kingdom, as the Psalmist speaks, is an everlasting
Kingdom, Psalm. 145.13.
and his Dominion endures throughout all Generations. I might say much more of
God's Sovereignty and right of Rule over us, a right to give Laws, and to
inflict Punishments, to exact Obedience and enforce Subjection. But I shall
proceed to show you in

The Second Sermon.
SEcondly, That as is his Majesty, such is his Mercy; as he has a more
complete and absolute Right of Dominion over us, so he has an infinitely more
tender Love and Kindness for us, than the Fathers of our Flesh have: This is
implied in their proper Characters and distinctions, Fathers of our Flesh, and
Father of Spirits. This bespeaks place by his very Name and Title, which bears
Signatures of Goodness, altogether as illustrious as those of Power, which you
have seen displayed.

Where Flesh in Scripture is not used to describe Sin either original or
actual, it for the most part denotes Weakness, if not the Corruption, the
Frailty of our Nature: And Spirit is a word of a quite contrary Import, and
carries in the notion of it high degrees of Purity, Knowledge, Power and
Goodness. But,

2. The Pre-eminence of God's Paternal Affection, and the Advantage of his
Discipline, is more plainly represented in the last word of my Text, Live, and
in the Explication of it by those following words, They indeed for a few days
chastned us after their Pleasure, but he for our Profit.

If they design their Childrens Good, they may either through want of Knowledge,
or excess of Passion, mistake the measures of their Discipline; but there are
none of these Imperfections in the Father of Spirits. His Anger, which is the
Product of Love, is also the Subject of Wisdom, and managed by both for a
singular Benefit.

He that is the Father of Spirits, knows their frame, and their Frailties, what
Medicines they need, and what they will bear, and as his Wisdom prescribes and
directs, his Love administers and makes Application.

1. He knows what Medicines they need, what will prejudice their Health, and
what will purge their Distempers, and therefore accordingly orders them pro
jucundis aptissima quaeque See the Art of Contentment, p. 123, 130.
profitable instead of pleasant things, sometimes wholesome Wormwood instead of
luscious Honey.

The same Wisdom and Goodness which denies us those things we like, because
they are hurtful for us, does upon the very same reason give us those
distastful things which he sees profitable.

A wise Physician does not only diet, but if occasion be, purge his Patient
also. And surely there is not such a Purifier, such a Cleanser of the Soul, as
are Afflictions, if we do not (like disorderly Patients) frustrate their
Efficacy by the irregular Managery of our selves under them.

God afflicts no further than the Necessities of his Patients require, and what
is short of this, is, though under the show of Compassion, a real Cruelty.

He does not punish willingly, Lam. 3.33. 1 Pet. 1.6.
nor grieve the Children of Men. Now for a season, if need be, you are in
heaviness through manifold Temptations. If our Affliction be sharp and painful,
certainly God sees that we have need of it, otherwise he would handle us more
gently.

The Husbandman plows not, but to sow, and he plows and harrows no longer than
till the Clods are broken: and God suffers wicked Men, whom the Psalmist
compares to Plowers, (or any other Harassers of our Ease and Content) no longer
to make Furrows upon the Backs, or rather upon the Hearts of his Servants, than
till they are softened and broken, and become a fit soil for his Graces to grow
in. For,

2. He that knows our frame, understands our Frailties too, not only what we
need, but what we can bear, and remembers not only that our Bodies are Dust,
but that our Souls also partake of the Infirmities of their Companions, or
rather of the Discomposures of their Instruments, and therefore resolves that
he will not contend for ever, neither be always wrath, Isa. 57.16.
lest the Spirit should fail before him, and the Souls which he has made; Ezra
9.13.
but he punishes us less than our Iniquities deserve, 2 Cor. 10.13.
and has promised to lay no more upon us than we are able to bear, and that we
shall not be tempted above our Strength.

If he chasten sore, he will not destroy; if he cause Grief, Lam. 3.32.
yet will he have Compassion according to the multitude of his Mercies. Psalm.
102.13,
Many times turned he his Anger away, and did not suffer his whole Indignation
to arise, for he remembered that they were but Flesh.

God will either enlarge our Grace, or abate our Trouble, so that it shall not
overwhelm us.

Who can lift up a Complaint against so compassionate a Father? Who can rebel,
so much as in a hard thought, of the Rigor of his Discipline? Especially if we
consider that he is altogether as much a Father when he corrects, as when he
cherishes us; and that he designs the same Good in a variety of Conditions. He
gives Riches to some, that they may honor him with their Substance, and keeps
them from others, lest they should abuse them to Avarice or Riot. To some he
gives Children to be the Staff and Solace of their Pilgrimage, and takes them
from others, lest they should take them from himself, and draw down their
Affections from things above. Eceius 37.28.
Some he continues in this World to declare the Works of the Lord, and others
he takes out of it to rest from their own Labors. All things, says the wise
Man, are not profitable for all Men. And the Wisdom of the Divine Providence is
seen as well in sending Winter, as Summer, Autumn as Spring, foul Weather as
fair, Adversity as Prosperity, Sickness as Health, and Death as Life.

It was a high Speech of Seneca's (after the manner of the Stoics) Bona rerum
secundarum optabilia, adversarum mirabilia: That the good things of Prosperity
are to be wished, and the good things of Adversity are to be admired. But to
speak the words not only of Truth, but Soberness, great and numerous are the
Benefits of Adversity. The Judicious Verulam magnifies and extols them in this
Comparison: Essays.
Prosperity is the Blessing of the Old Testament, Adversity of the New, which
carries the greater Benediction, and the clearer Revelation of God's Favor.

Solomon pronounces Sorrow more desirable than Laughter, Eccles. 7 3.
because by the sadness of the Countenance the Heart is made better.

Our blessed Lord and Master, who began, and lived and died in Sorrows, seeing
his own Sufferings to succeed so well, and that for suffering Death, he was
crowned with Immortality, resolved to take all his Disciples and Servants to
the Fellowship of the same Sufferings, that they might have a Participation of
his Glory.

No Affliction, says our Apostle, a little after my Text, is for the present
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless it produces the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness to those that are exercised therewith.

Those showers which wet the Husbandman, multiply his Grain, and a dripping
Seeds time is usually followed with a more plentiful Harvest. If the Servants
of God sow in Tears and Blood, those Tears and Blood will but water and manure
their Graces, and make them spring up, and blow into a fuller and fairer Glory:
Thick Mists usher in a bright day, and Clouds of Sorrows are usually the
forerunners of a more clear and constant Joy, and Death it self is an inlet to
immortal Life, which would bring me to the Conclusion of my Text and Sermon,
the great and last end and benefit of all our Crosses, or rather of our patient
bearing of them, everlasting Rest, and Exemption from Trouble in the Life to
come. But it will not be amiss, not only for the vindicating of God's Justice,
but also for the Exaltation of his Mercy, to show in several Instances, what
good Ends, though subordinate to this great one, he propounds to himself in his
most severe Chastnings. One good End is,

1. To make us sensible of our Sins, and thereby to lead us to Repentance. In
the warm Seasons of Health and Prosperity, variety of delightful Objects call
our Thoughts abroad, and we heighten the Pleasure of our Enjoyments, by the
prospect of our Hopes, and easily flatter our selves that when the Sun shines,
and the World smiles upon us, God is well pleased with us too; and that our
Sins are little because his Mercies are so great: but when stormy Clouds and
Thunder are in the Air, we keep within doors, we retire into our selves, and in
the time of Adversity consider, what and how great our Sins are which have
overcast our Heaven, darkened the Light of God's Countenance, and made our Face
foul with Weeping, Job 10.16.
as Job speaks.

The Goodness of God indeed should lead us to Repentance; but such is the
Disingenuity of our Natures, that we too often despise his Goodness, and force
him either to leave us in our Sins, or punish us for them, which is the most
merciful Cure that our Case will admit of. If they be bound in Fetters, Job
36.7.
and holden in Cords of Affliction, then he shows them their Work, and their
Transgressions, as Elihu speaks.

When God had taken away from Naomi her two Sons (though by an ordinary and
usual Death) she concludes, Ruth 1.13.
and so should we in the like Case, that her Sins had deserved it, and that the
hand of the Lord was gone out against her. David's Afflictions had this good
Effect upon him, Psalm. 35.5.
When thy Hand was heavy upon me, etc. I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and
mine Iniquity have I not hid. We are all too apt to turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness, only impudent and hardened Sinners despise his Judgments.

2. As our Afflictions do in general admonish us of our Transgressions; so (as
has been already intimated) they point us to those particular Sins which
provoke God's Displeasure. Joseph's Brethren easily acknowledged their Guilt,
because they saw their Sin written upon their Punishment; Their close
Imprisonment taught them what it was to cast their Brother into a desolate Pit.
And the Wiseman observes, that the turning of the Egyptian Waters into Blood,
was a manifest Reproof of that cruel Commandment for the murdering of the
Hebrew Infants. Wisd. 12.5.


And surely, as one speaks, we might in most, The Art of Contentment.
if not all our Sufferings, see some such corresponding Circumstances, as may
lead us to the immediate provoking Cause of them. God who does all things in
number, weight and measure, does in his Punishments also observe a symmetry and
proportion, and adapts them not only to the Heinousness, but even the very
specific kind of our Crimes, which was observed by Quintus Curtius in the case
of Bessus, Quint. Curt. P. 203, 204.
who betrayed Darius. Scelesti haud raro supplicia luunt ejusdem generis cum
illis quae patrarunt flagitiis. Wicked Men are usually paid home in their own
Coin, made to suffer in the same way they sinned; in which we ought not only to
take notice of the Justice, but of the Mercy of God in giving such Instructive
Corrections, which, like Jonathan's Rod, that was dipped in Honey, enlighten
our eyes, 1 Samuel 14.27.
discover to us by a very affecting Evidence, both the nature of our Sin, and
the necessity of our Repentance.

3. God sends Afflictions to try us. Behold, I will melt them, and try them.
Jer. 9.7.

Now this fiery, this melting Trial, has these two good Ends.

1. To refine our Natures, to purge away our Dross and Corruption. 2. To
discover and illustrate our Virtues and Graces.
1. To purify our Natures and purge away our Dross and Defilements. Prove. 17 3.
The fining Pot is for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold, but the Lord tries
the Hearts.

We are by Nature Massa corrupta, Children of Wrath, being at best but like
Gold and Silver in the Oar, till God puts us into his Fining-Pot, and his
Furnace, yea after God's Grace has renewed us in our first Conversion, we have
many gross and drossy Intermixtures, which will not easily be cleansed off
without a frequent Application of some searching Refiners; the Word of God
indeed is an excellent one, Sanctify them by thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. The
Word of the Lord tried him: Psalm. 105.19. and so it does many others. But,

2. Affliction is also a great Refiner: I have refined thee, Isa. 48.10.
but not with Silver; I have chosen thee in the Furnace of Affliction. The
Furnace is not for the hurt of the Gold, but for the Advantage and Improvement
of it, it loses nothing there but its Dross, and becomes more precious, more
fit for the Master's use, to be made a Vessel of Service and Honor: So are
Troubles and Afflictions God's Instruments, to cleanse and purify our Natures,
to work out the Pride and Vanity of our Minds. This is that good end the
Apostle refers to immediately after my Text, He chastens us for our Profit;
How? That we may be Partakers of his Holiness.

And we should endeavor to gather these Grapes and Figs even from our Thorns
and Thistles, these blessed Fruits of Humility, Holiness, and Righteousness, I
mean, from the Tree of the Cross, that so we may comply and close with God's
Merciful Purpose in afflicting us, saying with Elihu in all meekness, and true
contrition of spirit, I have born Chastisements, Job 34.31, 32.
I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me: If I have
done Iniquity, I will do no more. But,

2dly. Afflictions are sent for trials of the Truth, and sincerity of our
Graces, our Faith, Patience, and the like: That the trial of our Faith, 1 Pet.
1.7.
being much more precious than that of Gold, which perishes, though it be
tried with Fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, says St.
Peter: and Tribulation works Patience, says St. Paul. To both these, that of
Minutius Felix seems to refer, Vt Aurum ignibus, sic nos discriminibus
arguimur; as Fire tries Gold, so Crosses and Perils discover the Truth and the
strength of Virtue.

This is taught us in the Parable of the Stony Ground. Every forward Hearer of
the Word, every specious Professor goes for a good Christian, till he is like
to suffer for his Profession, and till Tribulation or Persecution arise because
of the Word. Mat. 13.20, 21


God indeed sees through our hypocritical Coverings, all our painted and guilt
Outsides, and needs no Touchstone to find out our hidden Faults. But because
we are sometimes apt to mistake our selves, our own Strength, as St. Peter once
did, God in Mercy tries us to give us a right understanding of our selves, of
the true Habit of our Minds. Seneca reports it as the saying of his admired
Demetrius: Lib. de providentia.
Nihil mihi videtur infoelicius eo, cui nihil evenit adversi. I think no Person
so unhappy, as he who enjoys an uninterrupted Felicity. And he shows his
Approbation of it by giving this Reason for it, Non licuit enim illi se
experiri, for he could never prove and know himself, what he was, and what he
was able to do or suffer. Agreeable hereunto is that of St. Austin, Tentat Deus
non ut ipse hominem inveniat, sed ut homo se inveniat: God therefore thus
tries, not that he may find out a Man, but that Man may find out himself, and
be sensible of his own condition.

4. Hos. 5.15.
Afflictions make us more frequent and fervent in Prayer. Most Men too much
forget the God of their Mercies, but in their Affliction they will seek me
early. Lord, Isa. 26.16.
in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a Prayer when thy
Chastisement was upon them. The Sun of Prosperity puts out the Fire of
Devotion, which is kindled and enflamed by the Antiperistasis of a Winter
Blast, a bleak Season of Adversity. Israel learnt not to mourn until they were
sent to Bahel. Jonas sleeps in the Ship, but wakes, and prays in the Whale's
Belly.

5. God in Mercy exercises good Men with Crosses and Sufferings, to wean them
from the World, to discover the Indifferency, if not the Worthlesness of those
Persons or Things which they promise themselves most Satisfaction and Comfort
from: In our Friends and Relations it is usually seen, God soonest takes those
from us, for whom we have the greatest and most immoderate Passion, lest they
should alienate our Affections from himself, or abate the degrees of them, and
cool our pursuit of a Heavenly Happiness.

Yea, when he takes away our Children, the dear Parts of our selves, the
Off-sets of our Stock, he does not only design the better Growth and
Fruitfulness of our own Spiritual Life, by removing the Suckers of Piety and
Virtue; but he designs also their Improvement and unspeakable Advantage, by
transplanting them into his own Paradise.

Pliny the eldest, (though he could not see into the Glories of another Life
for want of our Revelation, yet had studied the World very much, and for his
parts of Nature, Wit and Curiosity, and other great Advantages of Fortune,
might be supposed to know as much as any mere Philosopher) made this
Observation, that no Wish was more frequent among Men, than the Wish of Death,
and thereupon his Conclusion is, that Natura nihil brevitate vitae praestitit
melius; that Nature has not done us so great a Kindness in any thing, as in
shortning our stay in this Life, that we may not contract too great an Intimacy
with the World.

And that we may not too much lament the Condition of those that leave the
World, before it leaves them, who are blasted in the Beauty, and Flower of
their Youth, have their Evening before Noon, and die in their first Enjoments
of the Pleasures of Life. He elsewhere calls Death, Praecipuum Naturae bonum,
the chief Blessing of Nature, which cannot come out of Season; because there is
no Good in this Life, which is not either tempered with some present Evil, or
followed with some evil Effects and Inconveniences: according to that of Pliny
the younger, in his incomparable Panegyric; Habet has vices conditio
mortalium, ut adversa ex secundis, ex secundis adversa nascantur; Such is the
changeable State of us Sejourners upon Earth, that our Comforts breed Crosses,
and what we reap in Joy, was first sowed in Tears.

This is another good End of God's chastning us, to wean our Affections from
this World, while we live in it, and to reconcile us to Death, our last Enemy,
and to make us willing to follow our Friends into another World, who could not
stay with us here, and from whom we cannot there be separated.

I say, methinks we should not be very fond of such a Life, either for our
selves, or those we love best; which is not only so short that it cannot be
kept long, but withal, so full of Trouble, that it is hardly worth the keeping;
nor by consequence to dote on a flattering World, which is so little to be
enjoyed, and its Enjoyments so very full of vexatious Mixtures.

6. Lib. de providentia.
Besides that particular and personal Good which God designeth us in our
Chastisements, he reaches the Benefit of our Example to others, and teaches
them Patience and Constancy by our Subjection to his Fatherly Discipline.
Seneca speaks it of good Men in their Sufferings, Nati sunt in Exemplar, they
are born to be Patterns to others. And we are advised in this Chapter to
consider our Savior's Endurance, for the fortifying of our selves, the
Confirmation of our Courage and Patience, lest we be wearied and faint in our
Minds. Christ suffered for us, 1 Pet 2.21.
says St. Peter, leaving us an Example that we should follow his Steps.

7. God designs a future Good in our present Chastisements, and the Prevention
of a greater Evil, than that which now oppresses us. The Father of Spirits
regards principally their Interest, and if he grieve them here it is that he
may spare them the better hereafter; When we are judged, 1 Cor. 11.32.
we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World.
And indeed, what can afford us so firm and solid a Support under all our Losses
and Crosses, all our Disappointments and Calamities of this Life, as the
comfortable Assurance and Expectation of a blessed Immortality? You have heard
that the Father of Spirits projects many Benefits and Advantages to us in those
Afflictions which seem most to express his Displeasure, and that we ought to
receive them cheerfully at his hand, as the Medicines of our Soul, and the
Seasonings of our Fortune, as the Incentives of our Devotion, and the
Instruments, Polishers and Discoverers of our Virtue; but that which will
enable us not only to bear the Cross with Patience, but with Triumph, and to
glory in Tribulations, as the Apostle speaks, is the Presage of future Joy, and
that well-grounded Hope of Glory, which they excite in our Souls. So that in
regard of this great and last Benefit of our Sufferings, I may forbear any
further Persuasions to Patience, and leave you under the Command and Compulsion
of so prevailing a Motive as your own Eternal Life and Happiness. If there are
other very good Reasons, as you have heard derived from the Power and Goodness
of God, this may supersede them all, How much rather shall we be in Subjection
to the Father of Spirits, and live? Live longer and more comfortably in this
World, live for ever in an Eternity of Health and Happiness in the next.

Now, the God of all Grace, who has called us to his Eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
FINIS.

