Independencie A Great SCHISM.

PROVED Against Dr. OWEN his APOLOGY in his Tract of SCHISM.

As also an APPENDIX to the former Discourse, showing the inconstancy of the
Dr. and the inconsistency of his former and present OPINIONS.

By D. Cawdrey Preacher of the Word at Billing Magn, in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. S. for John Wright at the King's Head in the Old-Baley,
1657.

Independencie A great SCHISM.
CHAP. I. By way of Preface.
Schism, is so heinous in it self (as his own, and other's aggravations of it
hereafter, will make good) and so dangerous and noxious to the Church of God,
(as the event in all Ages has declared); that no Invectives aginst the evils
of it, can well be too great or high. No wonder then, if all men, of any
persuasion, speaking of this Subject do make their entrance at this door: The
Ancients (and latter Divines) agreeing generally in the Notion of Schism, and
never changed, till now. for their mistakes there in, had indeed the the
Happiness* to deal with men evidently guilty of many Miscarriages, as in other
things, so for their Schismatical principles: which being taken up, and
espoused, by some in after-ages, have justly branded them with the crime and
character of Schism. I shall instance in the Donatists (the first in stories,
charged with it, as I remember) whose prime principles (for they took up more
in after times) were these two, 1. That they were the only Church of Christ,
in a corner of Africa, and lest no Churches in the world, but their own. 2.
That none were truly baptized, or entered members of the Church of Christ, but
by some Minister of their party. The Romanists, (as soon as Antichrist took
the throne) have impropriated and stoutly managed these very Principles. They
first assume to themselves, the name of the Church, excluding all, that are not
(as they speak to contradiction) of the Roman Catholic belief. And then,
that none are truly Ordained Ministers, but by their Bishops; and consequently
none are truly baptized, or members, but those admitted by men, so ordained.
These very principles are again improved by men of other persuasions, (whom I
yet name not); and whether our Reverend Author, will acknowledge them to be
Schismatical principles, or no, I do not know; But this I know, that all
protestant reformed Churches at home and abroad (besides those of his
constitution) do hold them so to be. And thereupon (if he desired not to be
singular) he might give up the nature of this evil of Schism, to the
determination and judgment of Ancient and Modern Divines; agreeing (as he
does) in the aggravations of its sinfulness.

Ancients (as Hierom confesses of himself) did perhaps load their Adversaries,
with charges they were not guilty of, (or the Controversy would allow) must be
yielded as a fault. The ground whereof, was partly this, That they saw further
into the ill Consequences of those opinions, than their Adversaries did
foresee; and partly a corruption, which insinuates it self, into the best men,
in the heat of their Zeal against errors, viz. "to strive for victory, rather
than Truth. And though they might so miscarry the notion of Schism, yet that
all Divines, Pious and Learned, in all ages, should so much mistake the Nature
of it, is most improbable; as, that none, but himself, should discover that
mistake, is not very reasonable to imagine.

. 3. How ever the Age wherein we live, has in good measure, freed it self from
the bondage of Subjection to the Dictates of men, because they they lived
before us: yet this course of procedure, has not lost its usefulness, or is
become impertinent. The concurring judgment of all men, of all persuasions, in
all Ages, carries weight of reason with it: especially when it agrees with,
either express Scripture, or regular and rational deduction, from it (to
which he here professes to stand or fall) it is cheerfully to be received. That
which may cause him to lie low, as to any expectation of success, is not only
the praejudice of many ages, the interest of most Christians, and mutual
Consent of parties at variance (taken commonly for unquestionable evidence of
truth) but his own prejudicate notion of Schism, limiting it as he does, to a
difference or division in a particular Assembly parley, which if it be not
clearly and sufficiently made out, will blast his hopes of any good issue, by
this Discourse, page 30,
as himself professes hereafter. But he is not Solicitous of the event,
endeavoring (as he says) to go, whither he should, not whither most men go.

. 4. What advatage in this business, the first chargers of Schism upon others,
have gotten, is not very visible. He that is first in his own cause, Pro. 18.17.
is righteous, but his (innocent) neighbor comes and tryes him. Those that are
most guilty of it, may first clamor against the innocent, but at last will be
proved most Schismatic. But when men cannot reasonably charge others with
that crime, as having never separated from their Churches, (of which they never
were, as he speaks hereafter) the suspicion at least, will lie at their own
door, who have Separated from all Churches (of some whereof they once were) and
they must either prove them all Heretical or corrupt, or themselves to be
Sch^smaticall, in separating from them. The Romanists indeed have made great
use of this Advantage, to accuse first, to hide their own greater Schism. But
the Donatists of old (and those that succeed them now in their principles) had
no color to charge Schism upon all true Churches; for that must lie upon them,
that made so causelesse^ a Separaration; not upon the Churches, which never
were of their Associat^on. But the chief Advantage of Rome, lay in this; that
having once bin a Famous Church, in the Apostles times, they plead the
privileges of that Church, to cover their Apostasy. For (to use the words of
our Author) if any party of men can estate themselves at large, in all the
privileges granted, and promises made to the Church, in general, they need
not be solicitous about dealing with them that oppose them, having at once
rendered them no better than Jews, and Mahumetans, Heathens or Publicans, by
appropriating those privileges unto themselves. Which practice, whether it be
not imitated by himself and party; let him consider what ever is spoken in
Scripture of the Cathol^cke Church, visible or invisible, they have too often
applied to their own particular Churches: and count all without, that are not
within the pale of their Societies, as is else where showed. And I shall add
still his own words; Whereas the parties litigant, by all rules of law and
equity, ought to stand under an equal regard, un^ill the severalls of their
differences, have been heard and stated; one part, is hereby utterly condemned
before it is heard: and it is all one unto them, whether they are in the right
or wrong. How applicable all this is to themselves, will appear ere we have
done.

. 5. In the mean time, (I still follow him) it cannot be denied, but that their
vigorous adhering to the former Advantage, (a thing to be expected from men,
wise in their generation) has exposed some of them to a contrary evil;
whilst, in a conceit of their own innocence, (as being the only true Churches
of Christ) they have insensibly slipped (as is the manner of men) into slight,
and contemptible thoughts of Schism (whereof they are accused) as esteeming it
no great matter to separate from any, or all true Churches; making it no
Schism, See. p. 46
no crime at all: as will appear hereafter. The safest way for them, is to deny
this Separation to be a Schism: for otherwise, he asserts well; To live in
Schism is to live in sin; which unrepented of, will ruin a man's eternal
condition. Upon this therefore depends the issue of this whole cause; For if a
causeless Separation from a true Church, be proved a Schism, (as, I doubt not,
it will) I shall add his own words: Every man charged with it, must either
desert his station, which gives foundation to his charge, or acquit hmself of
the crime, in that station. And this latter (for he likes not to leave his
Station) is that, which in reference to himself and others, he does propose,
and mannages with much confidence; Upon this we put the whole issue of this
present cause.

. 6. For let not them think that the Iniquity of their Accusers (as to other
corruptions) does in the least, extenuate their crime; "Schism is Schism st^ll.
Though our Churches, from whom they Separate, be not so pure as they ought or
would be. Yea though we were worse than we are (as bad as the Church of
Corinth) yet ought not they to separate, from us, as no Churches of Christ
(being desirous of Reformation) but are Schismatics* if they do. They ought
rather to have stayed, and helped to reform us; which they make almost
impossible by their uncharitable Separation from us. This that follows, were
worth their most serious consideration: A conscientious tenderness, and fear
of being mistaken, will drive this business, to another Issue, whereas their
Confidence in carriage of their way, is a stop to their, and our Reformation.

. 7. 8. 9. The state of things, in this time, is too well known in the world,
to the great scandal of Christianity; "And woe is to them, by whom the offense
comes. 1. Protestants are charged by Papists, as Schismatics, for departing
(as they say) from the Catholic Church, which Church they are. 2. Calvinists
by Lutherans, for no crime in the world but this (says our Author) but because
we submit not to all they teach: which he counts unreasonable, upon this
ground: That in no instituted Church-relation, would they ever admit us to
stand with them? Which is as considerable an instance of the power of
prejudice, as this Age can give; unless it may be paraleld in his own Church:
It is as well a Schism, to keep fit members, out of Church-Relations, and
privileges, as to separate from a true Church. 3. Presbyterians are charged
with the same crime, by Episcopal men, because they reject that way of
Government, and somewhat of the external way of Worship. 4. The Independents
are accused, by Presbyterians, of the same fault, for making differences in,
and then separating from their Churches, as no true Churches, and setting up
others of their own. The learned Doctor supposes, this last charge, is in a
short time, almost sunk of it self; and so will ask the less pains, utterly
to remove and take off. But he is an happy man, if things out of sight, were
presently out of mind. His party has rather sunk the charge by their silence
in not answering, than dispersed or removed it. And he will find, that it
swims on the face of those Discourses, written against their way; if he pleased
to take notice of them. And this charge (revived by his Importunity) he will
find, will ask more pains to take off than he is aware of: much more than we
shall need to take, to remove the same charge from our selves, put upon us, by
the other three sorts of men; Papists, Lutherans, and Episcopal. Had it not
been done often and sufficiently, by men of our own judgment, himself has
removed it from us, in removing it from himself, in this discourse. But how he
will remove ours, comes shortly to be considered.

. 10. What those general principles, of irrefragable evidence are, whereby he
will acquit us all, and himself also from the several concernments, in this
charge, we shall readily attend unto. But how the whole guilt of this crime,
shall be thrust into one Ephah, and by whom carried to build it an house, in
the Land of Shinar, to establish it upon its own Base (as he phrasisies it) I
do not well understand. Only I suppose, he will discharge the charge, by a new
definition of Schism (and some other like distinctions:) which if it be true,
will carry it almost quite out of the world, and bless the Churches with
everlasting peace. All Schism, shall be confined to a particular church: of
which hereafter.

. 11. But that he should profess his much rathernesse, to spend all his time,
in making up, and healing the breaches and Schisms among Christians, than one
hour in justififying our divisions, etc. seems strange to me, when as his
whole book, or greatest part, is (as a learned Doctor said) one great Schism,
P. 8.
and in the Design of it, nothing but a justification of himself, and party,
in their Divisions, with us, and Separation from us; and tells us, the cause is
so irreconcilable, that none but the Lamb, is worthy or able to close the
differences made: Who when he will come, and put forth the greatness of his
power, is very uncertain; and he puts us out of hope, that before that, it
shall be accomplished. And yet says; In the mean time, a Reconciliation
amongst all Protestants, is our duty, and practicable; and had perhaps, ere
this, been in some forwardness, had men rightly understood, wherein such a
reconciliation, according to the mind of God does consist. Which, I hope, he
will, ere we part, give us to understand. He seems to place it much, in a
principle of forbearance; that is, in Toleration of one another, in any way of
Religion; the cursed fruits whereof we reap (with lamentation) at this day.
They have indeed strongly improved that principle of forbearance, to persuade
us to bear with them; but how little of it, they have showed to us, the world
is Judge.

. 12. The two general ways fixed on by some, for compassing of peace, and
union among Christians, deserve some consideration, and to be searched to the
bottom: The one is, enforcing uniformity by a secular power: the other, is
Toleration, of all, or most ways of Religion; (except such as concern the
Civil interest). He speaks first of them both together; as if, there were no
hope of union, peace, love to be expected from either, though men of a good
zeal, and small experience, or any other account, may promise themselves much
thereof. It is something else, that must give peace, than what is the product
of the prudentiall considerations of men. As for Toleration, it is indeed a
prudentiall way of those Erastian Politicians, he speaks of below, that would
have the world in quietness on any terms Sect. 15. let what will be come of
Religion, Sect. 17. yet indeed is folly and no prudentiall way: When men have
tried all ways, to settle their interests; p^etie, in cleaving to the way of
God, is the best policy; as the events of both, (to which he often appeals) have
manifested: And, on the otherside, The Commonwealth of Israel, never prospered
better, than when it enforced uniformitie, in the way of Religion prescribed.
But this uniformitie compelled, is a product of Divine prudence, in the first
and second Commandments. And if Christ has instituted any way of Religion and
worship, in the New Testament, that alone must be enforced on all the members
of the Church.

Uniformity enforced, he says, It is the readiest means in the world, to root
out all Religion from the hearts of men, which if it were true, were a potent
Argument for Toleration; which yet he seems not to like. But 1. This was, by
God, thought the best way to plant and preserve Religion, in the hearts of the
Jews. Those great Reformers so famous among them, Josiah, etc: are commended
for compelling of people, and binding them by oath, to serve the Lord. 2. The
parable of compelling men to come in to the Wedding, seems (in the Judgment of
no mean Divines) to allow a power, to bring men to the public Ordinances of
worship. 3. Toleration (which is our present condition, Sect. 12,) has done
much more toward the rooting of Religion, out of the hearts of many men, in 7.
years, than the enforcing of uniformity did in 70 years. 4. To compel
uniformitie, (in a true, or false way) may, by the corruptions of men's hearts,
breed Hypocrisy, Formality, Fieri nee potest, nec solet, ut Deum sincere colat
qui diversas simul Religiones fovere desiderat: certissimumenim est, neutram
credere qui contrarias admittit, Gregor Tholoss.
Atheism, and Anxietie of conscience in some: But good and gracious souls, have
been discovered, and purified by it, as the three Children, and Martyrs have
manifested? 5. Many, at least some, that were enforced to conformity in the
worship of God, in families, or congregations, have blessed God for that
compulsion; who before were Atheists or profane; while they had a cursed,
intolerable toleration, to be of any or no Religion. Lastly, the will indeed
cannot be forced to believe; but that professed Christians should be compelled
to the external profession of that only way of worship, which Christ has
instituted seems as equal and reasonable, as it is unreasonable, that men be
left to their own choice, to worship God, either not at all, or after their own
fancies. And he that denies this, seems to me, to be, if not an Atheist, a
Skeptic in Religion.

enforcing of uniformitie) should have said as much, or something, against
Toleration; which he calls also a prudentiall way, for Reconciliation. Does he
think this (if not the other) is the ready way to plant Religion in men's
hearts? Let experience speak; If since the men of his way have gotten a
Toleration for themselves, they have not opened a door for all errors,
heresies, and horrid blasphemies, or profanesse. But if both these principles
be by him decryed (as he seems to insinuate; because he finds, that events
and executions follow not the conscientious embracing of one or other of these
decryed Principles, he should have done good service, if he had showed us
another way, to this due and practicable Reconciliation which he has not done;
but only tells us, he is persuaded that a general alteration of the state of
the Churches of Christ in this world, must determine this controversy. The
discovery of that way, might perhaps have freed us, from the vanity of those
reasonings, wherewith we are entangled. But I am to seek what he means, when
he says, "he has somewhile since ceased to be moved by the clamours of men,
concerning bloody persecution on the one hand, and cursed intolerable
toleration on the other. As if he took them to be idle clamours of men that
cry down enforcing uniformitie, as bloody persecution on the one hand or
toleration on the other hand, as cursed and intolerable. What, or which of them
will please him? or are both of them useful, according to the various
interests of N^tions? And I would know, why he calls, enforcing uniformit^e, by
the name of bloody persecution. Surely to force conformity, to the way of God,
is no Persecution, much less bloody: but is only a just prosecution of evil
and refractory Rebels to the Kingdom of Christ; unless Magistrates may be
called bloody persecutors, in prosecuting malefactors unto death. And again,
if prosecution of such offenders, as conform not to the way of God, be just
and necessary, then Toleration of such, in other ways, is and ou^ht to be
accounted intolerable, and will be cursed. Certain it is, that the embracing
of, either bloody persecution (which is against the truth) or toleration of all
Religions (as well as the truth) have had providentiall events, suitable
thereunto, as men have placed, their civil interests in them; both have met
with untimely ends, and fearful destruction.

proposalls and attempts made for Ecclesiastical peace, in this little world
of ours, of later times (not to look back to former) either by Erast^an
politicians, on the one side, or Jesu^ticall Toleration^sts, on the other, will
quickly assume, the liberty of affirming, concerning them all, that as wise
men might easily see flawes in all of them, and an unsuitablenesse to the end
proposed; and as good men might see so much of carnal interest, sell e, and
hypocrisy in them, as might discourage them from any great expectation: so
upon many other accounts, a better issue was not to be looked for from them,
than has been actually obtained, which has for the most part been this, that
those that could dissemble most deeply, have been thought to have (and have
had) the greatest advantage; and those that have come with the least candor,
most fraud, hypocrisy, secular baits for the subverting of others, have in
appearance, for a season, seemed to obtain success; And in this spirit of
craft and contention, are things yet carried on in the world. This witness is
true, therefore rebuke them sharply.

parties at variance now, ( Independents, and Presbyterians) are so well
acquainted at length, with each others principles, Arguments, Interests,
Prejudices, and real di^tance of their causes, that none of them expect any
Reconciliation, but merely by one parties keeping its station, and the other
coming over wholly unto them. The one party are got so high, that they will
not come down to the other; the other are so strongly convinced of the error
of their Independent way, that they may not, cannot come up to them: In what a
sad cond^t^on is poor England the while; like to be torn in pieces, by her own
Children.

whereupon having a mutual diffidence in each other, they grow weary of all
endeavors to be carried on jointly in this kind: And this is like to be the
state of things, until another Spirit be powered out on the professors of
Christianity, than that wherewith at present, they seem mostly to be acted.
Now the God of grace, and peace, power out that other good Spirit upon this
Church and Nation, before they be utterly destroyed.

Balm in Gilead? no hopeful way of Reconciliation? Yes, he tells us. The only
way remaining to be fixed on, whilst our divisions continue, is to enquire,
wherein the guilt of them does consist, and who is justly charged therewith: in
special, what is, and who is guilty of the sin of Schism. And this will we
also do if God permit.

subject of Schism, by very learned men; who rather (as he says) endeavored,
to convince their Adversaries (the Romanists) of the insufficiency of their
charge of the Church of England to be Schismatics, in separating from them;
than rightly and clearly to state the thing or matter contended about: which
latter seems to me very strange; For how could they remove the charge of
Schism, and not sufficiently declare what Schism is? wherein they and their
Adversaries agreed: But our Reverend Doctor, had a double design in this
undertaking: 1. To show us a new way of his own, to dispell that charge, by
giving us a new Definition of Schism, not known, or made use of in former
times. 2. Thereby to remove the charge of Schism, from himself and his party;
for so he says here, and hereafter; The present concernment of some fearing
God, lying beyond, what other men have undertaken, something may be farther
added, as to the satisfaction of the consciences of men unjustly accused of
this crime; which is my aim. What satisfaction he can give us and the world in
this undertaking, we shall, by his good leave, take notice of. Only premising
this, that I intend not to deal with whole Chapter and Section, as hitherto I
have done; consenting with him in his Removal of that part of the charge of
Schism, which is common to him with us; and only observe, how he will free
himself, from that part of it, which concerns himself and his party.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Schism in Scripture.
reverend and learned Author (as appears from his, page 16. Sect. 16. of the
first Chapter) undertakes to answer a Popish charge of Schism, upon the Church
of England, directed to both the Universities. And in his vindication of our
Church, (as was expected) carries on the debate so far, as not only to
vindicate himself and his party from the like charge, by some at home, but
also (as many wise men think) to unchurch his mother the Church of England; and
to find or leave no Churches here, but his own as the Donatists of old did.
That this is the result of his discourse (if not the design) will appear,
before we have done. But we shall attend at present, to the method of his
proceeding; who thus begins. The thing whereof we treat being a disorder, in
the instituted worship of God, P. 21.
I suppose it a modest request to desire, that we may abide solely to that
discovery and description, which is made of it in Scripture; that that alone
shall be esteemed Schism, which is there so called, or has the entire nature
of that, which is there so called. It is (they say) an ill sign or omen, to
stumble at the threshold, in going out. The first part of these words, is very
ambiguous, and may have a double sense, either that Schism is to be found, in
matter of instituted worship only, or only in the d^fferences made, in the time
of celebrating instituted worship: and neither of these is true, or yet proved,
and so a mere begging of the question: Yet both of these; are asserted by him
hereafter; the first, Sect 23. the latter, Sect. 9. of which, more when we come
at them. In the mean time we assert the contrary. That as there may be Schism
in the Church about other matters, besides instituted worship* so there may
also be Schism, in other places and times, than those of celebrating worship.
For the second part of the words, which is a Request, it shall by me be readily
granted. That we abide solely to that discovery, and description, which is made
of it in scripture; that, that alone be esteemed Schism, which is there so
called, or which has the entire nature of that, which is there so called. That
is, that only shall be esteemed Schism, which is either expressly in Scripture
so called, or in aequivalent words, or may be deduced thence, by regular, and
rational consequence, as he said above, chap. 1.. 3,

p. 23.
use and notion of the word is, is then first to be enquired: It is taken
there, either in the prime and proper sense, with respect to bodies natural,
for a separation into parts, or (as he expresses it, p. 24.) an interruption of
continuitie, by an external power, a division of parts before- continued: the
places are cited by himself, Math. 9.16. Math 27.51. "the veil of the Temple
was rent, from the top to the bottom into 2 parts. Or in the metaphorical
sense, from bodies natural, to bodies civil, or ecclesiastical; In a civil
body, Joh. 7.43. There was a Schism or division among the people. So Act.
14.4. the multitude of the city was divided; that was not only in their
opinions and judgments, but also into parts or parties, for so its added;
(...), and some were with the Jews, and some with the Apostles. So Act 23.7.
the multitude was divided, some following one, some another of their leaders,
in that dissension; which is the reverend Doctors own gloss. Thus also it is
expressed, in his Testimony in the margin The Inhabitants of Rome, p. 24.
were parted into two parts, and no more agreed, among themselves, and there
was a great Schism. They were divided, not only in their judgments, but in
their societies also, into two parties. This then being the notion and nature
of it in the natural and political sense, it might easily slip, into the
like, in its Ecclesiastical use; to signify, not only a difference in
Judgment, but a separation into parties also. As the Assembly may be Civil or
Ecclesiastical; so there may be a twofold Schism in each, (differing only
gradually) either a div^sion in opinion only, or into Parties also, one part
separating from another. And that the rather, because the latter is the
ordinary issue or consequence of the former. See Act. 19.9. There was but one
assembly at the first, in the Synagogue. But when diverse spoke evil of that
way before the multitude, Paul departed, (...)
and separated the Disciples, etc.

Ecclesiastical sense, the word is not to be found used, p. 25.
but in 1 Cor. 1.10. and 11.18. etc: only in the case of differences amongst
the Corinthians: I hear, that there are (...), among you; which what they
were, will presently come to be considered, when we have heard, what he
accounts in general, the constant use of the word; To denote differences of
mind and judgment, with troubles ensuing thereon, p. 25.
amongst men met in some one Assembly, about the the compassing of a common end
and design. But that this is a forestalling of the Readers judgment, by a mere
begging of the question, has in part been proved, even from the Scripture it
self, where it is used for separation into parties, upon those differences of
mind and judgment, in the political use of the word; and why it may not be so
used, in the Ecclesiastical sense, I see yet no reason; especially when the
proper use of it, is, to signify a breach of union, or a separation of a
natural body, into several parts, two or more. And I have cause to suspect,
that he sticks so hard upon this notion, not so much to confute that charge of
Schism upon us, by the Romanists, as to ward off the same charge* upon himself
and his party; as we shall show hereafter: But, granting him this notion of
Schism, for a while; this is the way, as on the one hand, to free all Church
separation, from Schism, with respect to one another; so on the other to make
all particular Churches more or less Schismatic. For what one Congregation
almost is there in the world, where there are not differences of judgments,
whence ensue many troubles, about the compassing of one common end and design.
I doubt whether his own be free therefrom. Yet he asks confidently below, p.
63. Have we any differences and contentions in our Assemblies? Do we not
worship God, without disputes and divisions? Its happy with them, if it be so:
For let most of the Assemblyes of several sorts and sects be visited, and it
will be visible enough, that in their prophecyings, (as they call them) there
are differences of mind enough, and troubles more than a good many, with
wranglings and janglings, and sometimes railing and reviings good store, that a
man might (upon this one principle of his, besides other) venture to call them
Schismatic Conventicles, rather then Churches of Christ. And why not, as
well as Paul charges that famous Church of Corinth, with the crime of Schism,
for the same or like disorders? p. 27.
They had (says our Author) differences amongst themselves, about unnecessary
things: on these they engaged into disputes and sidings even in their solemn
Assemblyes, probably much vain jangling, alienation of affections, exasperation
of spirits, with a neglect of due offices of love, etc. This was their Schism,
etc. That the Apostle charges this upon them, is true; but was this all? were
there not divisions into parties, as well as in judgment? we shall consider
that ere long. For the present, I say, difference in judgment, Separation may
proceed from Schism. p. 194.
was the ready way, to difference in, and alienation of, affections, and that
to exasperation of Spirits, and that to neglect of due offices of love, etc:
and at last ere long, to Separation of Societies. And he says well. The
Apostle would have them joined together, p. 28.
not only in the same Church Order, and fellowship, but also in oneness of
mind and judgment, which if they were not, Schisms would be amongst them, and
upon those, separation, into several assemblyes; as we see at this day, to a
lamentation. Difference in some one point, of doctrine, worship, or discipline,
has broken the Church into many fractions, almost as many as men; But I shall
observe his observations upon these Divisions amongst the Corinthians.

That the thing mentioned, p. 29.
is entirely in one Church: no mention of one Church divided against another,
or separated from another, or others: the crime lies wholly within one Church,
that met together, for the worship of God, etc: This it seems, is a matter of
great concernment, to be granted or denied. In so much that he professes, p. 30.
That unless men will condescend so to state it, upon the evidence tendered,
he shall not hope to prevail much, in the process of this discourse. This
then being the foundation of that great Fabric of Schism, as he calls it, it
had need be bottomed better, than upon his own bare Affirmation, (which is
all, we yet have for it) without any proof. For this end, I shall take his
first observation, into particular consideration. 1. That the divisions
mentioned, were in one Church is ambiguously spoken; for it may be taken either
for the collection of several Assemblyes in Corinth (where there were
multitudes of Christians) which are sometimes called the Church, yea a
particular Church, with respect to the Catholic or other National Churches So
himself speaks of those Patriarchs (so called) how many or how few soever they
were, p. 121.
they were particular Churches. Or else, that the Saints at Corinth, were, at
this time, but one particular congregation, meeting all, in one place. In this
latter sense, its evident, the Reverend Doctor takes it; but in so doing he
beggs the question, and consents not with himself. For he had said before,
they had disputings and sidings, in their solemn Assemblyes, p. 27.
not one, but many Assemblyes. And the Divines of the Assembly, have made it
more than probable, that the multitude of Christians of Corinth, were too many
to meet in one place, and yet may be said to meet together, (...), not jointly,
but severally in their particular places of meeting. As the Congregations of
London, may be said to meet together on the Lords Day, not conjunctim, but
divisim; 2. That, it was amongst the members of one particular Church, is
gratis dictum; For that all the Christians in Corinth, and about it, were
called one Church collectively, is evident, chap. 1. v. 2. To the Church of
God, at Corinth. And that there were more particular Churches there, or
thereabouts than one, is also evident, both by Romans 16.7. The Church at
Cenchrea, a particular Church distinct from that at Corinth, and also by, 1
Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches; one and yet many
Churches at Corinth. 3. This is also presumed, but not proved, That the crime
of Schism was charged on them, only, within the verge of one Church; as if all
their Divisions were confined to the Church; whereas there were Schisms and
differences, abroad and out of the Church; which I shall evince, first from the
Scripture it self. The differences or Schisms were of several kinds; Some out
of the Assembly, chap. 1. and chap. 3. sidings about their Teachers, as he
speaks p. 27. one said, I am of Paul, etc: these were, its likely, abroad as
they met, one with another; Some were in the Assembly, as those he charges them
with chap 11.18. When you come together in the Church, I hear that there are
divisions among you. But the Doctor carries it so, as if all their differences
were in the Church meeting, when they met to worship God; for reasons hereafter
to be given; The Apostle seems to charge them thus; I hear there are Schisms
among you, not only, in private conferences, chap. 1. but also, which is worse,
in your solemn Assemblyes, chap. 11. when you meet to worship God. And this is
the Doctors own Gloss, (unawares confessed) not content to make this
difference, p. 27.
the matter of their debates and disputes, from house to house, (but) even when
they met for public worship, or that which they all met in, and for, they were
divided on that account (also) chap. 11. This was their Schism, but not the
only, though the worser, Schism; which he confounds too much, to lead us away
in a mist. 4. That there was no one Church divided against another, or
separated from another, is assumed, but not proved, unless by a Negative,
which is invalid; There is no mention of such a separation, therefore there was
none: of which in the next.

Here is no mention of any particular man, or number of men's separation from
the Assemblyes of the whole Church, p. 30.
or of subduction of themselves, from its power, etc: only they had
groundless, causeless differences amongst themselves.

But was this all? were there not separations made, if not from that Church yet
in that Church, as well as divisions? Let the Scripture determine this. 1. The
Apostle, cap. 1. charges them with sidings about their Teachers, v. 11. It has
been declared to me, that there are Schisms among you: One says I am of
Paul, and I of Apollo, etc: And again, chap. 3. v. 3. Whereas there is among
you, envying, and strife, and divisions are ye not carnal, (...)
and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? That is, I am a discitle of Paul, said one, and I
of Apollo said another: In our language, I am a member of such a Ministers
Congregation, says one; such a man for my money: and I am of such a man's
Congregation, said another; and so a third: And hereupon, they (most probably)
separated themselves, into such and such Congregations; with slighting and
contempt of other Ministers, with respect to their own. And is not Separation
the ordinary issue of such envying, strife, and contentions? Let experience,
this day* speak. As Love is the Mother of Union; so Envy and strife, of
Separation.

2. That there was a separation of parties in the Church of Corinth, at least
as to one Ordinance, appears, cap. 11. that of the Lords Supper (as some do
now) v. 18. with 21.22.33. They would, See, Jeams 2.1, 2. etc.
such a company (the richer sort perhaps) meet and receive the Supper
together; and separating themselves, not tarry to take the poor with them.
This was part of their Schism, which the Apostle charges them with, and warnes
them of; They were not yet gone so far in Schism, as to separate from the
Church, by gathering of Churches, in opposition to it; but they were next door
to it, they made separations in the Church, first in their differences of
judgment, and then into parties, as to some Ordinances; Not long after, they
separated into other Churches, slighting and undervaluing the first Ministers
or Churches, as nothing, or less pure than their own; which we see practiced
sufficiently at this day. 3. But suppose it granted, there was but one single
congregation at Corinth, yet the Apostle dehorting the Brethren, v. 10. from
Schism, and writing to more than the Church of Corinth, v. 2. even all that
call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, in every place.

Here is no mention of any substraction of obedience from Bish^ps, Rulers, the
Pope, etc: p. 31.
Nor does the Apostle charge them as Schismatics from the national Church of
Achaia, etc: For the first part, it is no wonder; for such kind of Creatures
were not yet hatched, till many, or some generations after. And for the other,
the Church, was yet but small in Achaia, See him p. 37. f
(some scattered saints there might be, but few Churches) and therefore they
are charged only for their Divisions, and separations in, or from the Church of
Corinth, according to the several Ministers, which they set up, as is most
probable. As in the like case, p. 32.
by him instanced in the time of clement. Some few unquiet persons at Corinth,
drew the whole Society, into division, and an opposition to their Elders, a
few men acted by pride and madness; yet such power had those persons in the
Congregation, that they prevailed to depose the Elders, and cast them out of
Office. Is it not reasonable to think, they set up new Elders and new
Congregations? and most unreasonable to think, that the whole Church, ran
into this madness? and so some Congregations remaining sound, the rest made
Separations from them: and this, Clement calls their Schism. And besides his
several words, to describe it, (...), etc: his word (...), which signifies to
lead away a party, (...), etc, those that walk well, from their honored
Service (though the Doctor ways to know what it meant,) and misconstrues it, I
say, the word (...) implies a separation into other Assemblyes: as the manner
of seducers is, speaking perverse things, to draw away, ((...),) Disciples
after them, Act. 20.30. The like may be conceived, though not so clearly
expressed, in this first Schism at Corinth, the same Church, and place: Surely
those differences noted by Clement in the same Church, were not divisions in
the Church, met together to worship God; but out of the Church, and causing
separations from the Elders, and so from the Church, breaking of it into
fractions; which yet he calls their Schism.

As for his notion of (...), in Clement, to signify then, p. 34.
not a province (as some,) but a city Church, consisting of many
Congregations, the Church (...), etc I am apt to believe his conjecture to be
true. The Church inhab^ting Rome, or the Church at Rome (which at that time,
had no such large Territories, as a Church provincial, or Metropolitan, as
some rather dream, than prove) as its said of the Church in or at Jerusalem,
Act. 8.1. and the Church of God, (...), at Corinth. But yet I cannot agree with
him, that either Rome or Corinth, were in Clements time, only one Parish, (as
he now uses the word) or one Congregation, meeting all in one place. For as I
believe this Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, was intended to be written to
the Church of Cenchrea (which whether it were a stated distinct Church or no
the Doctor knows not p. 39. nor was persuaded it was completed p. 38. but yet
supposes, it comes under the same name with Corinth, ibid. though Paul mentions
it, as a distinct Church, Romans 16.1. and Phaebe to be a Deaconesse; or Servant
of that Church) to the Church, I say, at Cenchrea; So I see no reason, but
there might be and were several Churches, or Assemblies in Corinth, each
distinct from other; though not such Parishes, as ours are in London, etc: the
greater part, being yet Heathens, and the Magistrates not yet Christian, to
erect, or allow them Churches, as now we call them; or to distribute them into
particular Parishes; which was done, as soon, as most or all became Christians.
However, the Doctor acknowledges the word Parochia may be so called, p. 35.
from them who met together to break bread, and to eat, from (...) convivator.
Whence it will follow, that if the multitude be so great, that they cannot meet
in one place, to hear the word, or to break bread (as its evident the 3000, or
5000 at Jerusalem, could not) then look how many meeting places there were for
this purpose, so many Parishes, or Congregations there were, at Jerusalem or
Corinth, having several, if not fixed Elders over them, and yet the whole but
one Church.

p. 42.
But if he grant, that this evil mentioned by the Apostle, is Schism, does it
conclude that nothing else is Schism? He answers, he is inclinable so to do,
and resolved, that unless any man can prove, that something else is termed
Schism by some Divine writer, etc: he will be at Liberty from admitting it so
to be. Surely this is no safe Rule to go by: For as there are some virtues,
which are not termed so, expressly in Scripture; So there may be degrees of
Schism, which are not so expressly called there. It is sufficient, if the one
have the nature of such a virtue, the other of such a crime, though not so
called. There are other words used to signify the same thing. As Romans 16.17.
(...), of (...) and (...), as signifying a division into two parts, or parties;
And what thinks he of the word (...), which comes from a root, that signifies
sometimes trahere to draw, and sometimes sectari to follow; See Council. 1.
Constantinop. some are called Heretics; that hold the sound faith (...).
as Sect-masters use to draw away Disciples after them; and those that follow
them are called Secta, a sequendo; The opinions of the Philosophers, of
several Sects, were called (...), heresies; and their followers, Sects,
divided not only in opinion, but in parties and Schools also. So Paul uses the
word, Act. 26.5. according to the mos^ strict Sect, of our Religion, I lived a
pharisee: And is not heresy as bad a word as Schism? or is it any advantage
for a separatist, to change his name, from Schismatic to Heretic? The Apostle
1 Cor. 11.18.19. uses them promiscuously, one for another: I hear that there
are Schisms among you. For there must be heresies among you also. The word
heresy commonly is used to signify error against Faith, (which sense he is
not pleased with, p. 46.) as Schism is a sin against love; If he like not to
give his Separation, the name of Schism (though it has fully the nature of it)
let him, have good leave to call it Heresy; This men gain when they will
dispute about words.

Besides, the Scripture uses other words to signify Schism, in a political
sense; Math. 12.25. A Kingdom or house, (...), divided against it self; that
is, into parts, and so into civil wars, and dissensions, cannot stand: which
Act. 14 4. is expressed by (...), the multitude was divided, and that into two
parts (as well as opinions) as it follows; and some (...) were with the Jews,
and some with the Apostles, as I noted above: If this may not rather be
understood of an Ecclesiastical separation; for it was occasioned by
differences in one Assembly, v. 1. They entered into the Synagogue of the Jews,
etc: The unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds ill
affected against the brethren, v. 2. which caused that separation.

And the Schism was made by those turbulent Jews, the causes of that
separation, not by the Apostles or their party.

Schism, in the Church, was but an Embrio, in the Apostles time; at first a
difference or division only in judgment but quickly grew into separation or
division into parties.

But we need not plead any other text for our notion of Schism, but what is
included in this place of the Corinthians, having made it appear, that there
was a separation made in that Church, by such as lead away Disciples after
them, or rather by them; who by having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons, set up one Minister above another, and against another.
However, something may be deduced by paritie of reason If divisions of persons,
in a church, in judgment, may be and is called Schism, in Scripture; then
Separation from a true Church, (grounded upon those divisions at first, in an
Assembly, about unnecessary things, as he said) may well and much more, be
called Schism. For (says he) He is a Schismatic, p. 43.
guilty of this sin of Schism, who raises, or entertaineth, or persisteth
in such differences. And is not he much more a Schismatic, who having raised
groundless differences in a Church, and persisting in them, draws Disciples
after him, and sets up another Church in opposition to that from whence he
separated? To separate men, in judgment, in a Church, is a Schism and crime bad
enough; but to separate them from the Church, upon the former, is far worse.
Now this, as it may be done in a Church of many Congregations, all professing
the same truth, and practicing the same worship; So the persisting in such
differences by any one Congregation, against the rest, is a Schism in that
Church (as of Corinth) and ends commonly in separation from that Church: But
let us hear further, what is required to make guilty of Schism.

That they be members of, or belong to some one Church, which is so by the
institution and appointment of Jesus Christ. The ground of this assertion is,
that he by one Church, means only one particular Church, or Congregation; So
that if a man be not a member of that one Church, he can neither be a
Schismatic to that Church, nor to any other. But this, I suppose, to be his
(...), his great mistake, and the cause of all his miscarriage hereafter. For
as there may be a Schism in a Citie-Church, of many Congregations, which are
such, by the appointment, or allowance of Jesus Christ, (suppose them all
Independent, if he please): So one that is a member of one of the Congregations
of that Church, yea that is a member of none of those, but of some other, may
be a Schismatic to that Church collectively taken, and to any one of those
particular Congregations, to wit, if he shall raise any differences in any one
of them, and persist to maintain them, being e^ther expressly against the
Gospel, or merely of things unnecessary, etc. And this I shall prove; 1. By the
Doctors own principle; He that raises differences in any Congregation (and
persists therein) is a Schismatic; as was newly by him asserted: But that
Christian that breaks the peace of any Church, more general or particular, by
erroneous or unnecessary disputes, raises differences in that Church; and
therefore he is a Schismatic. Then it follows, that it is not necessarily
required, to the guilt of Schism, that he be a member of that one Church, but
he may be a member of another Church, or of no Church, but only a Christian. 2.
I prove it from a Scripture instance, Act. 15.1. Ceratine men which came down
from Judaea, (to Antioch) taught the brethren saying, except ye be circumcised,
etc: ye cannot be saved. These men were no members of the Church of Antioch,
but of Judaea, or Christians at large, of no particular Church: yet these men,
making differences in the Church of Antioch, are said, v. 24. to trouble them
with words, subverting their Souls, and therefore might justly be called
Schismatics: He cannot now say; this was not a Church of the institution of
Christ; for whether it was then but one particular Congregation, or consisted
of many congregations, (as not able to meet in one place), both ways it was a
Church of Christ's appointment. For the very light of reason, speaks thus much,
That when a Congregation or first Church, grows too numerous, it should swarm
out into lesser Congregations: and yet those distinct Congregations may fairly
be said to be but one Church; and have still some dependence (what ever it be)
one upon another.

It is required (says he) that they either raise, entertain or persist in
causeless differences, p. 44.
with them of that Church, etc: This is answered in the former, in part. And I
add, that those differences raised, etc: in that Church, though by a member of
another Church, do cause an Interruption of that exercise of love, which ought
to be amongst them, and the disturbance of the duties required of that Church,
in the worship of God, which he requires to make one guilty of Schism. It were
very strange, that he that entertaines, or persists in those differences should
be a Schismatic, and he that first raised them (though of another Church)
should be none.

It is further required, that these differences be occasioned by, and do belong
to, some things, in a remoter or nearer distance, to the worship of God. This
will reach a great way; even civil differences (as they may be called Schism,
as we heard above* so they) may come to trench upon the worship of God. But may
there not be differences in other matters, besides worship, which may amount to
a Schism? He told us above, that Schism might be, in unnecessary things, p. 27.
things that properly concern not the worship of God? such were those sidings
about their Teachers; not in the worship of God, but from house to house, as he
confessed above. But supposing the differences to be in the worship of God,
that is, in the time and place of it, may they not be in matter of doctrine?
perhaps he will say, that is Heresy, or Apostacy, not Schism (for so he
says, p. 161.) But 1. Every difference in matter of doctrine, is not Heresy,
much less Apostacy; Heresy is not charged usually on any, but either for
fundamental errors, or obstinacy in them; And though we commonly place,
Schism, in matter of discipline, or circumstances of worship, and Heresy in
matters of doctrine, yet, as we see by experience, those that began with
Schismatic separations, end too often in Heresy: So a Schism at first, if
obstinately persisted in, may come to be Heresy, (for there is a doctrine of
discip^ine, in the Scripture): and a Schismatic wilfully defending his
error, though but in a matter of discipline, or other unnecessary opinions,
may prove to be Heretical. 2. Heresy and Apostacy, presuppose Schism first:
So that a man may be a Schismatic for raising the difference, and an Heretic
in persisting in it. And say the same of Apostacy; as more perhaps hereafter.
Or may there not be Schism in a matter of discipline, which is distinguished
from worship? Surely the greatest Schisms at this day, are found about
discipline; As is evident, in the difference between Papists and us, in
subjection to the Pope: between Episcopal men and us, about submission to the
Hierarchicall Government, between the Presbyterians and Independents, where the
administration of discipline lies. And each parties charge one another with
Schism; as he aff^rmes in his following discourse. In doctrine and worship, the
Independents, some of them and we agree, having the same Confession of Faith,
the same Ordinance of worship. The discipline only makes the Schism; whereof
who is most guilty, will appear anon. Certain it is, on which party soever
the charge falls, to be guilty of this crime, they will be found to show
themselves carnal or to have indulged to the flesh, page 44.
and the corrupt principle of Self, and their own wills, etc.

professes, "he could never yet meet with a definition of Schism, that did
comprise, that was not exclusive of, that, page 45.
which alone, in the Scripture, is affirmed so to be. That shall be tried by
considering the definitions, ordinarily given. The definition of Austin is
this, Schisma est dissidium congregationis; when men of the same judgment in
doctrine, and same rites in worship, delight in the discord of the
Congregation. By dissidium Congregationis, the Dr. says he means, 'A
separation from the Church, into a peculiar Congregation. Which was the case of
the Donatists, which he had then in hand.

But 1. this definition is just the Doctors Dissidium Congregationis, is not
properly a separation from, but in the Church; and such was that of the
Donatists at first, till, refusing, or receiving no satisfaction, they
separated into other Congregations, and bid defiance to the Church; which is
the Common issue of such intestine divisions. Acts 15.39.
Paul and Barnabas, two holy, good men, first fell into a paroxysm of
contention, and presently separated and parted asunder.

2. Basil's definition, is almost the same; who makes schism to be a division
arising from some Church controversies; and (...), to be the unlawful
Conventicles, the ordinary consequents of such division; First, they raise
divisions, that is the first degree of Schism; from Schism they fall into
Heresy, the second degree; and then separate into new conventions, page 46.
which is the highest Schism. Nor, because of later years, honest and pious
meetings for Religion, were called Conventicles, and Schism, therefore may men
conclude, that there is now no Schism in unlawful Conventions apart from a true
Church, when it shall be determined so to be.

3. The Common definition given, That Schism is a causeless separation from
the communion and worship of any true Church, etc. presupposes a Division in
that Church, which occasions that separation, one party not being satisfied by
the other. The Crime of which separation, must be taken, and judged by the
unjustness of the cause thereof, which cannot be in a true Church, but in those
that separate from it. For if a Church, be either no true Church, or so
extremely corrupted, that a good Christian cannot hold Communion with it
without sin, such a separat^on is no Schism, but they are the Sch^smaticks, who
give the cause of that separation. But the Reverend Doctor is very large in his
allowance of Separation; page 46.
for he says, Certain he is, that a separation from some Churches, true, or
pretended so to be, is commanded in the Scripture; so that the withdrawing from
any Church, or society whatever, upon the plea of its corruption, be it true or
false, with a mind and resolution to serve God in the due observation of Church
institutions, according to that light which we have received, is no where
called Schism, nor condemned as a thing of that nature etc. If this be true,
there will be found but little or no Schism in any Church, or in the World. If a
man may lawfully separate from a true Church, as well as from a false, and that
upon a false plea of its corruption, as well as true, only with a good mind to
serve God, in Church institutions, true, or conceited by his own light; all the
Sectaries and Separatists, Donatists and Brownists in the world may be
justified, But this will come again below; thither I shall remit the particular
scanning of it.

p. 47.
that he complyes with them, that have slight and contemptible thoughts of
Schism, or to plead for his own Separation from our true Churches (as we are
able to prove them) he will at present heighten the heinousness of Schism,
when he has first considered what aggravations, others have put upon it.

a renting of the seamlesse coat of Christ, page 48.
but (says he) they seem to have mistaken their aim, and instead of
aggravating, extenuated it: a rent of the body is not hightned, in its being
called, the renting of a seamless coat. But this is but a nicity. I suppose
they used it only by way of allusion, a minore ad majus. The Soldiers thought
it not wisdom to divide that seamlesse coat, whereby it would be rendered
useless to all; how much more heinous was it to rent his Body. The Church is
called Christ's mystical Body. Look then as it was an heinous thing to those
Soldiers to divide his seamless coat, and much more to divide by piercing his
natural body: so it is more heinous to rent his body mystical; which must needs
reach to him the Head. This is the Apostles way of arguing, 1 Cor. 1.13. Is
Christ divided? (...) divided into parts.
q. d. Do you not by these divisions, divide and rent the Body of Christ? and
does not Christ himself suffer in such divisions? But enough of that.

It is usually said to be a sin against Charity, page 49.
as Heresy is against Faith: but is Schism so a sin against Charity? does it
supplant and root out love out of the Heart? He means so, as Heresy does the
Faith. But that is not the question; but whether Schism be not a sin against
Charity, as well (though not as much) as Heresy is a sin against Faith? And
suppose it do not root out Charity, may it not supplant, or at least suppress
and weaken it? may it not interrupt the exercise of the duties of love (as he
said above p. 27.) their Church order, as to Love, Peace, Union, were woefully
disturbed with divisions, etc. And if Schism be persisted in, it may in the end
root out Charity, and be inconsistent with it, as well as Heresy does the
Faith: Nor does every Heresy root out all Faith; a man may be an Heretic in
one Article, and Orthodox in the Faith, in others. Yea, page 49.
himself here confesses, men by Schism are kept off from the performance of any
of those offices, and duties of love, which are useful, or necessary for the
preservation of the bond of perfection, and then is it, or may in some sense,
be said to be a sin against Love. When the Apostle says, that Love is the bond
of perfection, because it preserves that perfect and beautiful order amongst
the Saints, notwithstand^ng all hindrances and oppositions made by Schism; He
tells us rather what true love is in it self, and ought to be in us, than what
it is manifested to be in men's corrupt hearts, and con^ersations. Divisions
among them, breaches of Love: so he, page 69. page 50.
They then that described it to be " open breach of love, aimed near, at the
true nature it; which his wary consideration, does not excuse from Schism. For
suppose it were possib^e* for a man to be all, and do all, that those were and
did, whom the Apostle judges for Schismatics, under the power of some violent
temptation, and yet have his heart full of love to the Saints, to the communion
disturbed by him, which is very rare; Yet that person, who ever he be, could
not be excused from Schism and a breach of charity, any more than those, whom
the Apostle calls Schismatics, who no doubt some of them, were under some
violent temptation. It is again confessed, It is thus far a breach of love, in
its own nature, in that in such men, Love cannot exert it self, in its utmost
tendency, in wisdom and forbearance for the preservation of order in the
Church. If this had been said at first, this had been enough to aggravate the
sinfulness of Schism.

it is a rebellion against the Rulers of the Church; if they mean it, page 50.
in regard of their Canons and imposition of unnecessary Ceremonies etc. let
them plead for themselves. But if he mean, that Schism may be raised, against
the instituted Rulers of the Church, walking in the truths, and ways of
Christ, (as well as against any other members of the Church) it may be so far
called Rebellion against the Rulers of the Church, as they* that desp^se
Christ's Ambassadors, despise Him also, the mischiefs whereof, extend to the
whole Church. And commonly the Schism begins against the Rulers of the Church;
as that against Moses and Aaron did: So that at Corinth in Clements time. This
is too evident, at this time, That all the present Schisms, strike principally
at the Ministers of the Gospel, All Sects, contending against them primarily*
and reproaching of them, either as Antichristian, He calls them, parochial
Priests. page 235.
or as no true Ministers (besides worser names of ignominy and contempt)
wherein the Dr. and his party, are not a little guilty* as will appear before
we have done.

Schismatics be Church Members, or no, is a question of no great concernment.
The Doctor is peremptory It is impossible a man should be a Schismatic, p. 51.
unless he be a Church member. If he mean it of a member of the Catholic
Church, its granted: for an Heathen cannot be a Schismatic. But if he mean (as
I believe he does) no man can be such, unless he be a member of a particular
Church, it is made appear to the contrary above, and shall be more hereafter.
For the present I only say, Suppose a Schismatic of himself departs from the
Church, or is ejected by the Church; yet still persists to maintain the
differences by him raised, in that Church; I desire to know, whether he ceases
to be a Schismatic, because he is now no member of that Church, or is not
still such, by the Doctors own principles? But too much of that.

Definition of Sch^sm, given by himself, A causless difference, or division,
amongst the members of any particular Church, page 52. Is not this a man's
definition, and the strength of it this? such an act is Schism, therefore none
else is: See p. 44.
that meet or ought to meet to the worship of God* etc. he proceeds to deliver
the Aggravations of the sin of Schism, wherein I shall agree with him fully;
though not in his definition, in all particulars, as was said above. That, that
is a Schism I confess, and contains a part, but not the whole nature thereof.
For, as I believe, a Schism may be made in a particular Church, by one that is
no member thereof* (seducers use to creep into houses and Churches, and raise
differences). So I think, a particular Church, or some members of it, may make
a Schism in and from the Catholic Church, or other particular Churches, which
shall be capable of those aggravations by him given. Look as in the body
natural, there may be supposed a Schism, amongst the fingers of either hand,
whereof they are the more immediate members, which yet may truly be said, to be
a Schism, in relation to the whole body, which has influence into, and
interest in those members, and shall suffer not a little by their divisions: So
it is in the body mystical, though the divisions immediately disturb the
particular Church, where they arise, yet they also reach to the disquiet, and
danger of the next Congregations, and then of the whole Church, "A little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump. A mutiny begun in a single troop, has been
the ruin of the whole Army. The Design (however disclaimed p. 47. f.) I fear is
this. This definition of Schism is forelaid, and so often repeated to prevent the
charge thereof, upon himself and his own select congregation. If they have but
so much wit, or so much grace, as either not to raise, or not to discover any
causlesse differences amongst themselves, though they separate from, and
disturb the peace and union of the whole national Church, or all the Churches
of a Nation, they are by no means to be styled Schismatics. But more of this,
in Hypothesi, when he comes to apply it to themselves.

Church of Rome, is a Church of Christ, or no, page 56.
and how they are Schismatical; I list not to be their Advocate, they are old
enough, to answer his charge themselves. I think he has said enough (if not
too much) to vindicate the Protestant Churches from Schism, in their separation
from Rome. But his principle will carry him further, not only to unchurch Rome,
but also all Protestant Churches, at home and abroad, for want (as he thinks)
of a right constitution by Jesus Christ: as well as to free himself and his
from the crime of Schism: as will presently appear. Only I observe that he does
not charge Rome it self to be Schismatical, but upon supposition, that it is a
Church; (which he denies below) then indeed, by her intestine divisions, she is
the most schismatical Church in the world; but if no Church, not schismatic;
whereas our Divines, have proved her schismatical, not only by her intestine
differences but chiefly by her schismatical principles, as those above
mentioned, That she is the Catholic Church, and none out of her Communion, are
any better than Heretics, Our Conventicles are no Churches, but styes of
beasts p. 63. say they.
or Heathens. That Ordination is void, except done by her Bishops; and also,
and especially, by her abominable corruptions, doctrine, and worship, departing
therein from the Scriptures, and example of the Apostolical Churches. Now his
chief, if not only principle, to conclude himself not schismatical, in
separating from Rome, is this, That there was never any such thing, page 60.
as that which is called the Church of Rome, instituted in reference to the
worship of God by Jesus Christ, which he hereafter affirms also of National,
and Presbyterian Churches, as he thereby frees himself from Schism, in
separating from all Churches in the world: So he therewith unchurcheth all our
Churches, as well as Rome.

upon the same principle, a plea, page 64.
for freedom from the charge of any Church, really, or pretended, as National,
may be founded and confirmed. That principle is, the definition of Schism
before given, Schism is an evil amongst the members of a Church. And hence he
inferred against the Church of Rome, If our own Congregations be not Churches,
whatsoever we are, we are not Schismatics. And against them that plead for a
National Church, and charge them with Schism for separating from it, he says
again; If we are not of the National Church, page 67.
(as they protest they are not) whatever we are, we are not Schismatics. And
this will once more be made use of, against the charge of Schism, in separating
from our present Churches; as we shall see below. But he makes a Dilemma, and
thinks it both ways unanswerable, either we are of the National Church of
England, or we are not. If not, whatever we are, we are not Schismatics. If we
are, and must be of it, whether we will or no, being made so, we know not how,
etc. show us then, what office of Love is incumbent on us, that we do not
perform. His arguing is not distinct, having not tot told us what he means by a
National Church. If he take it, (as he seems to do) for the Hierarchical
Church, with National Officers, with subordinations, etc. I would say, Its
certain, himself was once of that National Church, a member of it, perhaps
zealous of Episcopacy, and an exact observer of its Canons; So that, if that
National Church be proved (as it is by some attempted) to be a Church of
Christ's institution, he cannot be excused from Schism in separating from it.
For though they cannot charge him, as now, of that Church, both it being
abolished, and himself changed into another way, yet they may say, he was not
long since, a member of that National Church. But if he take National Church,
as the Churches were in the Nation, all professing the same truth, and
exercising the same substantial worship, (as the most Orthodox understood
England to be a National Church) he must either acknowledge himself to be still
a member of this National Church, (as he does page 224.) or else renounce
communion with her also as no Church, or Churches of Christ: which whether he
does or no, comes after to be considered.

For the other horn of his Dilemma, If they are, and must be of this National
Church etc. what duty of Love is there, which they owe to it, and do not
perform? Seeing he makes the challenge, and professes, that if it can be shown,
he will address himself to it. I shall take the pains to inform him fully,
before we have done; only now considering what he says here. Do we not (says
he) join in external acts of worship, in peace, with the whole Church? p. 67.
Call the whole Church together, and try what we will do? Is not all this
aequivocally spoken? In what external acts of worship, do they join with us, as
a Church? Do they not disown us, as no Churches? and our Ministers as no
Ministers? and admit none to worship with them, but confederat members? When
they sometimes preach in our Congregations, or hear us preach, do they not
count themselves to us, and us to themselves, as gifted brethren only, but no
Ministers? And what means he by the whole Church? or how can it be called
together? unless he mean his own Church, or Churches. How then do they join in
every Congregation in the Nation? When (though they presume to preach in our
Churches, to steal away our people from us) their own people will seldom or
never come into our Congregations to hear, unless some of them preach. Ad
populum phaleras. And as for their joining in peace, with the whole Church, it
is a Blind: for they separate themselves with some of our members, from our
Churches, to the great discouragement of the Ministers, and greater disturbance
of the whole, and all the Churches of the Nation.

Counsel that he gives to members of particular Churches, page 70,
who have voluntarily given up themselves, to walk in them, according to the
appointment of Jesus Christ, I fear, extends no further than to his formed and
confederate Churches, That they would be careful to prevent causeless
differences, in their own meetings, or among themselves; which if they do, let
them all say what they will, they are no Schismatics. For as for our
particular Congregations, they scarce account them Churches, though most of the
members of them, have voluntarily given up themselves explicitly, or
implicitly (as New England men confess) to walk in them, according to the
appointment of Jesus Christ. And if they grant ours to be true Churches, they
must necessarily acknowledge, those who first raised causeless differences in
them, and now foment them by separation from them, to be Schismatics, by his
own description. Yea so much worse, than those Corinthians, whose case he
exemplifies, if so be they did not upon their differences, separate into
parties and Churches, (which he denies, but we conceive they did) and these
both raise differences, and then separate from our Churches, into several
combinations; and one says, I am of Paul's Congregation, and another, I am of
Apollo's, I speak this in a figure, as Paul did. 1 Cor. 4.6:
He can easily apply it.

CHAP. III. Causeless Separation from a true Church, is Schism.
Objection, (as obvious to be made by every man) That if Schism be on^y amongst
the members of one Church, page 72.
then the separation of any man or men, from a true Church, or one Church from
another, is not Schism; which is contrary to the judgment of most Christians,
Divines, and Churches; he hopes to help himself by his old definition of
Schism, in the Scripture precise description of it, as he limited above: And
peremptorily denies, that in that sense, there is any relinquishment,
departure, page 73.
or separation from any Church, or Churches, mentioned or intimated in the
Scripture, which is, or is called Schism, or agrees with the description by
them given us, of that term. But to this, I have many things to say. 1. That
precise signification of the word, and description of the thing is before
disproved. The word properly signifies a separation of a Body into parts, and
is applied both to political and Ecclesiastical Bodies in the Scripture; as was
proved above. 2. Supposing that to be the only sense mentioned in the case of
the Corinthians (which is denied and disproved) yet may another sense be
intimated in Scripture, and deduced by regular and rational consequence. The
word signifying indefinitely separation, either in opinion, or parts, is it not
a fair consequence? If separation in judgment in a Church, be a Schism, much
more upon that difference, to separate from a Church, into another against the
Church. 3. St. John blames some for separating from the Church, 1 John 2.19.
they went out from us, etc: as is the manner of Schismatic and Heretical
Spirits: being obstinate in their opinions, and opposed by the Church, they
stay not, till they are cast out, but go out, and become the head of a faction,
against the Church: as histories do abundantly manifest. 4. His own places
brought for instances of blameable separation from a Church do all or some
mind the nature of Schism, as precedaneous to that separation, therefore this
sense is intimated in the Scripture, we shall consider them in order.

Heb. 10.25. not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as some do:
He renders the words (for his own advantage) not wholly deserting the
Assembling of our selves, etc: and makes it to be Apostacy from the faith, p.
74.
and thereupon upon forsaking the Assemblies: would any man call these
Schismatics, says he?

He formerly glossed this text, of neglecting the public Assemblyes only: see
Appendix.. 14.
He makes the context to be with the 26. v. that so he may draw it to Apostacy,
they departed to Judaism; but it rather looks back to the 24. v. Let us
consider one another to provoke unto love and good works, which is the fruit of
brotherly watchfullnesse in members of a Congregation: Mat. 18.15. (...), not
forsaking the assembling, etc: but forsaking another, q. d. If we, forsake the
assemblyes of the Church, we shall quickly neglect that brotherly mutual care
and inspection of one another, and so fall into separation or Apostacy. And
the 26 v. rather referres to the latter end of the 25. v. but exhorting one
another so much the rather, as you see the day approaching: For if we sin
willingly, etc: If we forsake the assemblyes, neglecting brotherly inspection,
and so fall into Schism, or Apostacy, (from one to the other) the end will be
dreadful.

But first, Estius in loc.
the Latin Interpreters expound it, of forsaking the Assemblyes, either by
Schism or Apostacy. 2. Apostacy is graduall, either partial in some point of
Faith; or total in all; the first may proceed to a Schism in the Church; the
second to a separation from the Church. As those, Act. 15. that in part forsook
the way of the Gospel, and joined Moses with Christ, circumcision with
baptism, are said to go out from the Apostles, v. 24. Certain, that went out
from us, have troubled you with words: These were Schismatics in the one, and
Apostates, or Separatists in the other. An Heretic or an Apostate may be a
Schismatic, and something more; as a Schismatic too often proves an Heretic.
For when seducers have first raised divisions in a Church, they either
voluntarily forsake it, or are justly ejected by the Church, and then gather
their Disciples into distinct bodies; in opposition to the Church as I said
above. The Apostle describes them thus, Act. 20.30. Of your own selves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them. These
are grievous Wolves, v. 23. so far from taking care of the flock, that they
rent and tear it, not sparing the flock. And therefore the Apostle joins
these together, 1 Cor. 13.25. That there should be no Schism in the body, but
that the members should have the same care one for another: Implying that where
there is a Schism, in the Church, the members neglect the care one of another;
and when the members neglect the care one of another, there is a Schism in the
Church. But if they so far neglect the care of one another, as to separate
from the Church, that is an higher degree of Schism, even a double Schism. As in
the body natural; if it be a Schism, for one member to rent and tear another,
in the body, much more to rend and divide themselves from the body, when they
cannot have any care one of another. We see this exemplifyed at this day. When
men have first raised divisions in the Church, they separate from the Church,
and gather themselves into distinct bodies, having no care for the body from
whence they separated, scarce owning them for Churches, but rather account them
no true Churches, reproaching and reviling them; Are not these Schismatics.

blameable separation, is of some, who withdraw themselves from
Church Communion, p. 75.
at least for a season by their disorderly and irregular walking. 1 These. 5.14.
(...), and (...), 2 These. 3.2.6. Such there were in the primitive times, and in
our days, whom we charge not with Schism, but vanity, folly, and disobedience
to the precepts of Christ, in general. No mervail these are not charged with
Schism; for they neither raised divisions in the Church, nor separated from the
Church but were disorderly and irregular out of the Church, in neglect of their
callings; So the Apostle expressly instances, 2 These. 3.11. we hear that there
are some which walk among you disorderly, not working at all, but are
busybodies. They did not separate from the Church, but rather (^s some now do)
made their frequenting of public meetings and exercises, the Cloak for their
idleness; thinking the Church was bound to maintain them. They were so far
from separating from the Church, that some (who bring, v. 14. for
excommunication) think, the Apostle commands the Church to separate them, (i^
they upon warning, mend not this fault) from the Society. Others think that he
commands them only to withdraw from them, in civil respects, and if they will
not labor, let them starve, v. 10. As for those (...), in the 2d verse, which
he calls persons that abide quietly in no place, or station; it is supposed
they were not the same men but persecutors of the Apostle, most absurdly and
unreasonably: He knows (...) is a Logical term; signifying absurd men, that
know not the Topics, or heads of reasoning; and these are joined with wicked
and faithless men. However, the Apostle commanding them to warn those
disorderly men as brothers, by no means can be suspected, to charge them for
separation. Yet if he will needs understand it of their separation from Church
communion, we shall charge them, not only with vanity, folly, disobedience, but
also with Sch^sm. For they might stir up dissensions in the Church, by
defense of their idleness (which himself calls Schism) and then separate from
the Church: but enough of that.

Men also separated themselves, upon sensuality, that they might freely
indulge to their lusts, p. 76.
and live in all manner of pleasure all their days, Jude 19. v. These are they
that separate themselves, etc: That some men do separate from the Church, upon
doctrines of Liberty and licentiousness, is too evident, as in the old
Gnostics, so in the late Ranters, and Family of Love; but no doubt these men
maintained their opinions and practices in the Church, so long as they could,
which caused divisions in the Church, and so were Schismatics: and after
separated into their own abominable meetings, as the world knows. That the
Apostle spoke of the same men in the 4, 7, 8, 10, verses, and in the 19. verse,
is not probable, for those former did not separate from the Church, (or were
nor then separated) for he speaks of them as frequenters of the Assemblyes, v.
12. These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you;
feeding themselves without fear. These Agapae, Love feasts, were kept in their
Church-meetings, at the Sacrament; therefore they were not separated. And as
for the 19. verse, its the judgment of learned Divines, it imports just the
nature of seducers, who draw disciples after them, out of the Church. The word
used to denote this separation is (...), which, Oecumenius says, comes from
(...) and signifies, extra terminos ecclesiae quempiam educere, elicere, to
lead, or draw men out of the Church: and so implies, they did not only
separate themselves, but drew others also into separation. And Clem. Alexandr.
interprets it, segregantes fideles afidel. bus, id est, alios ab aliis:
Seperating the faithful from the faithful that is, some members of the Church
from other: In a word, others understand it of both kinds of separation, tam in
doctrina quam in coetibus; in opinions and parties, or assemblyes. And both
these being causeless divisions, are by all accounted Schism. p. 27.
Now the reverend Doctor, to avoid this, calls these Abominations, and not
Schism, As Anabaptists, Quakers, etc: do not cease to be Independents, but a e
that, and some thing more.
and asks, whether the men of these abominations are to be accounted
Schismatics, or their crime, in separating, Schism? But this is but a d^sguise
of the business; For there may be Schism in this (and the other two before) and
something more. He that raises dissentions in a Church, and then separates from
it; either by Apostacy, Idleness, or sensuality, carries his brand of a
Schismatic with him; though it seem to be swallowed up, in further
abominations. There are degrees of Schism, (as I said) which are not
denominated from the terminus ad quem, the wickedness that such proceed unto;
but from the terminus a quo, that is from a true Church. I shall put him a
case; If a member of his Congregation, inclining to Apostacy, Idleness, or
sensuality should first raise divisions in his Church, concerning any of those,
and then should separate from his Church, either into irregular walking, as
some Antinomians, or into Abominations, as some Ranters, or into total
Apostacy and Atheism, which many are fallen into, from the height of this way;
would he not say thee were Schismatics and something worse? And of all it may
be said, "These are they that separate themselves: I leave it to him.

I say, p. 77.
for a man to withdraw, or withold himself from the Communion external and
visible of any Church, or Churches, on the pretension and plea, be it true or
otherwise, that the worship, doctrine, discipline instituted by Christ, is
corrupted among them, with which corruption he dares not defile himself, it is
no where, in the Scripture called Schism, etc. Before I come to scanne the
words in particular, I shall say, in general, this is a fallacious, because an
ambiguous, assertion. For 1. He tells not whether a man may separate, when
there is corruption in some one of these only, or in all of them. 2. Nor how
far some or all of these, must be corrupted, before we may separate. 3. All
these were as much corrupted (and more) in the Jewish Church, as in ours, (when
he and his party separated from us) and yet our Savior and his Apostles
continued their Communion with it: and the Church of Corinth, in all these, was
as much and more corrupted, than ours, yet the Apostle mentions, no separating
from it: 4. He now requires that it be called Schism in Scripture; when as
before, he said, if it had the nature of it, it was sufficient. 5. If a bare
Plea against corruptions, true or false, may warrant a separation; then the
most rigid seperatists may be, and are by him acquitted from Schism; as I said
above. But more particularly; He has not rightly stated the question, as now
it lies between us: which is not of a single man's secession from a true Church,
a particular Congregation; to join himself to another Church, of the same
Constitution, where he may enjoy (as he thinks) the Ordinances more purely, or
more profitably. For it was ever lawful for a man to remove his habitation,
and to join himself to such a Congregation. But the pinch of the question is,
whether a man, or a company of men, may separate from a true Church, upon a
plea of corruption in it, true or false, set up another Church, as to all
Ordinances, renouncing that Church, to be a true Church. And so much the worse
and more Schismatic is that separation, from a true Church, when either
those men that separate, have not done those duties incumbent on them, to
reform it; or that Church is upon a Resolution and endeavor, to reform it
self according to the Rule of the Gospel. This is plainly our case at
present, with the Doctor and his Associates.

Of one Church particular, departing from that communion with another, p. 78.
or others, be it what it will, which it ought to hold, unless in the
departing of some of them, in some things, from the common Faith, which is
supposed not to relate to Schism, in the Scripture we have no example. The more
happy were those times, that they yielded no such example. But if they did
not, yet if they give us an example of one Church, divided upon differences,
into several Congregations, or to some Ordinances (as we proved they do) they
come very near the case of Schism before us; And himself has granted, that
upon supposition that Rome is a (particular) Church (as opposed to the
Catholic) she is the most Schismatic Church in the world; not only in
regard of her own intestine divisions (as he) but also in her separation from
the Apostolical primitive Church, in doctrine, worship and discipline; (as our
Divines do maintain) upon this acount it was, that the Divines of the Assembly
said; To leave all ordinary communion in any Church, with dislike, where
opposition, See p. 141
or offense offers it self, is to separate from such a Church, in the
Scripture sense; though they add, page 79.
such separation was not in being in the Apostles time. His exception to this,
is frivolous, How they came to know exactly the sense of the Scripture in and
about things not mentioned in them, I know not. The reconciliation is easy; In
the Apostles time, or in that case of the Corinthians, (such was their
happiness) there was no separation of one Church from another, in that high
manner, as after they did; but yet the Scripture gives a fair ground, by way
of consequence; there and in other places, above named, to conclude, that if
separation in a Church, in opinions and judgment, be a Schism, much more
separation from a true Church by persons, or Churches, leaving all ordinary
communion with it, with dislike or opposition, is to be accounted Schism;
especially if they first depart from the common Faith, and then, upon that
difference, separate from the Church. And therefore, though he be unwilling, I
shall not doubt but to be able to compel him to carry on the notion of Schism,
further than yet he has done.

skill and gratify his Adversaries, he will carry on this discourse to a
fuller issue, p. 81.
according to the common definition of Schism; "That it is a breach of union,
only he will put in a reasonable postulatum, that this union be an union of
the appointment of Jesus Christ, which I shall freely grant him; provided he do
not limit Schism, as formerly he did, to the worship of God only: yet that he
does here again; The consideration of what sort of union, in reference to the
worship of God (mark that) is instituted by Jesus Christ, is the foundation of
what I have further to offer, etc: The Design of this is, that he may have a
fair retreat, when he is charged with breach of union, in other respects, and
so with Schism, to escape by this evasion, This breach of union, is not in
reference to the worship of God, in one Assembly, met to that end. And that is
only Schism in the Scripture- notion; as he has often said. But I shall
attend his motion.

This union being instituted in the Church, according to the various acceptions
of that word, so it is distinguished: For which purpose he undertakes three
things, to show. 1. The several considerations of the Church, with which union
is to be preserved. 2. What that union is, p. 82.
we are to keep with the Church, in each consideration. 3. How that union is
broken, and what the sin whereby it is done. Wherein we shall follow him as
far as we are concerned, leaving others to plead for themselves.

CHAP. IV. Of the Church Catholic Mystical, and its Union.
1. For the mystical body of Christ, p. 84.
his elect redeemed, etc: commonly called the Church Catholic militant, 2. For
the universalitie of men, called by the Word, visibly professing the Gospel,
called the Church Catholic visible. 3. For a particular Church of some place,
wherein the instituted worship of God in Christ, is celebrated according to his
mind. This distinction of the Church, is rather of the word, than of the thing
intended by it; and imports not a threefold Church, but one Church under a
threefold consideration: arising (as he says) from the nature of the things
themselves, that is, the members of that Church, who may be considered, either
as true believers, that makes the invisible Church, 2, as professors of the
same Faith, and that makes the Catholic visible Church: or thirdly as
partakers of the same instituted worship, and that is called a particular
Church: For, as the definition of a Church agrees to it, in all the three
considerations; It is a society of men called out of the world, by the word,
etc: So, the same persons are or may be members of all the three Churches, or
in that threefold consideration of it, at once, He that is a true believer of
the invisible Church, is also a professor of the Faith, and so a member of the
Catholic visible Church, and he that is of both those, is or ought to be (if
possible) a member of a particular Church: Now the Church, having its rise and
nature from a call, (as the word imports) that call admitting of several
degrees, causes this threefold notion of the Church, That call in Scripture,
is either internal, which he calls effectual; or external, and that again
admits of degrees: men are called either to the profession of Faith only
(lacking opportunity of public Ordinances) or to participat^on of the
instituted worship also; In their obedience to the first call, they are said to
be members of the Church invisible; to the second, to be members of the
Catholic visible; to the third, to be members of a particular Church: And his
own way of raising the former distinction, is the same for substance, p. 84..
2. Hence the necessity of Churches in the last acception is not only, because
members of a particular Church, are bound to external rules for joint
communion (for to those very rules, are members of the invisible and visible
Church bound also, when it is possible): but partly because, the Catholic
Church, in either sense cannot all meet in one place; and partly because, the
opportunity to yield obedience to those rules of joint communion cannot be
exercised but in a particular Society, not too great, or numerous.

the Mystical body of Christ his elect, page 84.
etc: the Church Catholic militant, I have but a little to say. I observe
only, first that he restraines the Catholic Church invisible, only to this
world, as militant; whereas commonly our Div nes take it for the whole number
of the elect, both Militant and Triumphant, from Heb. 12.23. The general
assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in heaven. 2. That
he makes the Church invisible, the only Mystical body of Christ, which is
ordinarily applied to the Catholic visible Church also; as contra
distinguished to the civil or political body of a state. 3. See, my Vind,
Vind. p. 9.
That he cites Math. 16.28. to prove the Catholic invisible Church, which is
commonly understood of the Catholic visible Evangelicall Church; He says;
They that will apply this (text) to the Church in any other sense, page 88.
must know that it is incumbent on them to establish the promise made to it,
unto every one that is a true member of the Church, in that sense, which will
be difficult, etc: But I say, that the promise in that text (and the rest
cited) is made good to every one that is a true member of the invisible Church,
is true; They are built upon that Rock, and the gates of Hell shall never
prevail against them; but yet it may be true, with respect, (if not to a
particular Church, which may fail, yet) to the Catholic visible Church, which
as it is built upon that Rock, the confession of Peter, that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and the Messiah come; So it is to continue to the worlds end,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail totally to destroy it. And this
himself confesses, I no way doubt of the perpetual existence of innumerable
believers in every age, and such as made the profession, that is absolutely
necessary to salvation, one way or other, p. 86. f. There is then a perpetual
existence of the Church, not only invisible, as true beleivers, but also of
the visible, as professors of the Faith of the Gospel; and so the promise is
made good to it. Indeed the promise in that text, is made to the whole Church
indefinitely, and respectively; but not to every particular person in it, nor
to every particular Church: There shall be a Church of true beleivers and
professors of the Faith in all ages, but whether it be made to a particular
Church, That Christ has had always a Church, in this sense, in the world,
himself says is a needless enquiry, p. 85.. 5. Of which more perhaps
hereafter.

Union of the members of this Catholic invisible Church, among themselves;
which he makes to be; page 95.
The Inhabitation, of the same Spirit, or the animation of the whole by the
Spirit; this is the fountain radical union of this Church, in it self, and
with its head with the formal reason of it. But he cannot but know, that some
of his own way, make Faith it self, in all the single believers, D. Ames.
Mcedull. l. 1. c. 31.. 21.
to be the form of this invisible Church; which they call the state essential
of this Church; they mean, the essence of the Church is preserved by Faith, in
single believers: but I contend not: Be it Faith, or the Spirit of Faith, in
its graces and operations, the matter is not great. But besides this radical
union, page 96.
he makes a double consequentiall union flowing from that. 1. of Faith 2. of
Love, of all those united in the head, toward one another, and of every one
toward the whole. But these are improperly called unions; they are rather
consequents of that union by one Spirit, than consequentiall unions; and rather
are the means of communion, Faith with the Head, Love with the members; page
98.
So he says I cannot say, they have their union in themselves by Love, but it
is the next immediate principle of that communion, which they have one with
another, etc. but I list not to strive about this neither. The third thing is,
to enquire wherein the breach of this union must consist: page 99.
In these two things. 1. The casting out that Spir^t, which gives this union;
2. The loss of Love, flowing from thenee into the body of Christ, etc:
concerning which, he tells his Adversaries, That our persuasion is, that this
union was never utterly broken by any man, page 100.
taken into it, or ever shall be, to the end of the world. I shall not differ
with him, in this Assertion: Only I take no ice of the wariness of his
expression; (utterly broken) which in that debate, signifies totally and
finally. But if I may gradually and for a t^me be interrupted, (as our Divines
allow) may there not be said to be a breach in that union, though not of that
union? And consequentially a bleach in this union by some sin may be called,
Schism; which he too slightingly disavows. That Faith may be weakened, and Love
remitted, there is no question; and that the Spirit may be quenched, and
grieved, the Scripture insinuates; upon which offense, there may be a kind of
Schism, even in the Invisible Church, if not to a separation of the Spirit
utterly, yet to a suspension of its influence, by hiding it self, and leaving
the Believer to a sad desertion; as experience tells us. Besides this, the
members of this Church, being also visible in another sense, and so of the
Catholic visible Church; may there not be a breach of union, even among them,
which may extend, not only to divisions in judgment, but also to separation
into parties, and what is that but Schism? I gave an instance in Paul and
Barnabas, both members of this Church; Act. 15. l^st; and members of no
particular Church. But strictly to speak, This Church it self, and its union
being both invisible, qua elect, there can be no v^sible breach of union in it,
or among the members of it; and so we must look for Schism, in the other
Notions of the Church.

CHAP. V. Of the Church Catholic visible, and its Union.
Catholic visible Church, which he describes to be, p. 112.
The universality of men professing the doctrine of the Gospel, and obedience
to God in Christ, throughout the World. These he grants, do constitute the
visible Kingdom of Christ, and so may be called his Church: but whether
precisely, so called in Scripture, (he says) is not unquestionable: But to me
and others (whom he may do well to satisfy) this is out of question. He makes
the question to be, p. 113.
what relation it stands in, to all particular Churches, whether as a Genus to
its Species, or as a Totum to its parts. And he seems to be Negative in both.
His general reason is, because The universal visible Church we speak of, is not
a thing that has, as such, a specificative form, from which it should be so
called, as a particular has for its ground of being so called. That shall be
tried, when we hear what is the specificative form of a particular Church. In
the mean time, let us consider why he denies this Catholic Church, to stand in
relation to the particular Churches, as a Genus to its Species; because this
would deprive every one of membership in this universal Church, which is not
joined actually to some particular Church, which is devoid of truth. What force
there is in this consequence against them of New England, who make particular
Churches to be Species of the universal Church, Mr. Hookers Survey.
as (say they) several drops of water, are Species of water; and also make a
man first a member of a particular Church, before he can be a member of the
Catholic, I say, what force there is, in this consequence against them, I do
not see; I only note his disagreement with them; though I agree with him in the
thing. For the other, That particular Churches are parts of the Catholic, he
also denies, because, this were to overthrow a remarkable difference, p. 113.
between the Economy of the old Testament and the New, to parts and members of
any Catholic Church, as that it should be constituted or made up of them, or
by them, for the order and purpose of an instituted Church, for worship of God:
he means, as the worship of God was National among the Jews. Mr. Hudson Vind.
But (besides what others have said, to prove the Catholic Church, to be a
Political Church, in a candid sense) I would say, the Ceremonial worship only
(or chiefly) was National; the moral worship was performed in several
Congregations, or Synagogues, (wherein there were Rulers and ruled) and yet
those might be called parts of the Jewish Church, as a Totum, or whole. And why
particular Churches may not be called parts of the Catholic (which is but the
National Church enlarged) I yet see no reason. That all the members of the
Catholic Church should meet together, to hear one Sermon, to partake of one
Sacrament, etc. as it was possible once, when their number was but an 120. Acts
1. so they are bound still, but that the multitude makes it impossible. That
the particular Congregations should join together, in the same specifical
Ordinances, and have Officers over them alike, is certainly an institution of
Jesus Christ, as well, as to make the same profession of Faith, and hope.
Indeed, that, being so numerous, they should have one Officer over them all,
and join to hear one Sermon, or receive the same Sacrament numerical, (as he
speaks) is a ridiculous fancy; and not only false, but impossible. But I would
gladly know a reason, See John 4.22, 23.
why 40, or more, members of no particular Church, but only of the Catholic,
meeting together, and having a Minister among them, may not join together to
worship God, in prayer preaching, and partaking of the Sacrament, as well as
the members of several particular Churches, and himself among them, may do the
same; as they do often at London and Oxford, when he preaches, unless he will
count those Ord^nances then and there administered no acts of instituted
worship, And if he grant them to be worship, how can he deny that Assembly, to
be a particular Church, though it be not fixed nor gathered and united, by any
explicit Covenant, or consent to live and dye together. I shall only note
again, that herein he deserts his friends in New England, Ubi supr.
who say, particular Churches, are parts of the universal as a Totum or
Integrum. And none think otherwise, but they (to use his words) who have profit
by the fable.

specificative form of a particular Church? p. 114.
The formal reason constituting a particular Church, is, their joining
together, in the same numerical Ordinances for Gods worship. It is true indeed,
the Catholic Church as now it is enlarged has not the same specification
form: For whether it be considered as a Genus or as a Totum, it cannot have the
same form, with the Species, or parts. But if it have another specificative
form of its own it may from that be called an Universal Church; as well as a
particular, from its form, may be called a particular Church. Why then is the
Catholic called a Church Universal? Because all Christians through the world,
(excepting some individuals providentially excluded) do upon the enjoyment of
the same preaching of the Word, the same Sacraments administered in Specie,
profess one common Faith, and Hope. The sum is the specificative form of the
Catholic visible Church (if it have any) is the profession of the same Faith
and Hope of the Gospel; whether the members enjoy the same Word and Sacraments,
administered in Specie or no? And he needed not to have excepted any
individualls providentially excluded from those Ordinances: for himself tells
us an instance of a man, that never was partaker of those Ordinances, and yet a
subject of Christ's visible Kingdom a member of this Church in the world, p.
139. And before that supposes, A man may be instructed in the knowledge of the
Gospel, by the Scripture it self, and make profession of it, where he lives,
though he be a thousand miles distant from any particular Church, wherein the
Ordinances are administered, nor perhaps knows there is any such Church in the
world. p. 137. If then a joining together in the same numerical Ordinances, be
the specificative form, of a particular Church, (of which more anon) why may
not the profession of the same Faith, and hope of the Gospel, be the
specificative form of the Catholic Church. The truth is, the Church considered
in the threefold notion, with the threefold differences, is not distinguished
into Species, or has any such specificative forms; but is one and the same
Church, considered in that threefold Notion, as the members may be considered,
as 1. Believers. 2. As Professors. 3. As Partakers of the same numericall
Ordinances of worship, as is said above, and shall appear more hereafter.

Union of this Church comes next to be considered; which, we shall easily grant
him, page 116.
is not first the same with that of the Catholic invisible, because many are
members of this, who are not true believers. 2. Nor the same with that of a
particular Church, because many are of the Catholic, who never were of a
particular Church. 3. Nor yet, has it its union, by a Relation to any one
Officer, given to the whole, or a subordination of Officers, as Papists
pretend: In all these we consent with him; and therefore pass by the large
discourse about them, as not concerned in it, It consists says he, In the
profession of one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. p. 133.
That all the members of the Catholic Church are united in this profession, is
very true; but this is not all, they are bound to more than this, viz. to the
exercise of the same specifical Ordinances, to subjection to the same
Discipline; as also to Love to one another; and, where it is possible, to the
celebrating together, of the same numerical worship. And in any of these, to
make any differences, is a breach of that union, that ought to be among the
members of the Catholic visible Church. Whereupon that is a strange assertion,
or addition of his, page 117.
If there he not an institution for joining in the same Numerical Ordinances,
the union of this Church, is not really a Church-union. For when Christ has
instituted, that every Church meeting together, and every member of of the
Catholic Church, should exercise the same specifical Ordinances, is not this a
Church union, or union of Churches? And let it then be considered, That if
every member of the Church Catholic, may be a member of any, or every
particular Church, where providence may cast him, (being rightly qualified
thereunto) having right first to the same specifical Ordinances, as a member of
the Catholic, and then to the same numerical Ordinances, where he comes and
finds them, (as some of his own way do grant, and cannot well be denied) then
the denial of such a person to join in those numerical Ordinances, is a breach
of that union and love, which ought to be, between the members of the Cath.
Church, which whether it may be called a Schism or no, we shall examine
hereafter; Sure we are, this is done continually, by some particular Churches,
and members of the same.

properties of that profession, for the preservation of this Union he makes to
be three, 1. p. 134.
That all necessary truths of the Gospel, be believed and professed. 2. That no
other principle of the mind, inconsistent with the real belief of those truths
professed, be manifested by the professors; Those that are enemies of the
Cross of Christ, are not any members of his Church. 3. That no opinion error
or false doctrine everting any necessary truth professed, be added and
deliberately professed also. To which I have but this to say, 1. The Apostles
of Christ were for a time ignorant of many necessary truths of the Gospel, and
some professors there were, that had not heard whether there was an Holy Ghost
or no. Acts 19. Yet these were members of the Catholic Church. 2. Those whom
the Apostle called enemies of the Cross of Christ, were Christians, and so
members at least of the Catholic Church, if not of a particular. As the
incestuous person, was a member of the Church of Corinth, till he was ejected.
And it is a position of his own party. A scandalous member tolerated, is a
member to all Ordinances, for himself, and his seed: wherewith how this
Reverend Author agrees, may be seen, when he says, p. 136.
"Men's profession of the knowledge of God contradicted by a course of
wickedness, is not to be admitted as a thing giving any privilege whatever. So
that such a man is ipso facto unmembred, without excommunication; and if he be
a wicked Minister, he is ipso facto unministred or degraded, and all his
Ministerial acts are null: Add to this what he says p. 159. Let those (that
are profane) profess what they will, and cry out a thousand times that they
are Christians, I shall never acknowledge them for others, than visible enemies
of the cross of Christ. Traitors and Rebels are not, de facto, Subjects of
that King, in reference to whom they are so. They are not within the Church,
any more than a Jew, or Mahumetan within the same precincts. There are in a few
lines, many mistakes; For 1. Though they be as bad as, or worse than
Mahumetans, in regard of their spiritual estate, yet are they better in regard
of Church estate; Does the wickedness of their lives, make their Baptism a mere
nullity? then must they be rebaptized, upon their conversion, as heathens are.
2. If they be no better than Heathens, then are their children to be denied
Baptism, and are very Infidels: yet a child of the prophanest Jew was
circumcised, and had right to other privileges. 3. That is so far from truth,
That Traitors and Rebels are not de facto Subjects of that King, in reference
to whom they are so, that they cannot possibly be Traitors and Rebels to him,
unless they be his Subject. As he said, A man cannot possibly be a Schismatic,
unless he be a Churchmember; either of a particular, or of the Catholic
Church. 4. Does not the Apostle call fornicators, drunkards, unruly walkers,
brethren? 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These. 3.17. But these three properties, are in^^^ed on
to insinuate, that if there be no breach of Union, in any of these th^re is no
Schism to be found in the Catholic Church, nor between the members thereof: as
appears in his application of them.

process sake, That Schism is the breach of any union instituted by Christ; the
enquiry is, p. 140.
Whether we be gu^lty of the breach of such an unity. And for the first of
these the profession of all necessary truths of the Gospel, the Church of
England in her doctrine, is as Orthodox as any Chuch under Heaven, consonant to
the Scriptures, and Apostolical Church; (till by Toleration, some false
Teachers have corrupted the Faith by damnable Heresies, and blasphemies,
disowned by the Church) The Schism then charged upon us by Papists, See p. 141
in this respect, lieu at their own door, who have not only deviated from the
common Faith themselves, but cause others also so to do, and attempt to destroy
all that will not join with them: Unless we may lay it also upon those
Sectaries, and Heretics among us, who are their Disciples, who agree with
them, in many of their errors, and are departed from the common Orthodox Faith,
of the Church of England. As for the second; That in our lives, we do not
manifest a principle, utterly inconsistent with the truths we profess; As Rome
has little reason to charge us with Schism, in this respect, whose lives
generally are as abominable as their Doctrines: So I may rather wish I could,
See p. 148
than profess I can, acquit our Churches from the charge. conversations of too
many eminent Professors and Saints, as they would be called, are not such as
becomes that truth of Doctrine, which we have so long enjoyed. And as for the
last, That we add not unto them, in opinion or worship, such things as are
destructive of them or render them insufficient to be saving unto us. For our
worship, we may I hope, without offense, say, that it is in the public
Congregations, (whatever it is in private Conventicles) according to the
simplicity of the Gospel, though perhaps, in some circumstances defective,
wherein yet we are endeavoring a Reformation. breach of Unity, and so of
Schism. But I have intimated, and partly proved, there may be a breach of
Union, with respect to the Catholic Church, upon other considerations. As
first, there is a Bond that obliges every member of this Church, See page 205.
7.
to join together in exercising the same specifical Ordinances of worship. When
then any man shall refuse to join with others, or refuse others to join with
him, in these Ordinances; here is a breach of Love and Union, among the members
of the Catholic Church; and in the particular Churches, as parts of the
Catholic. And what thinks he of those Churches, who deny Baptism, to Infants
altogether? or those that deny Baptism to the children of godly Parents, not of
their own confederate Church? and the Lords Supper to the Parents of such
Children? The Anabaptists do the one, contrary to the practi^e of the Universal
Church in all Ages since the Apostles; and themselves do the other dayl^, as is
too well known. Is not this a raising of differences in the Universal Church, a
breach of union, and so a Schism? Yet as he is earnest to free himself from
Schism in his s^paration; so he seems not to think Anabaptism to be a Schism.
p. 226. He that will upon that account, undertake to prove them Schismatic,
may find himself to be entangled. Of which more hereafter.

Catholic Church is visible, he grants, which others of his friends have
denied. p. 146.
That it is an Organical political body, in a right sense, is largely and
learnedly proved by others, Mr. Huds.
(though he denies it) to them I refer it. One thing I cannot but take notice
of, he says, It will not suffice to say that Christ is its Head; for if as a
visible political body, it has a political Head, that Head also must be
visible. But 1. What necessity is there, the Head must be visible? p. 148.
seeing he confesses, the Commonwealth of the Jews was a Political Body, and
God (who is invisible) was their Political Head. 2. Jesus Christ, the Head of
the Church, is a visible Head, yea sometimes more, visus, seen of men, while on
earth, though now for a time, in Majesty (as some great Princes do) he has
withdrawn himself from the sight of men on earth, yet is he seen of Angels, and
Saints in Heaven. But that, by the by.

CHAP. VI. Independentism is Donatism.
leaves together, for vindication of Protestants from the charge of Schism, in
their just separation from Rome as the Catholic Church, I cannot but
acknowledge to be rational, solid, and judicious. Only I am not satisfied,
with his assertion, That he not only denies the Church of Rome (so called) to
be a particular Church, p. 154. but also affirms it, to be no Church at all;
page 156. Wherein he has deserted most of our Divines; as we shall show
hereafter; our cause being defensible without this Plea. But I am far more
unsatisfied, that he undertakes the cause of the Donatists, and labors to
exempt them from Schism, though he allows them guilty of other Crimes, and
Miscarriages. The grounds of this undertaking, I suppose to be, 1. His singular
notion of Schism, limiting it only to differences, in a particular Assembly;
2. His jealousy of the charge of Schism, to be objected to himself, and
party; if separating from the true Churches of Christ, be truly called
Schism. For the ventilating whereof, I suppose, we may, without flattery or
falsehood, p. 163.
grant him his request (in respect to our selves, not to Rome) that is put the
whole Protestant Church of God, into that condition of Liberty, and soundness
of doctrine; which it was in, when that uprore was made by the Donatists.
Certainly, most of the Protestant Churches (our own among them) have as much
Liberty, are as sound in doctrine and as (if not more) sincere and incorrupt
in worship, than those Churches from which the Donatists separated; (they being
not only troubled with Heresies, as we all are, but pestered with mul^itude of
Ceremonies, from which we are freed). And now we shall take his thoughts of
the Donatists Schism, into consideration. The objection raised by himself, is
this. p. 162.
Does not Austine and the rest of his contemporaries, charge the Donatists with
Schism, because they departed from the Catholic Church? and does not the
charge rise up with equal efficacy against you as them? At least, does it not
g^ve you the nature of Schism, in another sense, than is by you granted? This
objection, concerns not us, the generality of Protestants, who grant that
sense of Schism* that it is a breach ^f union, or a causeless separation from
the true Churches of Christ: but it lies in full force against him and his
party, who ^ave broken the union of our Churches, and separated themselves from
all the Protestant Churches in the world, not of their own constitution, and
that as no true Churches of Christ, for lack (as they say) of a right
const^tution. We know indeed where and by whom, this Cloud is scattered,
without the least annoyance to the Protestant cause, as former^y stated, even
as himself has stated it, and produced the answers of our learned Divines, p.
190.. 47. etc, which he highly approves, p. 192. though he rest not in it, but
rather cleaves to his own way; as we shalll see err long.

p. 194.
That his design is, to vindicate himself and his party, as well as the
Donatists, from charge of Schism, is evident by what h^ says, I shall clearly
deliver my thoughts concerning the Donatists which will be comprehensive also
of those other, that suffer with them in former, and after ages, under the same
imputation. It will therefore be necessary, or very expedient, to consider, how
near their case comes to be parallel, with that of the Donatists, both for
matter, and manner, of mannaging it; and then, how he will free them and
himself from Schism. For the first; The Donatists having raised causlesse
differences in the Church, about Cecilianus being ordained by the Traditores,
(which, whether it were true or false was no just, ground of casting him out of
Communion,. 17) made that the ground of their separation; how ever they took in
other things (as is usual) into their defense afterward. 16. The principles
they first fell upon, were those two, long since named. 1. That they were the
only Church of Christ, in a corner of Afr^ca. 2. That none were truly
bapt^sed, or entered members of the Church of Christ, but by some of their
party. That the Stage is changed, from Africa, into America, is evident; but
that these were the principles of the Brownists, and are now of all
Independents, (for all Sects are Independents) I need not exemplify, by
drawing up the parallel; he that runs may read it, in their books and
practice. I wonder not; that the Doctor has unchurched Rome; for he has done
as much to England, and all foreign Protestant Churches; and makes none to be
members of the Church, but such as are by covenant and consent, joined to some
of their Congregations.

manner of mannagement of their way, the parallel runs but too smooth and
even. 1. He says of the Donatists; That upon supposition they had just cause
to renounce the Communion of Cecilianus, yet they had no ground of separating
from the Church of Carthage, p. 165.
where were many Elders, not obnoxious to that charge. The parallel comes home
to him thus. Upon supposition, or grant, that the Church of England, and
himself, had just cause to renounce the Pope, and Church of Rome; yet had he
and his party, no ground to separate from the Church of England, where there
were many Elders, and people, not obnoxious, to that charge of Apostacy, upon
the Church of Rome, 2. Leaving the instance given, to avoid prolixitie; I shall
only apply, what he says of the Donatists; Though men of tender consciences
might be startled at the Communion with our late Hierarchicall Church, yet
nothing but the height of pride, madness, and corrupt fleshly interest, could
make men declare hostility against all the Protestant Churches of Christ, in
the world; which was to regulate all the Churches in the world, by their own
fancy and imagination. 3. This line is also parallel. Though men of such pride
and folly, might judge all the residue of Christians, to be faulty and guilty
in not separating from our Churches, yet to proceed to cast them out, from the
very name of Church members, and so disannull their priviledgts, and
ordinances, they had been partakers of, (as manifestly some do, by rebaptizing
all that enter into their communion; and others by denying both Sacraments, to
some; baptism to Children of parents, and Lords Supper to parents themselves,
not in their Church way) is such unparalled pharisaism, and tyranny, as is
wholly to be condemned, and intolerable. 4. Once more, and I have done; the
consequences that befell the Donatist's separation, are too much parallel. The
divisions, outrages, and enthusiasticall furies, (in the Levellers and such
like) and riots (in the Ranters and Quakers) that have befallen some of them,
Mr. Baxt. Mr. Firm. Sep. exami. Mr. Raie. Gem. pleb.
or they fell into, (beginning at Independentism) were and are, in many pious
and wisemens judgment, tokens of the hand of God against them, to w^tnesse that
their undertaking and enterprise, was utterly undue, and unlawful. page 19.
I wish they may patiently consider all this.

Schism, in their separation from the true Churches of Christ. He cannot but
acknowledge them to be faulty, many ways, but not guilty of Sch^sm; If he
would acknowledge as much of his own way; I should use his own words, Let the
breach of union (in the Churches) be accounted (if you please) Schism, or a
crime; for being an evil, I shall not contend by what name or title it be
distinguish^d, p. 81. But he waves the question whether that separation of the
Donatists, from all other Churches, might be called a Schism, and takes it for
granted, they and himself, are free from that charge; for so he says. p. 167.
How little we are, at this day, in any contests that are managed amongst us,
concerned in those differences of theirs, those few considerations before, will
evince. Its true indeed, in our Separation from Rome, the instance of the
Donatists, is very impertinent: as in other respects, so in this, that they
separated from the truly Catholic Church, we from the Idolatrous, corrupt,
particular Church of Rome, falsely called Catholic. But it concerns him and
his party nearly, in respect of their separation from all true Protestant
Churches, agreeing (as they do) in the principles and practices of the
Donatists. The question then is unresolved, whether their and his separation
may justly be called Schism. All he says is this? We are thus come off from
this part of our charge of Schism, for the relinquishment of the Catholic
Church; p. 168.
which as we have not done, so to do, is not Schism, but a sin of another
nature and importance. The ground he goes upon, why separation from a true
Church, is no Schism, is that before: "That Schism, in the Scripture notion, is
only a division of judgment, in a particular Assembly, not a separation from
any Church: which if it were true, (as it is proved false above) as it would
free Protestants from that charge by Papists, with ease; so it will acquit
himself, and all Sectaries in the world, from the crime of Schism; That the
principle, and principal plea of Romanists, "that they are the Catholic
Church, out of whose communion there is no salvation, (as the Donatists was of
old, was and in Schismatic) was and is the common vote of almost all Ancient
and modern Divines. And if it be true, which his party assent to, that their
Churches are only rightly constituted; and other Churches and Ministers are
false, or none; (as they do also assert) they are equally guilty of that
Schismatic principle, That they are the only (not Catholic) particular
Churches, out of whose Communion, there is (ordinarily) no Salvation. This very
principle, in the Donatists first, and then in the Romanists, has been the
ground of all those sad differences among the Churches along time, and of the
troubles that have issued thence (and to make differences in a Church, and
troub^es and thereupon to separate, is acknowledged, or proved to be Schism);
then the raising of the like differences, and persisting to maintain them,
upon the very same principle, (as the only true Churches) how it can be
exempted from Schism, I am to learn.

Donatists of old, and Protestants, together with himself, from the charge of
Schism, was, his own notion and definition of Schism; will now appear, in his
own answer to the Romanists argument; which he rather insists upon, than upon
the solutions of our learned Divines page 192. He takes Schismin the notion and
sense of the Scripture precisely, that is, for divisions only in a particular
Church; page 193.
And thereupon denies, 1. that there can be any separation from the Catholic
invisible Church; or, if there could, it would be madness to call it Schism.
2. nor from the Catholic visible, because the forsaking its Communion which
consists in profession of the same Faith, is not Schism, but Apostacy.) 3. nor
from a particular Church; for that is not properly Schism; for so he says, 1.
I deny that separation from a particular Church, as such, as merely separation,
is Schism, or ought to be so esteemed, though perhaps such separation may
proceed from Schism, and attended with other evils: But this mistakes the
question, for the Romanists themselves do not mean, that every separation from
any Church, is Schism, as such; but a causeless separation from the true
Cathol^ke Church: which they suppose themselves to be. And so some, and most
of ours do state it, as he ob^erves, page 191. s. 48. and so they fall upon the
Idolatry, Haeresie, etc: of the Church of Rome, as just cau^es of separation
from her which plea (says he) will not be shaken to eternity. 2. He affirms
that separation however, upon just cause, p. 194.
from any Church, is no Schism. This, (as it is the same with the former, in
^ense, so) is by none denied; This is granted by all persons; Schism is
causeless, say all men however concerned separation upon a just cause is a
duty, and therefore cannot be Schism, which is always a sin. Hence it
appears, that he needlessely denies their Major proposition, being rightly
understood, in their sense, who propounded it. And our Divines did better to
deny the Minor: We have neither voluntarily, nor causelessely separated from
the Church of Rome. But his answer, is another thing. Separation in the sense
contended about, p. 194.
must be from some state and condition of Christ's institution, page 195
a Church of his appointment, otherwise it will not be pleaded that it is
Schism, at least not in a Gospel sense. The Sum is this, Schism is a
separation from a Church of Christ's institution; but our separation from Rome,
is not from a Church of Christ's institution: therefore it is no Schism: And
though it be true, that the national, Hierarchicall Church of Rome, the
papal, and patriarchall Church, be not a Church of Christ's institution, yet
the bottom of his argument lies here, That Schism in the Scripture notion, is
only found, in a particular Church: which must serve him for more uses than
one, as we shall hear anon. And thence he inferres, that separation either of
one Church from another, or of persons from a Church, upon any occasion, true
or false, what ever it be, it is no Schism; which is spoken to, above, and will
come again.

Schism, besides that in a particular Church, I prove by a double argument, ex
confessis. 1. Schism is a breach of union; But there may be a breach of union
in the Catholic visible Church; 2. Where there are differences raised in
matter of Faith, professed, (wherein the union of the Catholic Church
consists) there may be a breach of union, but there may be differences in the
Catholic, or among the members of the Catholic Church, in matters of Faith
professed, ergo: I suppose his answer will be; That the forsaking of it is
communion, which consists in the profession of faith, is not Schism but
Apostacy, p. 193. s. 52. But that is not always so; for both there may be
differences in the faith, and yet no Apostacy; or if there be Apostacy, it
may be a Schism, also: Apostates commonly make differences amongst professors,
before they totally depart. He must be remembered of what he said, p. 161.. 12.
The breach of this union (in the Catholic Church) and therein the
relinquishment of, the communion of the Church, lies in relinquishment of, or
some opposition to, some or all of the saving necessary truths of the Gospel.
Now this is not Schism, but Heresy or Apostacy: That must, be thus: If it be
the relinquishment of all truths of the Gospel, it is Apostacy. If of some
only (and they fundatally maintained with obstinacy) its Heresy: but if it
be of some truths only, (of lesser or greater concernment) about which,
differences are by some raised, amongst the members of this Church Catholic,
it may, by his own principles, be called Schism. His evasions, will be one of
these two, 1. That he did condescend, to gratify his Adversaries, that Schism,
is a breach of union, but that he denies to be the Scripture notion of Schism;
2. That upon the same account, he denies differences to be Schism any where,
but in a particular Assembly. Wherein he is singular and alone: and is
sufficiently disproved above.

fearing, belike, that in his so answering, some of ours, would be ready to
take up those words spoken to our Savior, upon another occasion, Master, in so
saying thou put us to rebuke also; "He starts an objection, page 196.
from the consequence of it utterly unchurching Rome, thus "Whether the
devesting of the Synagogue of Rome, of the privileges of a Church, in any
sense, arise not to the denial of that Ministry, at this day in England. To
which, before we take his answer, I would say, 1. That most of our pious
learned Divines, have hitherto not denied, but that Rome was a Church, in some
sense; not a true, but a corrupt Church, as having some privileges, or rather
some remainders of a Church; See D. Hall Apol. against Brownists Sect. 23.
as the same Articles of Faith, baptism, and a kind of Ministry, etc. 2. That
hereupon they have defended our Ministry to be true, though sometimes, coming
thorough their foul hands, with many superadditions to the institution of
Christ. Others perhaps would say, we had it not from Rome; there were other
Bishops in England, before Austin came hither, from whom we might receive our
Ordination successively. But hear his kind answer. If any man has nothing to
plead for his Ministry, but merely that successive Ordination, which he has
received through the Church of Rome, I cannot see a stable bottom of owning
him so to be. But (not yet to regest to him, his successive Baptism, which he
received through the Church of Rome) this would go near to annull the
Ministry, of those Martyr-Bishops, and Ministers, our first Reformers, who at
first, had nothing to plead, but their successive ordination, from Rome, and
acted upon it accordingly; He cannot gratify Rome better, than to asperse the
Ministry of England; it is the Jesuiticall business, in all the present
Sectaries. They look upon himself, and his party, (who have either none, or
have renounced their ordination) as no Ministers at all: If we be none also,
then have we (as they slander us) no Church at all. God help the poor
despised Ministers of England. The Romanists say, we are no Ministers, because
we have not our Ordination from Rome, The Sectarists say, we are no Ministers,
because we have our Ordination from Rome, which shall we believe? Neither, for
we have it from Jesus Christ, by whose hands soever we had it. But, as a little
blushing at this hard saying, p. 196.
he will mollify it a little. I do not say, if he will plead nothing else, but
if he has nothing else to plead. He may have that which will constitute him a
Minister, though he will not own, that so it does. What ever else we plead,
unless we will renounce our Ordination, it will not please them. That by
Bishops, is by them pleaded null, or Antichristian; and that by the people,
(which he intends) we think is nothing, and cannot own it, as a ground of our
Ministry, though perhaps, we have their call, as well as himself. We may have
(as many of us have) our call, and election to be their Ministers, from the
people; but our Ordination we shall justify to be from Christ, p. 197.
and not from the people. But hear more, Nor is it said, that any have their
Ministry from Rome as though the office which is an Ordinance of Christ, was
instituted by Antichrist; but the question is, whether this be a sufficient
foundation of any man's ininterest, in the office of the Ministry, that he has
received Ordination, in a succession, through the Administration of, not the
woman flying into the Wilderness, not of the two witnesses, not from them,
whom we succeed in Doctrine, as the Waldenses, ^ut the Beast it self. Does he
not by this, cast dirt in the face of our Ministry, as all our good friends,
the Sectaries, do? I have much ado to forbear, saying; ('The Lord rebuke
thee). But I answer; 1. Why may it not be as sufficient a foundation of our
Ministry, Either he must go forward to An^baptism, (as many have done) or come
back to us; as was said to the Brownists, by Dr. Hall Apol. Sect. 11.
as for our Baptism, which was never questioned hitherto, but by our late
Independent Anabaptists, upon another ground. 2. Had we received our
Ordination, from the woman flying into the Wilderness, or from the two
witnesses, or the Waldenses, all had been one to him and his party. For they
had not their Ordination from the people, (except some extraordinary cases) but
from a presbytery, according to the Institution of Christ. And yet, forsooth,
he will not plead this at large, professedly disclaiming all thoughts of
rejecting those Ministers as Antichristian, who yet adhaere to this Ordination,
being many of them eminently guifted of God, and submitted to by his people,
etc. Egregiam vero laudem! While he secretly derives their pedigree from Rome
and Antichrist, the Beast, etc: that yet adhere to that Ordination, if they
have nothing else to plead. As for their eminent gifts, as they do not plead
that as suff^cient for their interests in the office, without Ordination, so
many of his and our brethren have those gifts, whom we judge not therefore to
be Ministers, though he do. And as for the submission of the people to us, we
had that ever, if not explicitly, (as often) yet implicitly, (which some
Independents allow, as sufficient to make us true Ministers, and true Churches)
though we do not own Ordination, as from that submission of our people, but
from Jesus Christ. Even from such also they separate.

Why not Ordination from Rome, as well as the Scripture? which question I like
not; p. 198.
but should rather after, (why not ordination, as well as baptism): All our
fore Fathers doubtless received their baptism by the hands of Romanists, and
never scrupled it, to be rebaptized: why not Ordination also, without a new
Ordination? They received not baptism from them, as if instituted by
Antichrist, but as an Ordinance of Christ; They baptized, not as Antichristian,
not as Bishops, or Romish Priests, but as Presbyters, in whose hands (we say)
Ordination also is. Only since, we have taken away those humane Additions,
which they had sinfully introduced into the Ordinances of Christ. The
Scriptures are not the Inheritance of Rome, but Privileges for all the people
of God, where ever they find them; and therefore we deny we received them from
Rome; any more than the Jews received the Golden vessels from Babylon, because
they were sent by the hands of Cyrus. Its false then, that Ordination is
pleaded from the Authority of the Church of Rome, p. 199.
as such. Nor does the granting true Ordination (as also true baptism) to the
Church of Rome, prove that it is a true Church. This he says, he understands
not; They who ordained, had no power so to do, but as they were officers of
that Church; as such they did it; and if others had ordained, who were not
officers of that Church, all will confess, that action to be null. Do but
change the scene to baptism; and hear what he will say. They who baptized had
no power so to do, but as officers of that Church, as such, they did it: both
which must be denied, See Apol. against Brown. Sect. 27.
or he must deny his baptism; They did it as Officers, not as Officers of that
Church, that Papal Antichristian Hierarchy; And if others had baptized
(ordained) who were not Officers of that Church, or they, as Officers but not
as Officers of that Church, (which is as a scab upon the hand) no rational man
hitherto has asserted that action to be null. This is no such dark passage,
that the Doctor cannot see one step before him, unless his new light has
dazzled his eyes, that he cannot see Wood for Trees, which before he fell into
this way, he saw so many learned and pious men walk in, before him. For our
parts, See p. 199 But they who will not be contented, etc.
we profess, that in his way of personal qualifications, and acceptance of
the people, to make a man, without Ordination, a Minister, the passages in
Scripture or Church stories, are so dark, that we cannot see one step before
us. But this has sufficiently by others been discussed.

CHAP. VII. Of the particular Church, and its Union.
Acception of a Church, as it frequently signifies a particular Church: p. 202.
though all, the places produced by the Doctor, do not (I think) prove that
sense; But I shall not contend about it. That the Church of Jerusalem, was
called one Church, is true, but that those many thousands could meet in one
Congregation, in one place, is nothing probable, it possible: But take his
definition of a particular instituted Church. It is a Society of men called by
the word, to the obedience of the Faith in Christ, and joint performance of the
worship of God in the same Individual Ordiances; according to the order by
Christ prescribed. In this definition, there are some things to be considered.

1. The definition of a particular Church, by him given, will be applicable,
and is by himself or others of his side applied to the three several notions
of a Church; or the Church in those several notions. 1. To the Catholic
invisible Church, It is a Society of men called out of the World, D. Ames The
Church (in general) is a society of men called out of the world. p. 64 s. 2.
by the Word to the obedience of the faith in Christ and joint performance of
the worship of God in the same Individual Ordinances, according to the order
by Christ prescribed. This is all of it, true of the invisible Church, they are
called (which will be the only exception) to the joint performance of the
worship of God, in the same (specificall, and, where its possible) individual
Ordinances. And all the members thereof (ordinarily) being of some particular
Church, its both possible and necessary, to join in that performance. 2. The
same may be said of the Catholic visible Church; It is a Society of men,
called out of the World by the Word, etc: So himself describes it, It is a
collection of all that are duly called Christians, in respect of their
profession; p. 113. and before that, p. 112. All Professors of the Gospel,
throughout the World, called to the knowledge of Christ, by the Word, do make
up, and constitute his visible Kingdom, by their professed subjection to him:
which subjection has reference to the commands of Christ, to worship him, in
the same specificall Ordinances, indefinitely, and in the same Individualls;
where they are administered. And the members of this Church, living (ordinarily)
in some particular Church, its possible and necessary for them also, to join
in that performance. And this is as much is the members of a particular Church,
are bound to; no man being bound to what is to him impossible; and it often
happening, by absence, sickness, or otherwise; that it is not possible for
them to join in that worship. 3. That it is the definition of a particular
Church, we also grant, as understood before: 4. But we shall add, by way of
improvement, that such societies, are all our particular Congregations:
Societies of men, called out of the world, by the word, etc: holding parallel
in every particular, with his definition: and why we should not be esteemed and
called Churches, as well as theirs, I am to learn the reason. What exception
may be made, we shall hear an one.

Order prescribed by Christ, is not that all Christians must be of the same
Individual particular congregation, but of this or that, as is most convenient
for them, by their habitations. Supposing several meetings or Congregations in
Jerusalem, one of Paul, another of Apollo, etc: no man was obliged by any order
from Christ, to be of Paul's Congregation, or of another, so he joined himself
to one, for the participation of the same Ordinances. And when a Christian did
join himself to this or that Congregation, he did not explicitly enter into
a Covenant, Every belie- is obliged to join himself to some one of those
Churches, that therein he may abide in doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of
bread, and prayer. p. 206.
to live and dye in this Congregation, but thought himself bound to be of one,
by the obligation of his membership in the Catholic Church; with a liberty
reserved, to remove to another, if he saw just reason; as our Author will
confess anon. Whence it is evident, that from the beginning of Christianity,
there was no such explicit covenanting, or (as some speak) marrying of the
Minister and people, or of people one to another, that they might not depart
without leave: but as they had a liberty at first, to settle in such a
congregation; so also to remove their habitations, and to settle in another:
not to go many miles to partake of the Ordinances, which seems unsuitable to
the first plantation of Churches, and the mutual duties of people of one
congregation: But of that elsewhere. And though the Reverend Ministers of
London do grant, page 203.
That in the beginning of Christianity, the number of believers were so few in
great Cities, as that they might all meet in one place, yet they did not
imagine, that when they at Jerusalem, were multiplied into many thousands, or
myriads, they could so do. And if they met in several places; (as they must)
they had also several Elders, to administer the Ordinances to them, and yet
are called singularly, one Church. Add to this that at Ephesus (Act. 20.17 a
place brought to prove, there was but one particular Church there) the text
says expressly, there were (many) Elders there. v. 25. you all.
He sent to Ephe^us, for the Elders of the Church, which e^idences clearly,
that there were more Congregations then one, in Ephesus: for how could many
Elders, officiate in one Congregation. This alone, (if nothing else could be
said) affords more, for a Presbyteriall Church, than all the New Testament does
for an Independent Church gathered, I know not how, out of many Churches. But
he waves the dispute of this page 204. And so do I.

unity of this Church, and the breach of it, he premises some things: p. 205.
1. A man may be a member of the Catholic invisible Church. 2. Of the
Catholic visible Church, and yet by some providentiall hinderance, be never
joined to a particular Church, which I grant as true, but only note two things
to be satisfied in; 1. How he can reconcile this, with what he said before, p.
133. Sect. 26. The members of the Catholic visible Church, are initiated into
that professsion of faith, by baptism. But Baptism (according to his
principles) is an Ordinance of worship only to be enjoyed in a particular
Church; unless he will grant (what yet he does deny, but will be forced to
grant) that a Minister is a Minister to more than his own Church, even to the
Catholic Church; and may administer baptism out of a particular Church, as
Philip did to the Eunuch, and Paul to the Jailer; or else deny Baptism to be a
part of instituted worship; let him take his choice. 2. I note also, how he is
at distance, with some of his friends, in New England, Mr. Hooker's survey See,
my Review page 119.
who assert, That no man can be a member of the Catholic Church, but he must
first be a member of a particular. But 3. he grants; Every beleiver is obliged
to join himself to some one of those Churches, that there he may abide, in
doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayer; etc: if he have
opportunity. This he willingly grants, and I as willingly accept, for an use I
shall make of it anon, but I like not so well his reasons. p. 206
1. There are some duties with cannot possibly be performed, but on a
supposition, of this duty previously required, Math. 18.15. etc: If he had
said, those duties cannot so well be performed, its true; but some of them are
due to others, beside our own Congregation: But I shall make this advantage of
it; That if they cannot possibly otherwise be performed, then some of their
Church Members, are ill gathered, living many miles asunder. Cohabitation in
Towns and Parishes, seems a necessary requisite, to Church Membership. 2.
There are some Ordinances of Christ, which they can never be made partakers of,
not related to some such Society; as Admonition, participation of the Lords
Supper, etc. As for Admonition, it is a duty that concerns every man, to any
man, though not of his particular Church, though specially to them of their own
society; And as for partaking of the Lords Supper, why may he not enjoy it in
another Church, as well as Baptism; which he allowed before, to one of the
Catholic Church? If Christians, professing the same Faith, were looked on as
Brethren, and as having thereby right to the Ordinances of Christ, in any
Church where they come, they might be partakers of Ordinances though not
particularly joined to a particular Church. But this engrossing the common
Ordinances, to a few confederate persons, and making the rest little better
than Heathens, as to their Communion, violates the Order of the Gospel, and the
Rule of charity, and may justly be called Schism.

That Christ has given no direction for any duty of worship, merely and
purely of sovereign institution, but only to them, and by them, who are so
joined. But then I would ask, 1. Whether Philip Baptizing the Eunuch, in the
way, had Christ's direction for it, or no? or, is Baptism no part of worship? 2.
Prayer, and reading of the Word in private families, are they no duties of
worship? 3. Preaching to convert Heathens, (and then to baptize them) is it not
a duty of worship belonging to a Minister? Romans 10.14. 4 Let me be so bold, as
to ask once more; By what Authority does he himself preach and pray to and with
the Parliament, or at St. Mary's in Oxford, with a mixed unjoyned congregation,
etc? Or are not these there and at that time, parts of worship of Christ's
Institution? I hope he will not say so. 4. For his fourth reason he gives this,
The Apostles in planting of Churches, took care to leave none whom they
converted, out of that Order, where it was possible, etc. But this is evidently
false in the case of the Eunuch, the Deputy, Acts 13. etc. Unless where there
were enough converted to make a Church. But he laying so much stress upon a
particular Church, and the necessity of joining with it, it seems reasonable,
there should be some directions to enjoin every single convert (impossibilities
only excepted) leaving all inconveniences at least, to join himself to some
particular Church, rather than not to partake of the Ordinances all his days,
as he said before. For the 5. Christ's institution of Officers for them, etc.
that is, for particular Churches only, if it speak reason, is as weak as the
rest; For its evident, 1. That Christ instituted Officers at first, for the
whole Church, as the Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 4.11. 2 All those Officers ordinary,
as Pastors or Teachers, are set in the Catholic Church, and every Minister is
first a Minister to the Catholic Church; if he deny this, he knows where to
find a learned Antagonist. The last reason (as all the rest) is fallacious, or
inconsequent, Christ took care for particular Churches, therefore the
Ordinances, are no where to be had by any man, but in his own particular
Congregation.

instituted worship of God, to be continued under the New Testament, p. 207.
to which humane prudence may add nothing, is a certain truth, denied by none,
but fanatical spirits. And as for the institution of particular Churches, by
express words of Scripture, it is no where visible, but by a fair and necessary
consequence; That which is of Institution was, that Gods people should serve
and worship him severally and jointly, in such and such Ordinances of worship;
and consequently by a necessity of nature, there must be a place for people to
meet together in, or more, as their number is; God institutes public prayer,
preaching, Sacraments, therefore there must be societies, to perform this
worship. 1. Because of the multitude of Christians, which can neither meet all
in one place, nor exercise those acts of worship in too great a company. 2. For
the better obligation of all professors, as, to the exercise of all acts of
public worship, (which some, if left free to join with all, or any, would
utterly neglect); so of all those private duties, required of fellow members,
which cannot well be performed (as was said) by persons not conbined. But the
circumstances of those societies, how many, how great, what persons shall
associate, is left to humane prudence, with an eye to the general Rules of
Scripture, that all be done decently, in order, and to edification. And that
those that are so joined, are so confined, that they cannot, or may not worship
God in the same Ordinances, occasionally in other Churches, let him that can,
show the Institution; for I know none: yet this is the chief piece of
Independency; never yet undertaken to be proved by any of that party. Our
Author grants, that a man is at Liberty to settle in what Congregation he
pleases, and remove at pleasure; And the light of common prudence, (upon
supposition that there must be such societies) seems to to dictate, that when
all of a Nation are Christians, there should be a distinction o Churches, or,
as we call them Parishes, made by the bounds of men's habitations; so that the
divisions be discreetly made, that the Congregations be neither too big, nor
too little, and that the parties of each Society, may dwell so near together,
that they may be fitter to perform the services of God in public, decently and
in order, to edification: and also those mutual private duties, of brotherly
inspection, Admonition, etc. required by Christ, Matthew. 18.15. 1 Thessal. 5.14.
etc.

That there is in the Institutions of Christ, p. 209.
much that answers a natural principle in men, who are fitted for society; A
confederation and consultation, to carry on any design of common concernment,
etc. I suppose he may intend this, of Synods, carried on by Delegates from
several Churches; which is suitable to that prudence we see in States,
assembling in Parliament etc. But I shall improve this further. As the light of
nature taught men to unite themselves, in Towns and Cities, for their better
security, and mutual assistance, and comfort: So the same prudence taught the
Ancients, to distinguish Cities into Parishes, for their better Assembling
(some else would be of no Church, as pretending to be of all, or any, as we see
at this day) for carrying on the services of God, in a better, and more
profitable Order; and for those private duties before spoken of. Nor does any
man rationally hence conclude, That there is no more but this, in this Church
constitution, that men may be cast into any prudential form, etc. For the way
of worship, is peculiarly instituted; but the way of constituting particular
Churches, for persons, for number, etc. needs no institution, but is left to
the prudence of men, or Churches, as before.

Whether by any promise of Christ, there shall be always somewhere a visible
Church visibly celebrating his Ordinances, p. 211.
he told us above, was a needless enquiry, p. 85. yet both there, and here
enclines to the Negative, that all such Church state may cease, for some time,
and hereafter talks of an intercision of all Ordinances, so far as to make a
nullitie in them, as to what was of simple and pure institution, p. 271, In
this p^ace, he glosses some Scriptures, (alleged of others, as meant of the
Catholic visible Church) to be understood of the spiritual Reign of Christ, in
true believers. Luke 1.33. Math. 16.18. Of the sense of which place, I shall
not now contest with him: For the thing it self, something shall be said, in
answering those questions which here he propounds. 1. It is said, true
Churches, were at first planted in England, how then did they cease to be? How,
or by what Act did God unchurch them? They did it themselves meritoriously, by
Apostasy and Idolatry, God legally by his Institution of a Law of rejection of
such Churches. But first if Idolatry and grievous Apostasy will merit an actual
unchurching, not only the Israelites, but they of Judah had deserved it long
before they were unchurched. And if Apostasy in a great measure will unchurch a
people, England has of late years Apostatized sufficiently from our Ancient
truths. 2. Where has God instituted such a Law, to reject a Church, presently,
so soon as it proves Idolatrous or Apostatical? Rome had not then been standing
at this day. 3. It is a question, whether God ever absolutely, unchurches a
people, till he utterly destroys them: as he did the Israelites of old, and the
whole Jewish Church, after Christ's death: and the seven famous Churches of Asia
since. 4. As also, it would be resolved, when God did unchurch England, (which
he insinuates as granted) Whether whilst it was Popish and Antichristian, or
since the Reformation? 5. Let him resolve us, whether our first Reformers did
intend, or undertake to raise up a new Church, or to repair the old corrupted
state thereof (as they that returned from the Babylonish Captivity, did not
build a new Temple, but repair and purge the old.) 6. Whether at the
Reformation in K. Edw. and Q. Eliz. days, there were not true Churches planted
in England? and then how they came to cease to be, seeing they were rather
perfected since, than corrupted? 7. Lastly, Whether our Reverend Author, do not
in his conscience think, There were no true Churches in England till the
Brownists their Fathers, the An^baptists, their elder Brothers, and themselves
arose and gathered new Churches, not out of true Churches, but out of Babylon,
as their Predecessors used to speak: which he yet seems to insinuate when he
says, "The Catholic mystical, p. 212.
and that visibly professing being preserved entire, he that thinks there
needs a miracle for those who are members of them, to join in such a Society,
as those spoken of, according to the Institution of Christ, is a person
delighting in needless scruples. As if he should say, There was no Church of
Christ's Institution in England, till they or their Predecessors arose, and
gathered such Societies; and when all Church State was here lost, they had the
happiness and honor to revive it. Macte virtute.

How then is it possible, that any such Church should be raised anew? To which
he gives that answer, I say the Catholic Church mystical, etc. And to make it
good, he proceeds further to say, Christ has promised, That where two or three
are gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them. But I pray
to whom was this promise made? was it not to his Officers, the Apostles, in
their consultations, or Church-determinations? Or grant it made to Believers,
is it not as true of them that are out of his Church Fellowship? When two or
three Christians accidentally meet together, and pray, etc. Is not Christ also
in the midst of them? Yea, grant him his own sense, what then? It is now
supposed, with some hope to have it granted, that the Scripture being the power
of God to salvation, has a sufficient efficacy in it self, for the conversion
of Souls. All this is granted; what God may do by his extraordinary power, we
determine not; but this is ordinarily done by preaching, and those Preachers in
Office, Romans 10.14. But go on: It is not impossible that though all Church
state should cease in any place, and yet the Scripture by the providence of
God, be there in the hand of individuals, two or three should be called,
converted and regenerated by it. This also may be supposed, though I believe he
cannot exemplify such a case; The question only would be, if some Heathens
should find the Scriptures, how they should understand either the Original
Languages, without a Teacher, or a miracle; or the sense of them, without a
guide, as the Eunuch said to Philip: But suppose all; they are converted by the
Scriptures alone: What then? p. 213.
He asks whether these converted persons, may not possibly come together in the
name of Jesus. No doubt they may, if they were 20. or 40. of them; But can
their assembling together, make them a Church? How can that be, before they are
baptized? See Confess. of 7. Anabap. Churches Art. 34. A Church is a company of
baptized persons.
and how baptized without a Minister? Shall they be Se-baptists, or baptize one
another? I suppose our Author is not yet come to this. But he says; May they
not upon his command, and in expectation of his promise, so come together, with
resolution to do his will, and exhort one another thereto? Truly (to use his
own words) I believe they may, in what part of the world soever their Lot is
fallen; Where then lies the difficulty? In this, whether being come together in
the name of Christ, they may do what he has commanded them or no? whether they
may exhort and stir up one another, to do the will of Christ? No, there is no
difficulty, but duty, in all this. But here lies the difficulty, (which his new
notion, or his haste made him forget, How these persons can come to be a
Church, before they are baptized, and how they can be baptized without a
Minister? Were not men prejudiced, or prepossessed, with some Anabaptistical
fancy, So were the Indians Socrat. Hist. l. 1. c. 15. 16. converted by laymen,
as called.
here would be the difficulty of the business. The Iberians, if stories say
true, were converted by a Christian woman, and by a miracle; but surely, she
could not baptize them; therefore they sent for some Ministers to baptize, and
to put them into Church Order.

Soul-sick fancy of our late Seekers (that had lost all Religion) that all true
Church state, was lost in all the world, as well as in England, (and our Author
thinks little less, till the form of his own Churches was found) and therefore
they expected some extraordinary Officers to raise it up from the dead; which
was to look for a miracle. And in the case propounded* of two or three
converted by the Scripture alone, in a remote corner of the world, I would
gladly know, how a Church can be begun without a miracle. For though a company
of baptized persons, might (in an extraordinary case) choose themselves,
Officers, prima vice, and so make a Church; yet unbaptized persons converted,
cannot make a Church, till they be baptized, and who shall baptize them without
a miracle, unless providence send them a Minister to do it? For true Believers
or Professors of the faith, qua such, cannot make a particular Church: their
own first principle of a particular Church, must be baptized persons, and how
they can come to be such, without a Minister, without a miracle, I cannot yet
see. This is the bottom of the Seekers, now turned into Quakers, All Church
state it lost, and no recovery of it without new Revelation; and so they fancy
the Spirit to be given to them, to begin a new Church. And in our brethrens new
Church way, had their people renounced their baptism, (as Anabaptists have
done) as they themselves have renounced their Ministry, I would be informed,
whether they could ever have made a Church of unbaptized persons, without a
Minister, without a miracle; and then, whether they must not turn, either
Anabaptists or Quakers; See Confess. of 7. Churches Art. 41. The person
dispencing Baptism, is a disciple, not tied to a Church Officer.
either making Baptism administrable, by any brother, that has the boldness,
to take it up; or expect new Revelations of the indwelling Spirit, and so
become extraordinary Officers. This and more that might be said, imports (for
ought I see) that there shall never cease to be a Church or Churches, wherein
some instituted Ordinances shall be preserved (though covered over with much
corruption) those particularly, of the Ministry and Baptism; or else the
Church State being once lost, and perished, can never be restored, without a
miracle. When Judah was carried away captive to Babylon, with all her Priests
and Levites, and all the materials of their National Church State, the Temple
destroyed, etc. It may seem, that their whole Church State was ceased, as to
their Ceremonial worship, for 70 years together; It might be asked, How then it
was possible to revive that lost Church State without a miracle? The answer may
be, That God preserved the seed of that Church at Babylon; partly in preserving
the people there, a remnant of his circumcised people; partly in reserving the
holy vessels, useful for their worship, and partly in keeping the Line and
Genealogy of the priesthood entire; so that when all these were brought back to
Jerusalem, they had no need of a miracle, to revive their Church State; or, to
build a new Temple; but only to purge and repair the old and to set up the
instituted services, in their power and purity. The application is so easy,
that the Reader will outrun me: So, when Antichrist had usurped tyrannically
(like another Nebuchadnezer) over all Churches, ruind particular Churches,
corrupted the Ordinances of Christ, World, worship, discipline, yet God
reserved secretly, some true believers, and some professors, together with so
much of his Ordinances, as to substantialls, and necessary ingredients to a
Church, a Ministry, and baptism, etc. that when he stirred up the heart of
Luther, and other Ministers (like another Zerubbabel) and some people to
separate themselves from the Romish tyranny and corruptions in doctrine and
worship, they needed no miracle to begin a new Church; but some being
ministers of the Gospel, so made in their Ordination, and all being baptized,
they did not raise a new Church; but only purged the old.

What is the Union and Communion of a particular Church, page 214.
that so we may know wherein the bonds thereof do consist. And instead of
telling us what this union is, he tells us, what is the foundation of that
union; which he makes to be double; The one external, procuring command ng,
viz the Institution of Jesus Christ, before mentioned, requiring peace, order,
union, consent and agreement, among all the members of it, etc: But I think
that all this is the foundation of the union, both of the invisible, and
visible, Catholic Church; All the members of them, (as well as of the
particular) are under those commands requiring peace, order, etc: for their
walking in such societies, when and where they can associate: and where is then
the difference of this Church, from the other? 2. The internal foundation of
this union, is that Love without dissimulation, which always is, or ought to
be, between all the members of such a Church, exerting it self, in their
respective* duties, etc. But this also, is the foundation of the union of the
other two Churches; Love without d^ssimulation; as was said above. p. 98.
And so yet we have no difference. But we enquire, what is the union it self,
or rather what is the form (for that gives union) the specificating form,
that distinguishes this Church, from the rest, the other two aforegone. This it
is; p. 215.
The joint consent of all the members of it, from a principle of Love, to walk
together, in the universal celebration of all the Ord^nances of the worship of
God, and to perform all offices of Love, to one another, etc: But most of
this, is applicable to the other two Churches, or notions of a Church: All the
members of them, are bound by a command of Christ, to consent or agree to join
together, (when and where they c^n) from a principle of Love, in the universal
celebration of all the Ordinances or worship, and the rest: what then is the
Specificative form (if it have any) of a particular Church? And if it have a
form, to distinguish it spec fically from the other, have not they also f^rmes
to distance them from this? An^ if ^, are there not three species of a Church?
which he seemed to deny abo^e. We have them all, described below, p. 236. The
form of the Church Catholic absolutely so called, is the unity with Christ,
and in it self, by the one Spirit, whereby it is animated. This is not very
accurately spoken: is the unity of the head and members the form of a man? It
is not rather, the one Soul that animates it, the oneness of soul, whereby the
whole is animated. p. 95. And will he say, the one Spirit of God is the form,
or soul, that animates the Catholic Church? p. 95.
I was afraid when I read above, That which answers hereunto (the soul in man)
in the mystical body of Christ, is the Animation of the whole by his Spirit. I
was, I say, afraid to fasten this conceit upon the words: Nor did, I think, he
intended any such thing, when he said; See the Appendix below, Sect. 4.
That (...), is no (more, but (...), I cannot easily consent, p. 49. But upon
second thoughts, finding him to repeat the phrase, of Animation by the Spirit
in this place; and to talk of the Inhabitation of the Spirit p. 94. 95. and
the indwelling Spirit, I began to su^pect him to incline at least, to this
error, (for so it has been reputed by all Orthodox Divines;) And since I
hear, that he preached this publicly at Oxford. That believers have not only
the special graces, and operations of the Spirit in them, but the person of
the holy Ghost indwelling in them, which was the error of one of the chief
Leaders of Independent^sm, in New England, and by his brethren there condemned;
which is seriously to be by them considered. God seems to blast their way, not
only by suffering their people to fall from them, but also by setting
themselves fall into strange opinions, or strong delusions. Not only some that
were once theirs, have fallen into some doctrines of Popery and Arminianism
(all most all the sects, preach those points;) but some of themselves, that
fell not so far, have yet vented dangerous and damnable doctrines; as I could
instance but forbear: B^t to return; 1. The form of the mystical Church,
is, (say some of his side) Faith. 2. The form of the Catholic visibly
professing, is the unity of that, as being by them professed, that is, say
others, (and he above) the profession of the same Faith. 3. The form of the
particular Church, p. 236.
as such is its observance and performance of the same Ordinances of worsh p
unmerically in the confession of the same Faith, and subjection to the same
rules of Love, for the edification of the whole. I observe first, the
difference; He said above, the union of this Church, (which he makes the
specificating form, not very properly) is the joint consent of all the members
to perform the same Ordinances of worship: but now he says, It is the joint
observance of all Ordinances, etc. And indeed this seems to be the
specificating difference or form of this Church, as distinct from the other,
the Communion of all the members of it, in all the same numericall Ordinance,
of worship. And this is the plain truth; dropped from him unawares, (contrary
to his partners and his own Judgment), concerning the form of a particular
Church; It is not, (as they have held out hitherto) an explicit consent, of
all the members, but, Its observance and performance of the same Ordinances of
worship numerically, in the confession of the same Faith, etc: Whence I would
infer, 1. That if the members of the invisible or visible Church Catholic do
occasionally meet together, in observation of the same numericall Ordinances of
worship, then and there is found a particular Church; though no explicit
consent be passed by them, one to another. 2. That the explicit consent, they
so much talk of, is not necessary by institution of Christ to the form or
essence of a particular Church, (the implicit covenant of Christianity,
binding them to such performance, when and where it is possible) but is only a
prudentiall means, or bond, for the better tying of members together, for
observance of the Ordinances, and to exercise mutual duties of love, to one
another, as has been said. But as I said above, these are not three Churches
differing specifically, but a notionall distinction of that one Church, or the
members of it, as they may be considered, 1. As true believers, 2. As
professors of the same Faith; 3. As partakers of the same worship. Now its
evident that one and the same person, may be all these, an invisible believer,
a visible professor, and a fellow worshipper. As we use to say in Philosophy,
there is a threefold life, vegetative, sensitive and rational; which may be
all three, in one man, and yet but one man, or creature. So then the form of a
particular Church, (if it have any) is rather communion in the same numericall
worship, than joint consent to communicate in that worship: That consent Dr.
Ames makes not the form of a particular Church, but the bond, to tie the
members faster together, to their public and private duties among themselves.
For as a man may be a believer, or a professor, and yet not have opportunity to
communicate in the same worship, (as he said above) ^o all and every member of
a Church, every Christian is bound to believe, to profess that faith, and to
join in the performance of the same numericall worship, when and where only
he has opportunity: Which he granted above, p. 205.

joint consent of all the members of a particular Church? I suppo^e he intends
it, (as his predecessors did) of, an expl^cite covenant, entered by every
party, that joins in that society, gathered, or to be gathered. This is
their daily practice. But then I desire an instance, of any Church in
Scripture, or story, so consenting, so co^enanting as before. And withal I
would ask, whether none be members of his Congregation, but only such, as
give this explicate consent? If he say, Not any, but such; I ask, whether the
Children of such Chuch-members, born and bred up in that Church* be not to be
accounted members? If he say, they are confaed^rate in their parents, I regest,
that is but an Implicit consent; but he required an explicit one. And then I
would tell him, that the brethren of New England grant, that an Implicit
consent or covenant is sufficient, to make our Churches true Churches, and yet
o^r brethren here separate from us, as no Churches. 2. I wou^d gladly be
informed, where the Scripture speaks of any other consent, or Covenant, to
Church Membership, than that of Christianity, wherein they engaged, at
baptism, to serve God according to his will and word, and to walk up to all
duties, of all Relations, one toward another. 3. I would yet be satisfied
whether this explicit consent, be exclusive that none may partake of those
Ordinances (common to all Christians) in their societies, but such as enter
this consent? Their practi^e here and in New England is, or has been, that
none can have Communion with them in Church Ordinances, but only such, as are
confdoecrate. 1. They will not baptize the child of the most godly parent, nor
admit to the Supper, the best knowing and pious person, not- matriculated into
their Church. If they have relinquished this practice, its well; but if they
have, they destroy their own principles, and prove themselves the more
injurious to our Churches, in separating from them. 5. And as for those offices
of Love, spoken of, I ask once more; are they also exclusive, to be tendered
to none, but their own combined members? It should seem so, because they are
here limited to the members of this particular Church, in their respective
places and stations. And their practice has been answerable: As they account
none to be within, but such; so some have said; They had no more to do, with a
Christian, not of their own way, than with an Heathen. How truly is Schism
attended with breach of Charity?

I shall further grant, that over and above the un^on, p. 216.
that is between the members of several particular Churches, by virtue of
their interest in the Church Catholic, which draws after it* a necessity of
the occasional exercise of love one toward another, and that Communion they
have as members of the Catholic visible Church, etc: There is a^^^mmunion
also to be observed, between those Churches as such which is or may be exerted
in their Assemblyes, by their Delegates, etc: What does he mean? That the
members of each particular Church, among themselves, have communion, but not
with the members of another particular Church? That was their practice
somewhere. Or that the members of several particular Churches, have union and
communion, in the worship of God, in the same Church? This was not their
practice once, though they were Churches of the same constitution, with their
own. A member of one Church might not receive the Supper, in another; Nor one
Minister administer baptism or the Supper in another's Church; preach they
might, as gifted brethren, which they allowed them to do to Heathens: What
union or communion was here of several Churches? And for those Offices of
love, he speaks of; they were only occasionally, which they owe and tender to
an Heathen; which not only their interest in the Catholic Church, but even
the Law of Humanity, draws after it " an occasional exercise of duties of
Love, as the Samaritane once expressed. In a word, this Communion of members of
several Churches, is nothing but what is due to and from the members of the
Catholic visible Church, that never were joined in communion with any
particular Church. Lastly as for that communion between Churches as such, in
their Assemblyes by Delegates it is not a comm^n ^n, in his esteem, by an
institution of Christ: but a matter of prudence only, which he so much decryed
before, p. 210.

wash his hands from the guilt of Schism, in making d^fferences, first, and
then separating from our Churches. To this end, he lays down some Postulata,
which he takes as granted, because before debated which are all disproved, and
need not here to be done again. Yet we shall briefly take notice of them, and
give them a further answer. p. 217.
1. That the departing of any man or men from any particular Church as to that
communion, peculiar to such a Church, is no where called Schism; nor is so in
the nature of the thing it self, etc. This is not the question, as was said
above. A simple secession, of a man or men, upon some ju^t occasion, is not
called Schism; But to make causeless differences in a Church, and then
separating from it, as no Church, denying communion with it; has the nature
and name of Schism in all men's judgments, but his own. Yea, according to his
own principles, to raze differences in a Church is propery Schism; to persist
in maintaining those differences, is a worse Schism; and then upon those
d^fferences, to depart and break the Church in^o pieces, is Schism in the
highest degree, and admits of all his own aggravations given above, and is an
he nous sin. 2. One Church refusing to hold that communion with another which
ought to be between them, p. 218.
is no Schism, properly so called. Besides what has been said above, that one
Church may raise differences in and with another Church, which has the nature
of Schism; I add, that the^e words are aequivocall; for they holding all
Churches to be Independent, they must hold, consequentially, there is not
necessarily any communion between them as Churches, but as to particular
members of the Catholic Church; the refusing to hold communion with another
Church, can be no Schism, because they owe no communion to one another, at
least of divine institution, but of mere prudence, as was newly said. But
seeing, as I proved, there ought to be a communion between all particular
Churches, not only in profession of the same Faith, but also in the same
specificall, and where it is possible, numericall worship, the refusing to hold
this union and communion, in doctrine or worship, has the nature, and well
deserves the name of Schism. 3. If that departure of any man or men, be done
without strife, variance, judging and condemning of others, it cannot be evil,
but from circumstances, etc: This is as much as to say, that departure which is
not evil, is not evil; For Schism in its nature signifies or presupposes
variance, strife, and divisions before the parting, and is commonly attended
with judging and condemning of others, both persons and Churches as experience
tells us at this day; The very separation from a Church, to set up another
Church, is a real judging and condemning of the Church from whence they
separated. Is it not the practice of all Separatists, to judge and condemn all
our Churches, as Antichristian, or none; to asperse us as no Ministers, but
Priests, etc? Is it not the design of his book, to prove (if he could) and
condemn us as no Churches? Let the world be judge; for unless this be proved,
he can never justify his separation: either therefore, he must prove us to be
no Churches of Christ's institution, and that he owes us no communion, nor has
broken any union, of Christ's appointment, (which he shall never be able to
prove) or else he had need put himself, not upon the Justice, but on the
largest mercy of his Judges.

CHAP. VIII. Independentism, a great Schism.
vindicat^on of himself and party, from the charge of Schism, by Episcopal
men, he first lays down their Ind^cement: to which how he has answered, and
acquitted himself let them, if they please, consider. I shall only take
notice by the way, of some things tending to the issue of the debate between us
and him, and that very briefly. He first conside^s in what sense the Church of
England may be taken: As 1. The people of God his elect, etc: in this Nation,
may (though improperly) be called the Church of England. But why not a
properly, as all true beleivers in the world, may be, and are by him, called
the Catholic Church. The World and a Nation, differ but as greater and l^sser,
as a part and the whole; and a particular Church is but a part of the
Catholic, and so as properly called a Church. In this sense (says he) it is
the desire of our souls, to be and ab^de members of the Church of England; to
keep with it the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace. But unless he
think there are no members of this Church in England but those that are of his
formed particular Churches, I fear he will be found to break the Union, that
ought to be between them. And indeed, it seems by their gathering the Saints of
the first magnitude, they intend to have none but such of their Churches, which
is (as much as they can) to make the invisible Church, to be visible on earth.
He speaks something suspitiously this way, p. 90. The Elect and the Church, are
the same persons, under several considerations, and therefore even a particular
Church, on the account of its participation of the nature of the Catholic is
called the elect, 1 Pet. 5.13. And yet he speaks of some parts of the body,
uncomely, p. 215. which, who they be in his Church, I know not. They leave
those to us, to clouth and beautify, and then they may admit them, into their
elected Congregations. But he says, If we have grieved, p. 223.
offended, troubled the least member of his Church, so that he may justly take
offense at any of our ways we profess our readiness to lie at his foot for
reconciliation etc. This strengthens the suspicion of what I said; For unless
he take us all for Reprobates, we have and do profess our selves (and we think,
justly) offended at their ways, and how ready they have been to give us
satisfaction, let the world judge. The rest that follows, is spoken with equal
confidence and truth, If we love not all the members of this Church rejoice not
with them, etc. but I forbear; He deludes us, when he says, if we do not these
things, Let us be esteemed the vilest Schismatics that ever lived on the face
of the earth. For if we prove all or some of these to be false: yet he accounts
none of them to be Schismatical, whatever they may be else.

In this sense also, we profess our selves members of the Church of England, p.
224.
as professing and adhering to the doctrine of Faith, in the unity of it, which
was here established, declared by Laws, Confessions, Protestations, etc. Will
he undertake this, for all the Independent Churches in England? Are not many of
them grossly Apostatized from the professed doctrine of this Church, and so
Heretical? But, were it true which he says for himself, they may be excused
from being Heretical; but they may yet be Schismatical, in denying communion in
matter of worship. For the worship of God, was as well declared, professed,
protested, as the Doctrine. They hold communion with us in profession of the
same Faith, but not in the observance of the same worship; yet are the
Ordinances of worship as pure with us, as with them, or let them prove our
failings, and we promise a Reformation. In this sense they are neither
children, nor members of the Church of England. And this is the wonder, That
professing, they received their regeneration and new birth, p. 225.
by the preaching of the word and the saving truths thereof, with the seal of
it in their Baptism, they should now separate from us, not only in that
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, but also in the preaching of the Word and
Baptism. Could they make use of our preaching and Baptism, for their
regeneration, and not of the other Sacrament, and the same preaching for their
confirmation? and besides, now renounce us as no true Churches? This we think
is Brownistical and highly Schismatical. The Anabaptists deal more rationally,
to their own principles, in denying our Ministry, and Baptism, and all
Church State, than they do: The old Rule was,The sincere preaching of the Word,
and right administration of the Sacraments, are the Characters of a true
Church, Which we having, and they separating from us, in all Church Communion;
how shall this crime be named, but by Schism in the highest degree?

Independent Churches, p. 226.
have left them, viz. Those who have renounced the baptism they received in
their infancy, and repeat it amongst themselves. And have they not done this,
upon their own principle? That all true Church State is lost in England. And if
so, then no true Ministry, no Baptism, no Church; and then it must be revived,
by a new-baptism, the door of a true Church; It was told the Brownists long
ago; either they must come back to us, or go forward to Anabaptism; and so must
the Independents, if their principles and conclusions, be consonant to one
another, yea many are fallen from them to Anabaptsem; and I believe nothing but
the odium, or some private interest keeps many more from following after them.
But what thinks he of Anabaptists? are they Schismatics or no, for their
separation? Hear his Apology for them, yet I suppose, that he, who upon that
single account, will undertake to prove them Schismatical, may find himself
entangled. To raise up differences, causeless differences (unless
Paedobaptism be a trivial thing) and upon that to separate not only from the
judgment and practice of all the Christian Churches in the world, at present,
but from the judgment and practice also of all the primitive and succeeding
Churches in all ages, and all places, if this be not Schismatical, I know
nothing that deserves that name. Sure the Donatists were generally accounted
Schismatics, for rebaptizing those that came to them, from other Churches;
but, says he, The case is not exactly with the Anabaptists, as it was with the
Donatists. Exactly the same? True, for they lived in Africa, these in Europe.
But they do the same thing; rebaptize the same that were baptized by us. That
is granted; but not on the same principle: yes, upon the very same principle;
though they added another, which the Donatists knew not; As how? p. 226.
The Donatists rebaptized those who came to their societies, because they
believed, that all administration of Ordinances, not in their Assemblies, was
null, and to be looked on, as no such thing. And do not Anabaptists think so,
and say so of all the Ordinances administered in our Church? yea of Baptism,
given to Infants, in the Independent Churches? Do they not, or would they not
rebaptize any that comes from them, to their Societies? because they think
their Baptism null, if not their other Ordinances. But he has an help for
this, Our Anabaptists ( yes your Anabaptists) do the same thing, but on this
plea that though Baptism be yet Infant Baptism is not an Institution of Christ,
and so is null from the nature of the thing it self, not the way of
administration of it. Yes, both ways they hold it null; and so much worse and
more Schismatical than the Donatists. They rebaptized only (as some think)
those that were baptized by Cecilianus, or some of his Ordination; but did not
so with others, nor did they think Baptism in infancy to be null in the nature
of the thing. But Anabaptists, rebaptize all, come they from what Church they
will; and are not these the worser Donatists? But let him take heed, lest in
defending a bad cause, he make himself guilty of the sin. Does not he himself
labor, in this book, to prove, that the Administration of Ordinances, in our
Assemblies are null? Our Ordination null, p. 197. and Antichristian, from the
Beast: And charging them that insist upon it, as keeping up what God would have
pull^d down, p. 198. and consequently, the Ordinances by us administered, are
null: And why then, is not he rebaptized? Yea our Churches are esteemed not of
Christ's institution, because not lawfully gathered; See page 206.. 10.
and are not these worse than Donatists? But he says, This falls not within
the verge of my defense. Yet he could not but speak a good word for them; They
must not be Schismatics, lest he be proved so too. They are but one step
before him, it may be his own case ere long. And I durst almost be his prophet
to foretell what he and others will do; If they stick close to, and manage
that principle well, That all true Church State was lost in England: they must
not stay where they are but go forward either to Anabaptism, and be rebaptized;
or to Quakerism, (as some already are) and deny all use of outward baptism.

In these several considerations, p. 226.
we were and do continue members in the Church of God in England; and as to our
failing herein, who is it that convinces us of sin? How warily, first; Members
in the Church of England, not of it, not of any particular Church of England;
but as of a Church new revived and gathered, in England, But I ask: were they
not members of some particular Church of England, when they were baptized? yea,
for all Ordinances till of late, and some of them Ministers besides? And have
they not renounced Ministry, and Lords Supper, and all but Baptism? Let them
speak plainly: Were they baptized as members of any Church, or no? if of any,
of what? if of none, how at all? unless they hold Baptism no Church Ordinance:
And by whom? by a Minister as such to them? or is not Baptism a ministerial
act? If they may receive Baptism, without Church Communion (if we be no
Churches) why not also the Lords supper? If Communion with the Church
Catholic, may serve for one Ordinance why not for another? Or if they may
receive Baptism validly, in our Churches, why not other Ordinances? These
questions would be seriously and conscientiously answered. But how confidently
he shuts up, As to our failing herein, who is it that convinces us of sin? He
that spoke those words first, was more than a man. Its too much for any mere
man to think, much more to say, Who is it that convinces me of sin? in his best
performances; if men cannot, God can. But if our Churches were not true, sure
they failed in joining so long with us. Yet we charge them not with failings in
their Communion, but for relinquishing that Communion, and at parting, to cast
dirt in their Mothers face that bare them them (as is confessed) as no honest
Woman.

union of a National Church, and breach of that union, I leave to them that are
concerned in it. Only I shall take notice of one passage which is this; Whereas
sundry Ordinances of the worship of God, p. 245.
are rightly to be administered only in a Church, and Ministers do evidently
relate thereunto; the denial of a National Church State, seems to deny that we
had either Ministers or Ordinances here in England. How will he answer this?
especially having renounced his own Ministry, received in this National Church,
and all besides in respect of Church Communion, except his Baptism, as null, or
naught. Thus he says, and that's all; It may seem so to do, but it does not:
unless you will say that unless ye be a National Church State, there is no
other; which is too absurd for any one to imagine. The consequence cannot well
be denied, in his notion of this Church. For if there were no Ministers, but
ordained by those National Officers, and those Officers not of Christ's
institution, (as he has often pleaded) it follows necessarily, that first
there were no Ministers lawful in this Church, and so no Ordinances truly
administered in it, and at last no Church at all. This I doubt, or rather
believe, by what he has said, is his judgment, but he durst not speak out.
For I ask, Does he in his conscience believe, there were any true Ministers in
this Church, in the time of its being National? and if no Ministers, no
Ordinances rightly administered. But why does he not tell us, what that other
Church State is, of which he speaks? he denies all, but the Independent state
of new gathered Churches; which were not found in the Prelates times, except
some Brownistical Societies: we shall not thank him for this jejune and empty
vindication, but shall plead for our selves. Our former Divines of the first
reformation, and since, have pleaded, and justified their Ordination, for the
essentialls of it, received from Rome: which being purged from all those
super-induced corruptions, they propagated unto us, who may therefore the
better justify our own. Those Bishops that ordained us, had (as he told us
above) a double capacity; One as Lord Bishops, received from the state, p.
227. Another as Ministers of the Gosspell, to preach, administer Sacraments, to
join in Ordination of Ministers, p. 231. Now in this latter, some of
themselves professed, (and so we understood it) that they ordained Presbyters,
as presbyters, not as Bishops. Hence it follows, that though they presumed to
themselves, a Lordly power, not according unto the institution of Christ,
whereby they called themselves a national Church, etc. Yet the Ordination
being according to the Rule of the Gospel (as we believe it is sufficiently
proved, and never yet sufficiently answered) there were Ministers lawfully
called, and Ordinances by them rightly administered; and that is the other
Church state, which he would not do us the honor to name, least he should
there by condemn himself as a Schismatic, in departing from this Church State.
These true and faithful Ministers, (with their people in their several
Congregations) administering the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ (whereof their
baptism was one) were, and still are the true Church State of England, for
which we plead, and he has forsaken. Some additions of humane prudence, cannot
annull the Ordinances of Christ.

way of the prelates, he told us p. 235. p. 246.
to stablish a national Church, was descendendo; of the Presbyterians,
ascendendo: That is, that such a thing should rise from the particular
Congregations, by sundry Associations, and subordinations of Assemblyes, in and
by the representatives of those Churches. But this may prove a mistake, For, 1.
The Presbyterians rather go descendendo, as well as the prelates did at least
in part: They agree both in this, that they acknowledge their rise and
original to be from the Apostles, who were the first founders of all Churches,
and the supreme Officers of the Church; For them were other Ministers ordained,
in subordination to them, Bishops say some, ( Archbishops and then Bishops, say
others) and they ordained Presbyters subordinate unto them, or as he styles
them) parochial Priests, p. 235: The Presbyterians say, the Apostles first
made Presbyters, and gave them power to rule their particular Churches, and as
occasion required, to meet together, by Delegates, in a Classis, or Synod (as
that ^t Jerusalem consisted partly of Elders, with the Apostles). 2. They lay
the rise of Ministerial power, to be universal as well as the Prelates,
supposing a Minister to be a Minister, in what part soever of the world, his
lot happen to be; and do not, upon his removal, give him a new Ordination;
though he may not (for order sake) exercise that power, but when and where he
has a call, 3. That call may be different, 1. as he is called to take care of
a particular Congregation, 2. as a Delegate to a Classis, or Synod, (which
himself allows, in the Independent way, as above) 3. As he is, in the absence
of a particular Minister, desired to Preach, or Baptize, or do any other
Ministerial duty, to another people: (as when the Parliament commands Doctor
O. to Preach a Sermon to, and pray with them) Now this Delegation (which he
means by ascendendo) does not give him a new power, distinct from what he had
before by his Ordination, but a particular designation to act this power, pro
hic and nunc. As he has often heard, but will take no notice of it.

Church may be called national, p. 247.
when all the particular Congregations of one nation, agreeing in doctrine and
worship, are governed by their greater and lesser Assemblyes (as some learned
Divines have asserted) I will not dispute, but leave what they have said, to
the further consideration of their Adversaries; Though this may be said; they
did not make this the only, or the principal way, of that denomination; That
was rather, when all the Congregation of a nation, agree in the Doctrine and
worship, and celebrate it accordingly. The Disciplinary part, or form, of
Government, is not essential to the Church, nor absolutely necessary; and the
Church may exist, and be national without it: much less do any of ours say,
That subjection to one civil Government, and agreement on the same doctrine
and worship specifically, etc: does constitute one Church: or as he expresses
it, afterward, p. 251. they do not say, that being under one civ^ll
government, does constitute a National Church; for if so (says he) its form
and unity as such, must be given it by the civil Government. For the unity
thereof consists still in the agreement in the same doctrine and worship, and
not in the model of civil Government (of what kind soever). p. 250.
And if he allow (as he does) an Association of the Delegates, from several
Churches, to meet for matters of common concernment; by the same reason,
(whether it be by Institution, or prudence) he must allow those subordinate
Assemblyes. For the light of nature teaches the necessity of Appeals, in
male-administrations, for ending of troubles, and decision of differences, in
particular Congregations; as was instanced in the Antiochians appeal, to the
Church of Jerusalem, in such a case: which (I say) whether it were by an
institution of Christ, or an act of Christian prudence, will serve our turn,
to justify such Associations, though we do not account them to be the form,
or cause of the union, of a Presbyterian Church; but rather, prudentiall
means, to preserve that union.

form of a national Church to be the institution of greater or lesser
Assemblyes) he proceeds, to premise some things, which may take off the charge
of Schism, for their separating from our Churches, as true as their own. 1. No
man can possibly be a member of a national Church in this sense, page 251.
but by being first member of some particular Church in the nation; which
concurres to make up, the national Church. But that not being our opinion, the
consequence sails: He granted as much, as we plead, p. 250. On the same
account, (that all the professors of the truth throughout the world are the
Catholic visible Church of Christ) may all the professors of the truth in
England, be called the Church of England. And it was his own assertion above,
to the contrary, That a man may be a member of the Catholic visible Church,
and yet no member of a particular Church. And why then may not a man be a
member of a National Church, and yet be no member of a particular Church? I
could exemplify cases, but I forbear. Indeed as the state of the nation, is,
at this day, all generally being baptized (except Anabaptists Children) no man
is a member of the national Church, but he is also a member of some particular
Church: That Church being (as he often has said) the seat of Ordinances. Hence,
2. its evident that a man may recede from this national Church, and not depatt
from some particular Church; because he may be a member of the national, (as
well as of the Catholic) Church, and yet be no member of a particular Church,
etc. on the other side, a man may be a member of some particular Church, and
yet be no member of the national (in the sense of it by him given) as himself
and others do too much evidence. 3. He says, To make men members of any
particular Churches, their own consent is required. If he mean this of an
explicit consent (as I suppose he does, or he says nothing) it is fully
disproved above: and implicit confessed sufficient. A man that removes his
habitation, (as both he, and we grant its free for him to do) may, by setting
down in another Congregation, and submitting himself to all the Ordinances of
Christ there, with performance of all Officers of Love, to the members of that
Congregation, implicitly, and yet sufficiently, consent to be a member
thereof. And on the other hand, a man may not remove his habitation, from a
Congregation, wherein he has long consented to communicate, and yet remove his
consent to be a member of another; as we see too much, in this loose and
wandering age.

That as yet, p. 252.
at least since possibly we could be concerned in it, who are now alive, no
such Church in this nation has been formed. It is impossible a man should be
guilty of offending, against that which is not; unless they will say, we have
separated from what should be. This Engine has served him twice before; First
against the charge of Schism by the Romanists, Theirs is no Church, at all, how
could they separate from that which is not? Then against the Prelat's,
Hierarchicall Church: Their's is no Church of Christ's institution, That which is
wanting cannot be numbered, p. 242. And now the third time, against the same
charge by the Presbyterians. It is true indeed, there has no such national
Church, been uniformely, formed in this nation; but he knows, such a Church
has been endeavored to be, formed, conformable to the Word of God, and to the
best reformed Churches abroad, according to our solemn covenant; and who have
withstood resisted, and hindered it, (and yet do hinder) he knows well enough.
But withal, it cannot be denied, but there are some Presbyterian Churches
settled in England; (and perhaps some of their members, if not of themselves
have been of them) from these they have separated, as well as from the rest. If
there were not such here, there are such abroad, and yet they have renounced
communion with them, as no true Churches, and that is a negative separation.
Besides, there was, and is, another Church state in England, in our particular
Churches; from these also they have most of them (as once of them) p^p^bly
separated. The Presbyterian Church state, as to particular Congregations; in
doctrine, worship, and discipline in them, is the very same with theirs,
(excepting that they hold their Congregations, to be Independent, and entire
^or all Government in themselves; but we acknowledge our selves dependent, and
would be g^ad, we had other Churches to join with) and yet they separate from,
and disa^ow them as well as others. Lastly, I believe those men, that raise
differences in a reforming Church, and persist in keeping open those divisions,
separating also into other new Churches, do as well deserve the name of
Schismatics, as those that make differences in one particular Church. And
unless they can better prove (than yet they have done) that we are no true
Churches; and their own to be the only true Churches, in the nation, in the
World, the Schism will lie at their door, (in all aequall men's judgment);
remove it, as they can.

p. 253. Let him read the next disputation of Amyraldus, his definition of a
Schismatic: and his censure of those that separate, will little please him.
Disput. de ecclesiae membrie
As for Amyraldus his judgment, of the confoederation of Churches, it is the
same with ours, or not to the purpose. Our opinion is, that as the consent of
particular members, explicit or implicit, is not the form of a particular
Church; So the consent of several Churches, to associate in a classis or
Synod, is not the form of a national Church; The explicit consent of members
(as they make use of it) is but a prudentiall way, to tie their members from
running away from them, (and yet that will not do the deed) so the explicit
consent of several Churches, into Assemblyes, is likewise a prudentiall way,
for the better Governing of those Churches, and the easier determining of
things of common concernment. And as the one, so the other, is a result of the
light of nature, and need no institution. He may now perceive, that he is
mistaken, in his thoughts of a mutual acknowledgment of the things by him
delivered; hardly in one of them do we agree. But we expected that he would
(now at last) have laid down some principles peculiar to himself and those
with whom he consents, p. 254.
in the way of the worship of God, etc: for not till then, will the business
be brought to a speedy issue. As also we hoped, that he would have pleaded the
right, liberty, and duty of gathering Churches, in such a state of presessors
as that of late, and still amongst us, built upon other (and better) principles
than any (though he had occasion enough) by him as yet mentioned. But we must
wait his leisure. His business and policy is (like the Romanists he spoke of
at the beginning) rather to prove us, and all Churches to be corrupt and not
rightly instituted, than to defend and justify his own way of gathering
Churches.

removal of the charge of Schism, which he says, in the true notion of it,
relates not to gathering of Churches, as simply considered. If not as simply
considered yet as it is the consequent of those divisions and separations,
included in the nature of Schism; Tho e that make differences first, and then
separate from a Church, use not to stay there, but being especially Ringleaders
of the separation, they must conformably gather another Church, of a firmer
constitution, or else condemn their own separation, as being of no Church: And
the rather does this relate to Schism in gathering of Churches, because they do
not only depart themselves, (which is more tolerable) but draw off others also
into a formed faction. Lets hear the old D lemma revived against the
Presbyterians, as before against the Prelaticall Church; Either we have been
members by our own voluntary consent, according to the mind of Christ, of some
particular Congregations ^in such a national Church, as part of such a Church;
or we have not. It were ridiculous for any man to charg them with separating
from such a Church, as never was existent, and that by their own opposition of
its being, we blame them for hindering it to be set up and for raising
differences in our Churches, and then renouncing communion with them, and all
other of the like constitution, as was said above. Sure we are; most of them,
if not all, were once members of our particular Churches, and some of them
prime Ministers thereof; who after they had raised differences in those
Churches (which himself says constitutes a Schismatic) separated themselves,
and drew disc^ples after them, into new, never heard of opposite Congregations,
se^ting up Altar against Altar, as the Ancients used to speak. But hear
another evasion; If we have been members, by our own voluntary consent. As much
by their own voluntary consent, as they were made members of the Nation; that
is, implicitly, as borne and bred up in both. May they not as well renounce
their interest in the nation, as their communion with the Church? and deny
subjection to both? Or, is it in their power whether they will be bound to
communion with some Church or other, in the Nation? unless they can prove them
all heretical and Antichristian. Yet further; by way of Recrimination; Have
not we done as much as they in separating from the Church of England, page 255.
of Episcopal constitution? rejected their national Offcers? and the way of
worship established, etc? Not to regest to him, "that this was done by other
hands, I must tell him, this is an excursion, when he is speaking of his
relinquishment of a Presbyterian Church, to turn us back to the Episcopal:
But this has been his business from his first letting out, to make the
Presbyterian Churches, to walk pari passu, with the Episcopal and Romish
Churches. The Churches of England and all Reformed Churches are much beholden
to him. Let him say plainly, have they not renounced all our Churches, since
both the other were laid aside? what can he plead for this, but that we are not
reformed according to the mind of Christ? as we shall hear by and by.

We expect not that we shall be accused of Schism, p. 256.
for not esteeming our selves made members of a particular Church, against our
wills, by buying, or hireing an habitation within such a precinct of ground.
Surely they were once esteemed (and did esteem themselves) to be members of
those particular Churches (whether with or without their wills I know not)
where they were borne or dwelt, and must either be of such or none. And is it
not so, for the most part in New England? are not their Towns and Churches
commensurate? was not the Church of Jerusalem, and Corinth, so called from the
places? True it is (which was said by the Assembly-Divines) that living in
Parishes, is not sufficient to make a man a member of a particular Church, a
Turk or Pagan may do so: but all Church Members in a Parish, are members of
that Church, till they remove their habitations. Suppose there were but one
such parish, must not all Christians, be of that, unless they may be of none?
But they add; All that dwell in a Parish, and constantly hear the word, are
not yet to be admitted to the Sacrament, which (says he) excludes them from
being fideles, or Church Members, and makes them at best, but as the
Catechumeni, who were never accounted members of the Church. I pray, were not
baptized infants, and youth's, members of the Church? yet were not they (nor
are in their Churches) admitted to the Lords Supper; If those Divines meant it,
of unbapt^sed persons (as they may) no mervai^e if they, were not accounted
Church members. Yet what shall we say of Infants of Churchmembers, not yet
baptized, are not they Churchmembers? none but an Anabaptist will deny it. And
though the old Catechumeni, new come from Gent^l sm, we^e not accounted
Churchmembers, yet our Catechumen's, Children o Christian parents, are to be
accounted such. But we proceed.

If we have been so members by our own consent* and do not continue so to be;
p. 257.
then this congregat^on where we were so members, was reformed according to the
mind of Christ or it was not? We are now almost at an issue; the intimation
is, the ground of their separation is, that none of ^ur Churches are reformed,
according to the mind of Christ. None of them? not at home, nor abroad? that is
a sad condition. But what if they be in reforming should they separate from
such? Well, but suppose any be members of a Church refo^med according to the
mind of Christ? what then? If it were reformed, and a man were a member of it
by his own voluntary consent, I confess it may be difficult, how a man can
leave such a Congregation, without their consent, in whose power it is to give
it to him, without giving offense to the Church of God. That they have been
members (and Misters some of them) of our Congregations, by their own free
consent, is evident enough: That they have not continued so to be, is too
manifest. That our Congregations some at least were reformed, or reforming
according to the mind of Christ, (when they separated from us) cannot without
great injury be denied. What difficulty then is there to judge them offenders
against that, and the whole Church of England in leaving those Congregations,
without, yea, against their consent, if they had such power over them, as he
grants. But no marvel, they find no difficulty or scruple, in leaving our
Congregations, without any leave; when they can and do leave own Congregations,
( without or against their leave, to which, (they say) they have been married,
and may no more justly divorce them, than a man may his wife, (except for
fornication) and only for a greater portion, or preferment. But I must
profess, I know no such power, that any Church has, to engage into, and
enforce such an explicit consent, or to deny leave to any member, upon just
causes, to depart, without their leave. He said before, All men must admit it
free for a man, to choose where he will fix his habitation. Which if just
reasons call him to, either he must leave that Congregation, (as too distant
from his habitation) or else tie himself to much inconvenience, to enjoy the
Ordinances of God there, which he may with ease, and as much profit, enjoy at
his own door. If this be not an enslaving of Christians to the prudential (if
not politic) institutions of men, and manifest prejudice to the liberty,
wherein Christ has made them free, I know not what is. But the best is, their
people do not believe any such difficulty to remove from their Churches, but
take the leave, without humbly desiring it (which he requires) without their
consent, and run readily, to the Anabaptists, and Quakers Societies.

indulge this Liberty, as they to take it; (it may be, he may get the more
disciples by it. For as he gives any man the liberty, to de^ert the communion
of any society, if it be not reformed according to the mind of Christ, p. 265;
So he allows him this liberty, upon his own light. Hear him speak, As the not
giving a man's self up, p. 259.
to any way, and submitting to any establishment pretended, or pleaded to be of
Christ, which he has not light for, is no Schism, etc; So no more can a man's
peaceable relinquishment of the ordinary communion in one Church* in all its
relations, to join with another be so esteemed. Where first he seems to me to
be a very Sceptick in his way of Independency; or to gratify all the Sects,
Quakers and all, According to that light, which men have received.
with a Toleration. For why should they be denied the liberty, of their own
light, more than others? to judge what is, or is not, according to the mind of
Christ, and to follow it accordingly, submit to, p. 46.
and desert, what way they suppose to be Christ. And why should they be denied
to make use of their liberty? without such humble asking leave of the
Congregation. But I wo^^d make bo d to ask one question: Whether does he indeed
believe his own way to be the only true way of Christ, (for he has instituted
but one way) hav^ng run from, and renounced all other ways of Religion in this
Nation. If so, i^ not every man bound to come into it? and not upon any
conceited new light, to relinquish it? If not, then why does he encourage men
to leave the Presbyterian way, which, for ought he knows, may be the way of
Christ? But what is this to the purpose? We do not say it is a Schism for a
single person, upon good reasons, to remove from one Congregation to another;
(as because he can not edify so well by one Minister as another (provided it
be not an itching ear, that causes it, as often it is,) or in some necessary
worldly respects) if he do it peaceably, without contempt of the Congregation,
and Minister, from whom he departs; and not setting up a new Church against
them: In this case, we leave all our members free. It is not, actually not
communicating with a true Church, but renouncing communion, that we think makes
the Schismatic.

That some of the principles of the Churches constitution are not according to
the mind of Christ, p. 261.
which renders the communion of it, by scruples, etc. not so useful to him, as
if it were right: and that he has declared his judgment and dissatisfaction;
if no Reformation ensue etc. The question is whether he sees, or conceits he
sees some errors in a Church constitution; and then whether every want or
redunduncy in a Church constitution, necessitates a separation: But he takes no
notice, but peremptorily determines the case; That person I say is doubtless
at liberty to dispose of himself, as to particular Church communion, to his own
best advantage. This is liberality enough, and Dictator-like spoken. Does not
this open a door to all confusion, in Church and State? and give every man (all
as well as any) liberty, if they judge any thing amiss in Church or State, to
turn Reformers, if Superiors cannot, or will not Reform it. He asks this
question; Suppose the Congregation whereof a man is a member, p. 262.
is not reformed, will not, or cannot reform it self, whether in this case is
it Schism for any number of men to reform themselves, by reducing the practice
of worship to its original institution, though the minor part (...) Put it
home, in a State or Nationa^ Church as that of the Jews; was it lawful for a
few men, when State and Church were all corrupted, to go and reform both,
because they who had the power in their hand, either could not, or would not
reform? I will not exemplify it near home; but I think I may safely say, this
is an Anabaptistical Munster principle, at the bottom: and say no more.

I will boldly say, p. 263.
this Schism is commanded by the Holy Ghost: What Schism means he? that a man
or men shall separate from the corruptions of a Church, or reform themselves
from the sins of the place? that is certainly commanded. But for that man, or a
minor number of men, in a stated National Church, to take upon them to reform
the Church, was never given them in command. But see the proofs; The first is,
1 Timothy 6.5. From such withdraw (or separate) thy self. But this is a great
mistake, for as the advice is given to a Minister, and not a private member; so
it is not to withdraw from a Church, that has some corruptions in it, but from
such false Teachers, as its likely were of no Church. The second is, 2 Timothy
3.5. From such turn away. Who must do it? Timothy a Minister. Again, from whom?
from such loose professors, or false Teachers, as creep into houses, and there
make divisions, and then lead captive their Proselytes, from the communion of
the Church: Surely, those were not of Timothy's Congregation, for then he would
have bidden him, not only, turn away from them, but turn them out of the
Church, by a just censure. The last is, Hos. 4.15. which is only to dissuade
those that were of the true Church, from joining with Idolaters; come not to
Gilgal, neither go up to Bethaven, etc. for so the former part of the verse
has it, Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, etc.

Indignation, Is this yoke laid upon me by Christ, p. 263.
that to go along with the multitude where I live that hate to be reformed, I
must forsake my duty, and despise the privileges that he has purchased for
me, with his own blood? Is this an unity of Christ's institution, that (...)
must for ever associate my self with wicked and profane men, in the worship of
God? etc. This sounds too much of the Pharisee, the multitude, the wicked and
prophane^ But suppose fire the Church is no corrupt as Israel of ^^ch or Rom^^
Di^^e years, then (...) command (...) Come out of her, O my people and be not
partaker of (...) sins. But suppose a Church (...) in fundamentalls o^ doctrine
and worship, suffering some less corruptions, (...) ^t^ce in her communion;
add perhaps in such a condition, as it either cannot, or will not reform it
self; and there is no other Church easily to join with? Will he now leap out of
Church and neglect all Ordinances, because of some profane and wicked men?
Christ himself did not so: or will he go and separate into another Church? If
^o, as it justifies the Brownists in former times, in their separation
(condemned by his own party) so it condemns the pious Nonconformists, who did
not so. Though they could not communicate in some Ordinances, yet they never
withdrew communion from the Church, into separate Congregations. It is no duty
of Christ's imposing, no privilege of his purchasing, either to deprive a man's
se^^^m's Ordinances for other men's sins, (...) up a n^w Church, in opposition
to a true Church as no Church rightly constituted, for want of some
Reformation, in lesser matters. And does not this speech insinuate so much;
That our Churches are such as hate to be reformed, and tolerate profane and
wicked men, when it is our grief that we have not power enough to reform or
eject them. They might have stayed till they had found we had hated to be
reformed; or till they had given us a better Model of a Church State (which
never yet, we could by our utmost importunity, obtain from them) and then they
had had some color for their separation.

tender he is of our Churches honor and peace; I speak not this, as for a
principle, p. 264.
that it is the duty of every man to separate from that Church, wherein evil
men are tolerated, etc. It is too much that he said, every man is at liberty in
such a case, to dispose of himself, as to Church Communion, p. 261. though he
plead it not his duty. And here again he says; When a Church is overborne by a
multitude of wicked and profane, so that it cannot, or will not reform it
self, a Believer is so far at liberty, that he may desert the communion of that
society, without the least guilt of Schism. He grants him here too little; for
though he desert the purest Church on earth, yet he has told him, separation
from any, or all Churches is no Schism. But suppose the Officers of a true
Church tolerate wicked men in their Communion (which is the grand plea of
Separatists, a mixed Communion) this is taken by them as the duty of private
members, they sin in that Communion if they separate not: They will not bear
with such a toleration in our Churches, (though they do in their own) but hold
it their duty to leap out of our C^urches and practice accordingly. It were
happy for us, if they had showed some of that love and forbearance, (he so often
speaks of, and requi^es of us for themselves) to our Churches, and not reserved
it all for their own.

Corinth had as many disorders in it, p. 265.
as some of ours, from which the Apostle advises no man, to separate. He
answers, 1. The Church of Corinth was a true Church, instituted according to
the mind of Christ, and was not fallen from this privilege by any miscarriage;
which, wholly differences the case. Why, so were the Churches of England (in
some of their own confessions) true Churches planted according to the mind of
Christ, and needed only a Reformation, and reducing to their first
constitution. But he plainly insinuates, they are no true Churches now, by
reason of some miscarriages under the Papacy; He spoke more openly, p. 243. We
are yet far from being clearly delivered from the Roman Apostasy; Rome is much
beholden to him, for this courtesy, but not the Church of England. And as for
those miscarriages, they were long ago, the grossest of them, much amended by
the first Reformation, and more by the second and are endeavoring yet a
further Reformation, if some had not obstructed it. However, Corinth had (we
suppose) greater disorders in it, than are to be found (blessed be God) in many
of our Congregations; why then, do they fly, and separate from us? and that
before they had used all or any of the remedies of our cure, which he requires
first to be done, in the next page. But hear the conclusion; Yet this I say, p.
266.
had the Church of Corinth continued in that condition, etc. it had been the
duty (mark that, the duty) of every Saint of God in that Church, to withdraw
from it, etc. Its strange that the Apostle did not inform those Saints, of this
liberty or duty there, or elsewhere. It were an hard case for private
Christians to be made guilty of the sins of a Church, where evil men are
tolerated, or some of unsound opinions, are suffered; having (I mean) done
their own duty, for amending or ejecting them, according to Matthew. 18.15. etc.

Austin was mistaken in asserting that Eliah and Elisha, p. 267.
communicated with the Israelites in their worship, which was most Idolatrous;
unless he meant that Elijah sacrificed once among them, at his contest with
Baals Priests; or that both of them were partakers of the Sacrament of
Circumcision with them, they and theirs, if they had any issue: But its as
true, that our blessed Savior did communicate with the Jews in all the true
worship of God; though the Doctrine was much corrupted, and the worship also by
will worship, by the Scribes and Pharisees; only protesting against those
corruptions, he communicated in the rest, without sin; and neither himself
separated from that Church, nor advised others so to do; (though shortly to
begin the foundation of a new Church way) but rather advised to continue in it.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, whatsoever they say unto you do
it, etc.

issue, of this discourse of Schism, in the ordinary Acception of the Word, to
signify, p. 268.
A breach of union; which he allows to pass, (such is his condiscension and
confidence,) and yet avoid the charge of Schism. Thus he says, We have broken
no band of unity, no order instituted by Christ, we have causlessly deserted no
station, that ever we were in, according to his mind, etc. which how true it
is, and whether he do not hereby asperse all our Churches to be no true
Churches of Christ's institution, let the Reader indifferent, by what has been
said, be Judge. That on pure grounds of conscience, we have withdrawn or do
withhold our selves from partaking in some ways engaged into, upon mere
grounds of prudence, we acknowledge. Whether they have in their separation from
us, gone upon pure and mere grounds of conscience, God and th ir own hearts
must determine the business. The world is too apt to judge otherwise upon some
suspicious practices of theirs. And suppose they have withdrawn themselves from
some way; of prudence, in some of our Churches, (I suppose he means it of
Classical subordinations) yet they have withdrawn themselves also, from some
Congregations (not so united) that have only the pure Institutions of Christ;
and that may bring the charge of Schism upon them. But have not they also gone
upon some mere grounds of prudence (or policy)? Is there any Institution of
Christ, that they must gather members out of true Churches to make a purer
Church (if so it be)? Or is there any Institution of Christ, that a Minister,
who is married to a people, (as they hold) should relinquish it, for a place of
greater eminency or preferment? Or that people must be tied to their Pastor,
by an explicit Covenant, not to depart without their leave humbly desired? Or
(to add no more) Is th re any Institution of Christ in express words, that
Churches particular must send their Delegates to an Assembly, to determine
matters of common concernment? which he granted above. These and some more of
their known ways, the world takes to be but products of humane prudence; and
he may do well to show their Institutions.

confidence, From what has been said* it appears, in what a fair capacity;
notwithstanding any principle or practice owned by us, we are to live
peaceably, and to exercise all fruits of love, to the otherwise minded, if we
may be permitted to serve God according to our light. And must not the Quakers
and the rest, be permitted to serve God according to their light also? But it
matters not in what capacity they are to do those things named; let us see the
fruits of it. Does not their way break the peace of all our Churches? Has it
not been the door to let in all the errors, heresies, blasphemies, England
groans under? Do not all sores of Sects, (being all Independent, and none to
control them) exercise all the fruits of hatred toward us? look upon us, and
carry themselves toward us, as their greatest enemies as no Ministers, no
Churches, scarce as Christians? Has not he himself in this book, unministred
our ministers, unmembred our members, unchurcht our Churches? Does he give us
words, when we see such deeds?

Reforming of Churches, already gathered; p. 269.
and raising of Churches out of mere materials* Surely this is evident enough,
in raising of a Church out of Infidels, and reducing a corrupted Church to its
first institution. This he first says concerns not the business. What Is the
English of this, if he would speak out? Why the truth is, We have no Churches,
and they are not in repairing an old house, but building a new from the ground,
But hear him say something; 1 I know no other Reformation of any Church, or any
thing in it, but the reducing of it to its primitive institution, etc. We say
so too, grant us to be Churches; Reformation of a Church, or any thing in it,
presupposes there is a Church existent, though perhaps rotten and ruinous. But
these New builders will gather a Church out of no Churches, and begin a new
one. It had been happy for old England, if they had all gone into New England,
and laid the foundation of their Churches amongst the Indians, and not to build
upon other men's foundations; and then tell us, they are building o^ spick and
span new Churches. And does not this hold forth* that we are no Churches, and
our members no members of a Church, till admitted into theirs? But yet more (to
discover his very heart) When any society or combination of men (whatever
hitherto it has been esteemed) is not capable of such a reduction, and
renovation, p. 270.
I suppose I shall never provoke any wise and sober person, if I profess I
cannot look on such a society, ^^ a Church of Christ. Is not, Reader, this at
once, to unchurch all the Churches of England since the Reformation? for its
known, during the Reign of the Prelates, they were not capable of that
Reduction. And what capacity our Churches are now in, for that Reduction;
partly by want of power, and assistance from the Magistrate; without which some
dare not set upon a Reformation, for fear of a pramunire^ partly by our
Divisions amongst our selves, femented by he knows whom; he cannot but see, as
well as we lament. But if we must be denied to be Churches, because we are not
in such a capacity, and cannot do all we would to reform them, we are in a sad
condition. What if a Church want some things she had at her first institution
perhaps of no great concernment, (or be it great) but either by the prohibition
of the present powers, or the opposition of a prevalent party, it is not now
capable of Reduction, to its primitive Institution; Will he look upon this
society, as no Church of Christ, and think, no wise or sober man in that
society, or other where will be provoked to anger, if not to indignation? And
so much the more, when as upon this ground, we are in danger to lose all our
best members; for so he advises, thereupon, I shall advise those therein, who
have a due right to the privileges, purchased for them by Christ, as to Gospel
Administrations, to take some other peaceable course, to make themselves
partakers of them. That is, to come out from among them, and join themselves to
some Independent Congregation.

p. 270.
for he tells us, He must manage principles, which in this Discourse he has
not been occasioned to draw forth or to improve. I cannot but make it my
earnest request, (and so I think will many more) that he would be pleased to do
us the favor, to bring forth, and manage those principles, to their utmost
clearness, and strength; (which this discourse of mine and some former, have
given him just occasion to produce) that we might be once blessed, with the
sight of that Model of their way, so often desired, so often promised, and as
often unfaithfully denied. We profess our selves utterly unsatisfied, with
what has yet been vouchased us to see. But he will tell us briefly what are
the things of great and weighty importance, which must come under debate,
before a clear account can be given of the case stated in the Objection. Before
we hear them, I cannot but say they have dealt the more unbrotherly with us,
(to say no more) and all the Reformed Churches abroad, in setting up their way
of new Churches, and never discover to us sufficiently, the grounds of their so
doing: Let him look back to what he said, p. 7, The parties litigant, etc. But
we shall attend him for the particular Heads.

1. The true nature of an Instituted Church, under the Gospel, as to the
matter, form, and all other necessary constitutive causes is to be investigated
and found out. To which I say, 1. Are there any constitutive causes, besides
Matter and Form?
This (I thought) had been fully done, if not by all Reformed Churches, yet by
those of New England who have done what they could, to clear up their way: The
constituting causes (say they) are matter and form; the matter, visible Saints;
the form, an explicit Covenant, of all the members. But they have been told,
they have contradicted themselves, by requiring an explicit consent, and yet
confessing an implicit to be sufficient, and this to be in our Churches, and
yet separated from us. 2. I had thought his definition of an instituted
particular Church, given us above, had held out all the constituting causes of
such a Church: It is a society of men, called by the word to the obedience of
the Faith in Christ, and joint performance of the worship of God, in the same
individual Ordinances, according to the order prescribed by Christ. Such
societies are ours, in all the particular ingredients of this definition, as
was showed above. All that can be objected, is but to the last particle,
according to the order by Christ prescribed, which is the question between us,
and must not be begged, on either side, but proved, and it concerns him to show
the contrary. What Ordinance do we want? or what have we of humane addition?
And as for our joint consent, (though we have it implicitly, yet sufficiently)
it is not in his definition, which yet is one of the constituting causes of
their Churches; If then the definition of such a Church, be as applicab^^ to
our Churches, as to his own, we are true-instituted Churches; and whether they
be Schismatics, in renouncing communion with us, let the whole Christian
Church be Judge: And I go on to the next.

The nature and form of such a Church, is to be exemplyfied from the Scripture
and the stories of the first Churches, before sensibly infe^ted with the poison
of Apostasy which ensued. This has abundantly been done, by the Assembly, and
other Divines, (though he is not pleased to take notice of it) and we dare join
issue with him, in this debate, when ever he will begin it. 3. The extent of
the Apostasy under Antichrist, p. 271.
as to the ruining of instituted Churches, making them to be Babylon, and their
worship fornication, is duly and carefully to be examined. Here lies our
disorder; hence our darkness, etc. though we may arise, we shall not easily
shake our selves out of the dust. I suppose he does not mean this last of his
own Churches; they are not only risen, but have shaken off the very dust of
that Apostasy; I shall not contradict, him for his own particular Church,
because I am a stranger to it: but of some of the Churches of the same
constitution; I dare confidently affirm, they are fallen again into the old
Apostasy, in matter of Doctrine; and have more dust upon their garments than
many of ours have. But we shall be content to put our selves upon the search;
and if it may appear, that yet we retain any thing of that Apostasy, we shall
promise faithfully to relinquish it. But I am very jealous, he expects a finer
and a higher Reformation, than we dare look for, in in this world, (till Christ
himself come to Reign visibly on earth, as some do expect he will ere long)
viz: by Revelation of the Spirit. He speaks suspiciously this way; p. 42. When
the order, spirituality, beauty, and glory of the Church of Christ shall
return, etc. these disputes, will have an issue. And again, p. 70. When God
shall have reduced his Churches to their primitive purity, etc. And once more
p. 200. So soon as Christ's Churches are shaken out of the dust of Babylon, with
his glory shining on them etc.

By what way and means, God begat a new and kept alive his elect, p. 271.
in their several generations, when Antichristian darkness covered the earth,
supposing an intercision of instituted Ordinances* so far as to make a nullity
in them, as to what was of simple institution etc. he may do well to enquire
and resolve us. He cannot but know, that there are many learned men, that will
not grant him his supposition of an intercision of all instituted Ordinances,
so far as to make a nullity in them. And something has been said to this
above, which he may do well to consider. The sum is this, That if there was an
utter intercision, and so a nullity of all instituted Ordinances, it was
impossible to fix the Tabernacle of God with men again, without a miracle or
some Divine Revelation. As for the Bohemian brethren, concluding the whole
Papacy, to be purely Antichristian, it is not a singular conceit, for all
reformed Churches are of that opinion, They distinguish the Papacy, (which is
as a scab or Leprosy to the hand) from the Church of Rome; making the former
purely Antichristian, but not the latter. But as (perhaps erroneously; for
Luther and his associats did not so) they could not allow of the Ordination of
Ministers, by any in communion with them: So they were persuaded of a necessity
of continuing that Ordinance, in a way of succession, which whether our Author
does, let him declare, when he takes into consideration the Bohemian cases.
They sent to the Greek and Armenian Churches, to have Ordination from them;
(therefore they did not believe there was an I^^^ision of all instituted
Ordinances) and when they saw their way was perhaps, as superstitious, another
way; having no satisfaction there, they took their ea^e to be extraordinary,
and so chose themsel^es Elders, and set them apart by fasting and prayer, etc.
where note a double difference; Their case was extraordinary, there were no
Ministers to ordain them, but our brethren were ordained, by lawful Ministers,
or might have found enough to do it, if they had not been ordained; but they
renounced what they had and took it again of the people. 2. The Bohemians did
it but once, prima (...), but afterward kept up Ordination by Ministers, and
not by the people: but ours still continue it, by the people I might add a
third, but I forbear.

way of the first Reformation, p. 272.
in this Nation, and what principles those godly men proceeded on how far what
they did may be satisfactory to our consciences? etc. It is confessed on both
sides, they did (...) in well but by the badnesse of the times were not able to
finish their work. But how unsatisfactory their ways and principles are to our
brethrens consciences, to concur with them, their practice does demonstrate;
walking contrary ^o them in deformation of the Church, not repairing the o^^,
but founding and building up a new Church, and renouncing their principles. 6.
Whether ordinary Officers be before, or after the Church, and whether a
Church State is preserved in the preservation of Officers forra^gn to that
Church; or the Office be preserved, and consequenly the Officers in the
preservation* and constitution of a Church, is the last thing o^ importance to
be considered. For the first, whether ordinary Officers, were before the
Church, has been discussed elsewhere Instances may be given on both sides,
Sometimes the Church, is before the ordinary Officer viz. when one dying
another succeeds to that Church in his room: Sometimes the ordinary Officer is
before the Church a^ in the gathering of a Church out of Heathens. Mr. Eliot in
New England* an ordinary Officer he converts and baptizes many Indians and
gathers them into a Church: I hope they do not look for extraordinary Officers
now as the Seekers of late did. I know his exception abo^e; This is in
ecclesiae constituenda, not in ecclesia constituta: but I shall give him
another instance, suppose a Minister comes young to a people lives till all the
ancient people he found there be deceased; All that remain in the Parish, were
admitted by him into the Church, by baptism; here the Officer, is before the
Church, in a Church constituted. But this is as very a nicitie as, which is
first, the Hen or the Egg. I percei^e what he aims at in the second question;
See page 199. They who will not be contented, etc.
Whether a Church State is preserved in the Officer, or the Officer in the
constitution of a Church. He upon his principles must hold the latter part: for
he holds, that no man is an Officer, out of his own Church; is either the
Church be destroyed, or he be removed from it, he ceases to be an Officer
whence it follows, that 1 No Minister qua Minister, can convert the Heathens. 2
That if all Church State be lost, it cannot be raised up by an Officer, who is
foreign to that Church, as he speaks here. The result is, according to his
principles, the Office first, and then the Officers inclusively, is preserved
in the constitution of a Church: As how? A company of single Christians, So the
Anabaptists, Confess. ^ct. 36.
may meet, and join themselves in a Church society; which done they may, out of
themselves (for other Churches or Ministers, are foreign to to them) choose
them Officers, and set them apart by fasting and Prayer: This is pretty, and
never exemplyfied in an ordinary case, till the other day. But he forgot the main
business; that he supposes all Church State lost; but these Christians joining
together are supposed to be baptized; which is a part of a Church State, and
without which they could never make a Church, much less an Officer, as was
discoursed above: To raise up and revive a decayed Church State, in an ordinary
way, there is but one of these ways; either a Minister in Office must baptize
converted Heathens, and so make them a Church; or a company of baptized persons
when no Minister is to be found, must for once, join and choose themselves
Officers (which comes near to an extraordinary cafe, and not among us now to be
made use of): but yet still, the Church State depends upon the Minister
originally, that baptized them; and not upon those people, supposing them
unbaptized. But more of this above. When he takes those important things, he
speaks of, into his discussion, let him take those things, by me propounded,
into consideration also, as things of some importance.

p. 273.
The miscarriages that he speaks of, as ensuing for want of a due and right
apprehension of the thing (that is Schism) we have been now long exercised in
the consideration of, may with no more ease than truth, be rolled back upon
himself. It is not impossible, that he may begin to apprehend, that he has
been too hasty to judging our Church; to be none and himself and his party no
Schismatics in separating from them, as no Churches: And it may perhap appear
to him, that he is the man, that is more ready to charge highly, than able to
make good his charge. The Schisms that have ensued, by their causlesse
imputation of a no-Church-state among us, and setting up new Churches, is too
well known. And being in one fault of renouncing communion with us, he has now
confirmed himself, and his party in it, by a new, but false notion of Schism,
which none of his Predecessors, had the hap to stumble upon. I might parallel
the rest, in that Section, but I forbear, and leave it to the Reader.

differences, about the way of Religion, we have endeavored, to drive them to
their Rise and Spring, p. 275.
and find Schism to be as formidable in its first Original, in respect of its
terminus a quo; as in the streams, though much increased by many generations,
in regard of the terminus ad quem. And I cannot but observe, how he seems to
extenuate the crime of Schism (before aggravated) by his comparisons. Schism at
its first rise, and Scripture notion, (if he mistake not) was but a little
Spring; but swelled to a great breadth, by men's disputations about it. Hear his
swelling words, What a stood of abominations does Schism seem to be, as rolling
down to us through the writings of Cyprian, Austin, and Opratus of old, etc. Go
to its rise, and you will find it quite another thing. As if he had said,
Schism is not so formidable a thing, as it is made (by all but himself) if you
would but take it for some petty differences, within one Assembly; the charge
of it is not so dreadful as some would makest^. For so he adds; p. 276.
Whilst I have an uncontrollable faithful witness, that I do not willingly
break any unity of the institution of Christ. p. 277.
Whilst I disturb not the Peace of that particular Church, whereof by my own
consent, I am a member; nor do raise up nor continue in any can sless^d
differences, with them, or any of them with whom I walk in the fellowship and
order of the Gospel; whilst I labor to exercise faith toward the Lord Jesus
Christ, and love toward all the Saints I do keep the unity which is of the
appointment of Christ, and let men say, from principles utterly foreign to the
Gospel, what they please, or can, to the contrary, I am no Schismatic. That
is, though by raising differences, I set all the Churches of England on fire, I
am no Schismatic, if I disturb not the peace of my own particular Church, How
true and reasonable the particulars of his enumeration are, let the impartial
Reader judge.

p. 277.
Perhaps the discovery which has been made, how much he and his party are
concerned, in that charge of Schism, upon them, which is the greatest ball of
strife this day in England, (with respect to the Church) may be a most
effectual engine or means to reconcile them that truly fear God though engaged
in several ways. I can heartily say Amen to this: but yet must add what
follows, I have not any great hope of much success on this account, whilst men
are fore-stalled with prejudices, and have their affections engaged thereunto.
etc. But all our hearts are in the hand of God. etc.

What va^n janglings men are endlesly engaged in, who will lay their own false
hypotheses, (such as the Authors new notion of Schism is) as a ground of
farther procedure, is in part evident by what has been delivered. Hence is
that doughtie dispute, 1. Which is first, the Hen or the Egg, the Church, or
its Officers? 2. Whether a man may be a Schismatick^ that is not a member of a
particular Church? 3. Whether the member of one Church, may partake of the
Sacraments in another Church, and that of the same constitution? 4. Whether the
child of a scandalous person, may be baptized by the Minister of that Church?
5. Whether our Churches be true Churches, our members, true members; because
not gathered by an explicit Covenant? Which as it was never doubted of by
Non-conformists at home, nor any Reformed Churches abroad, till Brownists
arose; so it may be concluded from his own words, in his conclusion. He is a
member or a particular Church, who having been in a due order* p. 279.
joined thereunto, has n^^ther voluntarily des^rted it, nor been judicially
ejected out of it. But I assume, The members of our particular Churches have
been in a due order joined (...), and neither voluntarily have deserted them I
no^ been judicially ejected out of them; Therefore they are true members of
particular Churches; and con^equently, our Churches are true Churches; and by a
further consequence, They that raise differences in them, and draw disciples
from them, and renounce communion with them, say they what they please or can
to the contrary are Schismatics; Quod erat demonstrandum.

AN APPENDIX TO The former Discourse of Schism; Showing, the inconstancy of the
Dr. and the inconsistency of his former and present Opinions.
Discourse there came happily to my hands, a Book of the Learned Doctors,
entitled, The duty of Pastors, and people distinguished, licensed, and highly
commended, by the Reverend, and judicious Mr. Joseph Caryl, as, " Written with
much clearness of judgment, and moderation of Spirit* put forth in the year
1644. By comparing whereof, with this of his, of Schism, I perceive, that wise
and judicious men, are still but men, subject to mistakes; and therefore had
need of some of the policy or prudence, of the five Apologists; Apol. Narr.
page 11.
not to be too peremptory in their new opinions, or ways, not too presumptuous
in despising others proceedings, but to reserve to themselves a latitude; and
to keep some casements open, to take in New light. This our Reverend Author
has exemplyfied, to be necessary for himself, to make use of, as well as
others of his present Independent way; or else he will be concluded, to
contradict himself; and in many things to make good the Apostles Dictate, Jam.
1.8.
(...). And yet, had he changed to the better, from error to Truth, the thing
had been not only justly excusable but truly commendable, and might have been
salved by a Tract of Retractations (as Austin sometime did) without any
prejudice to his Reputation. But to run from opinion to opinion, from way to
way, from truth to error, (as many have done) not only to contrariety, but to
contradiction and; and, take no notice of the difference of Judgment, and
inconstancy of opinions and ways, is too palpable a discovery of an unsettled
Spirit, that knows not where to fix. All the hope is that if their new Notions,
and ways be really discovered, and ingenuously by them acknowledged to be
erroneous, they that can change from truth, to error, may in Gods good time
which is very rare) change back again from error to truth. Which wishing that
the Dr. and his party may do; I shall only present to him, ^ome few of his
former thoughts to show in how dissonant they are to his later modern^ kings.

distance between the Pastors and their people; page 2.
that the sacred calling may retain its ancient dignity and the people of God
not deprived of their Christian liberty. For in former times, he tells us, Some
would have all Christians to be almost Ministers; others none but Ministers to
be Gods Clergy: Those would give the people the Keys; these use them to lock
them out of the Church; The one ascribing to them primarily all Ecclesiastical
power for the ruling of the Congregation, the other abridging them of spiritual
duties, for the building up of their own souls; as though there were no
habitable earth between the valley (I had almost said the pi^) of Democraticall
confusion, and the rock of Hierarchical tyranny. Who these parties were, needs
no comment to declare; only it would be observed whether our Author be not
since fallen into that very pit of Democratical confusion, by flying from the
rock of Hierarchical tyranny; I leave it to his consideration, Evident it is,
that in a true Church State, he sets out the limits or the people, that they
may not under a pretense of Christian liberty, invade the dignity of the sacred
calling of the Ministry. And much he grants to the people, both under the Law
and Gospel, Always provided that they abstain from fingring the Arc or
meddling with those things which were appropriated to the office of the Priests,
p. 17. or of the Minister p. 46. except they can show some extraordinary, call
or case, for their so doing: p. 28. of which he thus delivers his opinion, and
states the question; In cases extraordinary, it may perhaps be affirmed that
every Christian is so far a Minister of the Gospel, as to teach and declare the
faith to others, although he have no outward calling thereunto: but only an
immediate call from God. All I say (for the change of his opinion) is, That he
allows them this liberty now, in cases ordinary; as will appear hereafter.

than ordinary, when a Church is much degenerated, and corrupted; what may
ordinary Christians do then to the Restoration of Religion? Concerning which,
his judgment was (what ever it be now) this delivered, and rested upon; That
in a collapsed and corrupted state of the Church, page 15.
when the ordinary Teachers are either utterly ignorant, and cannot, or
negligent and will not perform their duty; Gifts in any one to be a Teacher,
and consent in others, by him to be taught, are a sufficient warrant for the
performance of it. That is, the duty of teaching or preaching. But more
expressly* p. 40. In such a case (of Apostasy in the Church) I conceive he may
nay he ought, to preach and publish the truths discovered to him; neither is
any other outward call requisite to constitute him a Preacher of the Gospel
than the consent of Gods people to be instructed by him. I shall only remember
him, That as he spoke this of a lay man in Italy, (for that is his instance) so
he did not then take Rome to be no Church at all; as now he does; but a
collapsed, and corrupted Church: but that by the way: That which I observe is
1. That he is not distinct enough in these Assertions; for if he mean, that in
such a falling state of a Church; p. 16.
When it is ruinously declining every one of Gods servants has a sufficient
warrant to help or prevent the fall, as a common duty of zeal and charity, in a
charitative way, its not denied by any; Doing it as a charitable duty, not as
out of necessary function; even as Priscilla (a woman) expounded unto Apollos
the word of God, etc. page 50. f.
Its the duty of every Christian (man or woman) to publish truths re^ealed, to
others that will hear him; as he speaks hereafter: But if he take it, in an
Authoritative way, as an act of the Keys, (as a Teacher or Preacher is taken
under the Gospel for an Officer) then its certain, that Gifts, and the consent
of people to be instructed by him, is not sufficient warrant to make him a
Preacher; And this appears, upon his own former principles: For being at that
time a Presbyterian in judgment, (as we shall hear anon) he knew, and did then
hold; that Ordination by the hands of the Presbytery was a requisite to make
him a Preacher. But this he now declines, and has renounced his Ordination;
and requires now no more, but Gifts, and peoples consent, to make a man a
Minister. 2. And that not only in a collapsed, or corrupted Church, where
Teachers are either ignorant and cannot, or negligent and will not do their
duty; but now, when neither of these can, without injury, be charged upon our
Church State, he requires no more than Gifts and consent, to make a man a
Preacher in Office. 3. Herein his discourse was dark and defective, that he
allows the people a liberty of preaching, or publishing he truths of the Gospel
in such a case; but tells us not, whether such a Preacher be a complete
Minister, as to the administration of other Ordinances as the Sacraments, (not
one word of that) I suppose then he did not intend so much; but now (so is he
changed) he allows some that were never ordained, and himself, who has
renounced his Ordination; not only to preach the Gospel, but also to
administer Sacraments as complete Ministers, in the name of Christ. Let them
fear and tremble, to hear one day those questions, By what authority do you
these things? or who gave you this authority? It is a dreadful speech of his
own, p. 16. Who ever does any thing in another stead, not by express patent
from him, is a plain Impostor. And yet, how many such Impostors, are there
abroad, who take upon them, without commission from Christ, or Authority from
the Church, not only to preach, but to baptize, and give the Lords Supper? I
have heard a sad story of a young forward man, that did so, and fell into great
perplexity of mind, for so doing, and as I remember, so dyed. Many such there
are, who (...) before they are sent, having neither Gifts, nor consent of
people; The Lord say it to their hearts, and to the hearts of those that
indulge them in it, as guilty of such usurpation in them, and the great
contempt of the sacred calling of the Ministry. Lastly, how ever it might be
sufficient in an extraordinary state of a corrupted Church, to make a man a
Minister, to have such Gifts and consent of the people; (which was all the Dr.
then asserted) yet that those should be sufficient in an ordinary Reformed
Church State, is his (...) light and opinion; unless they can show some
extraordinary signs of such a call from God, which they cannot do: For he
speaks rationally below, when he says. It is certain enough, p. 34.
that God never sent any one extraordinarily, instructed only with ordinary
Gifts and for an ordinary end. But these his new Preachers, have no more than
ordinary Gifts, (some of them not so much) wherein others are* their equals if
not Superiors; and the end is no more but ordinary the conversion of souls, and
settling the Ordinances in purity: Then it follows, that these being not (...)
of God, nor ordinarily (...) by the Church, are no (...) Impostors, as he said
before.

That the blessed Spirit of God, is (...) and personally in every true
believer, I cannot tell, but he speaks suspitiously, that way, as on p. 94, 95.
and 236. of Schism; was noted above c. 7.^.11. so he speaks the same language
here p. 21. with what difference we shall observe. Thus he sales, As in his
Incarnation, Christ took upon him our flesh and blood, by the work of the
Spirit; so in our Regeneration; he bestows on us, his flesh and blood, by the
operation of the same Spirit: yea so strict is this latter union, which we have
with Christ; that as the former is truly said to be an union of two natures
into one person; so this, of many persons into one nature: for by it we are
made partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. becoming members of his body
of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. We are so parts of him, of his
mystical body, that* He and we become thereby, as it were one Christ, 1 Cor.
12.12. And the ground of this is, because the same Spirit is in him, and us: In
him indeed dwells the fullness of it, when it is bestowed upon us, only by
measure: but yet it is still the same Spirit, and so makes us one with him; as
the soul of man being one, makes the whole body with it, to be but one man.
These things must be taken cum gra^^ salis, or else they may prove insipid, if
not worse: As 1. Christ took upon him our nature essentially; but he bestows
his flesh and blood upon us spiritually and mystically. 2. The union of the two
natures in Christ was proper and personal, into one person hypostatically, as
the Soul and Body in us, make one man: But the union of many persons with
Christ, is not into one nature properly, but mystically into one person; we are
members of his body, flesh, bones, but mystically; otherwise, the union of many
persons into one nature, should be like that of Christ's two natures, into one
person hypostatically: And like unto the union of the three persons in the
Trinity, into the same nature or essence, which is incomprehensible. 3. We are
made parts of him, of his mystical body, that he and we become thereby, as it
were (that is improperly and mystically) one Christ. 4. We are made partakers
of the Divine nature, not essentially and personally, as Christ; but in its
graces and operations: as generally, all Divines understand it; renewed by the
Spirit, into that Divine Image, which we had by nature, but lost by the fall.
5. The same Spirit is indeed in Christ, and in us, but with this assigned
difference, In him dwells the fullness of it, ( fullness of grace and truth
Joh. 1.14.) it is bestowed on us in measure. 6. This same Spirit makes us one
with him, that is, still mystically not as the Soul of man being one, makes
with the body one man; for that is hypostatically and personally one. The words
thus expounded, and candyed, may pass for Orthodox; otherwise not to be
admitted. But now in his Tract of Schism, p. 94. of Schism.
he is declined into that Heterodox opinion, (so judged by most and best
Divines) that the holy Spirit, dwells personally and essentially in us. For 1.
he tells us, he cannot consent, that the Divine nature, given us, should be no
more than the new creature. 2, That it is in the person of the Spirit, whereof
we are by the promise made partakers, he is the Spirit of promise; page 95.
and in the participation of the Divine nature consists the union of the Saints
with Christ. 3. That the union of the head and members is the oneness of the
Soul whereby the whole is animated and that which answers hereunto in the
mystical body of Christ, is the animation of the whole by his Spirit. Now every
body knows, that the Soul is the form of a man, and the union of Soul and Body,
is personal; So then must the union of Christ, and his body, the Church, be
personal, as animated by the same Spirit, if the person of the holy Spirit, be
the Soul, that animates the body of Christ. And so he says it is, The form of
the Church Catholic, p. 236.
absolutely so called, is the unity with Christ, and in it self by the one
Spirit whereby it is animated, I shall not enter upon the contest at this time,
(it being a (...) to the main business) its enough to show the difference of
himself from himself, then and now.

evidences and signs, of an extraordinary vocation, which some of late pretend
unto. There is only one thing briefly to be taken notice of, that is, Whether
the Ministers of the Gospel are by the Scripture to be called Priests; which
name some have arrogated and ascribed to the Clergy: O which he affirms
peremptorily, p. 25.
The name of Priests is no where in the Scripture attributed distinctly to the
Ministers of the Gospel; Priests (and Prelates) are a sort of Church Officers,
whom Christ never appointed, etc. These were his then thoughts: and its like
are so still; only I would desire to know, why he gives that name (its suppo^ed
in scorn) to the Ministers of our particular Congregations, calling them
Parochial Priests: or Schism p. 235. I leave him to give, or others to guess,
the reason of that Appellation, and so proceed, to what I named before.

ways given by him to receive and be assured, that a man is extraordinarily
called to the Teaching of others, or to be a Preacher; 1. p. 30.
By immediate Revelation. 2. By concurrence of Scripture Rules. 3. By some
outward acts of providence. Concerning w ich in general it may be said. 1. That
p. 28. he thus resolved; In cases extraordinary it may perhaps be affirmed,
that every one (that is allowed to teach or preach the Gospel) for such an
undertaking, must have a warrant by an immediate call from God. But of all his
three ways named, only one of them, is by immediate call from God, viz. that
of immediate Revelation; such as the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles had:
the other, by Rules of Scripture; and Acts of providence, are but mediate
calls, or warrants, and may be common to all Christians, as the case may be. 2.
Before this, p. 15. and again p. 40. In such extraordinary cases of a corrupt
Church, etc. no more is required, but Gifts in the man, and consent of the
people; which latter is an outward call, and that by men; and the former, a
call from God, inward indeed, but not immediate. These things do not well agree.

extraordinary calling is immediate Revelation. This is specially in two cases,
p. 33.
1. Either the inchoation of some divine work to be established among men, by
a new revelation of Gods will; 2. Or a restoration of the same, when collapsed
and corrupted by men. The only question will be, Whether there be any
revelation to be expected now, with respect to either of those. And he answers
negatively to both: To the first thus, Nothing in such a way shall again take
place, God having ultimatly revealed his mind, concerning his worship and our
salvation etc. To the second thus, There being an infallible Rule, for the
performance of it, making it fall within the duty and ability of men, partakers
of an ordinary vocation, and instructed with ordinary Gifts, God does not
always immediately call men unto it. But grant that he does not always
immediately call men to it (as often he did, heretofore) it would have been
resolved, Whether sometimes God do now immediately call men to the work of
Restoration of Religion? To which he says nothing: If he shall say, he does
not, he contradicts himself, who said* p. 28. In this case (of a corrupted
Church) every one, for such an undertaking, must have a warrant by an immediate
call from God, If he say he does sometimes immediately now call men to it; I
would say, 1. This is needless (by his own grant) For there being an infallible
rule, it falls within the duty and ability of men, partakers of an ordinary
vocation, instructed with ordinary Gifts; as he newly said. 2. And then I would
call for those signs and evidences required to assure the man himself, and
others, of hi^ in mediate extraordinary ^^cation. p. 34.
These he makes to be a supernatural power, either on discerning of things
present, as thoughts and words, or things future, as 1. Things contingent. 2.
Speaking with Tongues. 3. Working of Miracles, etc. None of which being now to
be found, (or expected) from our new Restorers or Reformers, P. 41. f. who ever
pretends unto it, not warranted by an evidence of one of those three ways,
which God takes in such proceedings, is but a pretender, an impostor, and to
be rejected of all Gods people.
who yet plead the Revelation of the Spirit, and take themselves
extraordinarily called by God, to make new Churches, upon the pretense of a
collapsed and corrupted state of this our Church; I say none of these being now
to be found amongst them; they prove themselves to be extraordinary impostors;
and those that indulge and countenance them are accessory to t^eir impostures.
And whether our Author himself, have not relinquished these former Orthodox
principles The ^ow supposing an intercision of all Ordinances and all true
Church State lost as the seems to do, in his Tract of Schism, as was said
above) whether, I say, he must not maintain; and expect a new immediate call
from God to be necessary to the Restoration of a Church, I leave to all to
judge; when they consider what is said above at Chap. 7.. 10. And I proceed to
the next.

extraordinary call to preach the Gospel is, p. 37.
by a concurrence of Scripture Rules; drawn, either from express precept, or
approved practice: The precepts are such as these, Luke 22.32. When converted
strengthen thy brethren. Jam. ^ last. If any err from the truth etc. Math.
5.15. a candle is not to be put under a bushel, etc. p. 38.
Whence he infers, 1. There is a general obligation on all Christians, to
promote the conversion and instruction of sinners, etc. 2. When any truth
necessary is revealed to any out of the Word, not before known, he ought to
have an uncontradicted liberty of declaring that truth, etc. 3. Truth revealed,
carries with it an unmovable persuasion of conscience, that it ought to be
published. To the first of these it may be said, This is not an immediate call
(which he required above); but mediate by the word. Nor yet an extraordinary
call, to some particular men, but an ordinary obligation on all Christians; Not
only in extraordinary cases of a corrupted Church, but ordinary in the best
Church: Nor lastly is this sufficient to make any man a Preacher; but only an
instructor of others, common to all Christians, men, and women. To the second,
it had need be cautioned well, not only, because it may either be no truth,
which he thinks so; or no necessary truth, and so not fit to disturb the peace
of a Church for it: but also, because upon this pretense of truth, every man
must take uncontradicted liberty to speak in the Church: which will breed
confusion. Himself therefore adds; Provided that he use such ways for that his
declaration as the Church wherein he lives if a right Church does allow. But
this in part contradicts his uncontradicted liberty; for if it be a necessary
truth, no Church may hinder him: But then, the case is of a corrupted Church,
which will not allow, but contradict that liberty; and what shall he then do?
To the third I have only this to say; That a strong error carries often with it
an unmovable persuasion of conscience, (which is, in a sort obligatory) that
it ought to be published to others. And so error must have as much liberty as
truth. However, all these Rules bind in ordinary as well as extraordinary cases
of a Church; and give no authority to make a man a Preacher.

of our Savior himself, p. 39.
who preached in the Synagogues without any outward call; and of those Acts
8.1. who being scattered, went every where preaching the word; so did Paul and
Apollos, etc. For our Savior, his call was immediate and extrraordinary; So
was Paul's, and Apostle: Apollos was at first, no more a Preacher, than Aquila
and Priscilla, who instructed him in the way, as one Christian may do another:
As for those Acts 8.1. its made more than probable, by others, that they were
Elders of the Church, and Preachers by Office: If some were not, they did no
more, than any Christian man or woman may do, in such cases, and yet never be
Preachers: And all this, in a reformed Church State, ordinarily; and so not to
the purpose.

make and justify a lay man to be a Preacher of the Gospel, in an
extraordinary case, without an ordinary outward call from the Church; and
required no more, but Gifts and consent of people to be instructed by him, as
above: Now these instances before, though they had Gifts sufficient, preached
the word, when they had not the consent of people to hear or be instructed by
them: and so must every one that has the truth revealed, speak, whether they
will hear, or forbear. His main design is, to discover, what a man no Minister,
may do when a Church is collapsed, or corrupted; the ordinary Ministers either
so ignorant, they cannot or so negligent they will not teach the truth, p. 15.
And of such a state of a Church, he here puts the case p. 39, etc. Suppose a
man living in the midst and height of Apostasy, p. 40.
when an universal darkness has spread over the fa^^ of the Church: as in
Italy, (there the ^cene is laid though pointing at England) the Lord reveals
some points of faith not known or disbelieved, etc. I demand whether that man,
without expecting any call from the fomenters of those errors, may not preach
and publish these truths to others, etc. Truly, there is no difficulty in this
case; I conceive he may, (if he have so much confidence) nay ought, if when and
where he can find some that will hear him: But the question is, Whether this,
ipso facto, makes him a Preacher in Office? A woman a Christian amongst
Iberians, may and did do as much as this yet, I hope no Preacher of the Go pel,
in the strict sen^^: yet had she Gifts to preach Christ, and a people willing
to be instructed by her. And unless he take preach^ng in the larger ^ense, he
cannot (could not then, whatever now) say, No other outward call is requisite
to constitute him a Preacher of the Gospel, than the consent of Gods people to
be instructed by him. A Presbyterian (as he was then) cannot affirm this:
unless he can suppose a time and place, where there is no ordination to be
had; and that, but prima vice, neither; thus the Presbyterians hold. Perhaps
these principles of his then laid, might mislead others and himself, pretending
to Gifts, and finding a people willing to be instructed by him, or them, to
make a Schism in, and separation from our Churches; by gathering of a Church,
because of some corruptions in ours; yea, this is evidence that he now proceeds
upon those principles; that nothing is required to make a Minister, but, gifts
and consent of people without any outward call of the Church, which we shall
presently hear, he formerly required thereunto. And this made him so careless
in stating the case of our first Reformers, Luther, Calvin, etc. as to say,
With this I was always so well satisfied, p. 41.
that I ever deemed all curious disquisition after the outward vocation of our
first Reformers, altogether needless. But, by his leave, the ca^e o^ Luther was
not (as he says) exactly that which he laid down. For he is speaking of a
Layman, by that way to be constituted a Preacher or Minister; but Luther was a
Minister ordained; (though with much corruption) and so had an outward call by
a Church, to preach the Gospel in the truth and purity of it; and I believe our
Author, did then think him to be a Minister of Christ, but his present
principles deny it. Luthers case, in regard of the corrupted state of the
Church, and the zeal and spirit whereby he managed it, was extraordinary; but
his call was ordinary, as an ordained Minister. 2. The people who fell off from
Babylon, with him; were in Church State (though corrupted) as baptized persons,
and had a command to come out of Babylon; but the people that our Author now
gathers, come rather out of Sic^, and have no call to separate from us; but
rather a command, not to separate. 3. Luther did not renounce his Ordination,
in the Church of Rome, nor his people their Baptism; nor did our Author
formerly, think it requisite: but now he has renounced his Ordination, and
former Ministry; and upon his principle, of gifts and consent of the people,
made himself a Minister: and it is expected, that ere long, his people (if not
himself) will renounce their Baptism, both of them standing, or falling
together. And so I come to the last way.

extraordiry call, to preach the Gospel, without an ordinary vocation, is by
some act of providence. The instance is, Ibid.
of a Christian man cast by shipwreck or otherwise, amongst barbarous people,
who receive him humanely: may he not, ought he not, to preach the Gospel unto
them? and if he convert souls, may he not become a Pastor to those converted?
none I hope, makes doubt of it. But suppose a Christian woman, should be cast
upon the same place, (as once among the Iberians) ought she not (by his former
principles) to preach the Gospel to them? no doubt she ought: But if she
convert souls there may she become for a Pastor to them? none, I hope, will say
so: 2. But we have put him a case elsewhere, of his own making: Suppose a
Barbarian should find the Scripture, and be converted by it alone: he being
converted, converts others: I ask now, may he become a Pastor to those
converts? I hope he will not say he may, till he be baptized, nor can they make
a Church till they be baptized: but who shall baptize either him or them,
having no Minister there? This, while a Presbyterian he would not have granted,
nor may now by his Independent principles deny, till he is turned Anabaptist.
3. We read of men in the primitive times (as well as that woman) who, being no
Ministers, converted the Indians and Moors; Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 15. 16.
but they neither durst be their Pastors not baptize them, till they were
ordained in the Christian Church, and sent to do it. If consent of people and
gifts would have constituted them Ministers, they needed not to have come home
so many hundred miles, to fetch their Ordination: See but the difference
between himself a Presbyterian, and now an Independent: but enough of that.

Presbyterian formerly, and that upon good deliberation, and strong resolution
so to continue, we have his own acknowledgment, when thus he writes; p. 42.
The principles and rules of that Church Government, from which in the
following assertions, I desire not to wander, is of that (to which I do, and
allwaies in my poor judgment have adhered, since by Gods assistance, I had
engaged my self to the study of his word) which is commonly called
Presbyterial, or Synodical, in opposition to Prelatical or Diocesan, on the one
side, and that which is commonly called independent, or Congregational on the
other. Quantum mutatus ab illo! in his Tract of Schism.

Presbyterian Government holds forth, (in ordinary cases) to constitute a
Minister: for thus he ^^ies: For a public formal, p. 46.
ministerial teaching two things are required in the Teacher. 1. Gifts from
God. 2. Authority from the Church. Whence I wou^d in^er^ 1. That consent o^
election of the people, is not sufficient to make a man a Minister, though well
gifted; but an Authoritative act of the Church, is to pass upon him, (that is)
Ordination by the hands of the Presbytery, according to his then principles. 2.
That he is much changed (from what he was) in the Tract of Schism; where he
requires, no more to constitute a Minister, than Gifts of teaching, and the
peoples submiting to him: If any shall say, The Dr. by, Authority of the
Church, meant no more, but the election or Consent of the people of a
Congregation: I would answer for him, I do not believe, that at that time he
would or did aequivocate with the world; but took it in the Presbyterian sense:
though now he cries down Ordination, by Bishop, or Presbytery, and has
renounced his own ordination. And is not this a great alteration, and a sign of
much inconstancy?

Liberty of private Christians, lest they should surfeit of it and presume too
far; page 48.
he gives some wholesome Presbyterian Cautions, to bound them; First, The end
why God bestows his gifts on any, is merely that within the bounds of their
own callings (in which they are circumscribed, 1 Cor. 7.24.) they should use
them to his glory, and the edification of his Church. This was then his
judgment; but now he can allow men, of any calling, if gifted, to violate those
bounds, set by God himself, and to be Preachers of the Gospel, in ordinary
cases; which some of the prime brethren of New England do reject and reprobate.
Secondly, He required, That they do not under pretense of Christian liberty and
freedom of conscience, cast away all brotherly amity, and cut themselves off
from the communion of the Church: Christ has not purchased a liberty for any,
to rent his Body; they will prove at length, to be no duties of piety, which
break the sacred bonds of charity. Divinely spoken, and like a true
Presbyterian: To cut themselves off, from the communion of the Church (which is
separation) is to rent the body of Christ; and what is that but Schism? which
is so much declamed against, in his book of Schism: And what liberty his people
take, and he allows, for separation from not ours, but any Church, is fully
discoursed above: To separate from the communion of the Church, is also
affirmed to be a breach of sacred charity; which is often denied in the latter
book. But yet more Presbyterian Doctrine, Men ought not, under a pretense of
congregating themselves to serve God, separate from their brethren; neglecting
the public Assemblies, as was the manner of some rebuked by the Apostle, Heb.
10.5. There be peculiar blessings, and transcendent privileges, annexed to
public Assemblies, which accompany not private men to their recesses, etc. yet
this is ordinaririly done by most of the Independent way; and allowed, yea
justified now by himself: That sense of the text, Heb. 10.25. of neglecting the
public Assemblies (as the manner of many is) is now, otherwise glossed, and
taken for Apostasy from the Faith: Of Schism, p. 74. And the event has sadly
proved, that private recesses are not accompanied, with those peculiar
blessings annexed to public Assemblies, witness those errors heresies,
blasphemies, prophanesses, which have followed private meetings.

caution (and the third is) As the Ministry, p. 49.
so also ought the Ministers, to have that regard, respect and obedience, which
is due to their labors, in that sacred calling: would we could not too
frequently see, more puffed up with a conceit of their own gifts, into a
contempt of the most learned and pious Pastors; those are spots in your Feasts
of charity, etc. This is so plain and evidently true, as if he that writ it,
carried the sun in his hand. And he did in a manner prophecy, when he said,
Let not them, who despise a faithful Minister in public, flatter themselves
with hope of a blessing on their endeavors in private. Let them pretend what
they will, they have not an equal respect unto all Gods Ordinances. No doubt he
spoke then of our Parochial Ministers, and Ministry, as an Ordinance of God;
whom now he unministers, and despises both them and their Ordination, as we
have heard above. Viderit ipse.

Assemblies; That this seems to favor licentious Conventicles, which in all
places the Laws have condemned; and the Le^rned in all Ages have abhorred as
Seminaries of Faction and Schism, in the Church. To this he answers, li^e a
true Presbyterian; p. 51.
Under corre^tion I conceive, that the Law lays hold of none as peccant in
such a kind, but only those who have predeclared themselves to be opposers of
the worship of God, in the public Assemblies of that Church wherein they live.
Neither do I conceive, that they ought at all to be allo^^d the benefit of
private meetings, who wilfully abstain from the public Congregations, so long
as the true worship of God is held forth in them. Enough, enough: Now, what a
case are all the Conventicles of Sectaries in? the very Seminaries of Schism
and Faction; and besides, a sink of errors heresies, and blasphemies. The
only evasion will be one of these two, 1. That he spoke this, (under
correction) as not his peremptory judgment; And its likely he has come under
correction of his party, and done some kind of penance, for this declaration;
p. 16. p. 52.
and it may be, his Latin Discourse, (he tells us of twice at least) as an
answer to the Arguments of the Remonstrants and others, for such a liberty of
prophecyings, as they term it, has suffered strangling upon his correction;
for I hear not that it is in the Land of the living, (yet born or put forth)
for if it were, it would condemn his own ^aw allowance, and toleration of such
Conventicles. That Is one. Or 2. He must affirm, That the true worship of God,
is not held forth in our Congregations; which, I hope, he will not dare to do;
nor can be able to prove, if he do affirm it. What his performance in this
kind, is, (to plead for his separation) we have seen above; and to how little
satisfaction.

Objections, which he answers well, as his then opinion was; I shall dispatch
them in a word: 1. Men are apt to pride themselves in their Gifts, and so t
encroach on the Priests office, and create themselves Pastors in separate
Congregations: This we see done sufficiently now, by others and himself; What
says he to it? Offenses will come, etc. but God-fearing men, will remember
Korah; p. 53.
they that love their souls, will not suffer themselves to be carried away by
self-conceit, so far as to help to overthrow the very constitution of any
Church, by confusion; or the flourishing of it, by ignorance; both which would
certainly follow such courses: This needs no comment, nor confirmation; only it
will need a Reply from himself, since he has retracted this truth by him here
delivered, by a contrary practice. The next Objection is no less true, and
really exemplified in the present Conventicles. This may be a means for men to
vent their own private fancies unto others, to foment and cherish errors in
one another: to give false interpretations of the word, there being no way to
prevent it. What says he to this? For interpreting the word, I speak not, but
applying of it being rightly interpreted: And for the rest, would to God, the
complaints were not true, of those things, that have for diverse years in this
Church, been done publicly, etc. But to prevent this, the care rests on them
whose sedulous endeavor should be, to reprove and convince false Doctrine,
etc. That is, I suppose, the Ministers: This may do something in the public
but what is this to men of private meetings, separating from the Church? They
will not come to hear in public; and he does not intend, that Ministers should
attend those privat^ meetings; that were to turn them into public, as now they
speak: How then shall we prevent their boldness, in interpreting Scripture, or
their ignorance and folly in misapplying it? This answer is the most weak and
defective; and how he will give a better in his New way, it rests upon him to
consider, and give at his own leisure.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 9. r. against, l. last r. charg^^, p. 2. l. 2. dele the, p. 4. l.
7. del. they, l. 22. for parley r. only, p. 5. l. 5. r. advantage, p. 25. marg.
r. (...). p. 30. l. 4. 1. Patriarchats. l. 34. marg. r. Jam. 2. p. 35. after
the word place, in l. 4. (...), how can it rationally he thought, or inferred
that he dehorted the^ from no kind or degree of Schism, but such i^ was at that
time, in the particular Church (...) Corinth* so that all this, is nothing ^ut
a begging of the question. P. 39. l. 14. r. (...), ^ 53. l. 11. after nature
put, in p. 58. l. 24. before dest. put, in, p. 5^. l. 4. ^. affirming, p. 60.
l. (...) f. tot r. yet, p. 65. l. 24. f. mind r. include, p 66. l. 21. r.
exhorting one, p. 70. l. 10. (...) p. 72. marg. r. p. 77. p. 85. l. 27. f. l.
r. it, p. 8^ l. 26. f. to r. so, p. 94. l. 7. dele of, p. 104. l. 2^ f. err r.
ere, p. 110. l. 12. r. assert, dele to, ^ 113. l. 27. r. concessis, p. 114. l.
29. r. fund^mental, p. 115. l. 22. f. it r. his. p. 120. l. 1. after r. ask, p.
133. l. 9. dele to. p. 141. l. 1^ f. it r. is, p. 143. l. 5 f. world. r. word.
p 158. 5. af. f. as properly, r. improperly. p. 159. l. af. for his r. this. p.
167. l. 12. dele them. p. 16 l. 3. f. ye, r. she. p. 170. l. 3. af. for, r.
fre^ p. 172. l. 11. r. Congregations. p. 175. l. 3. r. O^ficers. p. 18. l. 16.
f. firmer, r. finer. p. 185. last, put in, their. p. 192. l. 14. after of, ^
in, the.


