THREE SERMONS: viz: 1. A Commission for an Assise, granted to the Saints. 2. A
close Hypocrite discovered. 3. The Lawfulness of doing Good out of Hope of
Reward.


By Daniel Cawdrey, Rector of Great Billing in Northamptonshire.

PHIL. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for Ph. Nevill, and are to be sold by Peter Whaley at
his shop in Northampton. 1641.

A COMMISSION FOR AN ASSISE, Granted to the SAINTS: OR, A Remedy against
Lawing.

As it was delivered in a Sermon at the Assizes held at Northampton. July 9.
1640.

By D.C. Rector of Great Billing in Northampton shire.

REVEL. 20.4. And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given
unto them.

PSALM. 149. ult. Such honor have all his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for Phil. Nevill, at the sign of the Gun in
Ivie-lane. 1641.

To the Right Worshipful Sir CHRISTOPHER YELVERTON, Knight (late) High
Sheriff of the County of Northampton, all health and happiness.
SIR,
IT is the manner of Midwives, so soon as the child is borne and dressed, to
present it first to the own parents, and then to the view of others. This
following Sermon, as it was first conceived by your motion and request (which
is to me a virtuall command) so it is but fit and reason, that it should first
be tendered back unto you, that the same party that helped to give it life and
bringing forth, might also give it protection and bringing up. The success and
operation that it had (as I am made believe) in the hearts of them who heard it
first speak, made me the more willing to expose it to the eyes of others, to
see if it might somewhat prevail to stifle, and (as Hercules the serpents in
his cradle) to strangle the lawless contentions of this Lawing age. I have
long and often lamented to see how all the world almost is turned into one
common Tribunal, either to sue, or censure others. The great resorts of people
in ancient times were wont to be for counsel to the houses of the Prophets:
But now the Innes of Court, and Courts of Justice are more pestered with
Clients, than the very houses of God. Hence it is, that for the most part, that
Profession of the Law thrives best of any; and those that, perhaps some of
them, envy an 100. L. per annum to a painful Levite, with a great deal more
ease, themselves get 500. L. and think it nothing. The peevish perverseness of
men, is much guilty of this thrift. For if men had either so much grace, or
wit, to do no wrong; or if they do, or suffer wrong, to be willing to refer
it to their wise and honest brethren, they might have both more peace in their
minds, and also more money in their purses. And I cannot but wonder at the
frowardness and folly of men, that rather choose to refer it to twelve men,
and they strangers, by force and course of the Law; than to two men their
neighbors and friends, by the persuasion of the Gospel. In which proceedings,
there is this disadvantage at least (besides many more) that whereas they might
have chosen Arbitrators, wise and honest, their differences fall oftentimes
into the hands of many, whereof some are wise perhaps, but not honest; others
are honest, but no wiser than they should be: In which cases, a good cause,
many times, falls to the ground. To prevent which mischief, was, at least, one
maine intention of this Sermon. Knowing the weakness of it to walk alone, I
have sent forth with it, two of its elder brethren, (two other Sermons,
preached on other occasions) to wait upon it, (and with it upon you, Sir) as
poor folks use to do, who set the elder to tend upon the younger. Such is
your noble Candor (as I well know) that you will both protect these now made
your own, and also lovingly accept, what is so duly, so respectfully tendered;
not only as a private pledge, but also as a public acknowledgement to the
world, of my many great engagements for your many undeserved, undesired
favors. And I shall never cease (till I cease to be my self) to solicit the
Almighty, for Grace, Mercy and Peace upon your worthy self, your virtuous
Lady, and hopeful offspring: taking it for none of the least favors, that I
may profess my self to be

Yours in all due respects, and service in the Lord. DANIEL CAWDREY.
^illing Magna. November. 20. 1640.
A COMMISSION FOR AN ASSISE, Granted to the SAINTS.
1. COR. 6.2. Do you not know, that the Saints shall judge the world?


THe holy Apostle Paul, having, Coherence.
in the former Chapter, taxed these Corinthians for their great Negligence, in
not-judging that incestuous person, in a case Ecclesiastical; Now, in this
Chapter, he blames them, for their overmuch Diligence, in going to Judgment,
in a matter civil and political. He does not inveigh against, much less
utterly abolish (as some fanaticall Anabaptists dream) the use of secular
Jugdements, which we call going to Law: but only reprehends the Abuses, which
he observed amongst them, in the use of that, which in it self (and some cases
excepted) might be lawful. We know, (to use our Apostles own words, of
another Law, 1. Tim. 1.8.
the Law of God) the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Which (at once to
confute them, and pass along) we may easily make good, from this very place.
For the same Apostle that denies them the use of Law, in regard of some
circumstances, allows it, in regard of others. He denies it in regard of
Infidels, Sanctis disceptatoribus. Beza in locum.
allows it in regard of the Saints, that is, of Christians; as the first verse
implies. But the best thing may be abused; and so is, too often, the Law it
self. Yet if the abuse may cry down the use of a thing, we must pull down
the Sun out of the Firmament. It is true, Law, and War, are much alike:
War is but a more public kind of Lawing; and Law is but a more private kind
of Warring; Ne hoc quidem remedio egerent. Id. in ver. 7.
and both of them Remedies of the last Refuge. Yea this we will say more, (if
that may please and satisfy our secular Antinomians) that if men were but so
wise and honest, as they should be, there would be either none, or little use,
either of Soldiers, or Lawyers. If men had but so much Honesty, to do no
wrong, or so much Justice or Charity, if they do wrong, to do right: as on
the one side, our Armor might rust in our houses; so on the other, the Courts
of Justice might have more Cobwebs than Causes, more Spiders than Clients. But
this may not be expected (fear it not, O you champions of War, or Advocates
of either Law) whiles two bitter roots grow in the hearts of men, Pride and
Self-love. The one, whereby they will do no right; the other, whereby they
will take no wrong. The best way therefore, that I know, is to consider,
seriously, what are the faults that usually men bring, or rather bring men to
those Tribunals, and, as much as we can, to labor every one to redress them.
Our Apostle has noted some, and the chiefest, to our hands.

Many were their errors in that proceeding: some concern the Plaintiff,
Errors in going to Law, in
some the Defendant, some the Spectators.

First, 1. The Plaintiff, that
the Plaintiff; and what he wants in weight, he has in number; and they are
five.

1. 1. With a brother.
First, in regard of his Adversary; who is noted, not only generally to be a
Corinthian, but to be a Christian: Dare any of you, you Christian Corinthians:
and, A brother goes to Law with a brother, verse. 6. Infidel to go to Law
with Infidel, were not strange. Infidel with Christian was too common. But
Christian with Christian, brother with brother, seems both unnatural, and (as
those times were) unchristian.

2. In regard of the Judge, 2. Before Infidels.
chosen to decide and umpire their controversies: (...), under the unjust,
verse the first: (...), verse. 6. under the Infidels, or unbeleevers, and not
under the Saints. If brother will go to Law with brother, let them make choice
of Christian Judges. For Infidels to be judged by Christians, were perhaps not
unfit; But for Christians, to refuse Christians, and to choose to be judged by
Infidels, was foulely Quod eligerent voluntary Infidelium judicium. Aquin. in
locum.
scandalous. What will the heathens say, when Christians are together by the
ears, and Infidels live in unity?

3. In regard of the Matter: some trifles, of no moment; 3. For Trifles.
as in the later end of this second verse, Are you unworthy to judge the least
matters? Should men, that I say not Christians, fight, as two Cocks, for a
grain of barley? for a Goose in the grass? or a Pigge in the corn? It is a
fault too common, every petty difference pesters these Tribunals. Gallio
should do well to drive them from the Judgment seat, with that word, I will
be no Judge of such matters. Act. 18.15, 16.


4. In regard of the Manner: with a great deal of Impatience, and impotent
Anger: verse 7. 4. With Impatience.
Why do you not rather take wrong? why do you not rather suffer your selves
to be defrauded? where the Apostle prevents a secret objection: They might
plead; We do not thus proceed without a cause; we have been wronged, perhaps
very much, and may we not seek the benefit of the Law, to right our selves?
No, says the holy Apostle; something should be hazzarded, yea lost, for peace
sake. Christ your master taught you this lesson, If any man will take away thy
cloak, Math. 5.
let him have thy coat also: Peace is a Jewel, if we knew the worth of it,
worth our buying, at a dearer rate than most men will give for it: And besides,
S. James has told us the disposition of all truly godly hearts, The Wisdom
which is from above, Jam. 3.17.
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
etc. Now verily, there is utterly a fault among you, that you want that
Christian Patience, to suffer some wrong, rather than go to Law.

5. 5. Too precipitate.
In regard of the Order: Law should be your last Refuge, after trial of all
other Means in vain. Amongst the rest, Reference unto your brethren, should
be used: If they cannot end it, the Law is open, implead one another. And this
was a principal fault amongst them, that so soon as any difference arose,
they ran or sent presently for a Writ to the heathenish Courts, and refused
to refer it to the Saints, as the first verse intimates.

Secondly, 2. The Defendant,
there are other faults that concern the Defendant; and what he wants in
number, he has in weight.

1. 1. In doing the wrong.
That he did the wrong, and so was the occasion, or cause of all, or most of
those errors in the Plaintiff, verse 8. Nay you do wrong, and defraud, and
that your brethren.

2. 2. In defending the wrong done.
That he Defended the wrong done, by denial of satisfaction, to do his
brother right; whereupon he was forced upon those scandalous and sinful
courses. Nay it may seem, that he that did the wrong, did not only defend it,
but also turned Plaintiff, (as we call him that begins a suit) and began to
sue him first, as the manner of some great ones is; either to vex him, or make
him unable to prosecute the former wrong, or to make themselves seem innocent;
For, attend the Apostles words: Why do you not rather take wrong? which
concerns the Plaintiff, without all question: yea (but adds the Apostle) you
do wrong, and defraud; which, in all congruitie, must concern the Defendant:
As if he were both Plaintiff and Defendant (a strange mystery) that is,
Plaintiff in the suite, but Defendant of the wrong done, by first complaining.
However, there was certainly a fault amongst them, in one, or other, or both;
yea, both, no doubt, are too often to blame. There is utterly a fault, that you
go to Law one with another, (...), verse. 7. that there are any causes between
you, which need the Judgment and decision of the Law. It is hardly possible to
go to Law, but that the one party, at least, is faulty.

Thirdly, the Spectators, or bystanders, 3. The Spectators; their
were not altogether innocent. Two faults there are to be found in them.

1. Their simplicity or Ignorance, 1. Ignorance.
that they were not able to comprimise their brethrens differences, before they
went so far, verse 5. I speak it to your shame, is it so, that there is not
a wise man amongst you? no, not one, that is able to judge between his
brethren? but a brother goes to law with a brother? etc. Now verily there is
utterly a fault amongst you, even you, that stand and look on these unkind
bickerings, and want skill to quiet them.

2. Their sloth or Negligence, that they were so lazy, 2. Negligence.
that they would suffer their brethren to go to Law, and that under Infidels,
rather than dis-ease themselves a little, to compose them, being designed by
God himself to be Judges of the world. These, I take it, are the principal
faults the Apostle finds with this proceeding of the Corinthians; which being
amended, Law is, no doubt, lawful, say Anabaptists what they can to the
contrary.

And now we come more nearer to the words. My Text has reference to all the
three; but primarily to the Plaintiff; and it is brought in as an argument, to
dissuade his course, and to disprove his choice. The sum seems to be thus
much: O Corinthians, O Christians, The Sum of the words.
you are much to blame, that choose such incompetent Judges, of your
differences, as Infidels are; Dare any of you, having a matter against another,
be judged under the Infidels, and not under the Saints? The expostulation is
very quick and sharp; If you will needs refer your cause to Judgment, in
all reason, Christians, the Saints, were fitter Judges than they. Why so? why,
Do you not know, that the Saints shall judge the world? As if he should say,
If you choose Infidels, and refuse Christians, you too much honor the one, and
disparage the other. You too much honor Infidels in suffering, much more in
voluntarily offering your selves to be judged by them, (...). verse. 7.
minoratio est: a lessening or disparaging.
whom you shall one day judge. You dishonor and disparage Christians, double:
First, your selves, in that you make your selves inferior to those that shall,
one day, be judged by you: As for example, Were it a beseeming thing, that the
Honorable Judges of Assise, should refer themselves, (...). Chrysostom. in locum.
in any matter of difference, to be judged by the Prisoners in the Jail, whom
they shall by and by judge? Do you not know, that the Saints, even you shall
judge the world? If then the world shall be judged by you, (as the Apostle
argues in the latter part of this verse) is it fit that you should be judged by
the world? Secondly, you disparage your fellow Saints, to undervalue them so
much, as to think Infidels worthy of that honor of Judicature, rather than
them, who shall one day judge the world: As if some persons that have business
at this Assizes, should refuse the honorable Bench, and refer themselves to
the Prisoners, who must be judged by the Bench. The argument lies thus, a
majore ad minus: If the Saints shall judge the world, then, much more, lesser
differences of their brethren, concerning things of this life: that is the
latter part of this verse. But certainly the Saints shall judge the world,
that is the former part of this verse, (for take off the Rhetorical
Interrogation, and it is a strong Affirmation) Therefore the Saints are the
fittest Judges of Christians lesser differences. You have the Coherence and
scope of the words; Now take the Sum of them, considered absolutely in
themselves. They are (if I may be bold to borrow your own terms) A Commission
for an Assizes, A Commission of Saints: In it
granted to the Saints: and contain in them two general parts.

1. The Dignity it self; The Saints shall judge the world; and therein, we
may consider three things:

1. The Commissioners designed, by the name of Saints. 2. The Matter of the
Commission, that is, to judge. 3. The Latitude, or extent of that Commission,
the world. The Saints shall judge the world.
2. The Certainty thereof: Do you not know this? as if he should say, You do
know it, you must know it.

We begin first, with the Dignity, and therein

1. 1. The Dignity; where
The Commissioners deputed, The Saints: wherein we have two things to consider,
Their Quality, Saints; 1. The Commissioners; both
Their Equality, all the Saints: the one in the sense and signification of the
word, the other in the Indefinitenesse and Plurality of the Number: we touch
upon both.

1. Their Quality, the Saints: The word, (...), 1. Their Quality; Holy For 3.
reasons.
signifies Holy, which in the largest acception of it, is equivalent to that of
Just, or Righteous, as might appear from other places; and must be so taken
here, as the opposition in the former verse does evidently manifest; For it is
not there opposed to profane, but to the unjust, that is to Infidels or
unbeleevers, that were generally unjust or unrighteous, as having no true
Christian Righteousness in them: And as, Righteousness in Scripture and other
authors, Justitia in sese virtutes continet omnes.
contains in it, not only that particular virtue of Justice, but all virtues
whatsoever; in a general notion: So Unrighteousness does not only signify
that particular vice of Injustice, (from which many heathen Judges were free)
but even the want of all the virtues, or the most of them. In the 9. and 10.
verses of this Chapter, laid together, the Apostle explaines what he means by
the unjust, or unrighteous* Know you not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? The unrighteous? who are they? mark the next
verse: Neither Whoremongers, nor Idolaters, etc. Now then, if unjust signify
all kind of unrighteousness; the Saints, or Holy, being thereunto opposed,
must likewise include all righteousness. The Sum is, All Gods Commissioners
for the heavenly Judicature, must be Saints, holy, harmless, innocent,
righteous: that is the point. Every man is not fit to be made a Judge on earth;
much less in heaven: There are three things, we know, that make a complete
Judge on earth, Authority, Prudence, Justice or Selfe-Innocence: The first is
founded in his Commision; and is without himself: The other two are within
himself, inherent in his person: And if the question be, Which of the two is
most requisite for a Judge? I should venture to say the latter, Holiness or
Innocence, for these reasons:

First, 1. To be like God.
Justice or Holiness, makes God himself a Competent and Complete Judge of
the world: so the Scripture often resolves it: Shall not the Judge of heaven and
earth do right? Genesis 18.25.
says Abraham. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God?
Romans 3.5.
God forbid: for how shall God then judge the world? says our Apostle: As if
he should say, God himself (with reverence be it spoken) were not a Competent
Judge, if that he were not perfectly righteous: The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works: Righteousness and Holiness in God, are
of equal latitude and extent: Now as God is King of Kings, so he is Judge of
Judges, and all his Judges must be like himself; Rev. 15.3.
Holy as he is Holy; and therefore called King of Saints.

Secondly, 2. To avoid Recrimination.
to avoid reproach, and Recrimination: If a Judge want Innocence or Holiness,
he is exposed to contempt, and shall be upbraided with his own errors. Thou
that teach another, Romans 2.21.
teach thou not thy self? was spoken to one of our coat. We may enlarge
it: Thou that judge another, judge thou not thy self? Thou that condemnest
a man for stealing, do thou steal? Thou that abhorrest Symonie, do thou
commit Briberie? etc. As that Pyrate under censure, retorted upon the great
Conqueror, What I do by sea, thou do that and more by land: and, many
times, Ibid. verse. 1.
Great thieves condemn little ones: Therefore thou art inexcusable O man,
whosoever thou art that judge; for thou that judge another, condemnest thy
self, for thou that judge do the same things, or some thing as bad.

Thirdly, 3. To prevent Partiality.
to prevent Partiality: For selfe-guiltinesse commonly makes men partial, in
judging others: Their Conscience holds both tongue and hand, and tells them,
they do but beat themselves, whiles they punish others: We may see it in
Judah: Genesis 38.
when his daughter in law Thamar, was accused for her Incontinencie, how rashly
he censures, Bring her forth, and let her be burned; But when he heard, By the
man whose these are, am I with child; the case is altered, She is more
righteous than I; no further talk of burning now; unless himself will be
burned with her: Now on earth, it is too evident, that Selfe-iniquitie is the
mother of Partiality: Therefore Jehoshaphat giving charge to his Judges, to
do justly, enforces it from the example of God, whose Judges they are: For
(says he) with the Lord, there is no iniquity, 2. Chro. 19.6.
nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts: As if he should say, If there be
Iniquity in the heart, there will be respect of persons, and taking of gifts,
to pervert Justice: Requisite therefore it is, that they who shall be counted
worthy, to be Judges in heaven, should be Saints, (...), of (...) privative and
(...) terra: men, that are like pure Gold, purified seven times in the fire,
purged from the dross of earthly corruptions; or like pure wine defecated and
wracked from the Lees and dregs of carnal affections: Incorruptus,
inadutabilis, contra improbos immisericors, inexorabilis, Majestate aequitalis,
veritatisque terribilis. Au. Gell. li. 14. c. 4.
Such as Chrysippus would have all earthly Judges: Incorrupt, unflatterable,
unmercifull and inexorable toward wicked men, terrible in the Majesty of
equity and truth. Men free from passion and compassion; that will know neither
father nor mother, friend nor brother; as was said of Levi in a like case: For
suppose a Judge should meet, at the bar, his child, or brother, etc. and
they should entreat, by those near relations, O my Father, O my Brother, etc.
What heart, not thoroughly hardened, could resist such melting compellations?
perhaps it will be thus, at the great day of Judgment; we have a type of it in
the Gospel; where our Savior brings in, (whether by way of Parable, or true
History) the rich man beholding Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom;
He dare not speak to Lazarus, who was perhaps a stranger, and was by him
before neglected; but to Abraham he addresses himself, with that oily name of
Father; Father Abraham have mercy upon your son: But Abraham was now above
relations, above compassions, and foolish pity: Son remember, etc. So at
that great Day there will be crying, O my father, O my son, O my husband, O
my brother! But there must be judgment without mercy: They, the Judges there,
must be as insensible, and inexorable, as Abraham was; and if not pronounce,
yet approve and applaud that dreadful sentence upon their dearest acquaintance
and friends, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. What manner of men then
ought they to be, that must be Judges of the world, 2. Pet. 3.11.
in all Holinesses and Godlinesses (so the Apostles words are) that is in the
perfection of Holiness and Godliness; 2. Cor. 7.1.
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, as our Apostle speaks. To conclude
this first point; However on earth, favor or affection, briberie or
corruption, may sometime make a Judge; as that Roman could say, to his little
credit, Act. 22.28.
With a great sum of money, obtained I this office: yet in heaven none but
Saints shall judge the world: and that is the first. The second is

2. Their Equality; Sancti, in the plural, and indefinitely, the Saints: and
I fear not to say, in the words of Psalmist, Psalm. 149.
Such honor have all his Saints: They are fellow-Commissioners; If I mistake
not, all our Judges are so; and so are all our Justices at the Quarter
Sessions; one Commission includes them all: There are indeed distinct
altitudes, in respect of their personal titles, and degrees, but no different
latitudes, in respect of their Commission; therein they are all equal. Heaven
observes the same proportion: One star differs from another in glory, not in
nature. The least is as true a star, as those of the greatest magnitude: One
Saint differs from another, perhaps, in personal glory in heaven, as in
personal grace on earth; but the meanest, the lowest, is as truly a Saint, as
the greatest, and as truly a Commissioner and Judge of the world. There may and
must be difference of order and prioritie, to avoid confusion, but no
disparitie of dignity in this heavenly Judicature. Math. 19.28.
Our Savior tells his disciples so: You shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Jsrael. They have all thrones, all sit, all judge;
Matthias the last, as well as Peter the first. What? only the twelve Apostles?
shall none sit upon thrones and judge but they? what shall then become of Paul,
and other Saints? He that made the question, can best resolve it, S. Augustine.
We ought not to think (says he) that only those twelve men shall judge with
Christ. For by that number, De Civit. Dei, lib. 20.6.5.
is signified the whole multitude of Judges. Otherwise the Apostle Paul, who
labored more than all of them, shall want a room to sit on; who yet
demonstrates, that himself with other Saints, do belong to that number, when
he says, Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world? and again in
the next verse, Know you not that we shall judge Angels? The Catholic
Schoolmen (falsely so called) some of them are here not Catholic enough; Aquin.
in locum.
They restrain this Dignity only to the Apostles, and such as have followed
them; by profession of vowed poverty, to the honor of their recluses and
Monastical superstition. Their color is slight, and vanishing: because
(forsooth) our Savior answering Peter's question, Master we have forsaken all,
etc. what shall we have? says, You shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge.
But the Apostle Paul, who had the mind of Christ, and the Spirit of God, and
had been once in heaven, has enlarged the Commission to all Saints, (...).
ver. 4.
even to these poor Corinthians, the most despised, and least esteemed among
them: And therefore it is observable how he varies the person, and makes use of
all the persons in the plural number; We, you, they. Not only, We shall
judge the Angels, Verse. 3.^
which might be applied to the Apostles, and no other; nor only, You shall
judge the world, or, The world shall be judged by you, which might exclude
others, besides the Corinthians; but, The Saints shall judge the world, in the
words of our Text: We shall judge, you shall judge, all Saints shall judge the
world. But S. Jude shall put it out of all question, by the ancient Testimony
of Enoch, the seventh from Adam: Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his
Saints, Jud. verse. 14.
to execute Judgment upon all the ungodly, etc. which Daniel reckons to be
thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, even all his Saints.
Even to the least of all Gods Saints, is this honor given; how poorly, how
basely soever esteemed of in this world, he shall be in Commission to judge the
world: Heb. 11.
They went about, some of them, in sheepe-skinnes and Goat-skinnes, (not like
Judges in skarlet) and yet, of them the world was not worthy, though they are
accounted worthy to judge the world. The Romans fetched some from the plough,
to the Dictatorship: Pharaoh took Joseph out of prison, to be the second in
Egypt: David was sent for, from the Sheepfolds, to be anointed with Regal
oil; Psalm. 78.71, 72.
As he was following the Ewes (good Shepherd) he took him, that he might
feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. This is sure* God fetches
his Saints farther, even from the lowest earth, to the highest heavens. Psalm.
113.6.
He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the needy out of the
dunghill; That he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his
people; Such honor have all his Saints: and now I have done with the first
part, of the three named, and pass on to the second.

2. 2. The Matter of the Commission; To judge: wherein
The Commission granted, or Matter of the Commission, The Saints shall judge.
There are, by Kings, several Commissions granted, not all alike honorable;
Some, for inquiry upon lands; some, for charitable uses; some, for matters of
Nisi prius, as you call them; and perhaps many more, which I know not, nor much
care to learn. That is the most eminent, which you call, A Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, which passes upon life and death; because it concerns that which
is most dear and precious in man, his Life. Gods preferments are ever like
himself, most gracious, most glorious, to the best and highest employments. If
there be any Commission weightier, either in honor, or execution, that shall
be conferred upon his Saints: Do you not know, that the Saints shall judge?
and that with the Judgment of Condemnation? For explication of it, two things
are to be enquired; first, the Truth, and then the Time; the one in the sense
of the word, judge; the other in the Tense of the Verb, shall judge: we
follow both.

1. First, the Truth of this Grant may well be scrupled; 1. The Truth of it; by
a distinction.
How the Saints can be said to judge; seeing first, we have God himself, (as
well he may) taking this honor to himself, God is Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6.
Secondly, granting a general and universal Commission to his Son, The
Father has committed all Judgment to the Son, even as, or because he is the
son of man, Joh. 5.22 And thirdly, we have the Son discharging all from
this Employment, Judge not, that you be not judged, Math. 7.1. And yet here S.
Paul tells us of a Commission of Judgment, granted to the Saints. For
reconciliation of this, we must distinguish of Judgment, and Judges.

1. Of Judgment, which, for kind or manner, 1. Of Judgment, which is
is manifold; as may appear in these particulars.

1. There is Judicium Authoritatis: 1. Authoritatis.
the Judgment of Authority; which resides in the King, as the root and
fountain; and thus there is one only Judge of the world, as one Lawgiver, God
is judge himself.

2. Judicium Declarationis, by way of Declaration; 2. Declarationis.
and thus the book of the Laws and Statutes may be said to Judge, because
they declare who, and how men are to be judged. And indeed, it is the Law that
judges, not the Judge; he does but pronounce the Judgment of the Law. So said
they of old, We have a Law, Jus dicere, non jus dare.
and by our Law he ought to die. Does our Law condemn a man, before it hear
him speak? said another. And thus, the Word of God, the book of the Law, is
said to judge; The Word that I have spoken, shall judge you at the last day;
Joh. 12.48.
said our Savior.

3. Judicium Prolationis, by way of Pronunciation, 3. Prolationis.
or passing of the Sentence: and this is done by the Judge alone, as our
experience tells us. And in this sense, Christ, as man, shall judge alone; All
judgment is committed unto him; and he shall pronounce that dreadful
sentence, Go you cursed, etc. passing the final doom upon the world.

4. 4. Comparationis.
Judicium Comparationis; by way of Comparison, and thus not only the Saints,
but one wicked man, shall judge and condemn another. (...). Chrysostom. in locum.
So our Savior tells some; Tire and Sydon shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and condemn it. And thus the Saints, not only shall, but do even
now, judge the world. Their lives are (...), a living Law; their examples of
Holiness, in the same temptations with other men, shall rise up and condemn
the world, that followed not their patterns, in the same allowance of means.

5. 5. Approbationis
Assessionis, and Approbationis (for I join them both together) by way of
Assession, and Approbation; as the Justices upon the Bench, do sit together
with the Judge, and approve his Judgment. And thus, especially, all the Saints
shall judge the world; They shall sit upon Seats or Thrones, and approve, yea
applaud the Sentence. The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance,
etc.

2. 2. Of Judges.
Of Judges, we may also distinguish; whereof there are several kinds, in a
well settled state.

1. 1. The King.
The King is the supreme Judge of all, within his own Dominions, and God is
Judge of all the world, by way of Authority.

2. 2. The Lord Chancellor.
The Lord Chancellor is a general deputed Judge, by Delegation from the King;
the King himself judges no man: so Christ, made the Great Lord Chancellor,
or Lord Chief Justice of all the world, The Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment to the Son.

3. 3. The twelve Judges, so called.
The twelve Judges are for their private Courts, or particular Circuits: and
thus we may (perhaps) grant, the twelve Apostles, by special Privilege, shall
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

4. 4. The Justices
All the Justices at their Quarter Sessions are joynt-Commissioners; And thus
again the Saints, even all the Saints shall judge, in manner aforesaid.

I conclude this point, with that of S. Peter, with a little alteration: 2.
Pet. 3.11, 12
Seeing these things are thus, what manner of persons ought they to be, in all
manner of holy Conversation and Godliness, looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of the Day of the Lord, when the Saints shall judge the world: For the
Time is not yet, but shall shortly come, when the Saints shall judge; And
that is the second thing observed.

2. The Time, or Date of this Commission; It is not, 2. The Time: prorogued for
two reasons:
do judge, for that is expressly forbidden, Judge not, etc. but (...), shall
judge. It bears not date till the Great Day of Assizes, at the end of the
world. It was the speech of him, who is Lord of the Saints, yea King of Saints,
when he was in this world, I came not to judge the world, Joh. 12.47.
but to save it. It is enough for the Saints to be like their Lord and Master;
He came not to judge, but to be judged; but he ascended into heaven, etc. and
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, says our Creed.
God has appointed a Day, wherein he will judge the world, Act. 17.31.
by that Man, whom he has appointed. He shall come openly among the Just,
Veniet manifest inter justos, judicaturus etc.
to judge justly, who came secretly to be judged by the Unjust, unjustly. He
shall sit as Judge, who stood before a Judge: He shall condemn the truly
guilty, who was falsely accounted guilty; as elegantly S. Augustine. Even as
he was, so are his Saints in this world. They judge no man, their hour is not
yet come; They are judged of all men, sor this is the hour and day of the
worlds Judgment. As thieves and malefactors, in the Jail, do sometimes, in
mockery, represent the passages of an Assizes; and there cite, arraigne,
accuse, condemn their Judges: So deal wicked men with Gods Saints, in this
world. But the Day of Assizes will come, when the Judges shall in earnest
condemn those malefactors, who thus sported themselves with their own
destruction. The Saints shall judge, but not yet: And there are good reasons of
this Prorogation.

1. Their Ignorance, and want of experience. There are many difficult and
perplexed cases, 1. Their Ignorance.
which, what by reason of the subtlety of wicked men, and what by the secrecy
of the intentions of men's hearts, they are not able to determine, without
danger of Error: It was an intricate business propounded to young Solomon,
that of the two harlots, to find out the true mother of the child, when no
evidence could appear on either side: And therefore it is said, The Wisdom of
God was in him to do Justice. 1. King. 3.28.
I have read of a case sometime propounded to the Areopagites, Judges amongst
the Athenians, Au. Gell. Noct. Allic. l. 12. c. 7.
which, because they could not well assoile, they wisely commanded the parties
to come again an hundred year after, and they would do them Justice: By that
time, they thought, either they, the Judges, or the parties would be dead. To
this purpose, may that of the Apostle fitly be applied; 1. Cor. 4.5.
Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of
the hearts.

2. 2. Impotence of Affections.
Their Impotence, in regard of their Affections; too subject to passion and
compassion: Fear, love, hatred, foolish pity etc. are able to corrupt the
best Judgment. Our friends may persuade us, our enemies may provoke us; the
one to be too favorable, the other to be too harsh and cruel: I have read
another story fitting to this purpose: In China, Joh. Hughen. Hist. Ind.
a part of the Indies, no man may rule, or bear any office of Justice in the
Town, or place, where he was borne; lest his parents, or other friends, should
work him to give sentence of Judgment, contrary to the rules of equity. And,
I take it, it is the Custom of this our Nation, that no Judge rides Circuit
into that country where himself dwells, perhaps, for the very same reason.
However, this we know: This world is the home-towne of our Nativitie; we live
here among our friends, and among our enemies, who are many times, (too often,
God knows) the snares of Justice: therefore, our God thinks it fit to remove
us from our Native soil, before he employ us in that state-businesse of
Judgment. I conclude it, Let the censorious world spend it self in judging
and condemning of the Saints; it is but man's Day, ^. Cor. 4.3.
as the Apostle calls it, but man's judgment, that may, and must be repealed;
There will come the Day of the Lord, as the day of Judgment is called; 2. Pet.
3.10.
yea the Day of the Saints will come; and then the course of things shall be
clean altered. The World now judges the Saints, then the Saints shall judge
the World; and that is the next, and last part.

The Extent or latitude of the Commission, the World. As Kings Commissions
differ in their subject matter, 3. The Extent of the Commission. The World, of
so also in their Extent; some are for one Town or City; some for one or more
Counties, the largest is but for their Kingdom. It is said of Samuel, 1. Sam.
7.16. 2. Chron. 19.5.
That he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh,
and judged Israel in all those places. But afterward this was divided amongst
many Judges, as we may see in the time of Jehoshaphat: Yet, what if a man's
Commission reached over the whole Kingdom; what is that to the whole World,
but a molehill to a mountain? If further (which never yet was granted to one
man) over the whole World, for one generation, what is that to the innumerable
generations past and to come? which yet are all subject to the Judgment of the
Saints. Know you not that the Saints shall judge the world? The World has
diverse acceptions in Scriptures; Here it is taken for the worser part, the
wicked men of the world, the unjust, in the 1. verse, the Infidels in the 6.
verse, 1. Wicked men
as opposed to the Saints: not excluding, but rather including the wicked
Angels, that is, the Devils; 2. Wicked Angels, for three reasons.
for so the Apostle adds in the next verse, Know you not, that we shall judge
Angels? The argument rises by way of gradation, The Saints may well be allowed
to judge your lesser matters of this life; for in the life to come, they shall
judge the world of wicked men, nay more, they shall judge the wicked Angels.
Such honor have all Gods Saints. Not to stand long: why might not Christ
himself alone judge them, and no more ado? why shall the Saints judge both
men and Angels? For three reasons:

1. To the greater torment and vexation of wicked men, 1. Vexation of Enemies.
and Devils, when they shall see those very men, whom they scorned, oppressed,
persecuted, to be now advanced, not only to Glory, but to be their Judges.
Those Angels, who sometime disdained to be servants unto man, Dolet Diabolus,
quod ipsum and Angelos ejus, Christi s^r^us ille peccator, judicaturus est.
Tertull de poeuit. c. 7.
(as some think) that tempted, seduced, vexed man, shall now, to their further
torment, see them gloriously advanced to be their Judges. Those wicked men, who
said, as they to Lot, with much disdain; He came in as a stranger, and shall
he rule us? shall be moved, not more with grief, than torment of indignation,
to see them thus exalted over them; and that so much more, as they did more
esteem them base and inferior: To find themselves delivered over into the
hands of their enemies, to be judged, of whom they can expect no mercy, what
horror must it needs breed in them? As if, when some Noble man or judge, had
wronged some poor and mean man, the King should deliver him over into the
power of that man, to take his own revenge: As Abraham did Hagar, to Sarah;
and Josuah those heathen Kings to every common soldier, to set his feet upon
their necks: God shall tread Satan under your feet shortly; is promised to
the Saints. To this purpose is that of the Psalmist, speaking of the great
advancement of the righteous, The ungodly shall see this, Psalm. 112.10.
and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth (for indignation) and melt
away. So our Savior tells those auditors of his, There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Luc. 13.27, 28.
when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of heaven,
and your selves thrust out. Hell it self should not be perfect Hell, if the
wicked should not know, and see the Saints, whom they have abused, to be thus
glorious.

2. 2. Their own Security.
For their own greater Assurance and Security; They shall not only see a
just retribution upon their enemies, men and devils, but have their own voice,
and hand in the excecution of it. They shall not need to fear any more the
persecutions of wicked men, or the wearying solicitations of wicked Angels; All
their enemies shall be destroyed, and for their greater Security, When the
ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 91.8.
they shall see it with their eyes, and help to act it with their own hand.
There shall be a mutual view of each other, in heaven, and hell: When the
righteous are exalted, the ungodly shall see it: Dives as well sees Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, Luc. 16.
as Lazarus sees Dives in hell: and a gulf is set between, that they can never
come near one another, either to comfort, or hurt one another any more.

3. For their greater Joy: 3. Their greater Joy.
We use to take wonderful contentment and pleasure in the misery and
destruction of those, whom we esteem our enemies (though Prove. 24.17, 18.
sinfully sometimes, I confess, on earth) much more, if we may have liberty to
revenge ourselves upon them. Psalm. 58.10
The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
footesteps in the blood of the ungodly, says the Psalmist: and that without
any the least sin, in heaven; where God himself shall laugh and mock at the
just condemnation of wicked and ungodly men. Prove. 1.
I conclude all this first part with that speech of the sweet Singer of Israel,
which, I think, was spoken by way of prophecy, of this very Day of the Saints
Judgment. Let the Saints be joyful in Glory, Psa. 149.5.etc.
let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in their
mouths, and a two edged sword in their hands: To execute vengeance upon the
heathen, and punishments upon the people: To bind their Kings in chains, and
their Princes in fetters of Iron: To execute upon them the vengeance, as it is
written, Such honor have all his Saints. Do you not know, that the Saints
shall judge the world?

And now we are come to the second General part of the Text, the Certainty of
this Dignity of the Saints: 2. Part. The Certainty: with
Do you not know it? It fares with Gods Saints here, as with men's heirs in
their Minority: Though they be Lords of all, yet many years pass, before
they know their inheritance, or the Privileges and honors thereof. God has
provided more for his Saints than they do know, than they can know: But yet,
this they do know, or may know, or must know, that the Saints, even they
themselves shall judge the world.

The Rhetoric shows the Divinity; the Interrogation negative makes it
strongly affirmative: You may know it, you do know it, you must know it; for
it is most useful and necessary that all know it. The Application.
And so I will now make the Application of all that has been spoken in the
former) part by way of Explication; which, of purpose, I have reserved for the
Conclusion. It is therefore very profitable for all parts, that it should be
known. Some things concern the World, some the Saints, some both.

1. 1. To the world a double lesson
The World (we begin with them) Let all wicked men know it, if they know it not
already, that the Saints, whom they now scorn and wrong shall one day be their
Judges. Then

1. 1. Not to sin before them
Let them take heed how they sin before the Saints. They shall be their
Judges, and dare they make them their witnesses? That were a bold thief, that
durst cut a purse in the face and view of the Judge. A good consideration, if
men were not past wit, as well as grace, to restrain the impudent looseness
of profane men. If they fear not God, whom they see not, and therefore believe
not that he sees them; yet let them reverence men, who see them, and whom they
see. The presence of some grave Senator has this power, Si forte quom
c^sp^x^re gra^em, etc. Virg.
in a tumultuous multitude: when those outrageous Citizens saw the chief
Captain, they left beating of Paul. Sanctity should make Impuritie blush, if
it were not grown bloodlesse. Act. 21.32.
Herod feared John Baptist, because he was a Saint, a just man; what if he had
known he should one day be his Judge? When Paul was but reasoning of
Righteousness, Act. 24.
Temperance, and the Judgment to come, Felix trembled: yet little did he
think his Judge was so nigh. They are worse than Herod or Felix, who neither
fear nor tremble to sin before the Saints, who yet would be thought to know
and believe this Scripture, That the Saints shall judge the world.

2. 2. Not to wrong them.
Let them at least take heed, how they wrong and abuse the Saints. The Saints
shall be their Judges, and dare they make them also their Accusers? He reproved
even Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm. Were not that malefactor mad or desperate, that should
way-lay his Judge, and offer him injury, in words or deeds, as he was coming
to the Assizes, or going toward the Judgment seat? what hope had he of any
favor? Dives durst not speak a word to Lazarus (as we noted before) whom he had
but neglected, but entreats his Father Abraham for mercy. Hear it, all wicked
oppressors, slanderers, persecutors of Gods Saints; you had as good, nay
better, abuse one of his Majesty's Judges, as wrong any, the poorest, the
meanest of Gods Saints. You have abused a Judge, yea your own Judge: Take it
for good counsel, If you will not be good your selves, yet hurt not those that
are good: Hurt them not? yea make them your friends (as men do the Judges) by
your unrighteous Mammon, and all the ways you can, that they may speak a good
word for you upon the Bench, at that grand Assizes, when a friend in the Court
will be worth more than all the money in your purses. At least, I say, wrong
them not, for certainly they must be your Judges. Agree with thine adversary
quickly whilst thou art in the way with him lest thy adversary deliver thee to
the Judge, is wholesome Counsel: I say more, lest thy Adversary prove to be
thy Judge. For now you do know, that the Saints shall judge the world. And so
much for the World.

2. The Saints: Let them take notice of this certain truth, 2. To the Saints a
ground
this excellent privilege; That they shall judge the world. It serves

1. For a ground, 1. Of Patience
not only of Comfort against those hard pressures, and great dejection,
whereunto they are subjected in this world, but also of Patience, in the
Censures and judgments of the world: as they that know their turn and time of
Judgment is coming. See how confidently the Apostle contemnes the censures of
men; 1. Cor. 4.3. (...).
With me it is a small matter, that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment, man's Day, as the original has it. Let the same mind be in you,
that was in Christ Jesus, etc. Phil. 2.5.etc.
who humbled himself to the death, even the death of the Cross: not only to
be judged, but to die. Or as the Apostle S. Peter expresses it; Christ
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps, etc.
2. Pet. 2.21.
He suffered himself to be censured, reviled, mocked, crucified; but he shall
come to judge both quick and dead: Col. 3.4.
When Christ, which is our life shall appear, then shall you also appear with
him in glory, says our Apostle. Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his
Saints, to execute Judgment, says S. Jude: Be patient (and comfortable) Jam.
5.7.etc.
therefore brethren (they are S. James his words) Behold the Judge stands
before the door.

2. 2. Of abstinence from their company.
For a Caveat against the Company of the wicked world; The Saints shall be
their Judges, and do they now make their companions? Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather: How? by
abstaining from their company, which is a real reproof, and a previous
condemnation; Praejudicium aeterni judicii, as that Father in a like case, the
praejudgement, of that eternal Judgment. How often are they called upon for
this? What fellowship has light with darkness? Quod est commercium damnaturis
cum damnandis? Tertull.
God with Belial? etc. what Commerce or society have Judges that must
condemn, with malefactors, who are to be condemned, asks Tertullian. Know
your selves (O you who profess your selves Saints) know your worth and
dignity, with God: He purposes to make you his Judges of the world, and do
you make your selves equal to the world? Come out from among them, and touch
no unclean thing: Avoid their company, abandon their fellowship, as well as
their fashions: Be not partakers of their sins, by too entire communion with
them, lest you be partakers of their punishments. For (so adds Tertullian)
unless we now praejudge and praecondemne in them those things, for which we
shall then judge and condemn them, certainly they shall judge and condemn us.
Let the Saints consider it.

3. 3. Of Peacemaking, both
For a strong argument and motive to Peacemaking on all hands: And this is
indeed the principal scope of the Apostle; where it is worth the while to
consider, the admirable Wisdom of the Apostle, in making one argument infer
a double conclusion; One in regard of the parties at variance, the other in
regard of the Spectators that suffered them to go to Law: For mark the words.
In the first verse he gives a sharp increpation to the parties going to Law,
Dare any of you, (either plaintiff or defendant) having a matter against
another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Why not? might
some man say. Why, do you not know, the Saints shall judge the world? how much
more, lesser matters: But then, lest those that were beholders should applaud
themselves as innocent, mark how he changes the words, in the latter part of
the verse, If then the world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge
the smallest matters? which cannot, in any reasonable construction, be
referred to the parties at variance, (it being utterly unfit, that men should
be their own Judges) therefore he secretly taxes them that were the
bystanders, for not interrupting their proceedings, by a wise and timely
arbitrament; upon the same ground still, Do you not know that the Saints, even
you, shall judge the world? we will apply it severally, first to the parties,
then to the Spectators.

1. To the parties litigant, or contending, 1. To the parties at variance.
whether plaintiff or defendant, it matters not. The Apostle would have
neither of them go to law, at least before or under unbeleevers. Nay he would
have neither of them go to law at all (as S. Chrysostom observes not amiss)
if the matter might, by any fair means, be ended by the Saints. For he does
principally blame them, not so much for going to Law before Infidels, as for
not referring, their matters to a private decision; He does not oppose
Christian Tribunals, to the Tribunals of Infidels, but public lawing to
private determination. My reasons are; First, there were no Christian
Magistrates, in those times of the Church, but all Heathenish, and therefore he
could not refer them, to such as were not. Secondly, the word (...), or
(...), does not only signify a public Sentence, but oftentimes a private
censure, Vide Bezam in locum.
as many instances would confirm, if we could stand upon it. To the point
then: The parties at variance must not go to Law, till their brethren cannot
end it. They must first refer it to their fellow Saints. This the Apostle
urges upon them, by this argument, Do you not know, etc. as if he should say,
Are the Saints so highly honored by God, to be made Judges of the world, and
do you think them unworthy to compose your lesser differences? There is
therefore utterly a fault amongst you, that you thus disparage the
Commissioners of heaven, the Saints; and expose not your selves only, but your
profession also, and the Professors of the Gospel, to the scorn and derision
of the Infidels. For what will the heathen say? See how injurious, how
malicious, how contentious these Christians are! See how simple and ignorant
they are! Not a man amongst them that has so much judgment or wisdom, as to
determine the least difference that arises, but they must come to us for
Judgment. We cannot, in our land (blessed be God) make that difference of
Infidel and Christian: but yet we have a distinction parallel to that, of
Papists and Protestants; Atheists and truly Religious. And this were argument
sufficient to a good heart, not to bring his differences into the public eye
of the world, till he had tried all other means in vain. For what will
Papists say? as of our Church differences, they do say, These are your
Protestants; ut se invicem diligunt! See how they love, or rather hate and
prosecute one another! What will Atheists and profane persons say? These are
your Professors, these are those that would be called Saints, (as in the text)
see how they fight, and war, and devour one another! See how simple and
weak they are, that not a wise man amongst them, to judge between his
brethren! Why then, O why should Christians so disparage one another, to think
them unable or unworthy to judge their lesser matters, who are so far honored
by God, to be Judges of the world: and perhaps, when all is done, the business
falls into the hands of some, who are neither wise nor honest; who are of the
world, and must one day be judged by the Saints? Let not, O let not then either
Papists or Atheists, I say not, be Judges, but nor Spectators nor Witnesses of
these unkind and unchristian quarrels. Refer them, refer them to your
brethren, and smoother them in the first smoking. Do you not, both parties,
know that the Saints shall judge the world?

2. To the Spectators: 2. To the Spectators.
The Apostle would have them both wise and willing, to undertake, if not the
prevention, yet the speedy conclusion of such differences, between their
brethren. And the argument is as strong for them: Do you not know, etc. If
then the world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest
matters? Truly, my brethren, the disshonour is greater, than you are aware of.
If you be willing but unable, it is your shame: I speak it to your shame,
(says our Apostle) Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not
one, that is able to judge between his brother? but a brother goes to Law with
a brother? If you be able, but unwilling, it is your blame, even want of a
great deal of Piety to God, and Charity to your brethren. How can you think
your selves able or worthy (willing I know you will be) to judge the world,
that want either skill or will, to judge between your brethren? Be admonished
then (I speak it* I hope, in a good time, to prevent many public differences
hereafter, though I expect no Fee for my Counsel) be admonished, I say, every
man, to spend some time, some labor, some pains, to repair the first
breaches of your brethrens peace. Entreat them, beseech them, adjure them, for
their own sake, for peace sake, for Religions sake, for Gods sake, to yield to
a private determination. I conclude it: If peace be had, keep it; if it be
broken, every one, Plaintiff, Defendant, Spectators, labor to repair it.
Live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. That for the
Saints.

3. To both, Saints and world, as being mixed together; 3. To both the Saints
and world:
and we have two things to propound unto them:

1. Moderation of their censures, in judging one another; How often, how
earnestly, are we called upon, to this purpose? 1. Not to judge one another.
Judge not, that you be not judged, says our Lord and Master. Math. 7.1.
Judge nothing before the time, says S. Paul. What expostulations the same
Apostle makes for excess in this particular? Who art thou, that judge
another man's servant? Romans 14.4.10.
Why do thou judge thy brother? and why do thou set at naught thy brother?
why do thou vilify, or as Tertullian expresses the sense of that word,
(...), why do thou Nullify thy brother? Yet as if the day of Judgment were
come already, we are all Judges one of another. It is a world of wonder to see,
how the world is made one common Tribunal, where every man ascends the Throne,
or place of Judgment, and there arraignes, accuses, and condemns his brother.
At least we keep our turns. Now we judge others; then others get up and judge
us, as if we were all Judges, and all delinquents. Amongst our selves, we may
divide all into two Classes, Profane and Religious, but both agree, or rather,
disagree in Judgment. The loose and Profane persons judge all men, more
stricter, and preciser then themselves, mad, foolish, simple, superstitious, in
a word (the worst they can say) hypocrites. On the other side, those that are
strictly, and would be thought truly Religious, discharge as fast at them;
Papists, Atheists, profane, wicked; yea (which I tremble to think on)
Reprobates. Good Lord, whither will our indiscreet zeal, and impetuous
rashness carry us. O men and brethren forbear, forbear: who made you Judges
in this world? when thy Savior would not be a Judge in a case of Nisi prius,
to divide an Inheritance, but refused it, upon this very reason, Man, Luc.
12.14.
who made me a Judge or a divider betwixt you; how dare thou be so bold, as
to judge of life and death, and that eternal, of the soul? Suppose you shall
be Judges of the world, yet not in this World. Will you anticipate, and
antidate your Commission? Wicked men are mere usurpers; they are to be judged,
not to judge at all. The Saints, are too precipitate, to start up into the
Judgment seat, (as Absalom into his Fathers Throne before his death) before
the Time. I say to both, Judge not now, that you be not judged for your labor.
Jam. 4.11.
Speak not evil one of another, brethren; he that speaks evil of his
brother and judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law:
but if thou judge or condemn the Law, thou art not a doer of the Law, but a
Judge: they are S. James his words, and not mine: S. Paul shall close up this
point: Judge nothing before the time, till the Lord come; till the day of
Judgment.

2. A strong enforcement for Holiness, 2. To study Holiness.
that thus qualifies a man to make him a Judge of the world. The Apostle shall
speak what I intend, fully to my foregoing discourse, Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, (hear it Plaintiff, Defendant, and Spectators)
and Holiness, (hear it all men) without which no man shall see the Lord:
without which, no man shall ever be a Judge in heaven, what ever he be on
earth. Labor above all things for Holiness, they that want it, to procure it;
they that have it, to increase it; Do you not now know, that the Saints, that
is the Holy Ones, and they only, shall judge the world? O you Sons of men,
how long will you have such pleasure in vanity, and seek after lies? Know you
that the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly, the man that is
holy, to make a Judge of in heaven: How long, O you profane ones, you scoffers
and deriders of Holiness, will you despise and scorn that which must be your
Judge? Kings choose Judges chiefly for their knowledge and experience; God
chooses his by conscience and Holiness. If these two must be severed, God
says, Let me have the man that has more Conscience, and less Science; rather
than him, that has all Science and no Conscience: Come then, my brethren, come
to the Innes of Court, these Courts of Gods houses, and study Holiness, more
than knowledge, that you may be accounted worthy, to be made Judges of the
world. Knowledge without Holiness may make a man a Judge indeed, but not of
the world, but of Himself: Such a man, is (...) selfe-judged, selfe-condemned,
to save the Judges a labor. Holiness is the very Seal of our Commission; or
at least the Posie written round about it, Holiness to the Lord: (...). Chrysostom.
in 2. Tim. 2.19.
as the Prophet in a like case, Zech. 14.20. The Apostle tells us so: The
foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are
his: but that is the privy Seal. The broad Seal is that which follows, Let
every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord, depart from iniquity; that is,
Let him be Holy. If any man pretend a Commission for this Judicature, and it
want this Inscription, it is a counterfeit, and merely forged. This Holiness is
the thing which God esteems above all things in his Judges; and which, above
all things, as we said at first, makes God himself a competent Judge of the
world. And thus he requires and expects his Judges should be qualified withal,
above all his other Attributes: not that they should be like him, in Power,
Wisdom, etc. But in Holiness Be you Holy, 1. Cor. 1.26.etc.
as I am Holy: Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Nay, (if we may,
as we may, believe S. Paul) Not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty,
are called out to this preferment: But God has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise: and the weak things of the world, (...).
verse. 4. here.
to confound the things that are mighty: and base things of the world, and
things that are despised, has God chosen to make his Judges of. Covet you the
best thing then, and that is Holiness. Let others scoff at Holiness: Let
others be Ambitious for honor, for knowledge, for wealth, for pleasure: but,
if you will hear my Counsel and advice, be you covetous, ambitious, zealous
for Holiness. One grain of true Holiness shall advance you higher with God,
in heaven, than a whole world of greatness without it. When I have prayed for
you in the Apostles words, I shall have done, and be no further tedious: Now
the very God of peace, sanctify you throughout, 2. These. 5.23.
and I pray God, that your whole Spirits, Souls and bodies, may be kept
blameless, till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, till the Day of
Judgment, the great and grand Assizes, and then you shall see the difference
between the Righteous and the Wicked, Mal. 3.
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not; between the Holy
and profane; Then shall it be manifest to all the world, that the Saints, and
the Saints only, shall judge the world. Now to the King of Saints, the Holy,
Holy, Holy God, be ascribed of us, and of all his Saints, as is most due, all
Holiness and honor, all might and Majesty, all Power and Glory, from
henceforth and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
'EPIAIPEKAKIA. OR, A CLOSE HYPOCRITE DISCOVERED. As it was delivered in a
Sermon, by D.C.

1. COR. 13.6. Love rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices together with the
Truth.

LONDON, Printed by R.Y. for Ph. Nevill, at the sign of the Gun in Ivie-lane.
1641.

'EPIAIPEKAKIA. OR, A CLOSE HYPOCRITE DISCOVERED.
LUKE 18.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane.


IT matters not so much sometimes what, 1. The Coherence.
as with what mind men speak. When Judas said, concerning the ointment powered
upon our Saviors head, What means all this waste? John 12.5, 5.
This ointment might have been sold, and given to the poor; the words were
seemingly very charitable, but the mind was nothing less, in the judgment of
the Evangelist, who knew him better then we: This he spoke, not because he
cared for the poor, but because he was a thief. The very like to this, is
observable in this present speech of the Pharisee: For who, that looks at the
words muteriall, without respect to the mind and intention of him that spoke
it, would not take him, not only for a good and honest, but also for a very
pious and devout man; who is ^ so thankful, and 2. thankful for such a mercy,
as few men take notice of, or acknowldege any favor, viz. that he is not so
bad as other men? Many indeed (being more sensible of corporal, then
spiritual mercies) seem thankful that they are not so miserable, sick, poor,
and as other men; But few, beside this Pharisee (or those that are truly godly)
give thanks to God, they are not so bad or sinful as other men. But he that
knew the heart, better then we the words, has discovered that which we durst
not have censured, that this so glorious-seeming a sentence proceeded from a
deep and gross hypocrisy* For both the Evangelist, in his preface to the
Parable, has told us, that his alme and end was naught; partly to justify
himself and partly to vilify others, with proud scorning and despising of
them; He spoke this Parable to certain that trusted in themselves, that they
were righteous, and despised others: And also our blessed Savior, the Parable
maker, has informed us of the issue (no doubt answerable to his intention)
that God rejected this his pretended thankfulness; The poor Publicane went
away justified, and not the Pharisee.

The words then (you see) may ^wo^ ways be considered: 2. The Division.
either absolutely in themselves; and so they are very good: and beside other
good things in them, this is not the least, that he is thankful (or at least
thought he ought to be thankful) for this privative or negative mercy, that
he was not so bad as other men: Or else respectively, with regard to the man,
or the mind of him that spoke them, and so they are very bad; as bad almost as
can be, even an intimation of a kind of Diabolical rejoicing at others
badnesse; as if he would thank God, there was scarce an honest man in the
world but he; Quid est caeteri homines, nisi omnes praeter ipsum? Ego, inquit,
justus sum, caeteri peccatores. August. de Verb. Dom. sermon. 36.
taking a kind of complacence and contentment in their illness, for ends
hereafter to be specified. Saint Paul indeed has a speech something like this,
but with a great deal of difference in the intention of the speaker, when he
thus writes to his Romans, Romans 6.17.
God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from
the heart the form of doctrine to which ye were delivered: He does not give
God thanks, that they were, or had been the servants of sin; that were
impious for the Apostle to do, or us to think: but that having been the
servants of sin, they had now obeyed the form of doctrine delivered to them.
Had this Pharisee thanked God, that he was better then other men; or not so bad
as other men, with a simple and humble mind, he had been worthily to be
commended; but when as he does this with a proud and scornful mind: he seems
to be glad, and pleased, that others were so bad, and so much worse then
himself: And this we may observe, That we well cannot (or seldom do) give
thanks for that, wherein we do not somewhat joy and take delight. Little joy
makes cold thanks; but as thankfulness increases joy, so joy produces
thankfulness. Now that a man should spend his joy or thanks for others
badnesse is a wickedness incident to none but divellish dispositions; and
this, we think, was justly taxable in this Pharisee.

To handle the words in both these respects, 3. The Observation confirmed.
the time will not permit; we will therefore look upon them in the second
consideration, with respect to the mind of the speaker, as it is discovered to
us; and occasionally take in such points of the former, as do, or may pertain
to the application of the latter. The point of observation will be this, [That
Whatever shows of goodness an hypocrite may make, yet he is secretly glad,
and takes delight in others badnesse:] God, I thank thee, I am not as other
men are, etc. which is a kind of triumph or insultation over other men's
infirmities, and especially over the poor Publican, who was reputed one of the
chief sinners of those times, and most odious and infamous. Now had the
Pharisee only looked at his own credit (as no doubt in part he did look at
it) he would not have compared himself with men so notoriously bad: For what
honor or excellency is it, for a man not to be so naught as a Publican?
especially for a Pharisee, whose profession was most eminent in those times? It
had been better in such an intention, to have left out this clause, and to have
told of his own extraordinary perfections, as after he does, I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of all I do possess. But making such a comparison,
in such a manner, discovers a naughty disposition of a soul, that did please
it self with others badnesse, or being worse then himself: This corruption of
heart, is more grossly manifested by some, who do openly make themselves merry
with other men's infirmities: Pro. 10.23.
The fool ( Solomon's wicked fool) counts it a sport to commit wickedness;
not only himself, but to see others do so too; as to hear men swear, or
curse, or fret, etc. An hypocrite does the same, though more closely; he seems
to thank God, that he is not so bad as others, when indeed he is glad others
are not so good as he. The contrary whereof appears in those that are truly
good, As they desire others goodness, I would to God all the Lords people could
prophecy, etc. so they take delight in seeing and hearing others virtues, and
thank God that others are better then themselves; as we may hear hereafter:
But to manifest the truth of our Observation before propounded, we have
examples of other hypocrites, 1. By Scripture.
who were of the same disposition: First, in those counterfeit Visitants of
David, In mine adversity they rejoiced and gathered themselves together: Psalm.
35.15, 16.
So we read it; but the word in the original signifies, in claudicatione mea,
In my halting they rejoiced; which is (...) a. Heb. 12.13.
applied to the soul sometimes, as well as to the body: and so may signify as
well the evil of sin, as that of punishment. David being put upon hard
adventures, by Saul's persecution, sometimes was subject to haltings, that is,
to failings, and the discovery of many infirmities: These, when some heard or
saw, they gathered themselves together, and rejoiced at it, made themselves
merry with it, though they would seem to him to be very sorry; and coming to
visit him, would tear their clothes, and express much grief; as Tremellius
understands the words. But now, who were the men that did thus? The next Verse
tells you that, Hypocritical mockers at feasts, that is, men indeed that
dissembled much religion, but were but stark hypocrites, the good fellows of
those times, that had many joviall and merry meetings; and when they were
assembled together, they dealt with David, as the Philistines did in a like
case with Sampson (sent for him to make them sport) made him, and his
infirmities, his haltings, their Table-talke; mocking, and making jests upon
him: Hypocritical mockers at feasts. And this David having former experience
of, he fears and prays against in another place: I said, Hear me, Psalm.
38.16, 17.
lest my enemies rejoice over me; when my foot slippeth, they magnify
themselves against me: For I am ready to halting, that is, Ainswor. in locum.
to show my infirmities, in my trials and afflictions. And upon this ground
he enforces his supplication, for strength and grace; because his
hypocritical enemies would vaunt, insult, and triumph in his failings. The
Prophet Jeremy had experience of the like in his times; Jerem. 20.10.
They waited (says he) for my halting; peradventure he will be enticed, and
we shall prevail against him, etc. There were some that watched the Prophet,
to see if they could catch him in some untruth; and to this purpose, they laid
baits to entice him, and snares to entrap him, that so they might have occasion
to insult over him, that Jeremy himself was taken napping, as well as others:
And who were the men that did thus watch him? All my familiars (says he) the
men of my peace; hypocrites, that would come to enquire of him, what was the
word of the Lord; Report, say they, and we will report it: False Prophets would
come to him, pretending they waited upon him, and depended upon him, as a true
Prophet of God; but the truth was, they waited for his halting, that so they
might triumph over him, that he was as much overtaken as themselves: which
argues, That Hypocrites, however seemingly good, yet secretly they take delight
and contentment in others infirmities, or sinfulness; 2. By reason.
which being a naughty disposition, and a divellish, you may wonder it should
be incident to any reasonable living man: we will therefore see the grounds
hereof.

First, 1. Reason, comfort in company: for it is
a corrupt heart finds comfort in company: It is true of sin, as well as of
misery, Solamen miseris socios habuisse. It is not so with good hearts; they
care not how many companions they have in good, how few in evil, either of
sin or punishment: Let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my
fathers house: as for these sheep, what have they done? Contrarily, the Harlot
having her own child dead, would be contented to have her neighbors to be
dead too; this would be a kind of comfort and contentment to her. Just so it is
in sin with naughty hearts, they comfort themselves in others sinfulness; and
they have it from their father the Devil: So soon as he had sinned, and was
hurled down to hell; his next work was to entice man, and make him sinful,
so to make him also miserable: But what comfort can a man take in wicked
company?

1. 1. A foil to his seeming goodness.
It will make a foil for his seeming goodness; others badnesse, opposed
against his goodness, makes him seem better, as his goodness makes others to
seem worse: as black and white opposed, make each other appear more eminent
in their kind: A Sunburned face is white, compared with a Black-moore. The
Pharisee was a Saint to the Publicane: And this was the very intent of the
Pharisee, to bring in these examples of the grossest sinners, to make himself
seem more gloriously virtuous. Abraham's faith was sublimated and exalted, by
the infidelity of those times: The chastity of Lot was more orient, that, like
a precious pearl, it lay in the dunghill of filthy Sodom: As their sin was
aggravated, and, if I may so say, magnified, by the opposition of Lots
chastity. An hypocrite, such as this Pharisee was, Animal gloriae.
is a vainglorious creature, seeking by all means to magnify himself; and
therefore glad to fetch luster to his seeming virtues from others vices: Yea,
Genus virtutis est, Salvian.
esse minus vitiosius, says one; It is held a kind of virtue and honor in bad
times, to be less vicious: And with simple judgments, he passes for a just
man, that is no extortioner, or oppresour; he very chaste, that is no gross
adulterer: This the hypocrite knows; and therefore if he can produce examples
of affirmative or positive illness, supposes he shall find the honor, at least
of a privative or negative goodness.

2. If he cannot attain this, 2. A cover of his badnesse.
to get a color to varnish his seeming goodness, yet to find a cover for his
own badnesse will be a comfort: He is not now without an excuse, to extenuate
at least his own known badnesse: I am a sinner indeed, but not so bad as such
and such; not as other men are, extortioners, adulterers, etc. men of good
note, and better parts, have done worse then ever I did: I am no extortioner, I
thank God; I am no adulterer: and this is the common plea of ignorant people,
I thank God, I am neither whore nor thief, as such and such are; and so
please themselves, and comfort themselves, that they are not so bad as others
are: and this is the use they make of others badnesse.

3. This gives them hope of a good condition, 3. A ground of vain hope.
notwithstanding their wicked lives: they hope they may be saved as well, yea
before others, that are worse then they in some particulars, especially if they
be men that have had the reputation of godliness. David committed adultery and
murder, Noah was drunk, so was Lot, and incestuous; many professors now are
worse over-seen then they are, they thank God: yet these men were (at least
hoped to be) saved; they lived and died Gods children, and why may not they do
so with lesser sins? This is the common delusion of ignorant men; If they be
not saved that are no extortioners, no adulterers, etc. what will become of
those that are? they hope to escape as well as they.

4. 4. A cloak of shame.
This will serve to allay the discredit, and shame of their own wicked
courses; singularity in sin makes men more remarkable, and so more infamous:
community either makes it esteemed no fault, or no crime; Incipit esse licitum,
quod incipit esse publicum, That begins to be accounted lawful, which begins
to be public: And that ceases to be shameful, that most or many do. For this
cause a sinner desires to infect others, if he can, or at least is glad to
find them infected, to qualify his own shame.

5. 5. Fellowship in misery.
Lastly, if in none of these he can take any comfort, yet in this he will, that
he shall not be miserable alone: This we hear desperately out of the mouths
of wicked men, If they do go to hell, they shall not go alone; company good
store: Miserable comforters are they all; yet such comfort the corrupt hearts
of men (as the Devil himself also does) suck out of the falls and sins of
other men: And this is the first reason of their joy in evil.

2. Reason, Envy.
Another reason is, that secret envy, which is the attendant of hypocritical
pride: Do you think the Scripture says in vain, Jam. 4.5.
the spirit that is in us lusts after envy, says Saint James? There is in
every proud heart a portion of envy, the nature whereof is, as to grieve at
others good, so to rejoice at others bad; whether of sin, or misery: The
ungodly shall see it, Psalm. 112.10.
that is, the prosperity of the godly, and it shall grieve him. Now this is
certain, He that grieves at another good, will rejoice at his hurt or evil:
And this is as true in moral good or evil, He that envies, and consequently
grieves at another virtues or goodness (as every hypocrite does, he would
have none thought virtuous but himself) will certainly be glad, and much
please himself with others badnesse; because (as we said) this adds a luster
to his seeming virtues. A proud man cannot endure a competitour in goodness:
The Pharisees did all they could to engrosse the name and honor of knowledge
and religion to themselves; and therefore, when our blessed Savior was
deservedly raised and magnified by the people above them, his honor was the
object of their envy, and the matter of their torment and vexation: And when
they had procured him to be put to death, how did they rejoice and insult upon
him! The like may be seen of Joseph's brethren, Genesis 37.

A third and last reason is, 3. Reason, hatred of goodness.
from a secret hatred of goodness, however he may seem to love and favor it.
An hypocrite, what shows soever he make, yet loves not goodness; not in
himself, much less in others. The appearance indeed he loves, because it
brings him credit in the world; but he receives net the truth in the love of
it: 2 These. 2.
Yea, secretly he hates it, and hates to be reformed, as the Psalmist speaks;
and no marvel: for he hates God, though perhaps he does not perceive it. Now
this is a rule, As Love and Hatred are contrary affections, so they have
contrary objects: Love good, and hate evil; or love evil, and hate good.
Again, as they that love good in themselves or others, cannot but joy and
delight in beholding it; so they that hate good, cannot but rejoice in the
evil of others. A good man is pleased as well with others good, as his own:
An evil man no less with others illness, then his own. Love (says the
Apostle) rejoices not in iniquity, but (...), rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor.
13.6.
or with the truth: Love (says he) envieth not, it swells not, Ver. 4.
it vaunteth not it self (over others infirmities) it behaveth not it self
unseemly: but Hatred envies, swells, or is puffed up, vaunts it self, and
behaves it self unseemly; and thereupon rejoices in iniquity: These are the
grounds of the point.

And now we come to make some Application 4. The Application, and that
of this Doctrine to our selves; and we will (for better method and memory)
reduce all we have to say to two heads: 1. The discovery of many for
hypocrites, by the wrong uses they make of others infirmities, or sinfulness.
2. The directions to the right uses that we should make.

The first use hereof is, 1. For discovery of manifold hypocrisy, as
to use it as a light to discover a world of hypocrites, who by several ways
do manifest this naughty and cursed disposition, to rejoice or take delight in
others badnesse; and they are of many sorts: We will note some:

First, settle themselves upon their dregs, as Zephany speaks: Why (say
they) many of the best of Gods children have been subject to their faults and
infirmities; done as bad, or worse perhaps then we, and yet were saved: Noah,
David, Lot, and others in our own knowledge. But to discourage this
conclusion, we propound to such a threefold consideration.

1. The difference between them and their copy: For, 1. they sinned of
infirmity, these men of deliberation: They did not look at the examples of
others that fell before them, to fall after them, which these men do: They
purposed, resolved, swore they would keep Gods commandments; so did never
these: therefore theirs were sins of infirmity, these of presumption. 2. They
sinned, but they repented, and proportionably to their sin; David watered his
couch with his tears; Peter wept bitterly; did not, as these men do, comfort
themselves, and put off sorrow, with examples of others fallings. And, 3. they
sinned, but not after repentance; Noah drunk but once, etc. these never
repent; or if they seem to do so, it was but in hypocrisy, as the continuance
in their sin, by others examples, does demonstrate.

2. The issue and success of those sinners, whom they presume to follow: They
sinned, but they smarted soundly; none so sharply out of hell: David had not
only the sword threatened without, but had his bones broken within, Psalm. 51. If
they knew how dear they paid for their sins, they would be loath to buy the
pleasure at so dear a rate; content not therefore your selves with this poor
comfort of their examples.

3. This would also be considered by such men, that this is a most fearful
perverting of the Scripture, and the providence of God, in suffering others to
fall before our eyes, to their own destruction, as the Apostle says some men
do; and amongst all the uses that God intends therein, this is the worst and
most dangerous: For if we ask, Why did God suffer his children heretofore to
fall into foul and scandalous sins, and record them in the Scripture? One of
these three may be said: First, for admonition; These things were written for
our admonition, that we should not lust as they lusted, 1 Cor. 10.11.
nor murmr as they murmured; let him therefore that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall. Secondly, for comfort, that those that fall by infirmity, or
otherwise, might have a ground of hope to rise again; Who should ever rise, if
they had not fallen? How apt are men, through their own corruption, and the
Devils temptations, to despair? None of Gods children ever fell so low, so
foulely, would he say: Yes, Paul was a persecutour, etc. and received to mercy,
1 Timothy 1.16.
that God might in him show an example, as of humane frailty, so of Gods mercy:
Or thirdly, God in his providence suffers these falls, in former and present
times, to make stumbling blocks for some, whom he purposes to destroy, to keep
them from coming into the way of godliness; and so from the end, to which it
leads, eternal life: Its certain, many do stumble at this stone, and rock
of offense, the fallings and failings of Gods people; and are either set at a
stand in the profession of Religion, as the people stood still at Asahels
carcass; or else turn quite back again, as if that were not the way, which
such men walk in; who fall many times more hainously, more scandalously then
mere natural men: They will not in sad and serious manner profess, because
some profess Religion, and are not; Woe be to them, by whom the offense
comes: but woe also to the world, because of offenses; woe to the giver, and
woe to the taker of offense. The way to heaven is a narrow and a straight way,
and besides, slippery; he is more then a man, that falls not sometimes, having
so many stumbling blocks laid in his way by the flesh, the world, and the
Devil: but there is no other way but that. Now were not he a mad man, that would
refuse to walk a slippery way, suppose over ice, seeing there is no other way;
because he sees many slip before him? Yet he is worse, who seeing his neighbor
down, will not step over him, but purposely stumble, and fall with him; and
then plead his example, to excuse his own falling: Thus do many men comfort
themselves in the falls of others; and these are the first sort.

This is their Religion, These are your Professors, your Holy ones, thus they
do such they are all: Fie upon this Faction; as sometimes they said of David,
Fie upon thee, fie upon thee, we have seen it with our eyes: Or, as some said
of Saint Paul, the ringleader of the Nazarenes, as one called him: Away with
him, away with him, it is not fit that he should live: But to cool this heat a
little, consider,

1. What hard measure these men exact of their brethren, over they do of
themselves; they will not allow them common, and humane infirmities: Their
brethren must live like Angels, themselves like Devils; and yet be counted
honest men.

2. What inequality, if not iniquity is this in judgment? What partiality in
judging? They can allow men of their own confederacy, many gross, not
infirmities, but crimes: Some drunkards, some whore-masters, and what not? yet
they hear, honest men, good neighbors, only they have their infirmities: But
if a professor of more godliness slip, and catch a fall (as who lives, and
sins not) his infirmities are made crimes; and himself proclaimed an
hypocrite. Had these men lived in David's time, and seen his grievous falls, he
should have heard, Hypocrite, and Counterfeit; and this is your holy David,
etc. and so he did from some, no doubt: The drunkards made songs of him,
perhaps for those or the like infirmities.

3. But what uncharitableness is this, to condemn all for one? There was a
Cham in Noah's family, an Ismael in Abraham's, an Absalom in David's, a Judas in
Christ's; shall any be so rash to say, They were all such? A gross falsehood;
all are not such: There are many (blessed be the grace of God) that shine as
lights, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Many, whom the
Devil himself (except but common infirmities) cannot accuse justly of any
scandalous sin.

4. What hypocrisy is this, to lay the faults of professors upon Religion;
yea, that Religion which themselves profess, at least in show? For Papists to
censure thus of our Religion were somewhat tolerable; but for Protestants thus
to fly in the face of their own Religion, what heart can hear with patience?
They know, Religion allows or teaches no such thing: The grace of God, that
brings salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc. The
commandment is holy, and just, and good; though in the best profession some
have their infirmities, and some indeed be hypocrites: And the truth is, this
man that thus strikes at the head or heart of Religion, through the sides of
some weak professors, discovers his own hypocrisy: For if he did not hate
Religion (in the power of it) he could not thus insult and rejoice in the shame
of that, which yet he would seem to honor.

insult over them, to scorn and despise them, as here the Pharisee did; God, I
thank thee, I am not as other men, etc. Its strange to see how superciliously
some (perhaps more civilly honest men) do carry themselves toward those, who
are more scandalously sinful, whether presumptuously, or by infirmity. How do
they entertain high thoughts of themselves, and their own goodness, in
comparison of those? How highly they over-looke them? how big they speak? how
scornful? how reproachful? like this Pharisee here, This Publican, and those
others elsewhere; This people that knows not the Law, are cursed: Or those
their predecessors of old, Stand farther off, I am more holy then thou: I
thank God, I am not as other men are, etc. To let out this swelling
impostumated pride, I would propound these few considerations:

1. This is no great matter to boast of; an hypocrite, an heathen, a reprobate
may be no extortioner, not unjust, no adulterer: Many such have been among the
Gentiles, as civilly honest as they.

2. This is but a negative kind of goodness, that is not to be better, but
less ill then others; which is indeed a positive kind of illness, though in a
lower degree: but to be less ill, is not to be good; unless to be ill, be to
be good. And if he may be accounted good who is less ill, there are scarce any
bad upon earth; none almost so bad, but he may find worse, if not here, yet in
hell: Cain and Judas might prove to be good and honest men, for no doubt there
were some worse then they. Nay, I dare be bold to say, there are many better
then this negative man in hell; there are some, who not only were no adulterers
extortioners, etc. but chaste, and charitable, and have done many good works
in appearance: and therefore this is but a poor matter to boast of; not so bad
as others on earth, not so deep as others in hell.

3. This may come from restraining, not from sanctifying grace; and what is a
man the better for that? A Lion in a chain cannot range and devour, as he
would do: The Devil himself, that roaring Lion, is held in the chain of
Gods Almighty providence, that he cannot do the mischief which he would.
Their nature is never the better for that: Thou art no extortioner, no
adulterer; perhaps thou would, but durst not, but could not: Is this a
thing to boast of?

4. But grant all this, yet who may they thank for it? not themselves, not
their own better nature, or disposition; but God that has chained up their
corruption, and let loose others to their own hearts lusts. If others be so
and so, they are to be pitied, not scorned: If any man be not so, he ought to
be the more thankful, not proud and scornful; Who made him to differ? What
has he, that he has not received? Why then does he boast, as if he had not
received it?

5. Yet see the hypocrisy of men discovered: I thank God, says one, I am not
an extortioner, not an adulterer, etc. What great matter is this? All men are
not extortioners, or adulterers: Some have another lust predominant their vein
lies another way: One man hates adultery, but loves drunkenness: Another hates
prodigality, but loves covetousness: Say then, thou proud Pharisee, I am no
slanderer, or detracter from other men's credit; I am not proud: but that thou
can not say: Thou art not like the Publican indeed, for he, though a sinner,
was humble; thou art a sinner, and proud. Several men have several ways to
spend and vent their lust; all are damnable: Boast not then, I am no adulterer,
when thou art a blasphemer, or covetous, or proud, etc. that is palpable
hypocrisy.

itching eyes, desirous to see or know: Some have itching ears, tickled and
contented to hear the worst reports, especially of professors; and itching
tongues, that please themselves in raking in the infirmities of other men:
Tell-tales, that like Pedlars go up and down from house to house, and open
their packs at every door: Did you not hear what such a one has done? I am
sorry to speak it, I pray tell nobody; when secretly he is glad, and desirous
all should know it. Such a fellow was that cursed Cham, who could not satisfy
his wickedness to see, but must needs run and tell his brethren of his fathers
nakedness; whereas his brothers took no delight to see it; therefore they went
backward, and threw their garments over it, to show how displeasingly they
heard so vile a report of their father. 2 Samuel 21.8.
Such an hypocrite was Doeg, who (forsooth) was detentus coram Jehova, detained
before the Lord at Nob, whether with conscience of the Sabbath, or some vow, it
matters not; yet in the next Chapter, turns Informer against David: I saw the
son of Issai coming to Nob, and^. This he did, either to flatter, and humor,
and curry favor with Saul; or to vent his secret spleen and malice against
David, whose virtues were more eminent, and whose fame eclipsed his. But David
brands him for a stark hypocrite for his labor, and for a lying fellow,
though he spoke but the truth: Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, Psalm.
52.1.etc.
O thou mighty man? Thy tongue devises mischiefs, like a sharp rasour,
working deceitfully: Thou love evil more then good (for all thy fair
pretenses of devotion) and lying rather then to speak righteousness: Thou
love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. Why (might some man say)
Doeg told nothing but the truth; why then is he thus complained on? Why?
because he spoke the truth with an ill mind, in an ill manner, boasting and
insulting over David's infirmity, as if he were glad of this advantage, to
ingratiate himself with Saul, and to do David a mischief: Such Doegs there are
too many now, Hypocritical mockers at feasts (as David calls them)
trencher-flies, who fall upon the sores of those that profess godliness; to
please some, to whom they know such news will be welcome: men notwithstanding
that seem sometimes very pious and devout, holy with the holy: this secret
delight, to hear or tell others infirmities, discovers them for hypocrites;
and these are the fourth sort.

envy at others goodness, or credit thence arising: Some preach Christ out of
envy, said the Apostle; and how glad were they to spy out the failings of
those that preached in sincerity? Now this is certain, He that is envious at
others goodness, will rejoice, or be much pleased with his badnesse. Paul was
of another disposition; Notwithstanding, whether in pretense, or in truth,
Phil. 1.18.
Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice. Good men
desire all men were as good, yea better then themselves; this they pray for: I
would to God (says Moses) that all the Lords people could prophecy. I would
to God (says Paul to Agrippa) not only thou, but even all that hear me this
day, were altogether such as I am. To conclude, see you a man proud,
vainglorious, and consequently envious? certainly, that man cannot but take
delight in seeing and hearing others badnesse: Envy feeds it self upon others
evils; it is as pleasant to him, as his meat and drink. But to allay this
cursed disposition in them all, I propound but these three things to their
consideration:

1. This argues, that they are destitute of all true Christian charity, and
love of their brethren; Love envieth not; love rejoices not iniquity, its own
or others: That man that should see his very enemy fall, and break a leg or
an arm, etc. and rejoice at it, were a beast, and no man. But he that shall
see his brother fall into sin, and break not a leg or arm, but the neck of
his soul, if I may so say, and make himself and others sport with it, has
put off man, and put on Devil. The Devil indeed rejoices at the falls of men:
As there is joy in heaven for one sinner that repents; so, no doubt, there is
joy in hell for one penitent that relapseth. I may allude to Saint James: Jam.
3.14, 15.
If you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts (which will certainly
cause rejoicing at others evil) glory not, and lie not against the truth. This
wisdom (or folly rather) descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
divellish.

2. As they have no love of their brethren, so nor any love of God (what ever
they may pretend) that can rejoice in his dishonor. Nothing more dishonours
God, then the scandalous lives of professors; and can thou rejoice in that
which grieves and dishonours him? Can any good child sport himself in his
fathers disgrace? I will say to thee, as Paul to Elymas the Sorcerer, Thou
child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness; what ever pretense or
profession thou make.

3. This is enough to discover such for hypocrites; what show of love to
Religion soever they make, they do indeed hate it: Psalm. 50.
God himself challenges such, To the ungodly (says God) what have thou to do
to preach my Law, and to take my Covenant in thy mouth; whereas thou hate to
be reformed? Wherein (might he say) do I hate to be reformed? Mark what
follows; Thou satest (in the seat of scorners) and spakest against thy
brother, and have slandered thine own mothers son: Thou take delight to be
speaking of thy brother, things either true or false, it matters not; and this
concludes thee for an hypocrite. No sound member of the body can delight it
self in the disease or dishonor of a fellow-member: If one member suffer, 1
Cor. 12.26.
all the members suffer with it: if one member be honored, all the members
rejoice with it. Let these things be considered; and so we proceed to the
second use.

And that is for direction, 2. Directions, what use to make of others ^alls.
how to stand affected at others badnesse, and what uses we ought to make, if
(at least) we will approve our hearts either to God or men, or our selves to be
sincere. To insult and be glad at others badnesse, that they are worse then we,
is a sign of a naughty and hypocritical heart: What then is to be done in
such a case? We cannot but see daily the out-flyings of other men's corruptions,
into many foul and scandalous sins; and what use worldly men and hypocrites
make thereof, to triumph in their falls, we have heard already; which being
considered, let us see what use we ought to make: We will reduce all to these
four heads; 1. To humble us, 2. to make us thankful, 3. to make us, pitiful
and mournful, 4. to make us watchful.

1. The first use we should make, is to humble us, 1. Humility.
consideration of our common frailty. It was a Heathen man's advice, When thou
beholdest other men's infirmities, reflect upon thine own heart, and ask thy
self, Numnam ego talis? Did I never commit the same, or the like as bad? Yea,
the Apostle inferres all meekness to be used to all men, upon this very
ground: Tit. 3.3
For we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts,
etc. Or, if not so, yet ask once more, May I not be so? May I not fall as
foul as he? Have I not the same nature? the same corruption? even this
consideration the Apostle also urges; Galat. 6.1.
If any man be overtaken a slip or infirmity, you that are spiritual, restore
him with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be
tempted. That sin (as well as misery) may befall every man, that does befall
any man: Yea, we should be so far from insulting and rejoicing at it, that
we should tremble at their fall, and at the justice of God in suffering it. To
be given over to a man's own hearts lusts, is one of the most fearful
judgments that can befall a man: Psalm. 81.12.
So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and let them follow their own
imaginations; as if he knew not how to punish them worse. To punish a man with
sinning, is the worst part of punishment. Now all Gods judgments ought to be
trembled at, much more the greatest. If we see a man suddenly struck dead by
the pestilence, or other disease, Acts 5.11.
we are amazed, and tremble at it; how much more ought we to do so, when we
see a man struck down with sin? And that the rather, when we consider, that
it might have been our case, having the same nature, the same desert in both?
we have as great sins to provoke God, to let our corruptions loose, to shame
both our selves and our profession: Romans 11.22.
Behold the goodness and severity of God, as the Apostle in a like case:
Goodness to thee, severity to them that fall; mercy to thee, justice to them:
and when thou beholdest, be humble and tremble. Tremble, I say, at his severity
to them, and his goodness to thee, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise (mark what follows) even thou also shall be cut off: shall be let
loose, and fall as foul as they. Thou will say then (to allude to the Apostle)
They are fallen, but I stand upright: Ver. 19
Well, they are fallen by unbelief, unthankfulness, or some other sin, by
the justice, and just judgment of God; and thou stand by faith (if so be
thou have faith) be not high-minded, but fear. If God spared not them, take
heed lest he spare not thee. And that is the first use to be made of others
falls.

A second is for thankfulness, 2. Thankfulness.
that we are not so bad. The Pharisee supposed right, had he but proceeded
right; had the manner been suitable to the matter, no man could have spoken
better. It is worth abundance of thanks, that we are not as other men are,
etc. as has been largely proved in the former point: we will but borrow the
remembrance of the chief heads, to quicken the exhortations, and then proceed
to another. There is great reason we should say (with a more humble heart then
the Pharisee) God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, not an
extortioner, etc. I know not whether is the greater mercy, Omnia peccata sic
habenda tanquam dimittantur, a quibus Deus custodit ne committantur. August.
to forgive a sin, when it is committed: or to prevent a sin from being
committed: I will not dispute the case; but propound the reasons of our
thankfulness.

1. If we consider the spawne and seed of corruption, which lies bedded in our
hearts, waiting but opportunity to break out into the same enormities; there
is not the vilest sin that ever was committed, but we might and should
commit, did not God in much mercy restrain us. We admire and wonder at others
badnesse; we need not, if we consider the root from whence it proceeds: but
rather wonder we are not as bad, and admire Gods goodness we are not. It is,
we said even now, one of the greatest judgments of God, to let corruption
loose upon a man, and to deliver him into the power thereof. It is consequently
one of the greatest mercies, to have it chained up from breaking out: and
therefore say humbly, God, I thank thee, etc.

2. In regard of the issues and consequents of sin committed, which are
manifold and grievous miseries, which our eyes have seen overtake men for their
sins which they have committed: A wounded spirit, broken bones, as David
calls them; sorrow, sickness, poverty, ignominy, shame to themselves,
friends, profession, and religion it self; death temporal, yea, and perhaps
eternal: from all which we are freed, by being kept from their sins.
Consider but what they would give to be innocent again, if possible; and
think what a mercy it is, to be kept from their sin, and their misery: and
then go and bless God, and say, God, I thank thee, etc. we cannot but stand
amazed, that many, and they in our opinion and their own, godly, learned,
wise, etc. have fallen into so many great and foul sins, to their own
shame, sorrow, misery, and the scandal of religion, etc. Why are not we fallen
into the same pit? Are we better then they? Nothing at all: It is the grace of
God that makes this difference between us: Blessed be God, and his grace for
his mercy. Oh then, do not insult over men wounded, and fallen at our feet,
do not rejoice at them, but, with all humble thankfulness, adore and bless
that grace that has preserved us from falling.

But it is not enough not to rejoice or triumph at the falls of others; 3.
Compassion or mourning.
it is also a duty required to mourn with them, and for them: This I am sure,
was the practice of holy men heretofore; Psalm. 119.
so did David, I was grieved to see the transgressors: Mine eyes gusht out
with rivers of tears, because men keep not thy Law. So did Saint Paul, in a
case of a scandalous sin, 2 Cor. 2.4.
by the incestuous person: Out of much affliction and anguish of heart, I wrote
unto you with many tears: Phil. 3.
Some walk (says he) of whom I have told you before, and now tell you
weeping, etc. And there is very good reason for it: for

1. Otherwise thou art like to fall into the same, or another sin as bad, and
as scandalous. Into the same, first: For nothing better to preserve a man from
the infection of other men's sins, then to be grieved and mourn for them:
This kept just Lot from the hurt of Sodoms sins, living amongst them, 2 Pet. 2.
that he vexed his righteous soul, in beholding their unclean conversation.
Upon this ground the Apostle told his Corinthians, that a little leaven would
leaven the whole lump; even infect them, that had not sorrowed for the sin
committed by the incestuous person: Or if thou escapest the same, it is just
with God, to let thee fall into another sin as bad and infamous; because thou
do not compassionate and mourn for others sins, much more, if thou in the
least manner rejoycest at his fall: The unmercifulness and scorn of men is
sometimes thus requited. What Solomon says of an enemy, Pro. 24.17.
may very well be applied to this purpose: Rejoice not at thine enemy when he
falls (into misery, or sin) neither let thine heart be glad, when he
stumbleth; lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn his hand
from him, upon thee; and suffer thee to fall into the like, or as bad a sin,
to find as little mercy and compassion, or as much scorn and contempt, as thou
have showed to thy brother. I doubt not, but this has overtaken many of Gods
children; they have been let go, to fall: because they have not pitied and
mourned with others that have fallen by them. God cannot endure that men,
subject to the like infirmities, should be proud and insult, or be merciless
and pitiless toward others; and therefore oftentimes pays them in their
own coin.

2. But if not so, yet thou shall be guilty of others sins, for which thou have
not mourned; much more, if rejoiced at it. The Apostle charges his Corinthians
for a double fault in this kind: one, 1 Cor. 5.2.
that they did not mourn for that scandalous sin; another, that they were
puffed up, swelled against him, insulted over him: and this made them double
guilty of his sin. Contrarily, when they had mourned for that sin, he gives
them their acquittance; Behold this very thing, that ye have been godly sorry,
2 Cor. 7.11.
what Apology it has wrought for you: ye have showed your selves free in this
matter. It may seem a paradox, but is a truth; A man is guilty of all those
sins of the times he does not mourn for: but if he shall add, to rejoice at
them, or take pleasure in them that do them, as the Pharisee did, he shall be
double, yea treble guilty of them.

3. And if guilty of the sin, liable to the punishment: Be not partakers of
her sin, lest ye be partakers of her judgments, is a caution prescribed
specially in the case of Babylon; but may extend to any nation, or particular
persons sin. This was once proved on the contrary, in a common destruction,
the mourners only were preserved: Ezekiel. 9.4.
Go (says he) and set a mark upon the foreheads of all those that mourn
for all the abominations committed in the city; and then smite the rest, and
spare none: Let this be considered.

The last use that we are to make upon the view and consideration of others
falls and infirmities, 4. Watchfulness, considering
is to be more watchful over our own hearts and ways. The Apostle makes the
conclusion for us: 1 Cor. 10 12.
Let him therefore that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: Not only
their punishments, but their sins are written for our example, that we sin
not as they did. They are written for our admonition; they murmured, they
committed Idolatry, they fell into fornication, they tempted; we are made of
the same metal, subject to the same infirmities: Let no man therefore insult
over their falls, upon conceit of his own strength; but let him that thinks
he stands, take heed lest he fall. The like may be said concerning those, who
fall into scandalous sins in our own knowledge: Consider thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. This exhortation is very seasonable, To walk circumspectly,
to walk exactly, especially to those, who make a more then ordinary profession
of Religion, considering

1. 1. Our own frailty.
Our own frailty, even the strongest of us; we are made of the same matter,
have the seed of the same sins in us: But when we see men far better then
our selves so foulely overtaken, how should we choose but tremble, and watch and
pray against our own weaknesses? Neh. 13.26.
That place of Nehemiah is pertinent, Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by
these things? yet among many Nations was there no King like unto him, who was
beloved of God: nevertheless him did outlandish women cause to sin. Whence
the Argument is strongly enforced: Did Solomon? Did David? Did Peter so
stumble, and fall so foulely and hainously? men of admirable wisdom, strength,
and piety? who then may not fear to fall? If the Cedars of Lebanon were so
shaken, so broken, how had the lesser under-wood need to look to their
standing? If men of years and strength slip and fall, how had children need to
look to themselves?

2. 2. The issues of such falls: for
Considering the issues ordinarily of the falls of those that profess
godliness, the sinful example of a wicked man does much hurt, but nothing to
that of a Professor: For,

1. 1. It hardens some wicked.
This more hardens some that are wicked in their courses; Why the best men have
their infirmities: nay, do sometimes as bad as we; Noah was drunken, David
adulterous, etc. and yet good men, and saved.

2. 2. It grieves the godly.
This more grieves those that are good: Nothing wounds their souls more, then
to see their fellow-brethren fall so foulely; Paul was grieved much for his
countrymen the Jews that were not, nor would be converted; but more, I
believe, for that sin and scandal of the incestuous person, who was a
Christian.

3. This more disgraces Religion, 3. It disgraces Religion.
and consequently keeps men off from being religious: The very rumor and
slander of the Primitive Christians, that they were incestuous, and adulterous,
was a strong engine of the Devil to keep many from being converted, especially
the civiller sort of the Heathens: They could not love that Religion that
allowed (as they were told and believed) such monstrous iniquities. And at this
day, what keeps the Turks and Jews from being Christians, but the wicked
lives of many professing Christianity? Amongst us Christians, what withholds
many Papists from converting, but the dissolute lives of many Protestants?
Amongst us Protestants, what keeps many, otherwise civilly honest, from being
altogether Christians, that is, truly godly, but the scandalous lives of some
Professors? That Indian, labored by the Jesuits to become a Christian, having
asked, what became of the Spaniards when they dye, and of his own
forefathers; and being answered, that the latter went to Hell, the former to
Heaven: replied, that he would rather go to Hell with his forefathers, then
to Heaven with the Spaniards; and all, because he saw those barbarous cruelties
committed upon his countrymen by the Spaniards: It cannot be (says our
Savior) but offenses will come; but woe to the man by whom they come: Woe to
the world, because of offenses; woe to the takers; woe, yea twice woe to the
givers: It were better that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and
they cast into the Sea, then that they should lay such stumbling-blockes in the
way of others: O therefore be watchful, be circumspect, walk wisely toward
them that are without; Give no offense to the Jew nor Gentile, nor to the
Church of God.

4. Lastly, this more dishonours not only Religion, 4. It dishonours God most.
but God himself; when the Doctrine suffers, the Name of God suffers with it:
It opens the mouths of wicked men, even against God himself. You may judge of
Christ, by the lives of them that are called Christians, said Salvian of old.
If Christ their Master were good, and his Doctrine good, these Christians could
not be so bad: Therefore the Apostle seriously advises people to be exactly
religious, Tit. 2.5.
lest the Word of God be blasphemed, as a teacher or allower of such things as
are dishonest. And again, 1 Timothy 6.1.
that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not blasphemed: And to whom speaks
he this? First, to wives, and they of the ordinary sort too: He would have
them be lovers of their husbands, lovers of their children, sober, chaste,
keepers at home, obedient to their own husbands, that the Word of God be not
blasphemed, Tit. 2.5. Then to servants, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as are
under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the Name
and Doctrine of God be not blasphemed. Alas (might some say) what credit or
discredit can a poor woman, or a poor servant do to Religion? Yes, much
either way: Therefore the Apostle Peter speaks of wives, that he would have
them virtuous and pious, that their husbands which believe not, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.
might be won by the conversation of the wives. And the Apostle Paul speaks
of servants, Tit. 2.9.
that they should be obedient to their own masters in all things, careful to
please, not answering again, not purloyners; but showing all good
faithfulness: To what end and purpose? that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. The poorest and meanest Professor that is, may
do much good or much hurt to Religion; and therefore my exhortation and
adjuration to you all, that profess Religion more then ordinarily, be you high
or low, rich or poor, masters or servants, is, that you walk circumspectly,
exactly, watchfully over your hearts and ways; and that the rather, because
there be many observers, Psalm. 27.11.
as David calls his enemies, that watch for your halting, and will rejoice to
see even the meanest Professor slip or fall; and be ready to insult over not
only you, but your Religion, your fellow-brethren, yea in a manner, your God:
I would have you therefore to abstain, not only from gross evils, 1
Thessal. 5.
but even from the very appearance of evil: Not only to be just, and
faithful, and sober, and chaste, and true in all your words, promises,
dealings, but to carry your selves so fairly, so openly, so clearly honest,
and godly, that those that watch for occasions, may not have so much as the
least ground to fasten a suspicion on; but may be ashamed, and (if God please)
be converted, or convinced, when they shall behold your blameless
conversation: Do but thus walk, and you shall honor God, honor your
fellow-brethren, (be you never so mean) honor Religion; and Religion and God
himself shall honor you here, and in the end crown you with glory and
immortality. Amen.

FINIS.
VINDICIAE SPEI: SHOWING THE LAWFULNESS of doing Good out of Hope of Reward.

Against the New Family of Love the Antinomians.

As it was delivered in a Sermon, by D. C. Rector of Great Billing in
Northamptonshire.

HEBR. 6.19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast,
and entering into that which is within the veil.

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for Phil. Nevill, at the sign of the Gun in
Ivie-lane. 1641.

VINDICIAE SPEI. SHOWING The Lawfulness of doing Good out of Hope of Reward.
2. John 8. That we may receive a full Reward.


THe Apostle having propounded an Admonition, to Circumspection, Coherence.
in the former part of this verse, (Look to your selves) enforces it by a
double argument, taken from a double danger, of a double loss; Loss of
labor, (that we lose not the things which we have wrought,) and loss of
reward; (but that we may receive a full reward.) These words then, are the
second ground of enforcement, taken from the fear or danger of a second loss;
And there are in it considerable, these three particulars:

1. Division.
The thing expected, A reward.

2. The degree of that reward, A full reward.

3. The expectation of that full reward; that we may receive it; Look to your
selves, that we may receive it.

Of the two former we have already spoken; Explication.
we are now to dispatch the last: And the words carry this meaning with them;
As if the Apostle should have said, We (or you, for the copies differ) do
expect to receive a reward, yea a full reward of our labor (and you of yours;)
if you do not circumspectly look to your selves, we, or you, or both, shall
come short of our hope; and lose, if not all, yet at least, some part of our
reward; our reward shall not be so full as we expect; therefore I admonish and
exhort you to look to your selves, lest we and you, losing the things which
we (or you) have wrought, lose also our reward: Look to your selves that our
expectation may not be frustrate; but that we may indeed receive, what we do
so earnestly expect.

The Conclusion hence resulting will be this: Observation. It is lawful to do
Good in Hope of Reward: proved by
That it is lawful (if not necessary) for the best men, for their better
encouragement in the service of God, to have an eye upon the promised reward:
Or thus, Hope of reward is not altogether unlawful, in doing of our duty to
God. This point, were it not for the ignorant clamors and presumptuous
importunity of some, need not any great confirmation, the thing is so
apparent, both in Scripture and reason: But that we may give satisfaction to
them that doubt, or conviction to them that deny this truth; we will bestow
some pains in making it good: and that

1. 1. The Promises.
By those gracious Promises of God made unto us in the Scripture; which, what
else can they import, but a liberty and lawfulness at least, to make use of
them, to the best advancement of our performances? We instance in some: That to
Abraham, is of this kind, to this purpose, Fear not, Abraham; Why? I am thy
Shield, and thy exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1.
Genesis 15.1. And that is another, I am God almighty, Genesis 17.1.
walk before me, and be upright, Genesis 17.1. As if he should say, Go on,
Abraham, in thy obedience to my commands, fear nothing; and for thy
encouragement take this my gracious promise, (which forget not to remember and
make use of) I will be thy Shield to defend thee; and thy exceeding great
reward, to recompense thee for all thy losses thou undergoest for my sake.
Look often upon this promise, and be encouraged to go on cheerfully. That is
a most pregnant place, Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.1, etc.
where Moses lays down a Catalogue of Blessings promised to obedience; If
thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. Blessed
shall thou be in the city, and blessed in the field, etc. To what purpose all
this, if those people might not, in performance of their obedience, cast an eye
upon them? Moses might have saved that labor both of repeating, and writing,
and have barely propounded the will of God, and so have left them to choose
whether they would obey, or no: As Kings proclaim their pleasure, without any
promise of reward, (or particular penalty) at the subjects peril be it, if he
refuse to yield obedience. But lest any should say, This was indeed a course
fit for the Paedagogie of the Law; Children must be drawn with sweet
allurements, as they with a land flowing with milk and honey; but the Gospel
gives more grace, and therefore, now, Love must supply the place, both of Hope
and Fear. Take we some in the New Testament: Our blessed Savior himself, the
only Lawgiver, not only implicitly, in propounding blessedness to those
particular virtues; but explicitly and plainly, Matthew. 5.12. Matthew. 5.12.
He provokes them to rejoice and be exceeding glad, in persecution, upon this
very argument of our text; Luc. 6.35.
For great is your reward in heaven* So Luc. 6.35. Love your enemies, etc. and
your reward shall be great, etc. Thus S. Paul 2. Cor. 7.1. Seeing therefore we
have these promises, 2. Cor. 7.1.
(to be the sons and daughters of God, cap. 6. last) Let us, (upon the sight
of these Promises, and certain expectation of their performance) cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, etc. And S. Peter treads
in the same steps: Wherefore, 2. Pet. 3.14.
beloved, seeing ye look for such things (a new heaven, and a new earth,
according to his promise) be diligent, that ye may be found, without spot and
blameless. I could be infinite in such parallel places; which (I say again)
are all needless arguments, if so be we may not make use of them, by exerci
sing of our Hope, to excite our diligence in those enjoined duties.

2. 2. The Command.
By the Commands of Scriptures, founded upon those promises, to exercise our
Hope; How often, do we hear it in the old Testament; Psalm. 42 5. 130.7.
Hope in the Lord; Hope in his mercies etc. Now what is hope, but the
expectation of those things which God has promised? Can a man expect them, and
not hope for them? Can a man hope for them, and not look at them? Can he look
at them, hope for them, or expect them, and not be provoked to those duties to
which they are promised? we have one pertinent place for all, and that in the
new Testament; 1 Pet. 1.13.
it is S. Peter's: Gird up the loins of your mind (your fainting hearts) be
sober, (...), and hope to the end for the grace (i. the glory) that is to be
brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Hope to the end, or
perfectly for that grace; and let that hope be the Girdle, to gird up the
loins of your mind, etc. We must hope; therefore we may hope for a reward,
etc.

3. 3. The instances of
By the many Instances, even of men regenerate, that did look at the reward
promised: It is a general description of good and holy men in Scriptures; by
their Hope, and expectation of the Promises: Luc. 2.25.
Old Simeon waited for the Consolation of Israel. Joseph of Arimathea looked
for the Kingdom of God. Mat. 15.43. Heb. 11.10. Phil. 3.20 Titus 2.13. 2 Pet.
3.14. Romans 8.19
Abraham looked for a City. We look for the Savior, who shall change our
vile body: Looking for the blessed hope, etc. Seeing ye look for such things,
etc. Nay more; their hope is called, the earnest expectation of the creature,
(...), which signifies such an intense expectation, as men express, when they
look for some longed for friend, and stand fixing their eyes, and thrusting
them almost out of the holes of their heads; as if they would send their eyes
to meet them, whom they think too long in coming: Yea, if more may be, the
Apostle has another word, more emphaticall, Heb. 11.13.
(...) They saw the Promises afar off (by their faith) and embraced them,
saluted them (so is the word) by their hope: They looked so earnestly for them,
as if they had sent their hearts before to salute them, which, yet they might
not perfectly enjoy; In particular:

1. Moses, a man of God without exception, and regenerate, 1. Mose^.
(lest any might object: We deny not the use of these to men unregenerate, to
draw them on, till Love may come in place) This Moses, (I say) as good as he
was, was glad to strengthen himself from the Hope of Reward; He had an eye,
Heb. 11.26.
(one eye at least) to the recompense of Reward. If Moses so good and holy a
man as Moses, had use, and it seems, need of this help; how much more we, who
(boast we what we will) I fear come far short of Moses's perfection. If any
shall say (as some will) This was under, or before the Law; but the time of the
Gospel, is a time and state of greater perfection: Take another,

2. Those Christians whom S. Paul testifies of in this manner, You suffered
with joy the spoiling of your goods: 2. Primitive Christians. Heb. 10.34.
what ground of encouragement had they? did they if purely and merely out of
the strength of their Love? hear on; Knowing that you have in heaven a better
and more enduring substance. A man will not throw away foul water, (we say)
till he has hope at least, of fair. Nor would they (I suppose) so joyfully
have parted with their earthly substance, had they not had an expectation of an
heavenly. But a weakness in them, to be checked, rather than allowed? mark
what follows: he encourages them to it still; still to make use of their hope;
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of reward.
Verse 35
But lest any should say, These were weaklings in the Faith, and not perfect in
Love, I add.

3. Adam in innocence: who certainly, 3. Adam.
being created after the Image of God, was perfect in righteousness and
holiness; and if ever man did, he might Love the Lord, with all his might,
etc. yet even Adam (it seems) had need of the same helps; that we now have,
the fear of punishment on the one side; In the day thou eatest, thou shall die
the death; and the Hope of reward on the other side, Do this, and thou shall
live; which was the tenure of the old covenant, as we all know: If Adam, much
more we. If any yet shall say, Adams was but a natural love, but ours now is
Supernatural; I add but one more:

4. 4. Christ himself.
Christ himself: the second Adam, both perfect and strong every way, and
therefore (we may think) needed not such helps; as we do: yet Christ
himself (I do not say, needed, I say) used this supportation of his Hope; and
of reward set before him: The Apostle is plain, Who, for the joy that was set
before him endured the cross and despised the shame. Heb. 12, 2.
Would we think Christ himself, so strong as he was, would use this Help, if
it were not lawful to be used? Or shall we think our selves stronger then he,
that we can go without it? All which (to add no more) are a sufficient
justification of the point propounded: But we have beside to confirm it

4. 4. Reasons.
By Reasons why it is lawful, yea useful for us so to do.

1. 1. Our weakness.
Our Weakness; which casts us upon a necessity of all the helps, that can
be afforded us. It is true that S. John speaks, Perfect love casts out all
fear; and he that fears is not perfect in love* 1. Joh. 4.18.
And it may peradventure be applied as well to Hope, Perfect love casts out all
Hope; and he that hops is not perfect in love: I said, peradventure it may be
applied to Hope; for I suppose, both Adam and Christ were perfect in love, and
yet made use of their Hope: And we shall hear anon^, that even in heaven, the
Saints both now Have, and ever shall have use of their hope: but grant it for
the present, Perfect love casts out all Hope, and needs no help but her own:
Then I assume, But no man living is perfect in Love; and therefore no man
living but has need of his Hope, to be assistant to the imperfections of his
love: He that hops (I grant for the present too) is not perfect in love; But
I assume again, We are not indeed perfect in love; and therefore we have need
of hope: We know but in part, and therefore we believe but in part, and
therefore hope but in part, and therefore love but in part; and therefore yield
but a partial and imperfect obedience, Our Obedience is measured by the
degree, of our Love, our love by our Hope, our hope by our Faith, our Faith by
our Knowledge; which being but in part, causes an imperfection in all the rest:
The truth is (however some presume, upon their strength) our weakness is such,
that while, we carry about with us the old man, we must expect to go stooping
a little to the ground; and support our selves with these two staves, of Fear
for the left hand, and Hope for the right hand, to stay up our Love from
falling in the way.

2. Our Humility requires as much: 2. Our Humility.
that seeing God himself (who knows us better than we our selves, and pitties
us as a father his children) allows us these helps; it is but fit, we should
with all thankfulness make our use of them. When God had said, It is not good
for man to be alone, I will make him an helper fit for him; had Adam, out of
the confidence of his own strength, as being innocent, and free from all
sinful concupiscence, refused so gracious a tender, I suppose it would not
have been well taken: The Lord himself, of his own good pleasure, proffered
Ahaz a sign; Ask thee a sign, ask it in the depth, Isai. 7.11.etc.
or in the height above. And he returns peremptorily, out of a foolish
modesty, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord: But mark how roundly
the Prophet takes him up, Hear ye now, O house of David, is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but will you weary my God also? It is not Humility, but
horrible pride and presumption to refuse and reject Gods offers (upon what
pretenses of strength soever) and in a manner to scorn his helps, which he
had never granted, but out of his infallible knowledge of our necessity. It is
not good (says God) for Love to be alone, I will allow her Hope and (if need
be,) Fear too, to be her helpers. It becomes then our modesty, in an humble
sense and acknowledgement of our well-knowne weakness, to accept, and make
use of our so graciously allowed Helper.

Application four fold: For
And thus having sufficiently confirmed the point, that it is lawful, yea very
useful for us to make use of our Hope, in eying the promised reward; Let us
make it yet more useful to our selves, by Application: It will yield us a

1. 1. Confutation of Antinomists, by
Confutation, of the conceited perfection of the New Family of Love, if I may
so call them; who no less ignorantly than presumptuously, cry down this
doctrine, that I have thus strongly confirmed; I mean the Antinomists, or, if
you will, the Anomists of our time; who pretend, that they are so full of Love,
that they scorn to be beholden either to Fear or Hope: They do nothing,
they, either for Fear of punishment, or Hope of reward; but all out of pure
and mere Love of God: Neither do they think a child of God, a regenerate
man, ought to do any thing with respect either to the one or the other. For
the fuller and clearer conviction of this their error, we proceed in this
method and manner, First by way of Opposition of our former Truth to their
error: Secondly, by way of Proposition of the many absurdities that will
follow upon that opinion: Thirdly, by way of Exposition of the principal
grounds of that their error.

1. 1. Opposing this Truth to their error: For,
Whereas they say, a regenerate man ought to do nothing out of Hope of reward,
but all out of Love, which perhaps has received warmth and strength from that
common received position of some Divines, That a child of God should serve God,
though there were neither heaven to reward him, nor hell to punish him: I
answer;

1. 1. Love is not perfect.
It is one thing to say, what we should do; another what we do, or can do:
The command indeed is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
etc. which if it were perfectly performed, might, perhaps, exclude the ^ise of
Hope or Fear; but let me see that man that ever did so love God; that durst
say, he did so; except the old Catharists, and insolent Papists, and these
late upstart Perfectists: What? are these men more perfect then Moses? yet he
had an eye to the recompense of reward: Are they better than S. Peter? I doubt
not but he loved Jesus Christ as well and as strongly as they; and presumed
upon the strength of that Love, as much as they can do, that though all men
denied him, yet would not he: And yet you know how shamefully he denied his
master, three times. But what? are they stronger than Adam in innocence? His
love, though supported both with Hope and Fear, failed him miserably, as
lamentable experience tells us: However, though they stick not, some of them
with little less than blasphemy, to say, they are as perfect as Christ,
Christed with Christ, etc. yet, I hope, they are not yet come to that height of
pride, to think themselves more perfect than Christ: who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, etc. what strange presumption is this? Me
thinks I see them like little children, that have newly gotten their feet;
who, proud and confident of their own strength, refuse the hand of the Nurse;
and will needs be going alone; till falls and broken faces teach them more wit.
Certainly, this presumption of theirs, presages some fearful fall, to the
disgrace of their Profession, and scandal of Religion; Let them but remember
S. Peter, and I will say no more, but with Saint Paul, Let him that thinks he
stands, 1. Cor. 10.
take heed lest he fall.

2. I add, Their argument is infirm and insufficient; 2. If it were, yet Hope
useful.
A Christian must do all out of Love, therefore nothing out of Hope; or
expectation of reward. This is to make the Graces of God to fall out one with
another, which sweetly do agree; A good thing may be done in Love of God, and
yet in Hope of Reward too: Hope and Love are not contraries, but coordinate,
like a pair of twinne-sisters, the daughters of one mother, Faith: or rather
subordinate, and therefore may well concur to the producing of the same
effect; we may say, (as the Apostle of Faith) Hope works by Love, and Love
works from Hope; as the Soul works by the hand, and the hand works from the
Soul. And indeed, Love proceeds more immediately from Hope, then from Faith:
These three, (this is their order) Faith, Hope, Love; Faith is the ground of
things hoped for, and so of Hope; and Hope is the ground of Love, as Love of
Obedience: Why then should Love thrust out Hope, her mother, from any influence
into her actions? It is in Love, but yet by Hope.

3. 3. Hope shall never cease: confirmed by reason.
I say yet further, (ex abundanti) whether we ever shall be so perfect, as to
do all our services to God, out of pure love, and nothing at all out of Hope;
whether here on earth, or hereafter in heaven, is a disputable question. It
seems probable we shall not; I give my reasons, but submit them to the censure
of the judicious; They are these:

1. Our Love of God, depends upon our knowledge of God, (ignoti nulla cupido)
Our knowledge of God is only of his back parts, as himself calls them; which
are such qualities, Exodus 34.6.
as have respect to us; The Lord is merciful, gracious, long suffering, etc.
not such as describe him absolutely in himself, as he is Goodness it self:
His Goodness absolute is only known to himself, and therefore only (so)
loved by himself: I conclude then, we cannot Love him but with respect to his
Goodness to us, which is the object of our Faith and Hope; and so not without
some mixture of Hope; that is the first.

2. Vide Aquin. 22 ae.q. 19. a. 6. c.
Self-love, (if moderate) is a natural Impresse of God upon a man's Soul; and
therefore (it seems) to make a man love any thing for it self, without some
respect to himself, were to destroy man's nature: Praise the Lord, for he is
good: why? for his mercy endures for ever.

3. Aquin. 12. e.q. 40. a. 7. c. Ames. Theolog. l. 2. c. 7.. 2.
Love proceeds from Hope, as the effect from the cause: For there we Love a
thing, because we hope to receive some good from that thing; we do not
(properly and directly) hope in any thing because we love it, but only by
accident, in as much as we believe, we are beloved of it: Hence it will follow,
that we cannot love God, but because we first hope in him, as the Author of all
our Good; and so hope will ever have Ingredience into our Love.

4. This is certain, in the Judgment of the best Divines, that the Saints in
heaven now have not lost their hope; they live in hope of the Resurrection of
their bodies, My flesh shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.9. No, Psalm. 16.9.
nor after the resurrection ever shall lose their Hope; though there be some
difference between our hope now, and then theirs and ours: For ours 1. arises
from Faith, theirs from sight: 2. Faith and Hope how said to cease in heaven.
Ours is with labor and contention, theirs without all difficulty. 3. Ours is
imperfect, theirs perfect. That received opinion of Divines, that Faith and
Hope shall cease in heaven; Vide Ames. Theolog. Pemble Vindiciae. p. 198. and
199.
is not to be understood of the Essence, or substance of those graces; but of
their imperfection, and manner of their use: Faith shall be perfected by
Vision, and Hope by Fruition: We shall then see, what now we believe; and
enjoy, what now we hope for. Yet shall there be still use both of Faith and
Hope; in as much as there shall for ever be something that we shall never
fully see; something that we shall never totally and together enjoy: the
Infinite essence and Goodness of God, which no creature can comprehend: and
the Eternity of Happiness, which no creature can at once and together
possess; and therefore shall have use of Faith to believe the one, and Hope to
expect the other; Those exceptions therefore of the Schooleman may be easily
answered both concerning Faith and Hope; Aquin. 12. ae.q. 67. a. 3. c. Ibid.
art. 4. c.
That because Faith is that whereby we believe what we do not see; and in
heaven shall see that which now we believe, therefore it is impossible that
Faith should remain. And again, because we hope for that which we have not;
and in heaven, have in possession, that we now hope for, therefore it is
impossible hope should remain in heaven; For I assume, against himself; But
in heaven, there shall be always something which we shall not see; and
something we shall not enjoy, (without any derogation to our happiness)
unless he will deifie the creature; therefore there shall be still use of
Faith and Hope in heaven: And this may be illustrated by the contrary Fear of
the damned; which fear being (contrary to Hope) an expectation of evil to
come, though the Fear that now wicked men have of hell shall cease, when they
once come in hell, fear being turned to present sense and feeling; yet they
shall be tormented with the fear and expectation of the eternal succession of
their torments, which shall be one of the worst pieces of their hell: So on the
contrary side; The Devils belive and tremble. Jam. 2.19. Pemble ubi supra, p.
197.
though Hope in the Godly, in regard of the complement of their Happiness,
shall cease, being turned into fruition; yet in regard of the eternity of that
fruition, their Hope shall be extended to eternity: and this shall be no small
portion of their Happiness. His distinction between the fear of the damned,
and hope of the blessed; that fear may better be in the damned, than hope in
the blessed, because (forsooth) in the one there shall be a succession of
punishments, and so there shall be a respect of futurition or time to come; and
in the other, the glory shall be without succession, after a certain
participation of eternity, in which there is neither time past, nor to come,
but only present: I say, this distinction is not true, (as I suppose) because
there is the same succession of Happiness in heaven, as of torments in hell;
in regard of the creatures, who being finite, cannot infinitely at once enjoy
their eternal happiness: God only being infinite and only eternally, at
once and together enjoying his own happiness: But enough of that: I now
rejoyne; If there be, (as its probable) a continued existence of Hope, and we
shall have always Hope attending upon our Love, its as probable that Hope
shall not be idle; but exercised often, if not continually, in viewing of its
object, and that view cannot but excite our love to all holy obedience, and
that for ever: If not, then hear --

2. 2. Proposing the many Absurdities of their opinion: For,
The many Absurdities that will follow if that opinion may be granted, that a
Christian has no use of his hope to encourage himself in the service of God.

1. 1. They make void the Promises.
They vilify, yea nullify the Promises of God, made to us in Scripture, at
least in regard of a regenerate man: For to what end are the Promises made to
our obedience, if, for the better and more cheerful performance of our
obedience, we may not, by the eye of hope, look at them? To what purpose were
Colors made, if the eye must be debarred the sight of them? or musical
sounds, if the ear may not be permitted to hear them? etc. Take away the use
of the Sense, and take away the object of that Sense: Take away Hope, and away
with all the Promises.

2. They cannot evacuate Hope; but all other graces will vanish with it: The
Graces of God are like a Chain, 2. Destroy all Graces: as
draw but one link, all the rest will follow; Add to your Faith virtue, etc.
Take away Hope, and take away all.

1. Joy; which (much of it) arises from Hope: 1. Joy. Romans 12.12. and 5. 2.
Rejoicing in hope. Romans 12. 12. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans
5. Lively hope -- wherein ye rejoice, 1. Pet. 1. 3, 6. Yea the greatest and
strongest part of our Joy springs from Hope; 1. Pet. 1.3, 6.
That we might have strong consolation, who for a refuge, Heb. 6. 18.
have laid hold on the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18.

2. Patience; which likewise is the daughter of Hope; 2. Patience. Romans 8.25.
If we hope for the things we see not, we do with patience wait for them, Romans
8.25. called therefore the Patience of Hope, 1. These. 1.3. For joy set before
him, 1. These. 1.3.
endured the Cross, Heb. 12. 2. etc.

3. Faith it self is likewise in danger; For though Faith 3. Faith.
be the mother of Hope; yet Hope is the staff and strength of Faith; and were
it not for Hope, Faith it self would soon languish: Sanguis fidei, spes. Hope
is as the blood of Faith: Clem. Alexandr.
In the body, the blood is vehiculum animae; the charet of the soul, the life
running in the blood; take away the blood, and you take away life: so take away
Hope, Hoc Ipsum quod Christiani sumus, fidei ac spei res est. Cypr. de Bono
patient.
and Faith will soon expire: and therefore it is that Faith and Hope are so
often joined together in Scripture; That your Faith and Hope might be in God*
1. Pet. 1. 21 We, through the spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness, by
faith, Gal. 5. 5. And we are said to be saved by hope Romans 8. 24 as well as by
Faith. Take away Hope, and take away Faith.

4. Love also will not be long after, 4. Love it self.
if you take away Hope; for Love it self (as I said) proceeds from Hope, as
well, and more immediately than from Faith: This is their order, in regard of
causalitie and generation, as the Schoolman calls it; Faith, Hope, and Love.
Faith produces Hope, and Hope produces Love; Because we Hope to obtain those
good things promised to, and believed by Faith; therefore we are moved to love
him, that has promised, and will perform them: Faith says (says devout
Bernard) there are great and glorious things laid up for Gods Saints; Hope
says, In Psalm. Qui habitat. 5.10.
they are reserved for me; Love says, I run to them and embrace them: Faith
believes them, Hope expects them, Bern. de pass. Dom. c. 43. Quantum quis
credit, tantum speral; quantum sperat, tantum amat.
and Love at last enjoyes them: And this is true, Look how much a man
believes, so much he hopes; how much he hopes, so much the more he loves.
Love indeed proceeds both from Faith and Hope; but in a different
consideration: From Faith, as Faith apprehends the mercy as present; from Hope,
as Hope expects the same mercy as future: A resemblance of the Trinity.
Or rather, we may see some resemblance of the Trinity in the proceeding of
these three Theological virtues one from another: Hope issues from Faith
alone, as the Son from the Father: Love proceeds from Faith and Hope, as the
Holy Ghost from both the other persons: Take away Hope then, and you destroy
not only this Trinity, these three, Faith, Hope and Charity; but also the
Unity of procession, and the very Essence of Love; as the joint isssue of Hope
and Faith. In a word, Hope both breeds and perfects Love; we could not so love
God for what he has done, but for the Hope of what he will do; so that I
may apply that of the Apostle hither; 1. Cor. 15.19.
If we have Hope only in this life, we were of all men most miserable. Those
then that stand so much for Love, to the vilifying, yea nullifying of Hope,
will in the end prove in themselves a nullitie of Love. Little Hope little
Love: No hope, no Love at all.

5. 5. All Obedience.
Lastly, (which they little think) all Christian obedience is thus endangered,
or at least, a great part of it: For take away Hope, even hope of reward, and
what will become of all good works? 1. Cor. 9.10. (...). Chr^s. Tom. 5. p. 175.
Does not every reasonable creature work out of Hope? He that ploweth, ploweth
in hope; and he that thresheth, thresheth in hope: The Soldier wars in hope
of victory and spoil; the Mariner goes to sea, in hope of gain; and so of
the rest. If you think this hope has no influence into our Christian
obedience; hear the Apostle; He that has this hope; (to be like him) purges
himself as he is pure: 1. Joh. 3.3.
1. Joh. 3.3. And hear Saint Paul for both the parts of Sanctification; Seeing
we have such Promises (to be the sons and daughters of God, 2. Cor. 7.1.
in the end of the former chap.) Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit; there is the first; Perfecting holiness in the fear
of God; there, the second: Hope therefore is a special Principle of New
Obedience, and that because, 1. of the excellence and difficulty of the
object, Aquin. 12 ae. q. 40. a. 8.0.
which excite and sharpen diligence, and 2. also in regard of the delectation
and delight, the proper issue of Hope, which furthers and quickens operation;
as he well observes: They then, that cry down Hope, cry down (by consequence)
all holiness and obedience. And now, I hope they will consider, they have
brought the matter to a fair pass; that by taking away one grace, have
subverted all; Joy, Patience, Faith, Love, and all Obedience. But we have more
to say yet.

3. The manifest injury they do to a Christian Soul, 3. Despoile a
Christian, of
depriving him of so necessary a furniture, as Hope is: we will express it by
a double Metaphor; of a Soldier, of a Mariner.

1. Of a Soldier by land; Our life is a spiritual, 1. His Helmet.
and continued Warfare; There is a Panoplie, or whole-armour commanded to be
put on, Ephesians 6. Amongst the rest, Ephesians. 6.17.
the Helmet of Salvation; which, what it is, Saint Paul himself tells us in
another place, And for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation. 1. These. 5.8. 1. These.
5.8.
They then that deny a Christian this use of his hope, send him into the Field
without his helmet, and so expose him to certain danger.

2. Of a Mariner, by sea, 2. The wind at sea.
then Hope has a double use under a double Metaphor in Scripture:

1. Of the Wind, Heb. 6.11. (...), Heb. 6.11.
the full gale (so the word imports) or full assurance of hope. If the
Christian Soul be a Ship (sailing in the sea of this world) Faith may
represent the Pilote, and Love the Sail; but Hope is the Wind, that must fill
that Sail: Let the Pilote be never so confident, the Sail spread to the
utmost, yet if it want a good gale of Wind, the ship lies becalmed; and her
course is ever quicker or slower, as the wind rises or falls: A Christian on
earth without Hope, is a Ship at Sea without wind.

2. His Anchor. He^. 6.19. (...). Chrysostom ad Theod. Laps. ^p. 2. Tom. 6. p. 61.
Of an Anchor: Heb. 6.19. which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, sure
and steadfast, etc. A Ship may sometimes have too much, or a contrary Wind;
and then she has need of an Anchor to fix her, from being carried away,
especially when she draws nigh her desired haven. Let Faith be the Ship, if
you will, (and we hear of some that make Shipwreck of Faith) Let Love be the
Merchandise, or passenger, to be conveyed to heaven (when Faith and Hope, in a
sort, cease, and stay behind) yet Hope is the Anchor, that fixes the Ship from
being tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of doctrine, or wave
of temptation, till Love the passenger, or merchandise be landed in the haven:
As the Ship with all her tacklings and the Anchor, lie still at Sea, but the
passengers and commodities are transported on Land: They then that deny this
use of Hope, expose the Soul to certain danger; either to be becalmed for
want of Wind; or to be carried away, for want of an Anchor: If this be not
enough, hear all:

4. 4. Incur harsh censures.
The harshnesse of the Censure they are like to undergo by this opinion: For
if there be no such use of Hope, then mark,

1. Either they are not yet converted, but in the state of Nature still; as
being such as the Apostle says the Ephesians were, without hope, Ephesians 2.12.
before their Conversion.

2. Or else, that they have lost their hope, after once they had it, 1. Pet.
1.3.
in Conversion; which cannot be, seeing a regenerate man is begotten again to a
lively hope.

3. Or else, (which some do not stick to affirm) that we have already all
we hope for that is, all already gloryfied: For if we may not hope for any
more, it is, as if there were no more to be hoped for: And this is it, which
some both senselesly and ridicuously have affirmed (and well they may, upon
their former opinion) that our glory in heaven shall be no other, no more, See
Mr Burtons Gospel and Law reconciled page 35. Romans 5. 2.
than what we have already, but only in our sense and apprehension; Contrary to
the plain text of the Apostle, We rejoice in hope of the glory of God These,
and many more perhaps, are the Absurdities wherewith this Novell opinion is
heavily pressed; which we leave to their more serious consideration: and deliver

3. The grounds of this their error, 3. Expounding the grounds of their error,
as far as we can conceive, and there are these two, the common mothers of
most errors:

1. Pride, 1. Pride.
and strange presumption of their own perfection, and of the strength of their
own (supposed) Love; that they can, and do love God so well, that they need
not be beholden to any inferior helps; contrary to the experience of all good
hearts, in all times, who were glad, and thankful for these supportations of
the weakness of their imperfect Love.

2. Ignorance, 2. Ignorance of three particulars.
the fertile Uterus ignorantae. Tertull. Apol.
womb of all errors and heresies whatsoever; However these men think
themselves wise, and able enough to teach their teachers, yet this opinion
manifests a manifold ignorance. We instance some particulars:

1. Of the true distinction and use of Faith, Hope, 1. Of the nature and order
of Faith, Hope and Charity,
and Charity; and that is the reason, that Faith and Love have devoured Hope
between them: For let me ask them, Why do they do good works? They will
answer, Because they Love God. I ask again, Why do they love God? Because
of their Faith; whereby they believe the Goodness of God showed toward them:
All this is true, but not enough; for they should have taken in Hope between
Love and Faith, and said, We love him, because we hope in him; and hope in
him, because we believe in him: For this is the right order of these Graces.
The good man is compared to a tree, Psalm. 1. the root of this tree, is Faith;
the stem or body of it, is Hope; the branches of it, is Love; the fruit of
it, are Good works: Now it is true indeed, the fruit grows immediately upon
the branches, Good works proceed from Love; but the branches grow next upon
the stem, and not upon the root immediately, that is, Love proceeds from
Hope, and Hope from the root of Faith: Let them learn this, and then they
will not exclude Hope: but give it its due place.

2. 2. How a free gift and a Reward may stand together.
Of the possible Union of a Free-gift, with a Reward: For thus they seem to
reason; If all be of Free-gift, then is there no reward; is there no reward; if
no reward, then no hope of reward. But this is their ignorance; Free gift and
reward agree well enough together; The same thing may be a Free gift, as not
being merited by us; and a reward, as so promised by God; and then it is Just
with him to perform his own promise: The ignorance of this, is one cause of
the popish Merit; Where there is a reward, there is Merit, say our Rhemists:
and these men for fear of Merit have utterly renounced all reward; whereas,
we say, There is a reward, where there is no Merit; and where there is a Free
gift, there may be a reward notwithstanding, freely promised, and faithfully
performed.

3. 3. Of the right use of the Law.
Of the right use of the Law, to a regenerate man; and this is the Source and
springhead of all their erroneous conclusions; For if there be no Law, it will
follow; Then first, there is no use of promises; if no promises, then no
reward; if no reward, then no hope of Reward: Again, if there be no Law, then
are there no good works; (for no work is good without a command) if no good
works, then no reward; and so no Hope: As on the contrary, If there be no Law,
then no sin; if no sin, then no punishment; if no punishment, then no
Fear: So that this first Absurdity being granted, all the rest will follow;
which I earnestly desire they would seriously consider. And so I leave them,
and come to a second use of

2. 2. Justification of our practice.
Justification of our practice; I mean of us Ministers who urge upon men, even
the best men, the duties of Religion, as with fear of punishments on the one
side, so with Hope of Reward, on the other side: For which our method, we are
by these Novellists, styled Legal Preachers, etc. But I would gladly be
resolved by any reasonable man, why we may not as well use the like arguments,
as (I say not the prophets of old) Christ and his Apostles in the New
Testament? why may it not be as lawful for me, to exhort men to the patient
suffering of persecution, and that with joy, as for our Savior, with the same
argument; For great is your reward in heaven? why may not I provoke men to an
endeavor of perfect Holiness, with remembrance of the Promise of God, the
object of Hope, as S. Paul did his Corinthians, Seeing we have these Promises,
etc. 2. Cor. 7.1.


3. Admiration, at the never enough admired Goodness of God, and our own
badnesse: His Goodness, 3. Admiration of
that will omit no means to do us good; Commands, 1. Gods Goodness.
promises, threatenings; to work upon our Love, by the Goodness of his
Commands; to persuade our Hope by the Sweetness of his Promises; and (if these
will not prevail) to scare us from our wicked courses, by the terrors of his
threatenings: He might (as Kings) command and expect our obedience; or punish
our disobedience; but no means shall be omitted to work us unto Good. Our
own badnesse, 2. Our own Badnesse.
that will admit scarce any of his means to do our selves Good: Nor Commands,
nor promises, nor threats can prevail with many (too many of us) either to
forsake evil, or do good: What metal are we made of, that no course can
work with us! A King a mortal! man, commands, and we obey; he threatens, and
we quake; he promises and we run: O the lamentable badnesse of our hearts; O
the admired Goodness of our God! etc.

4. Exhortation; that seeing we know our liberty, 4. Exhortation; where
we learn to use it; to provoke our selves unto Good works, by the Hope of
the promised Reward: Be not so ignorant, as not to know it; or so proud and
presumptuous, as to refuse such gracious Helps, as God in mercy has afforded
us: We say to you, in the words of S. Paul, (and why may we not?) Cast not away
your confidence (which is nothing but a confirmed Hope) which has great
recompense of Heb. 10. 35.
reward: And again, Be not weary of well-doing, for in due season you shall
reap, Gal. 6.9.
if you faint not. And with S. Peter, Gird up the loins of your mind, and
hope to the end, etc. Yet take some Cautions with you, 1. The Difference of
Good and bad, in use of Hope.
for your better directions in the use of your Hope: For there is a Hope of
reward lawful, there is another unlawful; Both good and bad are carried with
hope of Reward, but you shall observe a palpable difference, in these
particulars:

1. 1. In the Object hoped for.
A wicked man looks at the present, not regarding the future; at a Temporal,
not an eternal reward; Like that prodigal child, Father give me the portion
of goods, etc. what profit, (present profit) is there in serving of God, say
they, Mal. 3.14. Who will show us any good? What good? Corn, Psalm. 4.
and wine, and oil, profit, pleasure, honor; not staying or trusting to any
thing hereafter: But the truly godly man looks at things to come; and like a
good child waits till the time appointed of his father; So S. Paul intimates
the difference, 2. Cor. 4.18.
While we look not at the things that are seen (as worldly men do) but at
the things which are not seen; For the things which are seen are temporal,
but the things which are not seen are eternal.

2. 2. In the manner of expectation.
Wicked men look at the reward, as a due debt, merited by their formal
obedience; Give me the portion of goods that belongs to me, said he; and
therefore bargain with God for it: The godly expect it, as a special favor
of promise; in all humility acknowledging themselves less than the least of
all Gods mercies; that is another.

3. 3. In the end.
Whereas there are three things in Scripture to be eyed and observed, the
command, the promise, and the threatening; and it is not possible to look upon
them all at once with two eyes: A wicked man bestows both his eyes, one upon
the threatening, the other upon the promise, but neither upon the command; A
godly man, what ever he do with one eye, to bestow it either on the promises
or threatenings; the other is ever fixed upon the Command: which difference is
apparent by this; that where the Command comes without an express promise or
threatening, a wicked man will do just nothing, neither forsake evil, nor do
good; Take a vainglorious man, tell him, God commands him to give alms; if
you do not tell him withal, You shall have applause and credit from men, if
you do it; or a curse attending you, if you do it not; he lies like a Ship
at Sea, becalmed for want of wind; or a Mill, that moves no longer than the
water runs: yea that many times, neither Promises nor threats can make him
stir to perform an express command; which argues, that those commands he
performs, he does it not out of respect of the command; but either out of hope
of reward or fear of punishment: On the other side take a good man, tell him,
Thus says the Lord; this is Gods will and command; though you say nothing of
the promise or threatening; he is like the Centurions servant, if he say, Go,
he goes, etc. That Is the difference that David intimates, when he says unto
God; I have an eye, or respect, to all thy commandments. As a good servant,
that respects his Master; Let strangers say, Go, or Come, he stirs not,
because he respects them not, though perhaps, they promise or threaten; but if
his Master do but wink with his eye, or nod with his head, intimating his
pleasure, he presently runs. The Command of God is the wind that fills his
Sails; as that phrase is elegantly used by the Apostle, (...); Phil. 4.12.
filled with all the will of God; as a Sail with wind.

4. Because wicked men will pretend Conscience of a Command; there is yet
another difference observable: 4. In the Order.
and that is, That where these two mere (as sometime they do) a Command, and
a Promise; a wicked man does it principally out of the Hope of reward, and
subordinates the command to his own profit. Take but an instance or two:
Balaam goes to Balaac, as he was commanded, or rather permitted by God: but
the Lodestone that begun this motion was that wages of iniquity, 2. Pet. 2.15.
the Reward promised by Balaac. The like may be noted in Jehu, who drove
furiously, in the execution of Gods command (as he would seem) upon Ahabs
family; and in pretense cries, Come see the zeal, etc. But the first Mover of
all this fury (rather than zeal) was that message of the Prophet, Thus says
the Lord, I have anointed thee King over Israel. 2. King. 9.6, 7.
The Kingdom was principally in his eye; and if he might have safely enjoyed
that, without any further danger, I doubt whether Jehoram, and Jezabell, and
the rest had dyed. With a Godly man it is quite contrary; where he has an eye
upon the Reward, he subordinates that to the command, and uses it only as a
help to further his execution of the command. This will the better appear, if
we sever the duty from the reward; which meeting together, make it doubtful
(to others at least) which most prevails to the motion. For instance, when
Religion, and prosperity, and peace, and credit meet together, who, almost,
is not religious? and it is a hard matter* for a by-stander, to say, which
draws most: Sever them and you shall see straight. Two Gentlemen walk
together with one man at their heels: what stranger can say, whom he follows?
Follow them but till they part, and you shall discover the man to whom he
retains: So is it here, If to be religious (in such times, and places, or
company may purchase a wicked man danger, or disgrace, or scorn, etc. you
shall see a hollow heart forsake and almost abjure Religion, and swim along
with the stream: As the stonie-ground-hearers made fair show till persecution
arose, Matthew. 13.
and then they were offended; which concludes strongly they followed Religion,
but for Peace sake, and not Peace for Religion. Now a truly good heart, is
principally drawn by Gods Command, and entire Love to Religion; which appears
by this, that sever Peace from Religion, he still keeps on his course; and
though the world frown or scorn, or kill he will follow his Religion still.
What use then of the Hope of reward? why, indeed, if he may have Peace with
Religion, he likes it well, and is so much more zealous in his Profession of
it; but if not, he cares not for it, but will rather part with Peace than with
Religion: The hope of reward is in his eye, but by the by; He takes not up his
Religion for Peace, but makes his advantage of Peace, to advance his Religion.
It is a pretty phrase of the Apostle concerning Moses, Heb. 11.26. not (...),
Heb. 11.26.
but (...) he cast an eye (after he had made his choice, and was going on his
way) upon the recompense of reward: Not as a ground of undertaking, but as an
encouragement of his undertaken journey. As if a father should bid his loving
and willing child go of such an errand; and when he was readily running,
should call him back and say; Child, because I see you are so willing, to
execute my command, look you, here is money to put in your purse, to spend by
the way and here is a horse to carry you with more ease; and hereafter I will
promise you, you shall be my heir. This no doubt, must needs put joy and
spirits into the Child, with more cheerfulness to perform his duty; though
he had no eye upon these in his first setting out. In a word, there are two
things that further the motion of a clock, the Plummet, and the Oil bestowed
upon the wheels; the first and chiefest is the Plummet, that begins the
motion; the next is the Oil, and that facilitates the motion. So, be it a good
man has an eye to the reward, yet the command of God is the Plummet, or prime
mover; if he meet with a Promise by the way, he uses it as Oil to make his
motion quicker: The command of God is the principal Mover, the hope of reward
is but the subordinate helper of his course. And this, I take it, is lawful,
against all cavils and exceptions; A man, first looking at God, may in the next
place look at himself, and help himself, in the service of God, with the
hope of a promised reward.

And this is the thing, I have hitherto intended to urge upon you; The work of
Religion is not more laborious, 2. The Motive to it.
than the Reward promised is glorious: Look not so much at the work as at the
issue. What though you see no present profit, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous: He that sowes, shall in due season reap; Good works are a seed,
which many times seem lost; and we think all is gone. No, they are a seed,
which must lie a time under ground, before it can come forth: He that goes
forth and carries good seed, Psalm. 126.6.
shall come again with joy, and bring his she^^^^ (...) him. I use but this
persuasion; The want of this (...) the Promises of God, is the cause of all, or
much of our (...) content in our callings, of Magistrate, Minister, master,
servant, etc. when we find not our labor successful, or that respect which
we expected upon our conscionable endeavors: No man, so crossed as I; No man
takes so much pains to so little purpose; No man finds such poor respects,
etc. It is not because thou look at men, and have not an eye upon God, and
upon the promised Recompense of reward? It was a strong weakness, and a
strange pusillanimitie for such a Prophet as Jeremie, to say upon the non
proficiencie of his people, I will speak no more in the name of the Lord; Oh
that I had a cottage in a garden of Cucumbers, etc. That was Heroical of
another, his fellow, I have labored in vain, Isai. 49.4.
I have spent my strength in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord,
and my work (or reward) with my God. 1. Pet. 5.2, 3.
My brethren (the Lords Ministers) be instant, preach the word, in season, out
of season; be not discouraged by the unprofitablenesse or unthankfulnes of your
people; for you serve a good Master, that will pay you your wages; and the
less from them, the more you may expect from him: Its that wherewith the
Apostle encourages servants (of unthankful and unnatural masters) to all
sincere and faithful obedience; Servants obey your masters, etc. And whatsoever
ye do, Col. 3.22, etc.
do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men: Knowing that of the Lord*
ye shall receive the reward of inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ. The
like I say to all estates and conditions of men; Whatsoever ye do, do it
heartily, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance.
Oh, could we but look up at God, and his promise of Reward, by the eye of our
Hope, how easily might we in o^^ callings pass through good report and ill
report, good respect and dis-respect, and trample all the unthankfulnesses of
men under our feet! I conclude all with the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.
last.
Wherefore, my dear brethren, be ye constant, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

