FAMILY REFORMATION PROMOTED.

IN A SERMON on Joshua, Chap. 24. ver. 15.

AND By short Catechismes fitted for the Threefold Relations in a Family. Of
1. Children and Parents. 2. Servants and Masters. 3. Husband and Wife.


By D Cawdreys Preacher of the Word at Billing Magn. in Northmptonshire.

Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will command his Children and his household
after hm, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc.

1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and specially those of his own
House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

LONDON Printed by T. C. For John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily
1656.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
FOr the better understanding, and easier practice of the following Treatise,
be pleased to take notice of these three things: 1. The reason of my
undertaking this work 2. The end, or design I had in it. 3. The use of it; with
the directions tending thereunto.

1. For my undertaking this work, I desire no^ to assume or arrogate to my
self, any thing more than is mine own (the Method and ordering of the several
Questions and Answers in the little Catechismes) professing ingenuously, the
Materials thereof to be none of mine: they were lent me first by my ever
honored Father, Master Robert Cawdrey (long since gone to his rest and glory)
in a Tract first written and published by him, called, A Godly Form of Household
Government; which found good acceptance and success among the people of God:
But since his decease perused and augmented by those two pious and famous
Divines in this generation, Master Dod, and Mr. Cleaver. In whom I have nothing
to complain of, in their publication of it, but that they raised up seed to
themselves, and not to their deceased brother: I mean, for putting to their
Book their own Names, concealing (or at least obscuring the Name of the first
Father of it; only putting the two first letters of his names, R. C. which
signifies nothing to a strange Reader. But I shall as much commend them for
their learned Additions, and pious Augmentations, to make that Discourse more
full and complete. From that Book, I say, I borrowed the Materials; and after
them, from that Reverend, Judicious and godly Divine, (whose works and labors,
are famous in all the Churches and his Reward now with his God) Dr. Gouge, in
his Tract of Domestical Duties; Wherein, they are more elaborately, and largely
handled; but perhaps two largely for young ones, to learn or remember; and the
Book too dear for many, yea most poor householders to buy. I once (during our
sitting together in the assembly) motioned the business to himself, That he
would be pleased, to extract that his larger discourse, into some shorter
questions and answers, fitted both to the Capacity of younger people in a
Family, and to the Purses of the poorer sort; who have most need of such
Instructions. His answer (as I remembered) was, that he liked the motion well,
but wanted time and leisure to do it: and withal, not only gave me leave, but
desired me to do what I thought to be most useful therein. I had some thoughts,
diverse years sense, to have done it in his life time, to have had his judgment
and directions in it: But other troubles and business, hitherto diverted the
execution of it. I only drew out some particulars, for the use of my own
people, and family, and some private friends: Which being now perfected, and
methodized, I present to the public view, together with a short Sermon, of the
Duty, and Necessity of Family Reformation; to persuade, if possible (the
blessing of God accompanying it) all Householders, to put the same in practice:
I doubt not, but if all the aforesaid Authors were now living, they would
approve of this my undertaking, as others yet alive have done. That for the
first.

2. For the end or design in it, it was in general, nothing but the Glory of
God, and the Good of Souls, Families, Towns, Churches, and the whole Nation
in all these; To the advancing whereof, not only my Holy Calling (however now
despised by ungodly men) but my Resolutions of a long time, have obliged me;
having devoted my self (while I live, which cannot now be long) to the public
good; which I believe may be much promoted, by a conscientious use of the
directions herein given, for it is obvious to every observation, that Families
are the Seminaries of Towns, Churches, Countries, and Nations; and are as it
were, the Hives, out of which do swarm the materials of greater assemblies; if
therefore they be not well Principled therein all their Relations, the rest must
needs miscarry. And here I observed, was the true Original of all our
Miscarriages and mischiefs abroad; that when young people went out thence, to
constitute new families, either as servante, or by marriage, they knew not the
particular duties of their New Relations; as Husbands and Wives, as Parents and
Children, as Masters and Servants: because for the most part, they were never
taught them in the Families from whence they were transplanted. Remove a
Crabstock from a barren to a fruitful soil, it will still be a Crabstock,
without change of nature. It is a certain Truth, a thousand times exemplified,
That (without special converting grace) he or she shall never be good parents
to their children, that were not good children to their parents: Nor they good
Governors of servants that were not good servants to their Governors; nor
they good Husband or Wife, in their own families that were not good in their
former family Relations, as children or servants; Nor lastly, will those who
are naught in their Family Relations be good Neighbors in a Town, good Members
of a Church, or good Subjects, or Magistrates in the State: A good man is the
proper subject of the the goodness of all other Relations: And he only is a
good man, that is good in his first Relations; The Spring then of all
Reformation, in Towns, Churches, Nations, (next to personal Reformation, where
every one mends one, that is himself) is that which is found in Families. If
they were but either well constituted, or well ordered and reformed, the whole
work were done. And that is the Design of this Discourse, and the second thing
propounded to consideration.

3. The third and last now only remains, which is, the Use and Directions how
to improve this Treatise, to the ends for which it was designed. For the
expediting whereof, I shall have a respect. First to the Constitution of a new
Family; and secondly to a Family already Constituted: For as it is in Churches,
(and the House is or should be a little Church) they are considered either in
their first Constitution, or as already Constituted: So it is in Families; some
Rules will fit the first Constitution of it, and others the ordering of it,
when corrupted.

1. If a Family be to be newly Constituted, as commonly by the Marriage of
single persons it is, then they become first Husband and Wife, then Parents to
children, and with that Masters of servants, which are all the Relations of a
Family. The principal care must be to choose fit Materials for the building;
which how well, and how far it may be done, is delivered in the Sermon hereto
anneved, to which I refer the Reader.

2. For a Family already Constituted, but corrupted and needing Reformation the
same course must be taken, as in Reforming a corrupted Church: For as there,
Preaching and Catechizing, and all ways of Instruction are first to be used by
the Minister, the chief Officer thereof; and after that, the practice of that
knowledge wrought must be pressed by Admonition, Reproof, Exhortation; And
lastly, (if these proceedings prove ineffectual) the exercise of Discipline and
Censures upon wilful and stubborn offenders: Just so it ought to be in a
Family, as it is also a little more largely directed in the Sermon following,
to which I refer. But we are to speak now only to the first of those three,
how the chief Householder may lay that foundation of Reformation in his Family;
which is by Knowing, and Teaching them under his charge, the true knowledge of
those Duties, belonging to the several Relations of a Family, as before. To
which purpose I would commend (if they have not better) the reading, and
practicing (in all good conscience and sincerity) of the Sermon following, as
far as it concerns themselves in their single, double, or threefold Relation,
viz. as Husbands to Wives, as Parents to chidren, as Masters to servants; And
then to Teach the rest of the family (their correlates) wives, children
servants, their particular duties according to their relations respectively.
But when their children or seroants, are to be transplanted, either for the
constituting a new family, as Husbands or Wives, or for the furnishing of
another family, as servants; then to aquaint them with and make them
understand, the duties of their new Relations, before they come to practice
them. To which end, the little short Catechisme's fitted for each Relation,
will much conduce, if they be taught, and explained wisely by the chieife
Householder, and impressed on them, by his own Example, in the performance of
his duties in all his own relations.

The Benefit of teaching and whetting on of these prineiples, conscientiously,
will be exceeding great. For,

1. By this means Householders themselves may come to see, repent of, and amend
their own miscarriages, not only when they were children or servants, but also
their present neglects, of their duties, as Husbands, Parents, Masters, which
they must perform, as they expect that their correlates should be good and
serviceable to them, or Gods blessing upon both.

2 By the knowledge they may get by teaching others, they may not only learn
their own Duties in all their Relations, but also be able to call upon their
Inferiors to do their Duties, and to exact them of them, when they go astray.

3. This (if they have any conscience, or care to please God) may serve to make
them the more careful to perform their own Duties, in all their Relations;
because now their Inferiors will be able to discover their failings, having
learned their Duties in such Relations, when God shall call them to them.

4. This way they may fit and prepare their children and servants, to be
Materials of new Families, as Husbands or Wives, (according to their Sex) to
be Parents or Masters; being already furnished with the knowledge of the Duties
of those new Relations.

5. And lastly, make them Isntrumental and serviceable to the public good, as
good Neighbors in Towns, good Members of Churches, good Subjects in the
State, and some of them good Officers in Church or State; For that Rule of the
Apostle here holds well; He that cannot rule his own Family, how shall he
govern the Church, or Commonwealth? 1. Tim. 3.4, 5.

One thing more, and I have done; Because Duties will not easily go down or be
digested, if they be not manifested to be imposed by Divine Authority: I have
(following the Reverent Doctor herein) backed the most of them, by Texts of
Scripture, which held out, either express Commands, or eminent Examples of
holy Saints, the best comments upon commands; or noted Extravagances of wicked
men, against the rule of the Word; which in opening and explaining of the
Answers are to be taken notice of, and applied by the chief Householder. I need
say no more to persuade the Governors of Families, to set upon the exercise
and practice of these Directions, than what I have said in the Sermon. I only
add this short Ejaculation for them and theirs; That the God of all grace
would bless and prosper them, to the Glory of his Name, the Honor of
Religion, the public Good of Church and State; and to the furthering of their
comfort here, and eternal Salvation and glory hereafter. Amen.

FAMILY REFORMATION Promoted.
Joshua 24.15. But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.


THere has been of late (all know) much talk, but (God knows) more need of a
general Reformation. The foundations of Church and State, are out of course;
and unless God put under his hand, very like to come to confusion. The common
mistake, and mischief is, that every man almost complains, but few or none do
help to amend what is amiss, in themselves or others. It were the readiest (as
first and chiefest) way to reform all, for every one to mend one; that is
himself. For a Family, being made up of single persons, in several Relations;
Towns or Congregations of many Families, and the whole Nation, of Towns, or
Congregations; if single persons were but as they should be, and as in serious
thoughts they acknowledge they ought to be, that is Religiously good, the whole
body of Church or State, must needs be so. But it is not so easy a matter, to
reform one man; I mean, to persuade him to reform himself; while some, for
ignorance cannot, others for the Impetuousnesse of their lusts, will not; and
others out of selfe-conceite, think they need not Reform, unless there be
some other Superior, and Superintendent power to do it; we are not like in
have to see a Reformation. There are therefore (blessed be God) some other
means left us to effect this work. First the Govornours of families. Secondly,
Officers in the Church. And thirdly, Magistrates in the State. If Governors of
families would but reform their own Relations, the Church would have little
use of her Discipline, and the State less of Execution of Justice. If on the
other side, Towns or Congregations be loose and profane, the Nation consisting
of them, cannot be good or happy: if Families be wicked and licentious, Towns
and Parishes, consisting of them, must needs be naught: And if single persons,
be (and in spite of household discipline, will be) vicious, Families consisting
of such, must necessarily be bad; and consequently all very bad. The
Reformation then of all, should first begin with Single persons; if they
refuse, the Householder must undertake the cure. In his default, the Officers of
the Church must make supply by their discipline; And in their neglect, either
the civil Magistrate must reform, both Church and Families, and single
persons, or expect nothing but ruin and destruction of all. Now seeing, (as
was said) it is not possible, or not very probable for us (Ministers) to
persuade every single person, to a serious and through Reformation of himself;
It remains to us in the second place, to try how far we can prevail with
chief Householders to act their part, to make their Families good, so all good
who have both power in their hands, and all good reason to move them thereunto,
as shall appear hereafter. For this purpose, I have chosen this text, as a
worthy Instance of an Exemplary Resolution, in a great and good Householder;
that renowned Joshua by name: Who (leaving others to their choice) for himself
and family, undertakes to be Religious. Do you (says he) as you please, choose
what Gods you will serve: But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

Parts of the text.
In the words we may without much curiosity of Division, consider these general
parts.

1. The Epitome of all Religion, expressed in these words, To serve the Lord:
which is the sum of both Tables of the Law, especially of the first.

2. Joshuahs Resolution to serve the Lord; wherein we have three particulars.

1. His appropriation of it to himself, As for me, I will serve the Lord.

2. The extension of his Religion, to his family; As for me and my house, we
will serve the Lord.

3. The Order of it. First himself will be Religious, and then his house: I
and my house, etc.

1. For the first, The service of God, to be the sum of all Religion; 1 The
Epitome of Religion.
it appears by those places of Scripture where true Religion is commanded,
Exodus 23, 25. Ye shall serve the Lord your God. To serve God.
Deuteronomy. 10.12. What does the Lord thy God require of thee? but, to serve him
with all thy heart and all thy soul. How? To keep the Commandments of the
Lord, etc. That is, all his Commandments of both Tables. Some there are who
distinguish Worship and Service, making Worship the object of the first Table,
and Service of the second: but without any ground of Scripture; for that holds
out Service, as more general, and including Worship, as a more special part of
Gods Service: as is evident in the texts above cited, and many more like unto
them. We may better distinguish the Service of God into Imediate which is
properly called Worship: in the first Table and Mediate, by men, which is
called Righteousness in the second Table: for though we do not properly
worship God by doing the works of righteousness, yet are we said to serve God
in doing to men the duties of the second Table: As the Apostle says of
servants: That in obeying their Masters, they serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24.
We note this because it will be of use anon.

2 Joshua's Resolution.
2. For the particulars of the second part Joshuahs resolution; many things
might be obseved, but we shall wave them all; and look at him only, as an
Householder, with Relation to his family: I and my house will serve the Lord:
and draw out this one Observation.

That it is the property, Observation.
and duty of a good Householder, to provide and taks care, that all under his
charge do serve the Lord; that is, be religious, and righteous; the one
toward God, the other toward men: 1 Proved.
We shall first confirm it, and then apply it: confirm it.

1. In general; 1 In general, by examples.
And here we have first the commended example of Abraham, the father of the
faithful, by God himself, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do justice and judgment, etc. Which also he practiced, Genesis 14.14. where we
hear of his trained, or instructed, catechized servants: And Genesis 17.23. being
entered into Covenant himself, and circumcised; he circumcised the same day,
Ishmael his son, and all that were borne in his house, Genesis 35.2. Jacob
purges his family.
and bought with money. This Family Religion, or Reformation, is graciously and
courageously resolved on by David, Psalm. 101.2. etc. I will behave my self
wisely in a perfect way: I will walk within my house, with a perfect heart,
etc. And mark his wisdom, both in the constitution, and ordering of his
Family, ver. 3. I will set no wicked thing (a thing of Belial, the description
of a wicked person) before mine eyes. I hate the work of them that turn aside,
etc. I will not know a wicked person, ver. 4. as if said, None such shall come
into my house: He that works deceit, shall not dwell in my house (or if he
do unawares come in) he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight, ver.
7. Who then shall serve him? he that will serve God with him; Mine eyes shall
be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me; He that walks
in a perfect way (as I resolved to do, ver. 2.) he shall serve me, Hence it is
observable in the New Testament, that as a proper consequence of the
Householders conversion, when any such believed, his Family believed with him.
Joh. 4.53. its said of that Nobleman; Himself believed, and his whole house.
So Acts 16.15. Lydia was converted, baptized, and her household: and ver. 33.
the Jailer was baptized he and all his; as if they had learned Joshuahs
resolution: As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. This for the
general.

2 Specially in two Respects.
2. We shall look more specially and particularly at those Duties which concern
the good Householder to perform and practice; and that with Respect either to
his Relations, or to the particular Services, required in the Family.

1 To the several Relations in the Family. As,
1. In respect to his several Relations in the Family; which oftentimes (if not
always) are of three sorts: 1. As an^ Husband to a wife. 2. As a Parent to
children. 3. As a Master to servants. The same person may stand in this
threefold Relation, and in all these the Duty lies upon him, to see that all
under his charge, do serve the Lord: See the particulars.

1. As an Husband to a Wife: 1 As an Husband to a Wife.
And the Apostle has instructed him in that, 1 Pet. 3.7. Likewise ye Husbands
dwell with them (your wives) according to knowledge, etc. That is, being able
and ready to instruct, and guide them, in the service and ways of God: This is
implied also, 1 Cor. 14.35. If wives will learn any thing, let them ask their
Husbands at home: and ver. 34. they are commanded obedience, as also says the
Law: which implies he has power to command them, to know, and serve God: How
else can an Husband say (as Joshua) I and my house will serve the Lord, when
one principal party, is at liberty to serve the Devil, without control.

2 As a father to children.
2. As a Father (or in his death or absence, a Mother) unto children. The
Scripture is express for this, and full. Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8. These words which I
command thee, shall be in thine heart. And thou shall teach them diligently to
thy children; and thou shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house,
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. The same is repeated again (to note the excellency and necessity,
and common neglect of this duty) Deuteronomy. 11.18. with this addition in both
places; Thou shall write them upon the dooreposts of thy house, and upon thy
gates, to make them know, and remember them the better: So Pro. 22.6. Train up
a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from
it. The New Testament speaks the same language, Ephesians, 6 And ye Parents, bring up
your children in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord.

3. As a Master to servants: 3 As a Master to servants.
Abraham's example is here recorded for imitation: He will command his household
(as well as his children) that is his servants, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord, etc. That Psalm. 101. is David's profession, for ordering his servants.
He will have all his servants faithful and religious, or make them such, or
else eject, and turn them out of doors. The Masters of families, Exodus 12.44.
were to see that their servants did eat the Passover; and did sanctify the
Sabbath, Exodus 20. in the fourth Command^^ent. Thus in respect to his Relations.

2 To the kinds of service of God.
2. In respect to the several kinds of Services of God, to be maintained in the
Family; and they are (as we said) of two sorts.

1 Immediate in the first Table
1. Immediate service of God, in the first Table of the law, called specially
Worship: and that according to the four Commandments thereof: 1. To know,
fear, love, trust, delight in God: required in the first Commandment. 2. To
cause them to know, and attend upon all instituted Ordinances of worship; as
Prayers, Reading, hearing the word: Grace and Thanksgiving at Meals,
Sacraments, etc: 3. To Reverence Gods Name, in not taking it in vain; and
reverent using of all his Ordinances and Creatures. 4. To sanctify his
Sabbath: These the chief Householder is to take care of, in all in his Family,
as the places aforecited manifest.

2. Mediate Service, 2 Mediate in the second.
is that which at second-hand, redounds to God, by serving of men, according to
the Commandments of the second Table; Teaching them to be obedient to
Superiors; to be meek, quiet, peaceable: To be chaste and temperate: To be just
and righteous in their dealings. To be true and faithful in their words; And to
be moderate in their desires, contented with their own estate, etc. In doing
these things, men are said, by reflection, and at last result to serve God; as
is clearly spoken of servants, Col. 3.24. and Ephesians. 6.6. Not with eye-service
as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart. And ver. 7. With good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men.
God is pleased to esteem himself served and worshipped, in faithful
performance of the works of our callings, and duties of the second Table, to
our neighbor; as well as in our Immediate worship of himself, in the first
Table.

3. By Reason.
Thus have we both explained, and confirmed the Doctrine, by light, and proofs
of Scripture; we shall add the light and strength of Reason.

1. He is Gods Deputy.
1. The chief Householder, is in his family Gods Deputy or Viceroy, yea a God to
his Wife, children, and servants, as Moses was to Aaron, Exodus 4.16. Liberis
suis Pater Dei vice est. Greg. Naz.
And therefore to manage his Authority for God, in promoting his service, in
the little World, or Kingdom of his own House. He has Gods Titles, of Father,
and Lord put upon him; and so the Supreme power in the family, to command all
his subjects (for so they are in a sense) for God: As was said of Abraham, he
will command his Household, etc. He is also called the Head of the Family
(though chiefly of his wife) to oversee and guide the body, that little
Domestical body.

2. The Chief householder Christian, is in Christ's stead, 2 In Christ stead; in
all his offices. As,
to his family; And hence it is said of dutiful servants, that in serving their
Masters, they serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24. whose Deputies, Masters are to
them. Whereupon they are invested with all his Offices (as every good Christian
is to himself. Rev. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.) of Prophet, Priest, and King. These three
Offices met all in one man at the beginning, as in Adam to be sure, he was all
these to his Family; afterward, they were severed, and distributed into
several persons; one a Prophet, another a Priest, another a King: Sometimes two
of them met in one person, a Priest and a King, as Melchisedeck; a Prophet and
a Priest, as Samuel; a Prophet and a King as David; But they never met all in
one person, till Christ the Second Adam was anointed above his fellows, and
recovered that which the first Adam lost. And this Ointment, descended to the
skirts of his garments, the meanest of his Members; but especially to
Houshlders, as their primitive right, to be in one person, a Prophet, a Priest
and a King to his Family; Touch but the particulars.

1. A Prophet, 1. A Prophet.
to teach and instruct his Household, Deuteronomy. 6.6. Thou shall diligently teach
them, etc. Ephesians. 6.6. Every Householder, is a Preacher to his own family, a
Minister in a sense, to read and expound with modesty, the word of God, to
Catechize and instruct his wife, children servants.

2. A Priest, 2 A Priest*
to off^r Sacrifice for them, and with them as Job did for his: Both
propitiatory sacrifice (after a sort) that is, praying for pardon of their
sins, and for grace; and Peace Offerings, or Eucharistical Sacrifices, of
Praises and Thanksgiving, for them and with them, as for himself. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Ye are a royal Priesthood that ye should show forth the praises of him, Heb.
13.15.
who has called you out of darkness, into his marvelous light.

3. A King.
3. A King to rule and command (as well as to protect) his family. Abraham will
command his Household, etc. And the Coercive and correcting power over his
family, argues his authority to be King-like. The very Heathens acknowledged
this truth by the light of Nature, Ephesians. 1. last. That every man should bear
rule in his own house. It is spoken with respect to the Wife; but will much
more extend to children and servants: There is a kind of Civil judicature
erected in the Family, a power to examine, try, censure, punish, and eject
offenders, Genesis 21.10. Cast out the Bondwoman with her son. And this household
discipline David resolves to exercise in his house, Psalm. 101. either to keep
out, or cast out such as are wicked and incorrigible: This of the second Reason.

3. Every chief householder has Curam animarum, 3. He has the cure of souls.
the charge of the souls of his family (not properly pastoral, but very like
it.) He must give an account of the souls, of his Wife, Children, Servants, as
well as the Magistrate of the souls of his Subjects, Ezekiel. 34.10. or the
Minister of the souls of his people, Ezekiel. 2.18. It concerns him therefore
very nearely to endeavor to make them Religious, which is the only way to
save their souls.

4. His house is a lesser Church.
4. Every Christians house, should be a lesser Church; as the Church is called
the House of God. Hence we read of a Church in a house. Romans 16.5. The Church
which is in the house of Aquila and Priscila: Philem. ver. 2. The Church in thy
house: Whether it were, because the Congregation did assemble in their houses
(having at that time no public place of meeting) or that in their houses there
were enough to make a little Church (as some limite the number at lest to
seven) or whether their houses were so ordered for Religion, that they seem^d
to be lesser Churches: it is not material to inquire. Of that famous Emperors
house Constantine, it is reported by Eusebius, that the exercises of Religion
were so ordered in it, that it differed little from a Church; There were
Prayers morning and evening, reading of the word, Catechizing, Singing of
Psalms (all but Sacraments and Preaching) as in the Church: And to use St.
Chrysostomes words, Where there are (in a house) Prayers, and Singing of
Psalms, Tom. 1. page 6.11. l. 19. etc, in Psalm. 41.
and reading of the Prophets, etc. a man should not much mistake, in calling
such a meeting or assembly a Church. And this service of God in the family, he
calls (...); a good Liturgy, and worship of God. And besides there is, or
should be exercised a Church-like Discipline, even a lesser Excommunication of
refractorie offenders; as David professes he would deal with wicked, proud,
deceitful, lying servants. Psalm. 101. If by instruction, admonition,
correction he could not reclaim them, he would Excommunicate and cast them out
of the Church, in his house. This may suffice for confirmation of the point.

2 Applied.
We now come to the Application of all, by Uses and Inferences therefrom.

1 To check the rashness of young people.
1. To consider and bewail the rashness of many young ones, who rush upon
Family Relations, and never know or weigh how fit, or unfit they are to
discharge the Duties of those Relations. They must be married forsooth, in all
the have; there is one Relation; then come children (perhaps before the lawful
time) there is another: And then servants must be had, to attend them and
theirs: that is a third Relation; but know not what the duties of any of those
relations are, nor the charge of those souls, under their Inspection. While a
man is single, he has care (almost) of none, but his own soul; and much
liberty to study how to serve and please God, 1 Cor. 7.34. But when once he
has a family, made up of these three relations, his duties are multiplied with
them, and now he must take care of the Souls of wife, children, servants: and
yet scarce knows how to take care of his own soul. Little do they consider,
that the chief householder must be a Prophet to teach, a Priest to pray with and
for, a King to rule his own family: when they cannot teach, pray, or rule
themselves. Let this consideration check and cool the heat, and heady
rashness of younger people.

2 It shows the iniquity of Toleration.
2. This may serve to discover the iniquity of that so much called for cursed
Toleration of all Religions; falsely called Liberty of Conscience. The
mischiefs of it are so many, and so great, that they cannot be aforehand
imagined; Besides the public, disturbance of the peace, by different fractions
and factions, etc. The natural, or unnatural consequences of such a Toleration;
the divisions in families will be as many almost, as there are persons; and the
wisest Householder cannot possibly redress it. But the maine is this; that it
will prove impossible for the most pious Householder to do his duty, in making
his Family Religious, and to serve God with him, in all his relations, when as
he has no coercive power to resolve with Joshua, I and my house will serve the
Lord. Suppose (which experience daily confirms to be true) The Householder be a
godly, zealous Protestant, his Wife an Independent, the children Anabaptists,
some one or more of the servants Papists, etc. How is it possible the Superior
should unite all these into a Church in his house, to serve God, if a
toleration for all Religions be granted? Some will pretend they go to serve
God in their own way, and assemblies; and perhaps go to serve the Devil, in
the Stews or Tavern. How shall the Householder join with his family, wife,
children, servants, in prayers, reading, hearing, Sacraments, and
sanctification of the Sabbath by all together, (which is charged upon him in
the fourth Commandment) when they not only detest his way of serving God, but
his prayers, reading, Sabbaths, etc. and perhaps himself? different affections
commonly arising from differing opinions and judgments: Let the wise consider
it.

3 Complaint of many Householders.
3. Here Is matter of just complaint of many, of most Householders; who are
discovered to be little Religious themselves, by the profaneness, and
loosnesse of their Family; wives, children, servants. In that place before
cited, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. its made a sign of a man, that is godly and religious,
that has Gods words in his heart, that he endeavors to make his family such.
These words that I command thee shall be in thine heart: And thou shall teach
them to thy children, etc. Contrarily, ignorance of God, and irreligion in
their families, are joined together, Jer. 10.25. and both of them Characters of
a nation or family lying under the wrath of God, and subject to his curse and
destruction; Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy Name. Much complaining there is every where,
of the badnesse of servants, children, wives, as if they were corrupted abroad;
when the truth is, they are either corrupted, or neglected at home, for want of
instruction, or household discipline, or good example of the chief and Head of
the family. This might be exemplified in all the Relations of the family; and
in all the Services of God required in the family, to be exercised by the
Master of the house* How much ignorance of God and his word in most families?
For neglect of
How much loosnesse, profaneness, wickedness, in children, servants, wives?
Take but the reason of all in a word, it is because there is no care of the
service of God, in the family, by the Chief of the family. Look but upon the
particular services:

1 Morning and evening prayers in the family.
1. A constant course of Morning and Evening Prayers, is one principle part of
the service of God in the family, which is evinced by this one argument
(because some deny the necessity of it, and call for Scripture for it) to omit
others; Because it being God that has placed men in a Community (setting the
solitary in families, Psalm. 68.6.) it cannot be justly conceived, he did this
merely for their worldly conveniences; but rather that they should improve
their Society to his glory, who is the Lord of them altogether, as well as of
every one single; so to worship him jointly, as well as of every one solitarily
and apart, Zach. 12. And as Congregations or public Assemblies, are appointed
purposely for the more solemn worship of God, by all several families: So are
families for a joint and less solemn worship of God, by all the single
persons thereof together. And indeed, how has the family that knowledge of
God, to be 1. Their great Lord and Master. 2, The Author of their peace among
themselves; Psalm.
He makes men to be of one mind in an house, that the Governor is gentle to
his inferiors, and they dutiful to him. 3. The Author of all blessings to them
all; of health and strength to follow their labors, and of success and
comfort in them; if they agree not together to join in worship of that their
Lord, and in tendering Prayers and Praises, for such things as they expect and
receive from him? But now how visible, how common is the neglect of this
service of God? How many, or rather how few families are there that keep this
course? How many go to bed like their Swine, and rise again like their Dog,
without ever calling upon Gods Name? to give thanks for mercies received, or
pray for what they want? The very Lords Prayer (which runs in the plural)
implies this a daily duty of every man, and being a society, it requires it of
all together that can meet; to say, Our Father, etc. and thine is the Kingdom,
etc. The House is a little Church, and so may be called an House of Prayer.

2. Reading and hearing of the word, 2 Reading and hearing of the word.
is another commanded service, as by every person single, so by all together in
the family: It concerns the Master of the family to see this done, Deuteronomy. 11.18.
etc. is expressed for this, to make the Scriptures known to their household;
speaking of it to them, writing it upon the posts and gates, and reading of it
is now the readiest way. But now, how many Families have not one Chapter read
from years end, to years end, at least from Sabbath to Sabbath? How shall they
understand the word in public, Col. 3.16.
that are not acquainted with it in private? The Apostle commands, Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another, etc. And it was the commendation of Timothius Parents that he knew he
holy Scripturs from a child; which only are able to make a man wise to
salvation. In many families, and they great ones, we may find Play-Books, and
amorous lacivious discourses frequently read; but rarely a Chapter of the
Bible, all the week long: Is it any wonder then, that wives, children,
servants, are so bad?

3. Catechizing and instructing of those under their charge, 3 Catechizing.
is another Service of God, Deuteronomy. 6.6. Thou shall whet them upon thy Children,
etc. or sharpen them by often repeating.
and the best means to work knowledge of God and his service in the hearts of
inferiors: Train up a child (and servant) in the trade of his youth, and
when he is old, he shall not depart from it. Thus did David drop Religion into
Solomon, while a child, Pro. 4.3, 4. and so did his mother Bathsheba, Pro.
31.1, 2. etc. Timothies did the like, 2 Timothy 2. But how is this every where
neglected? Few children or servants are taught the Catechism, the first
principles of Religion? Hence the unprofitablenesse under the best public
preaching: Hence so many are seduced into so many gross errors, and heresies,
and profanesse.

4 Singing of Psalms.
4. Singing of Psalms is another service of God in the family, as well as in
the public: See Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another, with Psalms,
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making melody in your hearts to God. We hear
Ballads, and Jigs, and filthy Songs, sung in families; but not a Psalm all the
year long.

5. Grace before and after meals, 5 Grace at meals.
is a part of Prayer and Praises, due to God; but shamefully neglected in
families, or but a mere formality, if used, without any reverence. Is it any
wonder children, servants, be so bad to them, when they are so bad to God? that
they do as the children of Israel did, Sit down to eat and drink, and rise up
to play: and that play was Idolatry. Our blessed Savior himself never eat
himself, or fed others at his Table, but he blessed and gave thanks, Mark.
8.6, 7. and the Apostle Paul amongst Heathens observed the same, Acts 27.35.
And the same Apostle, speaking of meats particulary; God has created them to
be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know the truth: For
every creature of God, is good if it be received with thanksgiving; For it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. As if it were not
good, if not sanctified by prayer and thanksgiving; but may prove a Serpent,
even a poison to soul or body: And the neglect hereof argues (in the Apostles
Logic) that such persons, neither believe, nor know the truth. Let them
consider it.

6 Sanctification of the Sabbath.
6. Lastly, Sanctification of the Sabbath, by the whole family, in all or most
of the duties aforesaid, publicly and privately, is the care of the chief
householder; as in the fourth Commandment: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath
day: Thou Master, and thy son and daughter, manservant and maidservant. What
need so particular enumeration, if there were not a great weight in the
performance thereof? But where shall we find the family that does all this?
when the Householders themselves neglect or profane it by their own example; and
employ their children and servants in businesses, to keep them from the public
Congregation, or leave them to come or go at their own pleasure; or to spend
the day in Idelnesse or Sports and pastimes, that day; How can these men say
truly, I and my house, we will serve the Lord? I shall only say more truly,
what once was falsely applied to our Savior; This man is not of God, because he
keeps not the Sabbath day: because he takes no care, that his family with
him, do keep the Sahbath day. And thus much of the third Use.

4. Exhortations to the duty; where,
4. The last is a word of Exhortation, to set on this duty, upon all Chief
Householders, in all their Relations, to resolve with Joshua, (what ever others
do) As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. To persuade them more
effectually to the performance hereof, I shall propound some more special
Motives, and then prescribe some Directions or means, how they may effect it,

1 The Motives from the Good.
1. The Motives (besides those Reasons used in the Doctrinal part) which should
be sufficient to persuade any Christian) I shall add these which shall have
respect, 1. To the family. 2. To the public. 3. To themselves.

1 To the Family.
1. To the Family; It is the greatest Good they can do to them, to make them
Religious: To provide an Estate, or inheritance for children; meat, drink and
wages for servants is no more than Turks and Heathens do. What singular thing
is this? yea, they provide meat and drink for their beasts, and no more for
their families souls? to leave them interested in the Covenant of grace, under
the favor, blessing and protection of God, when they are gone hence; this is
the choicest, and chiefest good, and for this they will bless God for them,
for ever.

2. To the public, 2 To the public.
in Towns, Countries, Church, Nation, which are all made up of families, as
families of single persons: To make the family good and Religious, makes good
Magistrates, good Subjects, good Husbands, good Wives, good Masters, good
Servants good Neighbors; when any of the family swarms, as I may so say, into
other Societies; The Town, Country, Kingdom, is bettered and blessed by such:
He or She, will never be good neighbors, Subjects, etc. that were not good in
their Family Relations: He will never be good Father, that was not a good
child; nor she a good Mother, that was not a good daughter: nor he good
Master, that was a naughty servant; and so of the rest. Absalom who was a
rebellious child, proved a traitorous Subject: Hophin and Phineas, that were
disobedient children, proved sacrilegious Priests, etc. There is a saying of
the Philosophers; Mulus vir, bonus civis: An ill man, may be a good Citizen;
But Divinity says, An ill man, can no more be a good Citizen, or neighbor,
then evil can be good. The want therefore of family Reformation is the cause of
all the miscarriges abroad, in Towns, Churches, Country, Nation: Hence come
all those disorders in Towns and Nations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Profannesse, etc. from want of discipline in families. This fills the Goales,
and furnishes the Gallows: Be the Laws, Orders, in Cities, Churches, never so
good; yet all in vain, if Masters of families neglect their duties. Much
complaint there is of the general badnesse of the times, but they may thank
themselves: And as for the Church or Congregation; the long desired, and by
some much endeavored Reformation, sticks here: The want of this Resolution in
Masters of families, I and my house will serve the Lord: makes all the
Ministers labors unfruitful. It Is impossible a Minister should teach,
instruct, and make a Town, or Congregation Religious, unless assisted by the
Governors of houses. If their Households be not taught the Principles of
Religion at home, acquainted with the word, by private reading; brought to
attend on, and called to account for public Ordinances, all our labor comes
to nothing. As then the Householders intend the Public good of State and
Church, let them resolve, I and my house, etc. See Psalm. 101. last, this mend
all.

3. To themselves; 3. To themselves: it is
if the other prevail not, self-love should. It is for their own greatest
good, and that two ways.

1. The way to make them faithful, diligent, profitable to themselves, 1 For
their profit.
is to make them truly religious. Now, Wives, children, servants, obey them for
Conscience sake, toward God. Onesimus, while unregenerate, was unprofitable to
his Master Philemon; a purloyner (it seems) and a runaway; But Paul having
converted him, sends him home, now profitable. Ungodly and profane servants,
are commonly idle, deceitful, at best but Eye-servants; and bring a curse upon
the whole family. But religious servants, if truly so, prove faithful, you may
trust them with any thing, with all you have (as Potiphar did Joseph, and Laban
did Jacob) and they dare not be false: And diligent in their labors, because
they set themselves always under the eye of God; and when their Masters eye is
far off them, they see him that is invisible: But above all, they are
Prayerful, morning, evening, and at all times, and so procure a blessing on
their labors, upon estate, children, businesses entrusted with them. See an
instance in Abraham's servants, Genesis 24.12. his prayer for success of his
journey, and business, and ver. 33. his faithfulness, and diligence, not eat
till know the issue. They then are enemies to their own profit, that endeavor
not to make their families good.

2, This is for their comfort, 2 For their comfort.
living or dying, when they shall see their care and labor succeed and blessed
by God, with grace and holiness in their families: what joy and comfort will
this be, to have been instrumental to their salvation? I have (says he) no
greater joy than this, to see my children walking in the truth: A wise son
makes a glad father: but a foolish one is an heaviness and shame to his
mother: So is a wise and religious servant, no less honor than comfort to his
Master. If it succeed not, yet a comfort to hem, that they have done their
duty. Though it be a grief to see no fruits of their travel, yet much more when
conscious of their neglect of their souls: In hell nothing more tormenting,
than for not having done their duty, to help them to salvation, by instruction,
admonition, correction: but rather to further their damnation, by wicked
examples, and so to be filled with their curses, as soul-murderers. Let all
these things be considered. I might remember them of the famous examples of
such Householders, as were careful to make their families Religious, in
Scripture and Stories; those before named, Abraham, Jacob, David, etc. And that
of Constantine the Emperor, whose house was for Religion, like a Church: I
shall give but one of later times, That of Jews the ninth, King of France, who
was found instructing a poor kitchen boy; and being asked why he would do so,
said, The meanest has a soul as precious as my own, and bought with the same
blood of Christ. But I forbear any more, and come to

2. The Directions, 2. The directions
or means how they may make their Families religious with themselves.

1. Begin at home, 1. Begin at home.
and make themselves examples to their Families, as Joshua here observes the
right order; I first, and then my house, shall serve the Lord: Inferiors look
more at what Superiors do, then what they say. The wickedness of the
Heathens, was from the lewdness of their gods and goddesses, as the Poets
described them. Jup^ter adulterous, Venus a wanton, Bacchus a revelling
drunkard, etc. Who will care to be better then his God? what servant will be
more religious than his Master? or maid than her Lady or Mistress? Nay, it is
a shame to a Parent, or Master, to have his children, or servants better then
himself: And this is the reason, why dissolute and wicked Masters will not
endure religious servants because their life is a real reproof; Solomon's
experience tells us, When a Ruler (of House, or Town, or Nation) hearkens to
lies, all his servants are wicked, Pro- 29.12. It Is true in other vices of
Superiors; when they are Drunkards, Unchaste, Profane; their servants are so
too, or will quickly be made such. If you would have your families, in all
Relations religious and holy, be you holy in all manner of conversation: if you
be wicked, its in vain to offer to make them good. It will be said, Physician
heal thy self. Nothing either silences, or duls the edg of instructions,
reproofs, corrections more, then to hear; Thou that teach another, teach
thou not thy self? Thou that say thy Wife Child, Servant should not commit
Adultery, be drunk, be a profaner of the Sabbath, lie, swear, etc. do thou do
all, or any of these things? As one candle cannot light another, if it self be
out, so, nor shall an householder inform or inflame his family with the love of
God and godliness, if himself want it; or reform those that walk disorderly,
if himself need Reformation. Reformation never sticks, but (as they say in
fleying of a beast) at the Head. When one told Sigismund the Emperor; Let the
Reformation begin from the Minorites) a kind of Friars) No, says he, if ever
it be done, it must begin at the Majorites. We heard before, when the chief
Householder was converted and believ^d all his house believed also.

2. Look to the constitution of the Family.
2. Look well to the constitution of your Families, (as some say of Churches,
the house being to be a lesser Church) that they be at least visible Saints,
that is, apparently religious; though perhaps secret hypocrites. That is, look
well when you first set up a family, whom you admit into that society:
Especially for a wife and servants: (for Children cannot be chosen, but given,
as a gift from God.) If in choice of a Wife, men look either only, or chiefly
at Beauty, Parentage, Portion; it matters not for Religion; if they be vexed
with an ill piece of Housholdstuffe, they may thank themselves, and make the
Reformation of the Family, very difficult, if not impossible. When the Husband
shall call to prayers and the Wife to playing, Carding, Dice; what, hope of
Reformation, or Religion there? When Mical shall sc^ffe at David's devotion,
what can be expected that is good? Woe be to him that has a Philistine in his
bosom, as Sampson had. So if in choice of a servant, men shall look only at
their own service, for such an employment, and never care for the Religion or
godliness of that servant; the less of that, the better: is it any wonder
they complain of ill servants, and bad services? can you look they should be
faithful to you, when they and you are unfaithful to God? Mark and imitate
David's choice, Psalm 101.4. I will not know a wicked person. v. 6. Mine eyes
shall be upon the faithful, that they may dwell with me, etc.

3. Set up Religion in earnest
3. Set up, and keep up Family Religion in earnest, and not in formality only:
Instruction, Catechizing, Reading of the word, praying, sanctification of the
Sabbath, etc. in your selves and yours; And resolve to exercise and execute
Family-discipline upon those that are incorrigible. If admonition, reproof,
correction, will not amend them; proceed to the censure of household
Excomunication: (the house being a lesser Church) So David resolved, Psalm.
10.4, 5, 7. A froward heart shall depart from me; He that privily slandereth
his neighbor, him will I cut off. He that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight, (in my house) Let no Swearer, Drunkard, Unclean person, etc. dwell or
tarry in your houses: Tell them, As for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord; if you will not serve the Lord with me, you shall not serve me.

4. Keep out (as much as you can) all wicked Companions from your houses: 4.
Keep out.
Its not possible to keep Religion up in your Families, in power and purity;
when Swearers, Drunkards, etc Atheists and Scorners of godliness, may have
entertainment, and countenance therein. These will corrupt your children and
servants (and well if not your wives.) These will scoff you out of your
Religion or cool and quench your devotion. Prayers, and Reading, etc must be
sometimes intermitted to gratify them: Sabbaths must be profaned for their
sakes. Say then, you Masters of houses, Away from me, ye wicked, I will keep
the commandments of my God* even Strangers of old were to be kept from
profaning of the Sabbath, as in the fourth Commandment; the stranger that is
within thy gates: or if not, to be turned out of doors, out of the gates,
Nehem. 13.17, 21. If they will not observe the religious services of the house,
nor go with you to Gods house, let them not lodge in your houses. Say then
peremptorily, say and hold it: As for you, do as you think good, be wicked,
profane, etc. it is like you, But as for me and my house we w^ll serve the Lord.

Lastly, to conclude all; Here might have been added a short exhortation to all
sorts of Inferiors in the Family- relations, Inferiors to submit to this way.
as wives, children, servants, to submit to this Religious Ordering or
Reformation by the Governor of the house. If he must necessarily command, they
ought conscientiously to obey; that so the family, Town, Church, State, may be
happily reformed, and blessed.

Chapter 1. The Duties of Children to their Parents.
Col. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for that is well pleasing
to the Lord.


Q. WHat are the parts of this Text?

A. Three.

1. A duty; Obey your parents.

2. The extent of it, in all things.

3. The reason or motive; For this is well pleasing to the Lord.

Q. What is meant by children and Parents?

A. By children are especially meant such as proceed by natural generation; by
Parents, natural Parents, both father and mother.

Q. What are the grounds of childrens duties to Parents?

contra 2 Timothy 3.3.
A. A mixture of love and fear; love from the affections of Parents to them:
and fear from the authority of Parents over them: A fearing love, and a loving
fear.

Q. What are the duties of children to Parents?

A. Two, Reverence and Obedience.

Q. Wherein consists their Reverence?

A. In their speech and gest re.

Q. How does reverence appear in speech?

A. 1. In a modest forbearance to speak in their presence, Job 22.9, 10, 21,
till Parents give leave.

2. In right framing their words when they do speak.

Q. How may they frame their words aright?

A. 1. Their words must be honorable (to them, or of them) giving them their
Titles of Father, Lord, Sir, Mother, Genesis 22.7. 1 Kin. 2.20.

2. They must be few, only as occasion is offered.

3. They must be meek and humble, as Jonathan to his Father, 1 Samuel 19.4.

4. They must observe fit opportunities, 1 Samuel 19.9. and 20, 30.
when their Parents are not busy, or in passion.

5. A ready pleasing in their answers, as 1 Samuel 3, 4, 6. Matthew. 21.30.

Q. How must they express Reverence in their gesture or carriage?

A. 1. In tendering obeisance, Genesis 46 29. 1 Kin. 2.19. Genesis 46.12.
uncovering the head, standing up, bowing the body or knee,

2. In modesty and bashfulnesse in their countenances and carriage.

3. in taking the lower place.

4. In asking their blessing, Genesis 27.19.34.

Q. What obedience is due to Parents?

A. Both Passive and Active, 1 Pet. 1.14.

Q. Wherein must Passive obedience appear?

A. In forbearance to do any thing of moment, without consent of Parents; As,

In choice of a Calling, Genesis 28.2.

2. In marriage, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 1 Cor. 7 36, 37. Genesis 24.67. and 29.18. Judge. 14.2.

3. In disposing of their goods, Gal 4.1.

4. In ordering their apparel, Genesis 37.3. 2 Samuel 13.18.

4. In vowing, Number. 30.4.

Q. Whereby must their Atctive obedience be manifested?

A. 1: In obeying their commands, to come or go, or do any thing required, Genesis
28.5. and 49.1. 1 Samuel 17.19, 20.

2. In hearkening to their instructions, Prove. 1.8, 9. and 4.1, 3.

3. In patient bearing their reproves, Genesis 37.10. 1 Samuel 20.30. with
amendment, Ezod. 18.17. contra 1 Samuel 2.25. Pro. 13.1.

4 In submission to their corrections, Heb. 12 9. and reforming, Prove. 29.7.

5. In recompencing their care, love, and kindness, if God makes them able, 1 Timothy 5.4. by protection, provision, Joh. 19.17
support, comfort, etc. 1 Samuel 22.3, 4. Genes. 37.35. and 47.8.47.12.

Q. What more is required?

A. 1. In natural infirmities, inward or outward, they are to bear them
patiently, and cover them carefully from others, Genesis 9 23. Luke 2.51. contra
Pro. 30.17.

2. In casual necessities, upon their bodies or estates, they are to their
power to relieve them.

Q. Do children owe any Duties to their deceased Parents?

A. 1. Yes: A decent and honourabble burial, as they are able, Genesis 25.9. and
35.29.

2. In paying their debts, if the State will bear it.

3. To suppress evil reports of them.

4. 1 Kin. 3.3. and 15, 12
To imitate their good examples: these are a part of that honor due to their
Parents.

Q. What is the extent of their obedience?

A. The Text says, in all things, that is in all lawful things, in the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.1. In things indifferent, bringing their wills to their Parents.

Q. What motives are there to enforce these duties upon children?

A. 1. This is well pleasing to the Lord; and the cantrary displeasing.

2. Parents are in Gods stead to them, and in doing their duties to them, they
do it unto God: and contra.

3 The promises made to their obedience, of long life, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. and
happiness in this world, in their persons, estates, posterity, by their
Parents blessings, Deuteronomy. 5.16. and the contrary, threatenings and curses to
undutiful children, Prove. 30.17.

4 This Obedience to their parents on earth, shall be a good evidence they are
childen to God their Father in heaven.

Q. Are there not some besides natural Parents, that children owe duty to?

A. Yes: Such as are in the place of parents to them; which may be three ways.

1. Fathers or mothers in Law, by marriage.

2. Guardiars, the next of kin, when Parents are dead.

3. Tutors and Schoolmasters, entrusted with them.

Q. What duties do children owe to their fathers or mothers in Law?

A. The same for the most part, that they owe to their natural Parents. As 1.
Reverence, Exodus, 18.7. 2. Subjection, Luc. 2.51. 3 Recompense, as Ruth 1. and
2. chap.

Q. Upon what grounds are these due?

A. 1. The marriage bond makes man and wife one flesh, and so to be accounted
by them.

2. It is an honor to the natural Parent for children to respect the other
party, that is now one flesh with them.

Q. What duty owe they to Guardians and Tutors, etc.

A. A subjection and reverence, because they have the trust and charge of
Parents to them, as Esth. 2.20. 2 Kings 2.12, 15. Gal. 4.2.

Chapter 2. The Duties of parents to their children.
Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Col. 3.21. Fathers provoke not your children to anger, lest they be
discouraged.


Q. WHat are the parts of those Texts?

A. Three. 1. A prohibition, provoke not your children to wrath.

2. A reason thereof; lest they be discouraged.

3. A Precept; but bring them up; etc.

Q. What duties are here enjoined?

A. 1. To nourish or breed them up, with food, apparel and other necessaries.

2. To nurture them, viz. with good discipline.

3. To instruct them in the ways of God; in admonition of the Lord.

Q. What is the foundation of Parents duties to their children?

A. Love; (as in other relations) Tit. 2.4. by reason of the pain, pains,
care, and cost, which nothing but Love will bear out.

Q. What vices are contrary to this love?

A. 1. Want of natural affection, in the defect. Romans 1.30. Tit. 3.3.

2. Doting on them, and fondness in the excess, with too much indulgence, 1 Samuel 2.29

Q. What are the general duties, at all times to be done by Parents?

A. 1. Faithful and fervent prayers for them, 1 These. 5.17. from beginning to
end.

2. Upright walking with God, before them, Psalm. 112.2. Prove. 20.7. and 13.22.

3. A provident care for their childrens good, all their days, both temporal,
and spiritual good.

Q. What is the duty of mothers to their children in their infancy?

A. 1 Before it is borne, care for the safe carriage and delivery of it.

2 When it is borne, 1. provision of necessaries for it, Luke 2.7. 2. Nursing
it her self, if God make her able, Genesis 21.7. Sarah and Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.22.
Psalm. 22.9. 3. Procuring of right Baptism, which concerns also, and chiefly the
father: as in circumcision.

Q. What duties concern them in childhood?

A. A special care, in bringing them up, and in putting of them forth when fit.

Q. What must Parents aim at, in bringing of them up?

A. 1. At their temporal good; in first nourishing them well, providing all
needful things for life, and health, Math. 7.9, 19. Genesis 37.3. Zech. 8.5. Joh.
4.47. 2. Nurturing them with good manners, Prove. 22.6. Levit. 19.32. Prove.
25.6. Luke 14.8. and in some honest Calling, Began. 4.2. and 37.12. Exodus 2.16,
etc.

2. At their spiritual good; in admonition of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Genesis 18.19.
Prove. 4.4. 2 Timothy 1.5. In reading the word, 2 Timothy 3.15. Catechizing, Deuteronomy.
6.7. and by an exemplary life, Josh. 22.15.

Q. what are the means of Nurture?

A. 1. Frequent admonition, to fasten their instructions, Deuteronomy. 6.7. wheting
them.

2. Correction; both in words of reproof, Prove. 6. 23. and 15.32. and in
stripes if needful, Prove. 22.15. and 23.13, 14.

Q. What duties do Parents owe to children at riper age, past childhood?

A. 1. Provision of fit callings, as before.

2. Provision of fit matches in marriage; as Abraham, and Isacc did for theirs;
both which require, preparation of a Stock and Portion.

Q. What are the duties of Parents at the time of their death?

A. 1. Good counsel, precepts, directions, as Isaac and Jacob did.

2. Faithful prayers, and blessings of them, commending them into the hands of
God.

3. Commending them to some faithful friend to oversee them, and supply their
loss, Esth. 2.15.

4. To settle their estate by Will, to prevent divisions amongst children. Isa.
38.1.


Q. Are there not some besides natural Parents, that owe duty to children?

A. Yes, those that are in stead of Parents which are (as before) fathers or
mothers in Law, guardians, and tutors or scoolmasters.

Q. What duties do fathers and mothers in Law owe to children

A. The same for the most part, that natural Parents owe to them, Luke 2.48.
Exodus 18.1 Ruth 3.1.

Q. What reason is there for this?

A. 1. Marriage making man and wife one flesh, they ought to love each others
children, as part of themselves.

2. It Is a sign of entire love to each other; Love me, and love my child, etc.

3. It Is a special means to preserve love betwixt them.

Q. What duties do Guardians owe to the children entrusted with them?

A. The same (some few excepted) that natural Parents owe them, Esth. 2 7, 11,
20, 22. and 4.13. 1 Timothy 5.8.

Q. What are the special duties?

A. 1. To look carefully to their education.

2. To preserve their patrimony, etc.

Q. What is the duty of Tutors, etc?

A. 1. To instruct them well in Piety or Religion. 2. In learning. 3. In good
manners.

Chapter 3. The Duties of Servants to their Masters.
Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the
flesh, not with eye-service, etc


Q. WHat are the particulars of these Texts?

A. Four. 1. The kinds of their duties.

2. The manner. 3. The extent. 4. the motives.

Q. What are the kinds of servants duties?

A. Two. Inward and outward.

Q. What are the inward?

A. 1. In judgment, to he persuaded of their Masters Superiority over them.

2. In a special affection of fear, not a slavish, but reverential fear,
counting them worthy of all honor, Mal. 1.6. Ephesians. 6.5. 1 Pet. 2.18.

Q. What are their outward duties?

A. Two. Reverence, and Obedience.

Q. Wherein appears their Reverence?

A. 1. In speech; 2. In their carriage.

Q. How in their speech?

A. 1. In forbearing to speak in their presence, attending to what they say.

2. In ordering their speech aright, when they do speak; where their words must
be. 1. Reverent, giving their titles, Lord, Master, etc. 2. Few. 3. Meek and
humble. 4. Seasonable, Mark 4.10. 5 Ready to answer, Job 19.16. 6 True without
lying. 7. Good of them in absence; as contrarily, Ziba of his Master, 2 Samuel
16.3.

Q How in their carriage?

A. 1. By obeisance. 2. Standing before them. 3. Heads uncovered. 4. Sober and
modest countenance. 5. Modesty of apparel, suitable to their estate and place.

Q. What are the parts of their obedience?

A. 1. Negative or passive, to forbear what is forbidden or denied them: as 1.
Not to go when and whether they list. 2. Nor do their own, but their Masters
business. 3. Nor dispose of their goods, without leave, Prove. 31.15. Exodus
21.4.
4. Nor marry without their consent. 5. Nor go away before their time expired.

2. Affirmative, or Active; and that expressed. 1. In doing their commands,
Luke 17.7, 8. 2. In harkening to their instructions, both Religious and Civil.

3 By patient bearing their reproves, or corrections, 1 Pet. 2.18. though
unjust, Tit. 2.9. with speedy amendment, Prove 27.22.

Q. In what manner must all their duties be performed?

A. 1. In singleness of heart, Col. 3.22. and heartily, v. 23. or from the
heart not with eye-service, or as men-pleasers; as Geheri, etc.

2. In conscience, as fearing God, as unto Christ; as serving the Lord Christ,
Ephesians. 6.

3. With good will, which implies four things. 1. Cheerfulness. 2. Quickness,
or readiness. 3. Diligence and activenesse in it. 4. Faithfulness, 1 Cor.
4.1. Tit. 2.10. In respect of,

1. Their Masters goods, both in keeping them, as Jacob, and increasing them,
as they that had the Tallents: contra. Tit. 2.20.

2. Their businesses, dispatching them well, as Genesis 24.2, 12, 26, 33.56.

3. Their secrets, especially their infirmities, by concealing them, Jerem.
38.27.

4. Good example to their fellows; to make them faithful, diligent, etc.
contra. Math. 24.48, 49.

5. Loving and careful of their children, to procure their good, of soul and
body.

Q. What is the extent of their obedience?

A. In all things; that is, in all lawful things, in the Lord: to bring their
judgment to their Masters in all indifferent things: For which end, let them
choose to serve Religious Masters.

Q. What are the motives used to persuade servants to do their duties?

A. 1. The place of a Master; he stands in Christ's stead; and so Christ is
served or neglected in him.

2. The honor of their own place, and condition; they are Christ's servants,
and freemen, 1. Cor. 7.22

3. The Recompense of their service from God, Col. 3.24.

Q. What is that Recompense?

A. Reward or punishment.

Q. What reward is promised to them?

A. 1. Temporal, many blessings. First from their Masters, as Joseph, Mordecai,
etc. 2. From strangers that behold their good service. 3. He will bless their
labors when they come to deal for themselves: Genesis 43.23.
as he did Jacob. 4. And give them such good servants as they have been.

2. Eternal; of the Lord receive the reward of inheritance with their Masters,
verse 24.

Q. What punishment is threatened?

A. The contrary to the Reward; Temporal, sending them hard Masters, or bad
servants, when they are Masters: or curse their labors: And eternal, v. 25. He
that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong he has done.

Q. Are there any other motives?

A. Yes: 1. If their Masters reward them not, God will: if they wrong them, God
will right them, upon their Masters. He that does wrong (though a Master) shall
receive for the wrong he has done. No respect of persons with God.

2. By being good servants, they shall be fitted to make good Masters.

3. And prove themselves good servants to God, and truly gracious, Tit. 2.10,
11. and adorn the Gospel and Religion.

Chapter 4. The Duties of Masters to their Servants.
Ephesians. 6.9. Masters, do ye the same things to them, forbearing threatening;
knowing that your Master also is in heaven,

Col. 4.1. Masters give unto your servants that which is just and equal,
knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.


Q. WHat are the parts of these Texts?

A. Two. 1. The duties in general, Justice and Equity. 2. The reason; knowing
that ye have a Master in heaven.

Q. What duties concern Masters?

A. 1. Care in choosing good servants, as Psalm. 101. at large; especially godly
and religious.

2. Conscience in using them well.

Q. Wherein does this last consist?

A. 1. In a wise maintaining their authority, as the authority of God.

2. In a right managing of it.

Q. How may they maintain wisely their Authority?

A. 1. By a good example and worthy carriage, Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101.1, 2.

2. By an awful carriage, that servants may stand in fear of them.

3. By keeping a distance from them; least familiarity breed contempt, Prove.
30.22. and 29.21.

Q. What is the extent of their Authority?

A. 1. In their commands; restrained to the Laws of God: and exercised in
execution of Gods commands: as Abraham, Genesis 19.

Levit. 25.43.
2. In their corrections, which must be moderate, and discreet; in consideration
of the age, sex, fault of the person, etc.

Q. How may they manage rightly, their Authority?

A. By Justice and Equity; as the Text.

Q. What does Justice respect?

A. 1. The souls of their servants, in their edification and salvation, Josh.
24.15. to serve the Lord; by teaching them Principles of Religion, bringing to
public worship; calling them to account, and praying with them, and for them,
Jer. 10.25.

2. Their bodies, cherishing them with wholesome food, fit apparel, Pro. 31.21.
Deuteronomy. 5.14.
moderate labor, convenient rest, vales; and in sickness, physic needful,
Matthew. 8 6.

3. Their estate, that they may have a calling, and that they may live of
themselves, Genesis 30.30.

Q. What does Equity require of them?

A. 1. A good esteem of them, not as slaves, but as children rather, 2 Kin.
5.13. 1 Cor. 7.22.

2. Taking notice of their goodness, with approbation and kind acceptance:
Matthew. 25.21. Romans 13.3.
well done good servant.

3. Rewarding the good, when go away, as Deuteronomy. 15.13.

Q. What motives are there to enforce these duties upon them?

A. 1. They have a Master over them; and this will be a spure to incite them to
their duty, and a curb to do no wrong to them; because he takes notice of both.

2. Their Equality, in regard of God; ye (also) have a Master; and so
fellow servants, Math. 24 49.

3. In heaven, servants are admitted there; no respect of persons with God; And
yet there is far greater distance between God and them, than between them and
their servants.

Chapter. 5. Of Marriage in general.
Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable among all, etc.


Q. WHerein appears the honor of Marriage?

A. 1. In the Author, God himself.

2. In the place, Paradise. Genesis 2.18, 21. etc.


3. In the time, in Innocence.

4. In the persons, the first Parents of all.

5. In the manner, consultation, etc.

Q. What are required to Marriage?

A. 1. A right conjunction, of man and woman.

2. The common and mutual duties, which concern them both alike.

3. The particular duties of each party.

Q. Who are accounted Husband and Wife?

A. They who are rightly joined together in marriage, and of two made one flesh.

Q. Who are parties fit to marry?

A. They who having ripnesse of years, and wisdom to choose; no way made
impotent to marriage duties, 1 Cor. 7.36.

Q. Who are to be accounted impotent?

A. Born, or made Eunuchs by any occasion, Mat. 19.12. or dangerously diseased.

Q. May all sorts of person (but such) marry?

A. Yes, all, Heb. 13.4. 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. as the disease of Concupiscence is
common to all, 1 Cor. 7.2, 9.

Q. In choice of a person, what is required?

A. Choice of a fit helper, Genesis 2.18.

Q. What makes a fit helper?

A. 1. One not within the degrees of consanguinity, or affinity prohibited.

2. Equality, in Age, Condition, Estate, and Piety, Luke 1.6.

Q. How may a godly person be known?

A. 1. By their religious education, and their answerable walking.

2. By the report and fame with the good.

3. By the looks, if modest and chaste, etc.

4. By the speech, if sparing and humble.

5. By the Apparel, 1 Pet. 3.

6. By the Companions: like will to like.

Q. After what manner are fit persons to be joined together?

A. 1. By a mutual liking of each other, Gen, 24.58.

2. By an actual contract, Genesis 19.14, 18. Luke 1.27. a promise of marriage in
due time.

3. By a public solemnization of the marriage.

Q. What are the ends of marriage?

A. 1. To be fit helpers one of another.

2. Propagation of an holy posterity.

3. To avoid fornication, 1 Cor. 7.2.

Q. What are those mutual and comm^n duties, concerning both parties alike?

A. 1. Such as concern them between themselves. 2. Jointly with respect to
others.

Q. What are the duties that concern them between themselves?

A. 1. Such as respect the very being of marriage. 2. Or such as respect the
well being of it.

Q. What are those mutual duties to one another, which resp^ct the being of
marriage?

A. 1. Matrimonial unity, accounting one another to be one flesh; and that
without desertion of one another, except in case of Death, or Adultery, Math.
1. Cor. 7.10, 11. etc.

2. Matrimonial chastity, or faithfulness in the Covenant of marriage, Mal.
2.14, 15. Tit. 2.5.

Q. What reasons are there for this chastity?

A. 1 Its one end of marriage, 1 Cor. 7.2.

2 It preserves an holy posterity, Mal. 2.15.

3 Its the honor of marriage, Heb. 13.4.

Q. What is the best remedy against unchastity?

A. The rendering mutually to each other due benevolence, 1 Cor. 7.3, 4, etc.

Q. What are those mutual duties which tend to the well being of marriage?

A. 1 Mutual love, or entire affection one toward another Epp. 5. last. Tit.
2.4. 1 Cor. 16.14. This is the ground of all their duties

2 Mutual concord and. peace, by unity of minds, Ephesians. 4.3. avoiding
contentions, Pro. 21.9.

Q. What are the best means to preserve love and peace between them?

A. 1. All offenses must be carefuly prevented.

2. If given by one, not taken by the other, forbearing one another, Ephesians. 4.2.
and forgiving, v. 32.

3. Beware of jealousy, or occasions of it.

4. Study to please one another, 1 Cor. 7.33, 34.

Q. What other common duties concern both?

A. In general a provident care for one another good.

Q. What are the means to promote that care?

A. 1. Cohabitation, or dwelling together, forsaking all others, Psalm. 45.10. 1
Cor. 7.12. 1 Pet. 3.7.

2. Prayers, not only singly for one another, but jointly with one another, or
together.

Q. What must they pray for together?

A. 1. That they may be one spirit as one flesh.

2. That this Ordiance may be sanctified to them.

3. That (if God please) they may have children, comely, wise, gracious and
heirs of salvation.

4. A competency to bring them up.

5. For graces, wanting or weak in themselves.

Q. What good must they promote in each other?

A. 1. Of their souls, 1 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1, 7: both for conversion and
edification; and if fallen, restoring one another, 1 These. 5.11. Levit. 19.17.

2. Of their bodies, in health and in sickness, as mutual helpers, Genesis 27.14.

3. Of their good name, Matthew. 1.19. Prove. 22.1. both preserving it, and
preventing ill reports.

4. Of their goods or estate, Prove 31 12.

Q. What common duties concern them in regard of others?

A. They respect the Family, or others.

Q. What concerns them jointly to the Family?

A. A joint government of it, each to be helpful in overseeing the children,
servants, and affairs thereof: The Husband chiefly without doors, the Wife
within, 1 Timothy 5.14. Prove. 31.11. etc.

Q. What Duties respect both, in regard of strangers?

A. 1. An hospitable intertainment, Genesis 18.6, 7. etc.

2. Relieving the poor, Nehem. 8.10. Prove. 31.20.

Thus far the duties common to both; the particular duties of each party
follow.

Chapter 6. The Duties of Wives to their Husbands.
Col. 3.18. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as it is fit, in
the Lord.


Q. WHat are the parts of this Text?

A. Three. 1. Their subjection commanded, wives submit your selves to your
husbands. 2. The motive or reason of it, As it is fit.

3 The rule or direction, in the Lord.

Q. Why does the Apostle begin first with Husbands and Wives?

A. 1 Because man and wife were the first couple in the World; before there
were Parents and children, or Masters and servants.

2 Because they are the chief of the Family, and rule of all the rest; if they
be not good husband and wife, they will never be good Parents, nor good Masters.

3 Because, if they neglect their duties to each other, nothing goes well in
the family; the rest will be naught by their example.

Q. Why does the Apostle in every Relation, begin first with the Inferior?

A. 1. Because inferiors are most unwilling to undergo their burdens.

2. To obey well, is the best way to learn to rule well: They prove best
Superiors, that are best Inferiors.

3. It Is most for their own ease; because, as they are weakest, so like to
feel the smart of it. Due obedience will move Superiors to be kind to them.

Q. Why amongst Inferiors, does he first begin with Wives?

A. 1. To show the wives inferiority to her husbands, as children to Parents,
etc.

2. Wives were the first on whom subjection wa^ laid, as instrumental to sin.

3. The wives example, if good, is very prevolent to the rest to do their
duties.

4. They most unwilling to yield subjection, by reason of the little distance
from, and nearer Union with their Husbands.

Q. What is the maine duty of the Wife?

A. Subjection, or submission to her husband, Genesis 3.16.

Q. Wherein does that subjection consist?

A. In these two things. 1. An acknowledgement of his Superiority over her. 2.
In her respect to him, as her Superior.

Q. How does it appear that her Husband is her Superior?

A. 1. God has given it to him, Genesis 3.16.

2. Nature teaches it, in the weakness of all Females, 1 Pet. 3.7 The weaker
vessel.
and so inferior to the Males.

3. His Titles imply superiority, as Lord, 1 Pet. 3.6. Guide, Prove. 2.17. Head,
1 Cor. 11.3.

4. He represents Christ, she the Church, Ephesians. 5.23.

5. Woman was made for the Man, not the Man for the Woman, Genesis 2.18. 1 Cor.
11.8, 9.

Q. What reason is there of this acknowledgment?

A. Because this is the ground of all true subjection, and obedience, as to the
Ordinance of God.

Q. Wherein stands her respect to him?

A. In two things, Reverence, and Obedience.

Q. What is her reverence to him?

A. Inward, or outward.

Q. What is her inward Reverence?

A. An high esteem of him, for his place sake, as her Lord and Head, by the
Ordinance of God; which is called fear, 1 Pet. 3.2. and Reverence, Ephesians. 5.
last, a reverential fear.

Q. Whereby is that fear manifested?

A. 1 By her care to please him, 1 Cor. 7.34.

2 By her joy in pleasing him, Pro. 31.12.

3 By her grief in offending him.

Q. Whereby is her outward fear or reverence discovered?

A. By her behavior and speech.

Q. What must her behavior to him be?

A. 1 With gravity, in a sober carriage, 1 Timothy 3.11.

2 Meekness, or mildness in a clear and amiable countenance.

3 Courtesy, on all occasions.

4. Modesty in Apparel, fitting for his estate and place.

Q. How must she order her speech?

A. She must order it aright, both in his presence, and absence.

How in his presence?

A. 1. Her words must be few, Contrary, Pro. 7.19.
rather with silence, than much talking, 1 Timothy 2.12.

2. Reverent, giving him his due Titles, of Lord, or Husband, 1 Pet. 3.6.

3. Meek, from a quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. 2 Kin. 4.10, 22.

Q. How in his absence?

A. Speaking of him with all due respect, as her Superior, Genesis 18.1^.

Q. Wherein consists her obedience?

A. It is either Passive or Active.

Q. Whereby is her Passive obedience manifested?

A. In forbearing to dispose of the affairs of the family against his mind, or
without his consent, Genesis 16.5, 6. and 21.10. and 2 Kin. 4.10, 22.

Q. May the Wife do nothing without his consent?

A. Yes in three cases.

1. In case of Impotency, as when he is sick, or distracted, etc.

2. Of impossibility, when far absent.

3. Of allowance, manifested two ways.

1. Generally by resignation of all to her, Prove. 31.10, 11.

2. Particularly, in some things, expressly, or by silence and connivence.

Q. How does this appear her duty?

A. 1 by that Law, Genesis 3.16.

2 By example of the good Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.9.

3 From an Husbands power, to make void her vows, Number. 30.7, 13.

Q. Wherein consists her Active obedience?

A. In obeying his commands, and bearing his reproves.

Q. Wherein appears her obedience to his commands?

A. 1 In cohabitation, following him whether God by his providence calls him,
Genesis 31.16. 1 Cor. 4.5. 1 Pet. 3.7.

2 Coming to him when sent for, as Jacobs wives did, Genesis 31.4. contra. Esth.
1.17.

3 Doing what is required of her, as Sarah, Genesis 18.6. and Jeroboams wife, 1
Kings 14 2.

Q. How must she bear his Reproves?

A. 1 If unjust, yet with patience.

2 If just, though sharp, with meekness, Genesis 33.1.

3 With readiness to amend what was done amiss, Genesis 35.2, 4.

Q. What reason gives the Apostle to enforce these duties?

A. Because it is fit to do so.

Q, What means that fitness?

A. 1 Decency, or comeliness; So it is her honor.

2. Equity, as agreeable to the Law of God, of Nature, and to the Gospel.

Q. What means those words, In the Lord?

A. It implies, 1. A limitation. 2. A direction. And 3. A motive.

Q. What is the limitation?

A. A Wife must submit and obey, but in the Lord; that is, in lawful things.

Q. What is the Direction?

A. To do all her duties to her Husband, with an eye to the Lord, as unto
Christ, Ephesians. 5.22.

Q. How is it a Motive?

A. 1. In doing her duty to her husband, she does it to Christ; and he takes it
so.

2. In refusing or neglecting it to him, she does the same to Christ.

Chapter 7. The Duties of Husbands to their Wives.
Col. 3.19. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter against them.


Q. WHat are the parts of this Text?

A. Two. 1. The Duty of an husband, To love his wife. 2. The manner of
performance, with mildness; expressed by forbidding the contrary: and be not
bitter to them.

Q. Why does the Apostle comprehend the whole duty of the husband in love? Ephesians.
5.25, 28, 33.


A. 1. Otherwise no duty can be well performed, from one to another, 1 Cor.
16.14.

2 The Wife is the chiefest object of love, above friends, ch^^de, parents;
must leave all for her (as she all for him) therefore must love her most, Deuteronomy.
13.6. wife or his bosom.

3 Least his Superiority and Authority over her should degenerate into Tyranny,

4 She the weaker Sex, and apt to offend; but love will cover all.

5 To provoke her to love him, because he first loves her, as Christ the Church.

Q. What particular duties of the Husband do proceed from Love.

1 Pet. 3.7. According to knowledge.
A. Two. 1. A wife maintaining of his Authority. 2. A right managing of the
same.

Q. Why must an Husband maintain his Authority?

A. 1. This maintains Gods and Christ's Authority, who entrust him with it.

2. This most promotes the good of his wife, and the whole family.

Q. How may he maintain his authority?

A. By being an example to them in Love, Gravity, Piety, Honesty; which cause a
reverent respect, in Wife and Family, 1 Timothy 4.2.

Q. How is this authority to be managed?

A. 1. By a tender respect of her.

2. By a provident care for her.

Q. What is that tender respect of her?

A. It is either inward or outward.

Q. Wherein consists his inward respect?

A. 1. In regard of his Opinion of her.

2. In regard of his affection to her.

Q. What opinion must he have of her?

A. 1. In regard of her place, 1 Pet. 3.7. Giving honor to her.
he must esteem her (not as a servant, but) as his yoke fellow and companion,
a little lower then himself, as nearest to equality.

2. In regard of her person, so he must esteem his own wife fittest and best
for him, as provided by God, Prove. 19.14. and 18.22.

Q. What affection must he bear to her?

A. It must be with the greatest delight in her; as the delight of his eyes,
as, Ezekiel. 24.19. ravished (modestly with her love, Prove. 5.18, 19.

Q. Wherein appears his outward respect?

A. 1. In avoiding offenses to her.

2. In wisely ordering her offenses to him.

Q. How may he avoid offenses to her?

A. 1. In taking her duty tendered to him.

2. In tendering his own to her.

Q. What is to be done in taking hers?

A. 1. A kind acceptance of it, as Abraham did Sarahs, Genesis 21.8. 1 Samuel 1.23.

2. Commending and rewarding her for it, as Prove. 31.28, 31. Esth. 5.3. 1 Kin.
1.28, etc.

Q. How must he tender his duty to her, to avoid offenses?

A. In mildness, a special fruit of love; which the Apostle intends in these
words, Be not bitter to them: which is expressed.

1 In his speeches; whether giving her Titles, as Wife, Love, etc. or
instrutions, commands, or reproves, all with meekness, Gal. 6.1. Prove. 25.15.

2 In his countenance, which must be amiable and pleasing.

3 In his gestures, with a kind of (modest) familiarity; as Isaac to Rebecca,
Genesis 26.8.

4 In his Actions, by favors and gifts, as 1 Samuel 1.4, 5. Elkanah did to his.

Q. What is required in ordering her offenses to him?

A. To pass^ them by with meekness, and patiently to bear with her weakness,
P^ov. 19.11. 1 Pet. 3 7.

Q. Wherein appears his provident care for her?

A. 1. In providing things needful for her, as her Head, 1 Samuel 1.3, 4, 7. and
2.19.
both for her soul, in priva^e and public means of her edification; and also
for her body, both in health and sickness, especially in the time of
childbearing; and this not only in his life time, but after death, 1 Kin.
1.21.
settling a comfortable and suitable maintenance on her.

2. In protecting her from danger, in her person and name, 1 Samuel 27.3. and
30.18.

Q. What motives have Husbands to love their Wives, and do all these duties to
them.

A. Beside the command of God, these two.

1. The example of Christ in loving his Church, (and therein themselves, if
godly) Ephesians. 5.25. Now Christ loves first. 1 John 4.19. Indeed and in truth,
giving himself for it, Ephesians. 5.26. Freely. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Purely, to sanctify
it. v. 27. Constantly, Joh. 13.1. Hos. 2.19. so may they.

2. The example of ones self, Ephesians. 5.28, 29 A wife is himself; they are one
flesh.

FINIS.

