REFLECTIONS ON A LIBEL, ENTITLED, A Plea for the Apothecaries.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the two Angels and Crown in Little
Britain, 1671.

Reflections on a Libel, entitled, A Plea for the Apothecaries.
Reader, Observe that I. R. signifies the Libeller, W.C. the Animadverter, D.
M. the Person writ against by the Libeller.

AFter twelve months consideration, comes forth this Plea, written by an
Apothecary, as appears page 41, 42. and perhaps the Author of this Paper could
from I. R's own Company have named him, and could tell, that though he were not
commissionated, yet the presentation thereof was liked by them: But for his
gravity I shall spare the naming him, taking notice only of his matter and
failings.

I. R. in page 41. 42. endeavors to gain a belief, because (says he) he was
never accounted a Liar: That he is one, shall be first proved out of his false
Quotations; in his Book, Page 8. He refers you to something lately published by
an intelligent, knowing person of the same faculty; but since he is ashamed to
name him, it is H. Stubbs, proved at large by D. M. and Mr. Glanvil, to be a
most Impudent and notorious Slanderer and Liar. I. R. goes on, and says, he
quotes him totidem verbis, viz. If I might take an estimate of his parts from
his writings, etc. W.C. disparaging maliciously all D. M's Books, whereas the
words of H. Stubb's are, from that writing, viz. the View. A second is in page
24, 25. I.R. says that D.M. will put in one grain, or two at most for an
hundred, as was formerly demonstrated from his own confession. See Page 15. of
I. R's Book: where D. M. speaks of Bills, and not of Prescriptions, and those
too not of his own Bills (for he makes none) but of the Apothecaries rated
Bills. Page 41. I. R. affirms, D. M. would make the world believe, that the
Company of Apothecaries combined with H. S. to asperse the Royal Society. W. C.
There Is nothing of the Company of Apothecaries, nor of combination in D.M's
Book. Page 26. I. R. makes D.M. to call his own medicines inconsiderable: W.C.
Which is absurdly false. Page 33. He falsely pins these words on D.M. viz. A
Physician ought not to make use of any chargeable things. No such words in any
of D.M's books, nor does I. R. quote any place where they should be.

W.C. Lies of another order are p. 9, 10. that D.M. suborned Dr. Cox to write
his book against the Apothecaries. p. 1. That D. M. had an intention to invade
their Profession (W.C. it is his birthright, as has been proved) which he says
has been for many years constituted. W. C. The contrary whereof he
acknowledges. Page 2. I.R. goes on, and says the whole series of Pharmacy
(understand these words who can) by their good Laws has been improved to as
high, and laudable a Pitch, as in any foreign Nation, or Republic whatsoever.

W. C. Next follow his modest lies, wherewith he asperseth D. M. saying, he is
a Criminator, mad or blind, cajoles the Ladies, collogues Surgeons and Nurses,
setting the Nurses cock a hoop, and choosing them for his Mates; calls him
Sinon, Saul among the Prophets for quoting St. Augustine; his Language is high,
provoking, invective, abusive; his many aspersions unjustly charged, his former
chat, Tale of a Tub, he rants, and chants, and will do so in infinitum, bauls
and chants, Zealot for kindling coals, acts contrary to all good manners and
ingenuity, his nakedness and rudeness; he has as many tricks as a dancing
Horse, Hyperbolizeth to such a height, he deceives and deludes; calls him
impudent, Mountebank; says he gives little or nothing, or nothing to the
purpose to his Patients. Scornfully he says, the good Doctor, worthy Doctor,
Domine Doctor, a learned Physician; a pretender to Philosophy, a great
Philosopher, etc. His brave Heroic Roman valor, his humor of vapouring, his
imaginary confidence; with much more to the same purpose from this modest man.

W. C. Next follows the malice of this Zealot for kindling coals (as he
phraseth it) to D. M. in several places, Page 5, 9, 14, 15, 17, 18, 46. to set
his Colleagues and most of his own Profession against him by childish and
pitiful deductions. But that all this is false, the choosing by vote of D. M.
and Dr. Goddard Censors for this present year evidently demonstrate to all the
world, that the College judge they have not aspersed or injured any of their
Faculty.

W.C. Now I come to the matter of his Plea, wherein he acknowledges all the
Frauds, and abuses to Patients, and Physicians, complained of in the View,
endeavoring only sillily to evade some, as will appear by what follows: Page
3. (He says) he will not countenance any of their members to take upon them
the practice of Physic; nor that they should repeat a whole course of Physic
without the directors knowledge. And p. 36. That the Apothecary of his own head
in any case of difficulty or danger (mark that) should dare to undertake the
cure of the Patient without consulting the Physician; He conceives that the
Apothecary does not therein discharge his duty. But page 40. contrary to what
has been before said, he restrains them only from the professed customary
practice of Physic. Page 2. He believes there may be some persons, that use
medicines quite contrary to the Prescriptions, and falsify the grand
compositions of the London Dispensatory. And Page 12. That the whole-sale-men
sell not medicines honestly made. Page 13. he confesses the seventh, eighth,
and ninth Criminations. And page 14. to the first eight he has nothing to say.
Page 27. Commends Zwelfer for reforming Mithridate and Treacle, which the same
Author also calls absurd and ridiculous, which words are far higher than
[unintelligible and unreasonable] of D. M's. Page 29. That it is above the
Sphere of the Company of Apothecaries to meddle with Medicines, which are best,
or to make any alteration in Compositions. Page 32. He ingenuously
acknowledges, that the Apothecaries might better keep their Shops, and do the
Patients better service than by their Visitings. Page 39. That Physicians may
use their own Arcanums, or Preparations, and that upon just grounds they may
turn out the Apothecaries. Page 40. He cannot judge it reasonable that the
Apothecaries should discover the Physicians Arcanums. W. C. By this the Reader
may easily perceive he acknowledges all the material things D.M. complains of;
what he does not, now follows page by page. In reply to whom W. C. will give
you the bare objections and answers, leaving out his impertinently quoted
Latin, and farcing in things to no purpose to mislead the unconsidering Reader.

Page 1. Three falsities have been mentioned in it.

Page 2. Contains only ill language, and his own unfitness to answer.

Page 3, 4. mentions some things (he says) he will not entrench on the
Physicians, and such as D. M. complains of.

Page 5. says D. M. asperseth his own Profession, besides some words of
railing.

Page 6, 7. he charge D.M. for putting in Pharmacopoeus in the old Distich,
and that it is in larger Characters. W.C. Nothing's more ordinary with all
Writers than to change words, and fit them for their purpose; and therefore
Judaeus, and Monachus are left out, because we have none such in England that
practice Physic; besides Pharmacopoeus makes the better Verse. As for the
distinction of the Character it might be the work of the Composer, who usually
prints in large Characters the Argument of the Book. But why does I. R.
mis-quote and foist in Prophanus in the Hexameter, which was Sacerdos in the
Copy?

Page 7, 8. He mis-quotes Mr. Stubbs (as has been said) and reviles.

Page 9. barely affirms that D. M. suborned Dr. Cox to write his book.

Page 10, 11. he borrows of Lex Talionis an answer to the Apothecaries Axiom,
that Apothecaries may be the veriest knaves, etc. by saying the Doctors that
make medicines may be so, the contrary whereto D.M. has proved at large in
several places.

Page 11, 12, 13. are some of his confessions beforementioned, only laughs at
the story of the Seeds-man, and D.M's man. No such word as [Man] in the text.
Every Seeds-man will tell you it is their common practice, and is this
ridiculous, that they should buy decayed Seeds, and only such which are
universally the best part of the Plant? It Is a horrid cheat, and abuse. Page.
14, etc. either confesses, or endeavors to make a division betwixt D.M. and
his Colleagues, and is stuffed with reviling language.

Page 15, 16. For the putting in of Bezoar and Pearls to increase their Bills,
though there be but a grain or two in the receipt. I. R. answers, Some of the
College, and also Zwelfer mentions 100, or 120 grains given at a dose. W. C.
Much to the purpose; D. M. charge them with overrating their medicines; I. R.
answers, Physicians give large doses.

Page 16, 17, 18, 19. Pleads for the dear Bills of the Apothecaries, and in the
whole says no more than that conscionable Bills made with good medicines ought
to be paid; which no body denies.

Page 20. Reviles. Confesses, and says that D. M. may mistake as well as the
Apothecaries.

Page 21. I. R. says, the Company disown any uncivil deportment of
Apothecaries to Physicians. W. C. This I.R. denies none of the affronts, etc.
by their particular members, nor any of the actings of the whole Company
against the College publicly. Ibid. he says, D.M. stumbles at a straw, and
says Patients will call themselves so. W. C. D. M. has proved it to be
nonsense to call the sick their Patients, and finds no fault with the sick for
calling the Apothecary Doctor, but with the Apothecary for taking that title
upon him: but whosoever shall consider, what influence words have on the
Vulgar, will not think it straw. Let but the people be inured to call the
Apothecary Doctor, they will soon think him a fit and lawful Practitioner, and
will make no difference betwixt the ignorantest Apothecary and the learned
Physician: but what an inference is it, to say that D. M. gives the lie to the
sick, when he only speaks of the arrogance of the Apothecary? Ibid. I. R.
says, it is not the desire of most persons to take medicines of Physicians. W.
C. This I suppose D. M. spoke as he found it, but I have heard him lately say,
that eight or nine persons have been seduced from him by the Apothecaries, of
which he has only heard by their deaths; as to understanding persons I. R.
wittily answers, some men are wise, some over-wise, some other-wise.

Page 22, 23. Whereas D.M. says, Physicians will avoid the trouble put upon
them by the Apothecaries Ignorance. I.R. replieth, that Physicians may mistake
their doses, and tells a story of three drachms of Laudanum prescribed for
three grains. W. C. D. M. speaks of the Apothecaries Ignorance, and I. R. of
the Physicians over-dosing; and as for the good Doctor he is already quit of
the ignorance and frauds of the Apothecaries, plainly thereby preferring the
life of his Patients before his own ease or profit.

Page 24. I. R. Foolishly infers with Lex Talionis, that D.M. judges none of
the Apothecaries honest; the contrary whereof is manifest in two places of his
View.

Page 25. Recriminates, says D. M. imployeth some novice to make his
medicines, while he is taking his recreations, and indulging his genius. W. C.
This is false, the Doctor imployeth a man who has a Supervisor besides
himself, who can do any thing better than the Apothecaries boys, and doubtless
than any of the Masters; and how much D. M. indulgeth his genius in
recreations, all that know him can say, as little as any man. Ib. and 26. D. M.
by Patients taking Medicines of Physicians, most of the great charges of
Apothecaries Bills will be saved. I. R. asks how this will hold water, and then
recites out of D. M. how it may be done. W. C. This needs no other answer, than
that it is done de facto, and to be sure if he had done any thing but what he
professes, this Libeller would have branded him for it. It Is strange that I.
R. should so miscensure Medicines he has never seen, who does in his own Paper
acknowledge his unfitness to judge of Medicines.

Page 27, 28, 29. Tells the Reader what esteem some have had of Mithridate and
Treacle. W.C. See his confessions before.

Page 30. Whereas D. M. tells Physicians they will improve their knowledge;
I.R. replieth high Language. Admiranda canit, sure the Doctor has got the
Philosophers stone, etc. Ibid. whereas D. M. says, when Dispensatories were
first made, Apothecaries were Physicians servants. I. R. infers, Ergo the
Doctor intitles himself Master.

Page 31. W. C. D. M. says by this means Physicians honor will be doubled. I.
R. replieth, Honesty is the greatest honor maugre what D. M. would infer to
the contrary.

Page 32, 33. Contains his good language, confessions, his childish answering
to the great charges Physicians are put to before they come into practice, and
asks, Whether those great sums came out of the clouds. W. C. This cannot be
better answered than by I. R's way, a Proverb, viz. His Father was born before
him.

Page 34. Accuses D.M. for leaving London in the Plague time, and tells the
Ladies how their Grandmother Eve was Cozened by the Devil; and then page 35.
says, it is absolutely impossible for a Physician to prepare his Medicines in
the time proposed by D. M. W. C. It Is true, it is so for an Apothecary that is
to dispense for several Physicians, and also long and tedious dispensations:
but the Doctors meaning by preparing is no otherwise than to see them well
done; and it is no more than when the Apothecaries say, I have prepared my
Medicines, though the thing be actually done by his Servants; and this pitiful
Scribler makes no difference between dispensing of Medicines, and curing of
Patients.

Page 35, 36. Supposes Physicians to be the first aggressors, the contrary
whereof has been proved at large.

Page 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Confesses things to be true they are accused for.

Page 41, 42. Endeavors with a strong asseveration to vindicate the Company
from any combination with H. S. against the Royal Society, which no body has
accused them of, as has been beforesaid.

Page 42, 43, 44 I. R. comments on Ambubaiarum collogia, saying, it is a hard
word to pose a man that is not book-learned, as the Doctor says he is able to
do. W. C. He should have added in their own trade. Ibid. I.R. says the
murdering Apothecary in Cicero was no shop-Apothecary. W.C. D.M. does not say
he was, and with good reason, for there were none such then. And lest H.S.
should suppose W. C. to be a Virtuoso, and so lash him for not taking notice of
a Criticism; observe how I. R. construes the word Circumforare, which according
to the true Etymology, may better be construed to make a Pillory for Libellers
necks, then as this man of Latin (to no purpose) expounds it, viz. To go from
one Market Town to another.

Page 45, 46. Recriminates D. M. for saying an Apothecary practiced ill without
putting the case (ridiculously) and infers, That he has therein aspersed the
honorable College; saying, They have more candor and ingenuity in them, than
to assume any such unlimited power, which no Law does, or can allow; and then
proves out of Job that a Physician ought not to find fault with Apothecaries,
and that because the Apothecaries are Gods creatures.

Page 47, 48. contains little but railing; and 45. says, that Dr. Maranta and
Schroder dedicated books, the former to Imperatus, the later to the
Apothecaries of Francfort; he should have added, they were his Kinsmen, and
assisted him in his book; and it is apparent that D. M. would have given due
praises to any Apothecary living (if there had been any such) that had
contributed but one natural thing to his Pinax.

Page 48, 49. Concludes with the opinion of Renodeus affirming, that the
prescribing and compounding are to be committed to persons distinctly. W. C.
But in the place quoted, Renodeus doubtless supposed that Apothecaries kept
themselves in their own trade, and made their medicines honestly, as they did
in England, when he writ that Treatise.

From what has been briefly said, observe how little the Apothecaries have to
say for themselves, and what material things I. R. has spoke to. Observe also
his Margin, and you will find him pass over several pages together of D.M's
book, which contains nothing but what is substantial, and to the purpose, not
answering one argument in the View, only taking occasion from some places to
rail at his Person and Medicines; besides of 50 pages in his Pamphlet, there
are 17 of them either preliminary, or not to the View, as his Title pretends.
Again, take notice how ridiculous his answers are, and that most that he has
said is not to the purpose; And lastly, that if this modest Author shall tell
so many lies, and use so many scandals against D. M. in Print, what will not he
and his Brethren do behind his back?

FINIS.

