A late Great Shipwreck OF FAITH: Occasioned by a fearful VVrack of Conscience.
Discovered in a SERMON Preached at Paul's the first day of July, 1655.

By Dan. Cawdrey Preacher of the Word, at Great Billing in Northamptonshire.

1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience.

1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times,
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and unto
doctrines of devils.

2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with an hot
iron.

Pack Mayor. Tuesday the third day of July 1655.

O^dered that Mr. Daniel Cawdry be desired from this Court, to print his Sermon
at Paul's the last Lords day. Sadler.

London Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at the Phoenix in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER PACK. Lord Major; and to the Honorable
Court of Aldermen, of the Famous City of LONDON.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
BEing at your request (which was to me little less then a command) prevailed
with, to tender my service and pains before you at Paul's, I began first to
think, that this unexpected Providence of God, had some intention for good to
be done; And then to consider with my self, not what might be most pleasing, to
scratch an itching ear, 2 Timothy 4.3.
but what Doctrine might be most seasonable to the time and place, and most
useful and profitable for that great Panegyris, or Solemn Assembly. And I
could pitch upon nothing, (in so short a warning) that might (as I conceived)
be more beneficial, then this present Discourse (now humbly presented to your
Eyes, as then to your Ears) concerning the sad, and never enough lamented
Shipwreck of the Faith, amongst many professors of the Gospel: my aim being,
if not to recover the fallen (who Adder-like refuse to hear us) yet, by Gods
blessing, to prevent the fall of others. And truly, had it not been clearly
foreprophesied of these last and worst Times, that many should depart from the
Faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. 2 Pet. 2.1.3.3,
we should have wondered the more, to find this Apostacy, after so much light
of the Gospel, so long enjoyed; and after so serious and strict profession of
it by many, even to suffering much for it; Not only the truly Religious people
of the Land, who stand fast in their old Integrity, do wonder at the monstrous
and blasphemous Opinions, now lately hatched amongst us, by the power of Hell,
and Prince of darkness (assisted by those Locusts, the Jesuits) that craule
amongst us) under the notion of New lights; But the whole Christian world do
stand amazed at it: yea some reproach and deride us, as if Amsterdam, (the late
sink of all Religions) were now removed into England. The Conjectures of men,
at the causes hereof, are almost as various, as themselves. Several Heads
seek out, and have found Several Reasons of this Apostacy: We will hear what
they say.

First, Some (the Prelaticall party) charge it upon the Abandoning of
Episcopal Government, which with a watchful eye, and strict hand, did
Suppress, and keep them under. For that, I have these things to say. 1. They,
the Bishops, did indeed suppress all sects (as they called them) that were
opposite to their Hierarchicall Pomp, and Tyranie, but tolerated (yea
countenanced) many Popish Superstitions, and much Romish and Arminian Doctrine;
which now some great ones of their own, and most of the present Sectaries, do
openly Preach and publish. It is observable, that many points of Popery, and
Arminianisme, are now vented by these several Sects; I know not, to what to
impute it, but either to the Jesuits Subtletie, who profess and Act every
Sect; or to the suitableness of many of those errors, to corrupt nature; that
even ignorant and unlearned men, fall into them without any Teachers; as well
as some Learned Rabbis; I wish, they would consider it. 2. We may truly say of
the Bishops, some of them, they hatched and bred those Sects and Heresies, which
we now labor under: They, by their rigor, in exacting Conformity, to
needless Ceremonies, first drove many to Separation, and then to fall from one
error to another; which now show themselves, in this time of Anarchicall
Liberty. 3. It is indeed want of Government settled in the Church, which is the
Inlet to all these errors, and Heresies; Here was the beginning of our misery,
that some were hasty to pull down one Government, but had no mind to set up
another; and so left the Church, as a Vineyard without hedge or Wall, to be
trampled down and eaten up by all the Beasts of the Forest.

Secondly, others impute it to the charge of those, who first pleaded for
Liberty of conscience, and prevailed with Authority for connivence at
themselves; which they intending perhaps, only to be indulged to truly tender
consciences, (which ought to be regarded) that door of Liberty being but a
little opened, the violence of others widened, and kept open the door, for the
rest to rush in, and it could never since be shut.

Thirdly, Others lay it at the door of that Power, which repealed the Paenall
Statutes, for not being present at Church, the place of public meetings;
which (say they) was an Implicit toleration for all Religions. This Key has
served ever since to open the doors of all the conventicles in the Land; where
every subtle Jesuited Sect-master, has free Liberty to vent his own poisonous
Opinions, and none to control him. Nothing (it is thought) has more gratified
the Pope and his Jesuits, since these late troubles began, then that repeal. I
wish, they (now at their leisure) may consider the mischiefs done; who had
their hands and votes, in that repeal. These and some others, of the like
nature, are the conjectures that are made, concerning the rise and original, of
this grand Defection from the truth. I cannot but think, these, or some of
these have done much toward our present miseries and Church-distractions: but
I believe, there may be found, other causes, nearer and more imediate, in the
men themselves, who have of late, made this Apostacy, this Shipwreck of the
Faith: And they are these three, or one of them.

1. Ignorance, in many of our misled Proselytes, has slain ten thousands.
Ignorance, I say, of the very first and Fundamental principles of Religion:
people were never well catechized, or grounded in the truth; and so carried
away with every new wind of Doctrine. The common prey of Seducers, of old were
silly women, and Children, not so much for age, as discretion: Look upon the
followers of our new Masters, and they are for the most part younglings of
eith^r Sects, but most females, who from the beginning were most capable of
Seduction. There are many of these speak with them, about the principle of
their own Sect or way, and they are ready and nimble, to dispute it; as about
Infant Baptism, and the Church way etc. But examine them about the points of
Catechism, what Faith is, what Repentance etc. They cannot give any reasonable
account. I my self have known some, that were Zealous Anabaptists, and the
like, who could sufficiently find Language to cry down a Steeplehouse, and
Tithes, and rail at the Ministry, who were so far from speaking the Language
of Scripture in p^ainest principles that they could not speak reason or sense,
in their common discourse. Little do most men think or know, what desperate
ignorance there is to be found, in most ordinary people; No marvel if
Seducers, by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.
Romans 16.18.

2. Pride (if they have gotten any more then ordinary knowledge) pride of
parts, pride of gifts, confidence of Spirit, nimblenesse of fancy, volubility
of Tongue, etc. these puff up self conceited Novices, with scorn and
arrogance, that they think themselv^s abler then their Teachers; and wiser
then 7 men, yea 7 Ministers that are able to render a Reason for what they say
or do; These young Lapwings run away, with the shell on their head; and
forget by whom they had their hatching. These turn Teachers and Preachers, and
scorn and disdain those from whom they borrowed their light. Nothing so much
discovers a light and a vain head, and the Levitie and falsity of their ways,
as first that pride and scorn manifested to all not of their own way; and that
railing and reviling of men, far better then themselves for wisdom and piety.
Truth makes men humble, especially to those supposed to be in error and that
merely out of conscience: showing all meekness to all men for we ourselves were
sometime foolish deceived etc. Tit. 3.3. But mark St Peter's description of
those false Teachers, who should bring in damnable Heresies: 2 Pet. 2.10.12.
Presumptuous are they self-willed, they are not afraid, to speak evil of
dignities: these speak evil of the things they understand not etc. That Is a
second; Pride.

3. Hyprocrisie; open, or secret corruption of men's hearts, does often betray
their heads into errors. This is the subject of the following Sermon; I must
not here Anticipate my own discourse. Only let me tell you my own and others
observation; It is too well known, that many (I will not say, most) of them,
who have left the old truths, for new, and the old ways for others, are
sensibly grown far more loose and remiss, in the practical parts of Religion,
then they were, before they departed from us: even some of those who pretend to
the purest way of Religion, and strictest way of Church Government are become
more careless of themselves and Fam^li^s, in secret and private duties; Men
and women that once durst not omit, reading, praying, catechizing their
families, now can neglect all: Holding it, some of them, a profanation for to
teach their Chidren, any Catechism, or form of Prayer, or to speak of
Scripture: But generally (which is observable) all the Sests cry down the
morality of the Sabbath, make every day, (that is, no day) a Sabbath: can make
it a day of recreation or ease; and neglect the Assemblies: most of them
(except the Quakers, who cry down pride and fashions, upon another Monkish
design) are as fashionable, in their hair and habits, as any the most vain
and garist amongst us; and call it a part of their Christian Liberty: what may
be the cause of these Defections, in opinion and practice? I fear some secret
lust, or corruption of their hearts, which accounted the former strictness and
preciseness of the way of Religion, their burden; and now is discovered by
some Doctrines of Liberty. Hence it is, that they generally fly and forsake
their old Teachers, who know their lives, and touch their lusts, and seek out
such as preach novell and high speculations, with swelling words of vanity,
which never stoop so low, as to touch their pride and wantonness, Covetousness
and worldly mindedness, etc. But these things are more fully prosecuted in the
following Sermon; and I fear, I have held you too long from it, I commend it
to your Honorable perusal, and to the Blessing of God, upon all that shall
vouchsafe to read it: In him I am

Right Honorable; Your humble Servant, for your furtherance in the truth.
Daniel Cawdry.
From my study; July 23. 1655.
A late Great SHIPWRECK OF FAITH: Occasioned by the VVrack of Conscience.
1 TIMOTHY 1.19. Which (good Conscience) some having put away concerning the Faith
have made shipwreck.


AS the life of a Christian man in general, 1. The coherence.
(in regard of the miseries of it,) So the life of a Man of God, a Minister in
special, is compared to a wayfare, to a warrefare, to a Seafare. To a wayfare,
and so the Minister is called a Guide, Romans 2.19. a Guide of the blind: To a
warrefare, and here he is called a Captain, or Leader, Heb. 13.17. obey (...)
your Leaders; To a Seafare, (in the metaphor of the text) and then he may be
called the Pilot of the ship, the Church: 2 Timothy 2.5.
The Apostle makes use of two of these Metaphors in the former, and this
present verse, there he bids him, War a good warrefare, as a chief Commander,
(according to the prophesies which went before upon him.) Here he bids him, as
a Pilot, take heed of a Shipwreck, by the example of others, that have
miscarryed, and prescribes the means for both, Holding faith and a good
conscience, etc.

2. The explication of the words to Faith, taken
For the explication of the words, we shall enquire,

1. What is meant here by Faith: Faith is taken either Objectively, for the
Doctrine of Faith, quam credimus, which we do believe: or Subjectively, for the
habit of Faith: and that 1. 1. Objectively. 2. Subjectively for the habit. 1.
Actively. 2. Passively for Fidelity.
Actively, Qua credimus Deo, whereby we believe in God. 2. Passively, Ob quam
creditur nobis, for which others believe and trust us, that is, Fidelity, or
faithfulness; and so the word (...) is taken, Gal. 5.22. The fruits of the
Spirit, are Love and Faith; where it is taken, not for justifying faith, but
for fidelity and faithfulness to others. It is taken here in the first sense,
objectively for the Doctrine of Faith, or Truth of the Gospel, as the parrallel
place manifests, 2 Timothy 2.18. 1 Timothy 6.21. Tit. 1.9. Faithful word.
speaking of Hymeneus (one of the Apostates there) and Philetus, he says, They
have erred concerning the Truth, as here they are said, To have made shipwreck
concerning the Faith.

2. Good conscience two ways. 1. Of Tranquillity. 2. Of Integrity.
2. What is meant by good conscience: Conscience is nothing but a reflect Act of
the soul upon it self, applying Science or knowledge to a man's self, and so
approving or disproving, accusing or excusing. The goodness of the conscience
is either the goodness of Tranquillity, a peaceable conscience, or the goodness
of integrity, or sincerity, a practical conscience, walking according to its
knowledge So Paul speaks, Act. 23.1. I have in all good conscience walked
before God, which 1 Timothy 3.9. is called, Act. 24.16.
a pure conscience. And by our Savior, in the Parable of the seed, its called
a good and an honest heart, which is expressed, by a Religious and honest
conversation. In this sense, it is here taken.

3. Holding, or Having.
3. What is meant by Holding; (...), having is the word; but being of the
Present Tense, it implies a continued Act, and so is well rendered, by Holding;
first get it and have it, then hold it; yea more significantly, Tit. 1.9.
(...), holding fast the faithful word, according to doctrine, etc.

4. The next word is (...), having put away; 4. Put away.
which signifies an act, not of ignorance or infirmity, but knowingly and
willingly, to refuse or reject the dictates of conscience; repellentes,
repelling, or rejecting the verdict of it: The same word is used, Act. 7.27.
Act. 13.46. Put it from you (...).
Of the man that quarrelled with Moses, (...), he thrust him away. It imports a
kind of violence offered to conscience, by walking contrary to it.

5. The last word considerable is, (...), 5. Made shipwreck.
have made shipwreck; a Metaphor taken (as I said) from Mariners or Seafaring
men, who when the Ship is broken or sunk, lose the Merchandise therein
contained. So that Faith, or the Truth of the Gospel is the Merchandise; a good
Conscience is the Ship. Faith is the Jewel, a good conscience is the Cabinet;
Faith is the Treasure, a good conscience is the Chest or Treasury. If the Ship,
Cabinet, Chest miscarry, the Merchandise, Jewel, Treasure cannot be safe.

The full sense and sum, is this, 3. The sum of words.
If thou (O Timothy) wilt war a good warfare, or fulfill thy Seafare with
comfort and commendation, Hold fast Faith, that is, the Truth of the Gospel,
but especially hold fast a good conscience which is the Ship or Cabinet; for
that being lost, or put away, the Faith will be lost inevitably, as the sad and
lamentable example of some, Himeneus and Alexander does manifest; who having
put a good conscience away concerning the Faith, have made Shipwreck.

The words being thus explained, hold out unto us, The Observation made good
(...), Chrs. in locum.
this observation, which I shall deliver in Chrysostomes words upon the place.
A corrupt and a culpable life breeds a corrupt judgment; an unsound heart
makes an unsound head: if a man put away a good conscience, he will soon make
Shipwreck of the Faith. As the conscience cannot be good, unless the Faith be
pure; so the Faith cannot be safe, unless the conscience be good. Without
knowledge the mind is not good, Prove. 19.2. A corrupt judgment, makes a
corrupt life or conscience; and a corrupt conscience, will soon corrupt the
Faith which was thus we shall make good.

1. From Scripture.
1. By parallel places of Scripture, we have the like (in a lesser degree) in
this very Chapter, verse. 5, 6, 7. The end of the commandment is Love, out of a
pure heart, good conscience, and faith unfeigned; (...), which (pure heart, good
conscience, etc.) some having swerved from, have turned to vain janglings. The
word (...), is a Metaphor taken from Archers, who mistake their aim, and so
miss the mark. The meaning is, some desiring to be (...), Doctors or teachers
of the Law, not levelling or aiming at purity of heart, and a good conscience,
etc. they have begun to decline from the Truth, being turned to vain janglings.
What is that? Fables, and endless or useless genealogies, which breeds
questions rather then Godly edifying, which is by faith, verse. 4. These vain
disputations, as they take men off from practical Truths, so they do by little
and little corrupt the truth. To the like purpose, the Apostle prescribes this
as a preservative of the Faith, chap. 3.9. to his Deacons, Holding the mystery
of the Faith in a pure Conscience. Pure faith, will not abide but in a pure
conscience, as the Doves a cleanly creature, (...).
will not abide but in a clean house. And on the contrary, see 1 Timothy 6.5.
these two go together, Men of corrupt minds (that is conscience) destitute or
deprived of the truth. He had said before, verse. 3. If any man teach otherwise,
and consents not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness. In the 4 and 5 verses, he gives the
reason of that corrupting the Faith: partly his pride, he is puffed up; partly
his ignorance (acquired perhaps) he knows nothing, but dotes about questions,
and partly, yea chiefly, He is a man of a corrupt mind; and therefore justly
deprived of the knowledge of the truth. The very like expression is in 2 Timothy
3.8. speaking of seducers of themselves and others, that lead captive simple
women; he shows the reason of both: They seduce others, whom? such as have
lost, or never had a good conscience, Simple women laden with sins, and led
about with diverse lusts. They are themselves seduced upon the same ground, men
of corrupt minds; then follows, reprobate concerning the faith, (...), men
that have lost their judgment concerning the Truth of the Gospel. And verse.
13. he says, Evil men and seducers wax worse and worse (not only in life, but
also in judgment, for so it follows) deceiving and being deceived. 1 Timothy 6.5.
Supposing that gain is godliness, through covetousness
First their life corrupts their judgment, and their judgment again corrupts
their life. Its strange to consider how far a man's judgment may be corrupted
by a bad conscience and wicked conversation: Take but one place, Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. How comes it to pass that a
man should be so grossly corrupted in so clear a principle? The works of God
proclaim a God, Romans 1.19. That which may be known of God, etc. How come men to
think there is no God? the reason follows: Corrupt are they and become
abominable in their doings, etc. This is rendered as a reason, why the Prophets
and Priests corrupted the Law of God, Zeph. 3.4. Her Prophets are light and
treacherous persons; her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary, they have done
violence to The Law. More might be added, but these may suffice for instances.
We shall now manifest it further.

2. By Reasons: How comes it to pass, 2. By Reasons.
that the corruption of the heart or life, has such influence to corrupt the
head or judgment in the plain Truths of the Gospel? Take these.

1. Sinful lusts (allowed and lived in) hinder spiritual light and saving
knowledge. Lusts are like scales upon the eyes, 1. Sinful lusts hinder
spiritual light.
like a webb or cataract (as they call it) that covers the sight of the eye of
the soul: And therefore the Apostle makes repentance (which is the removal of
those lusts) the way to saving knowledge, 2 Timothy 2.25. If at any time God will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth. It was well said of a
Divine of ours, that Repentance is the Ministers best Comment upon his text,
and the hearers best Comment upon the Sermon. So 2 Cor. 3.16. speaking of the
Jews, When their heart shall be turned to the Lord (by true repentance) the
vail of ignorance and blindness) shall be taken away. Hence are those promises
of knowledge made to the Godly, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord, is with
them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant: and before that, verse.
9. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way. And
verse 12. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose. So Solomon, Eccles. 2.26. To him that is good in his
sight, God gives wisdom and knowledge. And our Savior himself, See Joh. 8.31,
32.
Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whither I speak of my self. If a man resolve to hold the truth
unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. 2 Timothy 2.6, 7.
not letting it break out in his practice, God will not do that man the honor
to let him know the truth: we our selves would not impart our skill to such
Scholars, as we know, would not make use of it. It was (as Chrysostom well
observes) a strange thing, that David so wise a man, (...) Chrysostom. Tom. 1. page
697.
and a Prophet, should go about to hide his sin, not only from men, but
prehaps from God too: He gives the reason of it, Though he was a Prophet, yet
lust had blinded his eyes, and darkened his understanding: That Is the first.

2. They put out Natural and Artificial light.
2. Sinful lusts, put out natural and artificial light. All sin is of an
infatuating and darkening nature, it either finds or makes men fools. It is not
for nothing that sinners are so often called fools, and sin folly, by Solomon,
and others; or that sins are called by the name of ignorances, Heb. 9.4. (...),
the errors or ignorances of the people. They are mutual causes one of another;
many (if not most) sins are caused from ignorance, Father forgive them, they
know not what they do, and much ignorance is procured from sin. Nemo malus nisi
stultus, enim saperet bonus esse mallet, Salv.
If men were not foolish, they would never venture to sin: and if some did not
sin so much, they should be wiser then they are: no man (says Salvian) is evil
but a fool, for if he were wise, he would be good. Sins are called darkness,
and works of darkness, because as they proceed from, so they end in darkness,
inward darkness of the mind, and outter darkness of death and hell, without
repentance. As the crude and cold darkness of the night thickens the clouds and
those clouds, thickened, increase the darkness of the night: So the ignorance of
men, casts them into lusts, and those lusts blind their reason and judgment:
See it in the Gentiles, Romans 1.21, 22. Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; they became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, professing themselves to be
wise, they became fools, Gross fools against the very light of nature, as
appears in the next verse. They changed the glory of God the incorruptible into
an image made like corruptible man, and to birds and four footed beasts and
creeping things. So the Apostle of some others, Ephesians. 4.18. Having their
understanding darkened: How? (...); by the hardness of their hearts: An hard
and callous humor grow over their eyes by customary sinning, as it follows;
Being past feeling, they gave themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. Our own experience may afford us examples of this
kind, too many; Men of excellent parts of Nature, Art, Learning, besotted and
befooled in their Judgments, and given over to as vile errors as lusts; well
therefore called deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.2^. or lusts of deceit, because they
seduce and deceive their owners.

3. Sinful lusts, if they do not put out the light of reason, 3. They corrupt
Reason and turn it against the Truth.
yet they corrupt and bribe it, and employ the strength of it to defend
themselves and oppose the truth. See that place 1 Timothy 6.4. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, etc. He is puffed up and dotes
(so we read it) the word is (...) he is sick; and as sick stomachs desire
unwholesome food, so a sin-sick soul, cannot endure sound doctrine (as he speaks
of others, 2 Timothy 4.3.) but studious how to plead for his own lusts and errors:
So the Apostle adds, Whence comes envy, strife, etc. and (...), perverse
disputings and wranglings of men of corrupt minds: So corrupt that they esteem
gain to be godliness. How comes this to pass? Why, they dispute, and
distinguish themselves into these groses opinions; So that lusts, not only
corrupt reason, but turn the edge of it against the truth, to maintain gainful
errors and practices; study new distinctions and new niceties, to qualify the
grossest obsurdities. We could hardly believe this; did we not see it in
experience. The Church of Rome, first plotted a Religion full of superstitious
formalities, to uphold their own lusts, pride, ambition, covetousness,
voluptuousness; and then set their best wits on work to maintain it, with nice
distinctions, and Scholastical speculations, deceiving their followers so long,
that at last they deceived themselves, and believed their own delusions to be
truths. So it has been, I fear, with some of the Arminian and Socinian party;
who the better to maintain their own lusts, have patronized with much subtilty
those Pleagian doctrines, of Universal Redemption, Freewill, etc. And diverse
practices, formerly condemned by all Divines, or the most, as usury, etc. are
now studied and upheld by soft distinctions and tender qualifications, etc.

4. They corrupt the Affections.
4. Sinful lusts allowed, etc. corrupt the affections, and they corrupted,
corrupt the judgment. All judgment (we use to say) is lost, when the
Affections are trusted with the Resolutions of the case. From hence (the
affections corrupted) proceeds: First, a strangeness to the light, He that evil
does (and loves to do it) comes not to the light, least his deeds should be
reproved, Joh. 3.20. or discovered to be evil: He that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
Can a thief or deceiver love or like the light, that betrays him? 2. Yea more
then this, he loves darkness, verse. 19. because his deeds are evil. 3. But more
then this, he not only grows strange to the light and loves darkness, but
hates the light, as our Savior there speaks. When Jehoshaphat would needs
enquire if there were never a Prophet of the Lord to consult with; Yes (says
Ahab) there is a fellow, one Michaiah, but I hate him, for he never prophesies
good to me, but evil: Ahab was resolved upon his own project to go against
Ramoth Gilead: and he fears honest Michiaah will cross him in it; therefore he
not only avoids, but hates him: So deal resolved sinners with the light of the
word: first grow strange to it, neglect to read or hear it, and after come to
hate it. He that loves his lusts cannot love the word that reproves them; but
least the word should correct him, he will correct, indeed corrupt the word.
Hence comes it, that men Having itching ears after their own lusts, they get
themselves an heap of teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3.
suitable to their lusts, so the words may be read, If a man will prophecy of
wine and strong drink; he shall be a Prophet for the people, Mich. 2.11. That
is, they being given to voluptuousness, love and like, and seek out Prophets,
good fellows like themselves, that will indulge them in such courses: And they
say to their teachers, as the messengers sent for Michaiah said to him, 2 King.
22.13.
All the Prophets speak good unto the King with one mouth; let thy word, I pray
thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak good. So these kind of men,
enquire the judgment of their Ministers concerning some doubtful practice,
usury, gaming, fashions, etc. and they tell them, such and such allow it, I
pray, let your word be as one of them: And mark the issue; If but one or a few
men agree with them, they shall be believed against thousands that condemn the
practice. As Tertullian said of the persecutors of the Christians, They believe
accusations which are not proved; nor do they desire to try them, Credunt quae
non probantur, nec quaerunt ne non probantur, Apol.
least they should not be proved; So is it here, they easily believe what they
would fain have to be true; and what they like not, they will hardly believe.
This then is a fourth reason; Sinful lusts corrupt the Affections, and the
Affections corrupt the judgment.

5. Sinful lusts, do stupifie, 5. They silence or stupifie the Conscience by
corrupting the truth.
conscience or silence the clamor of it, by corrupting the Truth. Hence you
hear of some, That have made a Covenant with death, and with hell: are they at
agreement? Isa. 28.15. that is, have silenced their fears of death and hell, by
some lying and false persuasions of peace, notwithstanding their sinful
practices, as the Prophet intimates in the following words, For we have made
lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we covered our selves. There is in
sinful practices a sting of terror and horror of guilt, till this be either
taken out by repentance and pardon, or at least stupefied and laid asleep, the
soul cannot quietly enjoy the pleasure of sinning. This cannot well be done, in
a knowing Christian but by corrupting the Faith. Resolved they are, not to
disease or disquiet conscience, by so much as questioning the lawfulness of
their practice. As the Athenians having shamefully lost Salamis, a Town of
their jurisdiction, made a Law, that no man should once name Salamis. Aquinas
upon 1 Timothy 6. applies it to usurers and such like, Many unlawful things (says
he) are forbidden by sound doctrine, which men are unwilling to forsake, and so
they find out a new doctrine, where they may have some hope to be saved in
these courses. We need not go far for an instance, Hymeneus (one of the
Apostates mentioned in the text) together with Philetus, corrupted the Faith in
a prime Article of it, the Resurrection of the dead, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. Their
word will eat as a canker: of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the
truth have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is past already: and overthrow
the faith of some. What was the reason of this corrupting the Faith? I will
give it you in the words of a judicious Interpreter upon the place, Because
they could not bear an accusing conscience, and the torment thereof, they
undertake to defend their vices: and least they should be vexed with the terror
of future judgment; they deny any providence, and persuade themselves, that
these things are false, which the true Faith and Religion declare concerning
the immortality of the soul, the Resurrection of the body and the last
judgment. If their practices will not agree with the word, they constrain the
word to agree with their practice: That Is a fifth Reason.

6. The Just judgment of God.
6. Lastly, It is the just judgment of God upon such sinners: when men, for the
maintenance and allowance of their own lusts, will not see the light of truth,
they shall not see it, That he (as Austin well) who knowing what is right,
would not do it, at length should come to be ignorant what is right; we have
instances enough, both in Jews, Gentiles, and Christians. In Jews, Psalm. 81.8,
etc. Hear O my people, and I will testify unto thee, if thou will hearken unto
me, etc. But my people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would none
of me, verse. 11. What followed? So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts,
and they walked in their own counsels: Let them follow their own Imaginations,
corrupting the truth of God, by their corrupt lives and practices. In Gentiles,
Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. How or
wherein does this wrath appear? See verse. 21, 22. Because that when they knew
God, and glorified him not as God, etc. they became vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish heart was darkened. And verse. 24. God gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own heart, etc. even to most unnatural
lusts, not fit to be named, verse. 26, 27. And for this cause God gave them up
to a reprobate mind, to do things which are not convenient, verse. 28. In
Christians we have it threatened, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. abundantly made good upon
the followers of Antichrist: of whom he says, Whose coming is after the
working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders: And with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, in them that perish; because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God
shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie. That they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. And thus we have finished the Doctrinal part of our discourse,
That a corrupt heart makes a corrupt head: An unsound heart makes an unsound
judgment. Let us now proceed to the Application. 5. Application Use 1. To show
the Depravation of our Nature.


1. Take notice of the miserable and lamentable Depravation of our nature,
since our first Father affected too much knowledge, to be like God, knowing
good and evil. We are now our own worst enemies; and our corruptions begins at
our selves. It is a question (yet no great question) Whither Adams
understanding, or his affections were first corrupted? This is certain, that
both ways now we are subject to corruption. Sometimes the head corrupts the
heart, A corrupt judgment corrupts the affections: Without (sound) knowledge,
the mind is not good, Prove. 19.2. Sometimes the heart, affections, or
conscience, corrupt the judgment: As it is in nature, there is a mutual influx
or influence of the head upon the stomach, by distillations of ill humors; and
of the stomach upon the head, by ascension of ill somes or vapors; and both
ways the health of the body is endangered: So is it in the soul, a corrupt
head, or an ill principled judgment, corrupts the heart and life; evil
doctrines (as evil words) corrupt good manners, like Gangrens, that eat and
fret away the vitals of Religion, and the power of Godliness The Apostle was
speaking of some that were infected with this cursed principle, That there
should be no resurrection. What influence would this doctrine have upon the
heart and life? See verse. 32. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye, and
there an end of us and all; Be not deceived (says he) evil communications
(evil doctrinal principles) corrupt good manners. 1 Cor. 15.33.
The judgment thus corrupted, corrupts the heart and life. And contrarily, a
corrupt heart or life, corrupts the head: some evil practices sophisticate the
judgment, and both ways the health and salvation of the soul is hazarded.

Use 2. To manifest the Reason of the prevalence of of errors at all times.
2. We may cease to wonder (for we see the reason) why seducers prevail so much
upon people, and why the Church in all times, has been pestered with so much
error, and false opinions. The hearts and lives of men corrupt their heads and
judgments. Not to look too far back into the Primitive times, see it of latter
days in the prevalence of Popery upon the world. The Apostle foretold it
should come to pass in the last days, 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit speaks
evidently, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the faith, and
shall give heed no errors and doctrines of devils, which speak lies through
hypocrisy. What Is the occasion of it? Having their consciences seared with an
hot iron. Their consciences were scorched and seared with gross sins, and then
they corrupted the faith to heal them whole again. So 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Because
they received not the love of the truth; therefore God sent them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie, verse. 12. They believed not the
truth. Why? because they had pleasure in unrighteousness. We wondered, of late
times, to see so many, not simple people only, but learned Clerks and Rabbis,
to turn P^pists, Arminians, Cosin-germanes of Papists: we needed not, if we had
considered, that their hearts were gone to Rome before, and now their heads
followed after. Were they well examined, many of them, it would be found, they
first put away a good conscience, before they made shipwreck of the Faith;
their hearts betrayed their heads. Many of them were (its known they were)
covetous, ambitious, voluptuous: and Popery has baits of all sorts to catch
them; that great Harlot and mother of fornications, has a golden cup, full of
preferments, profits, pleasures, and this made men's heads drunk and giddy, to
embrace the grossest errors and obsurdities for truths. Look upon these present
times and see what defection from the Faith there is, and what sad Apostasy
from the old received Truths, is to be found amongst us; and that not of the
common ignorant multitude (though they are a daily pr^y to seducers) but of old
professors; who had not only knowledge in the word (as they thought) but also
a form of godliness in the worst times. Our Church of England (I mean the
professing party in it) seemed to me, not long ago, as a fair great looking
glass, wherein was represented one only Image: a sweet unanimity and
uniformity in judgment and affections. But now (Oh pity!) its like the same
glass broken into many pieces, and every one presenting a several Image, in so
many sects and factions almost as men: What may be the matter? Truly, I think
men's hearts have betrayed their heads. They had a form, and but a form of
Godliness, denying the power thereof, allowing themselves in some open or
secret corruption) and now justly delivered over to self-pleasing and
self-deceiving errors. Have you not seen in Summer time upon a tree, an Apple,
or a Pear, red and yellow-ripe before all its fellows? Come next morning, and
you find it on the ground. What was the matter? Why, there was a worm (as
opening you find) at the Core, which sucking up all the moisture, hastaned the
outward ripening; and drew away that very sap, that should have preserved it on
the tree. So is it with many professors, that in outward shows outrun many
times, sincere and honest hearted Coristians; making a more glorious show of
knowledge and practice, then other of their neighbors (the stony ground brought
forth fruit immediately, the good ground with patience) but there is a worm of
some lust within, that eats out the heart of Religion, hypocrisy hastening on
to ripeness of profession, and then they fall off from the Faith to error. It
were easy to instance, in almost all the present errors and heterodoxe
opinions of the times; they are oftentimes entertained upon this very ground;
because they comply with and favor some open or secret lust. The Apostle
speaking of some novel opinions of those Primitive times (so early they began)
calls them (...) profane, as well as vain bablings, 2 Timothy 2.16. and says they
grow to more ungodliness. Mark it, they suppose, and find profane and ungodly
hearts, and make them more profane and ungodly hearts that intertain them: Do
we not see the open looseness of many formerly professing hypocrites; as the
event discovers? Do we not wonder at such and such zealous professors, turned
not only erroneous in their judgments, but loose and far more licentious in
their lives since they fell to these new opinions? Take but some few instances,
of taking opinions, which in their very nature, are suitable to some men's
corruptions; I told you heretofore of Hymeneus and Philetus, who fell into a
gross error, Saying that the Resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
And the doctrine took exceedingly, Whose words fretted like a Gangrene, and
overturned and subverted the faith of some. And have not we the same errors
revived, now of late, in some that deny the immortality of the soul, At the
beginning of our troubles the first Pamphlet that appeared, was of the
Mortality of the soul.
and consequently the Resurrection of the body, and the last judgment? so did
those Saint Peter speaks of; the false teachers he had spoken of, Chap. 2. they
made a mock of the last judgment, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. This first know, that in the
last days shall come mockers, walking after their own lusts (mark that)
saying, where is the promise of his coming? that is, to judgment. Willingly
ignorant (says he) of all those grounds that evidence the truth thereof;
willing easily to believe there should be none, because they could heartily
wish there might be none. And is not this pleasing doctrine, to men that walk
after their own lusts? Again, That cursed and blasphemous doctrine, That God is
the Author of men's sins; Not of those actions alone, in and with which sin is,
but of the very pravity, ataxy, anomy, irregularity and sinfulness it self,
page 36. Abfit. Abfit. Romans 3.5 6. Page 37.
that its feared (though the Author be dead and the book burnt) lives in the
heads and hearts of some, it not being then time to vent it, till a Tolleration
of all Opinions be granted, and the times fitted to bear it: That opinion (I
say) who are like to embrace it? Why, troubled souls (troubled with the horror
of guilty consciences, so for their comfort was it published) but troubled, not
Evangelically sure, they need no such comforts, but Legally that would fain
enjoy their lusts, but dare not unless their consciences be stupefied with some
such doctrine as this, That God has more hand in men's sinfulness then
themselves. Let me not multiply cases, I will give you one instance of a lusts
that troubles many, though in several ways. Do you think the Scripture says
in vain, The spirit that is in us lusts after liberty? Where does the
Scripture say so (you will say?) If it say so by consequence, a fair deduction,
I hope you will say, it says so. The Apostle hints so much, when he says,
Brethren, you are called unto liberty, only use not your liberty as an occasion
to the flesh, Gal. 5.13. implying not only a possibility, but a proclivitie in
men, to abuse their liberty. Now I am much deceived, if this be not the common
bait of most seducers of these times; and that which subverts the Faith of
many, but through their own lusts. It was fore-prophesied by Saint Peter of
old, to come to pass in these last times, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. He had said in the
beginning of the Chapter, verse. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the
people, even as there shall be false Teachers amongst you, which privily bring
in damnable heresies, etc. How shall they convey their poison? See verse. 18. In
speaking swelling words of vainity, they beguile them that were a little
escaped from them which are wrapped in error: What Is the bait? verse. 19.
promising them liberty (and are themselves the servants of corruption)
promising them liberty. But what betrays them? much wantonness, through the
lusts of the flesh: which lusts after Liberty. I pray consider, if this be
not the Lure, that allures most of our Sectaries at this day. The Antinomians
preach Liberty from the Law, Liberty from sin, Liberty from Repentance, from
sorrow for sin, Liberty from punishment, or chastisement for sin, Liberty from
Duties, from the Sabbath, etc. Is not this a fine Doctrine for loose libertine
consciences? The Anabaptists preach Liberty from the power of the Magistrate
(so some of them have, though others yet disclaim it,) Liberty of prophesying
or preaching, and administering Sacraments, to any supposed gifted brother;
Liberty from Tithes, a taking doctrine, no question, not like a Gangrene, but
like wildfire. The Brownist pleads for Liberty too, Liberty from Classes and
Synods Ecclesiastical, Liberty for the people to Govern and Vote in the
Government of the Church, and to have power and Authority in the keys, in
election, ordination, excommunication, etc. And how near our Independent
brethren of New and Old England come to them, in granting their people the key
of Liberty, I would wish them to consider; If all be true, which is reported,
they find their peoples key of Liberty (in N. E.) has almost devoured their
Officers key of Authority, as Aarons Rod devoured all the rest. But Liberty,
desire of Liberty in this and the like kind, is that, I fear, that wins them so
many proselytes. In a word, your Seekers (that have lost their Religion, and
God knows when they will find it) and those that are for Toleration of all
Religions, Quakers, and the like, do they not find speedy acceptance and
entertainment amongst loose-professing Christians? we may now cease to wonder:
we have seen the reason, A corrupt life corrupts the judgment.

To conclude this second Use; Who are they ordinarily, that are the prey of
seducers? the Apostle has told you often: either very simple, or very sinful;
either weak in judgment, or strong in lusts and passions. I shall instance but
two places: The first is that in 2 Timothy 3.6. Of this sort are they that creep
into houses (their qualities are before described) and lead captive, Whom?
First, silly simple women, (...); women, or men as simple as women: people
never very well principled in the grounds of Religion, always learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and then follows their
sinfulness, laden with sins and led about with diverse lusts, pride and
wantonness, scorn and bitterness, etc. The second place is in the 4 Chap. of
the same Epistle, verse. 3, 4. The time will come (and now its come) when they
will not suffer wholesome or sound doctrine, but having itching ears, (...),
Emphatically.
shall get them an heap of teachers. What makes their ears itch thus, after
variety of new teachers? their own several lusts: after their lusts, their own
lusts, shall they get them an heap of teachers: that is, as I hinted before;
Teachers suitable to their several lusts. And thus, I have done with the second
Use.

3. We may upon this ground, Use 3. A prognostic of more Apostates
make a very probable prognostic concerning the state and condition of many
men and women, viz. those who are loose and corrupt in their lives, not yet
taken with any of the New old errors, and blasphemous notions of these times:
They are in a fair and ready way to Apostasy; to be made a prey to one seducer
or other, who can most sutably scratch their itching ears, and comply with
their own proper lust. An unsound heart, will make an unsound head. These are
the perilous times, the Apostles have forewarned of to come to pass in the
last days, 2 Timothy 3.1. 1 Timothy 4.1.
when many shall depart from the Faith. These are discovering times if ever any
were, as in the State, so in the Church. There must be heresies, that these
that are approved may be known. The men that shall be discovered, are largely
described, 2 Timothy 3.1. Lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters proud etc.
lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. Yet verse. 5. Having a form (or
figure) of godliness, but denying the power thereof. There are many already
fallen away to believe lies and strong delusions upon those corrupt practices;
and assure your selves you that are such, will not be long after them, if God
put not a stop to the seducers of the times: Let no man say, Am I a dog, that
I should fall to such gross opinions, such horrid blasphemies, such Ranting
practices. Assure thy self, thy corrupt heart, will easily corrupt thy head; If
men be openly vicious, or secretly hypocritical, and withhold the truth in
unrighteousness, it is not more ordinary, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
then just with God, to give them up to believe a lie, that all they may be
damned, that believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And
they that cannot endure sound doctrine (the old wholesome truths) because it
suites not with their lusts; 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
it is just with God, that as they turn their ears from the truth; so, they
shall be given unto fables. That any secret or open hypocrites are not yet
seduced, they may thank the providence of God, that has preserved them from
the opportunities of Temptations, Heb. 3.12.
and not their own strength. An evil heart of unbelief, will cause men to
depart from the living God. Look to it, Christians, that you be sincere and
keep a good conscience, if not (these are winnowing and discovering times) you
will ere long (I dare be your Prophet, you will ere long) make shipwreck of the
faith. Avolent quantum volent paleae istae levis fidei, etc.
I Will say no more of this but in Tertullians words, Let the chaff fly away as
much as it will, the wheat will be the more in the floor of God, and we shall
be the fitter for a Reformation.

Use 4. A caution to people, whom they trust in matters of Religion. Mat. 7.16.
4. This may serve for Caution, a fair warning to people to take heed whom they
trust in matters of Faith and Religion. Beloved (says Saint John) 1 John 4.1.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whither they are of God, for many
false spirits are gone out into the world. How shall we try them? By their
fruits you shall know them. Take heed of crediting too much those men, those
Teachers whom you see loose and corrupt in their lives, and given over to
Liberty, or rather licentiousness: Its twenty to one, they are, or will be
unsound in their Judgments, who are unsound in their practice, at least in
that particular, wherein they allow themselves. Will any man ask the advice, or
rest upon, the Judgment of a Covetous man concerning Usury? Or of a voluptuous
man concerning Temperance and chastity? Or of a Libertine, concerning
strictness of conversation? etc. Nay, it is just with God, when Teachers are
corrupted in their lives, in any one of those, or the like lusts, to give them
up to errors in judgment, to blind their own eyes, and so let them be blind
leaders of the blind. Its true indeed, sometimes false Prophets come in sheeps
clothing; the greatest seducers and Heretics, have been men visible of very
strict lives, that its hard for people to discover them without very serious
observation. Yet a diligent watchful eye may do much: The Scribes and Pharisees
had a very devout and Saint-like profession: But yet our Savior, both
discerned, and discovered them; by a more spiritual sin (if I may so call it)
that is, by their pride. They prayed, fasted, gave alms, devoutly, frequently
charitably, but all to be seen of men: pride and popularity, was their lust and
corruption. And this was very visible in the Ancient Heretics; very proud, and
scornful. Thus (they say) Augustine the Monk, that was sent over into England,
was discovered, by the advice of an holy Hermit, not to be a man of God. And
this vice is visible to half an eye, in many of our new Teachers, and many of
their followers, they are a proud and scornful generation; undervaluing and
trampling upon the reputation, of the most not only learned, but pious and
Godly Ministers of the former and present times: I say no more, By their fruits
you shall know them. Take heed whom you trust.

5. The last Use shall be for Exhortation to all, Use 5. Exhortation to all.
both Ministers and people, To be careful, to hearken to the Apostles charge to
Timothy; To hold Faith and a good Conscience together; and as we desire or
intend, not to make shipwreck of the Faith; so to see, that we keep a good
Conscience. As you tender the preservation of the Jewel, look well to the
Cabinet; the better heart, the better head. For the more profitable pressing
home of this Doctrine, give me leave to enlarge my self a little. First by a
more particular d scovery of some special corrupti^ns, which experimentally
Shipwreck the Faith. Secondly by urging some special motives, to people and
Ministers. Thirdly, by prescribing some directions to preserve from Apostasy.

1. The special corruptions, By discovering some special corruptions, as 1.
Covetousness.
that most endanger the Faith to corrupt our Judgments, are these,

1. Covetousness, nothing worse to corrupt the Faith, then an heart exercised
with covetousness, as the Apostle Peter speaks, and notes it for one of the
vices of false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2.1, 3. Through covetousness shall they with
fained words make merchandise of you, with 14, 15. Which forsaking the right
way have gone astray, following the way of Balaam which loved the wages of
unrighteousness. So Saint Paul expressly, The love of money, is the root of all
evil, which while some have lusted after, they have erred concerning the Faith,
1 T^m. 6.10. So he describes those Cretian seducers, Tit. 1.10, 11. There are
many disobedient and vain talkers and deceivers, which subvert whole houses,
teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre sake. And therefore he
prescribed this as one necessary qualification both of his Bishop or Presbyter
(for both are one, verse. 5. with 7.) and also of his Deacon, that they be not
given to filthy lucre, not covetous, 1 Timothy 2.3. to this end, that he may hold
fast the faithful word, Tit. 1.9. Implying that if he be such, he would soon
corrupt the Faith. The holding of the Faith may cost him the loss of all his
estate. Will a covetous heart suffer that? The Prophet Jeremy saw the
experience of this in his time, Jer. 6.13, 14. For from the least of them, even
unto the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness, and from the
Prophet to the Priest, every one deals falsely. Wherein? In the Faith, so it
follows, They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly,
saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace. And Saint Paul clears himself
from corrupting the word of God, by colored covetousness (as elsewhere he
calls it) 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not as many who corrupt the word of God ((...), a
Metaphor taken from Hucksters or Vintuers, who for lucres sake, mingle water
with their wine) but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak
we in Christ.

2. Ambition.
2. Ambition, or desire of Domination, is another corrupter of the Faith,
especially in corrupt times, when preferment cannot be had, but by complying
with the errors of the times. We need not go far for instance, the Apostle in
the 7 verse. of this Chap. gives a reason why some had turned to vain janglings,
(...); Desirous to be (reputed) Teachers, or Doctors of the Law, as some now of
the Gospel) understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. Such
a kind of ambitious person, was Diotrophes 3 Ep. of Joh. verse. 9. who withstood
the Apostles doctrine written to the Churches. Why? (...), he loved the
pre-eminence, he would be chief Bishop himself. This was the occasion of Arrius
corrupting the Faith; his ambition to a Bishopric crossed, and when his cursed
Heresy got head, and was countenanced by the Emperors, many turned Arrians,
only because they saw preferment went that way. Crysostom observed it long
ago, (...), etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy 5. hom. 2.
Heresies grow out of the desire of ruling, because they loved not their
brethren (says he) for want of love, they envyed those that were in honor,
from envy arose ambition or desire of Ruling, from thence they sell into
Heresies. To this purpose is that of the Prophet Jeremy 5.31. The Prophets
prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, etc. Tremel. in
locum.
That is (says the learned Translator) the Priests did Lord it over Gods
inheritance, by the aid of some false Prophets, whom they allowed, and sent
abroad on purpose to procure them favor with the people. Why did they suffer
the Truth to be so corrupted by the false Prophets? because themselves did bear
Rule by their means. The Priests maintained them in their false doctrine,
because the Prophets maintained them in their false honor. Just as some
Prelates did of late with us. To this head may be added, pride, popularity,
Pride.
and affection of singularity; pride is a great forerunner of false doctrine,
pride goes before a fall, is true in this sense, before Apostasy. The Apost^e
therefore cautions, that his Bishop or Elder, must not be a Novice, (...), a
new convert to the Faith, (...).
Least being lifted up (with pride) he fall into (Apostasy) the condemnation
of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. And one reason of heterodox doctrine, is declared to
be pride, 1 Timothy 6.45. If any man teach otherwise, etc. He is proud, knowing
nothing but doting about questions, etc. pride is his corruption; As pride of
parts in many of our people, their (not very great) knowledge, utterance,
expression, gift of prayer, etc. puffs them up that they swell above their
sphere, and casts them into many dangerous errors: So in many of our young
Ministers, pride of their learning, gifts, etc. The like does that corruption
of popularity, to be admired and applauded by the people, Popularity.
by a multitude of followers, especially if of the highest magnitude, rich,
wise, noble, etc. The Apostle noted this long ago, Act. 20.30. Also of your own
selves shall arise men, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them.
So did those false Apostles teach and preach for Circumcision and the Law, to
be joined with Christ; upon what ground? They desire to have you circumcised
(as some now rebaptize) that they may glory in your flesh, that is, that they
have drawn many to be proselytes, to their way and opinion; and have a
multitude of followers. Oh, for a poor simple fellow, a Miller, a Weaver, etc.
to be followed at heels with a troop of giddy disciples; what a glory is this.
Oh, to be pointed at, as the man. etc. The Minister is able to puff up a young
unballasted spirit; and that is the way to be given over to, or held in error.
Simon Magus did not so bewitch the people with sorceries as the applauses of
the people did bewitch him to continue in his enchantments. He bewitched them,
by giving it out, that himself was some great one, Act. 8.9. And they bewitched
him with their applauses, They all gave heed unto him from the least to the
greatest, saying (mark that saying) This man is the great power of God.
Singularity does work the same effects, I mean desire to be reputed singular;
as many of our people (formerly of no great Religion) now Religion is come into
fashion, cannot content themselves, to be wise to sobriety, Singularity.
to be soberly Religious: but they aspire after singularity of opinions, new
notions, new nothings indeed, and singularity of practice to be of the highest
form of Religion, the Court Religion of the newest fashion and dress So some of
our preachers affect a singular way of preaching upon a common subject, 2 Pet.
2.18.
in an high, Meteorical, Metaphysical strain of notions and language, which (it
may be) the Apostle calls (...), great, bunchy, swelling words of vanity, to
stupefie and amuse their unlearned Auditors. This is, as God speaks to Job, to
darken council by words without knowledge, Job 38 2. The excellency of a true
Minister, is to make obscure texts clear; these count it their excellency, to
make clear texts obscure. And who understand or admire them, except ignorant
and unlearned young men and silly women? but learned, judicious, and
substantial Christians admire their vanity and folly. And what is the issue of
all this pride and singularity? They many times strain a truth so high, Romans
16.18.
that they break it into errors, and mislead simple, but sometimes well meaning
people. Take heed of these. 3. Voluptuousness.


3. Voluptuousness, desire of pleasure and ease, etc. That this is an Inlet of
errors and aberration from the Faith, is intimated by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.1.
Many shall depart from the faith, both Teachers and people. Why? not only
because in general they have seared naughty consciences; but for this in
special, They are lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3, 4. 1 Timothy 3.3.
Amongst other qualfications of a Ministers, the Apostle requires, that he be
not (...), given to wine, one that sits at the wine (as the word imports) or
tarries long at the wine, as the like phrase is used, Prove. 23.30. and of his
Deacons, verse. 8. (...), not given to much wine, one that takes more heed to
fill his lusts with wine, then his head with knowledge, or his heart with
holiness. Why this required? That he may hold the mystery of the Faith in a
pure conscience, verse. 9. Because wine is a mocker, Prove. 20.1. that is, a
deceiver, and takes away the heart, that is, his wisdom: If you will see how
far, look Hos. 4.11, 12. Whoredom (another sin of the voluptuous) and wine,
and new wine takes away the heart; that is, the underderstanding, to run into
the grossest and most unreasonable Idolatry: My people ask counsel at their
stocks, and their staff declares unto them, for the spirit of whordome has
caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God. That Is
a famous place to this purpose, Isa 28.7. But also they have erred through
wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the Priest and the Prophet
have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine; they are out of
the way through strong drink they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.
See also Isa. 56.10, 12. Her watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they
are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. I will
conclude this with one place more, an instance of an idle, Nonresident Prophet
or Minister, Zech. 11.17. Woe to the idle shepherd (that has eyes and sees not,
etc.) that leaves the flock: The unconscionable Minister, that for his ease,
pleasure and idleness, neglects his Ministry and people. What shall be his
punishment? The sword shall he upon his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.
Experience of former times verifies this.

4. Timerousness.
4. Timer^usness, and fearfulness, in corrupt and persecuting times, often
betrays the judgment unto compliance at least, with the errors of the times.
There were some false Apostles, that preached for Circumcision, and the
observation of the Law of Moses, together with the Gospel: telling the people,
that unless they were circumcised, they could not be saved, Act. 15. This was a
very gross perverting and corrupting of the Gospel of Christ. What was it that
thus mislead and seduced them? partly to please and comply with others of that
way and opinion, but chiefly their fearfulness to suffer for the truth of the
Gospel. So the Apostle resolves it, Gal. 6.12. (...). As many as desire to make
a fair show in the flesh, (that is, to please and not offend the Jews, strictly
cleaving to their old Law and Religion) they constrain you to be circumcised,
only least they should suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ. The same
did in part betray Peter and Barnabas into dissimulation of the truth, that
they did not (...), keep the right path of the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.14.
the reason is given, verse. 12. For before that certain came from James, he
(and Barnabas) did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come, he withdrew
and separated himself, fearing (mark that fearing) them of the circumcision.
Fear of men will betray men's judgments into error. How many in the Primitive
times turned Arrians for fear of that persecution under the Arrian Bishops and
Emperors? How many, in the Marian times, turned to be Papists for fear of
persecution? And in the later times. How many turned aside to Arminian
doctrine, and Popish superstitions, partly for favor and preferment, and partly
for fear of the frowns and displeasure of some in higher places. To shut up
this, As any lust allowed and lived in, with the loss of a good conscience,
will corrupt the Judgment. So especially these four instanced in covetousness,
ambition, voluptuousness, Timerousness: Against all which, let me leave this to
your serious consideration: It is the opinion and Judgment of many learned,
judicious, and Godly Divines, Rev. 11.
that the Witnesses spoken of in the Revelation, are not yet, but are shortly
to be slain; and that then, Antichrist will once more (for a time prevail over
the Reformed Churches, with the hottest persecution that ever the Churches
felt; which if it come to pass (as God forbid, for we are not fitted for
sufferings) let all our loose professors and Protestants at large (who allow
themselves to live in their open or secret lusts) and all those, who are
covetous, ambitious, voluptuous, timorous in special, know that they will
(without more grace from God) as surely turn Papists, as now they profess
Protestant: Their hearts will betray their heads: Their wrack of conscience
now, will then shipwreck the Faith. That Is the first.

2. In the second place, I shall press home, 2. The motive^
the exhortation of the Apostle here, Hold faith and a good conscience; in the
words of Solomon, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, or as the
original has it, Above all keeping, keep thy heart, thy conscience; Deer
Christians, let it be your greatest study, not to keep your estates, honors,
liberties, lives, but your hearts and consciences: upon the reason employed in
the text, because that is the only way to keep the Faith. I shall not go far
for motives, having store, in and about the text; only for methods sake, I
shall divide them into a double stream, betwixt you the people of God, and us
Ministers.

1. To the people of God (and indeed to all) above all keeping keeping your
hearts and consciences pure; 1. To all the people of God, by 4 things.
I shall follow the Metaphor of the text; which speaks of a Shipwreck: Here
four particulars.

1. From the richness of the merchandise or Jewel, 1. The richness of the
merchandise the Faith.
wherewith your Ship, your conscience, is laden and betrusted; It is, the
Faith, that is (as you heard) the Truth; the Truth of the Gospel, the Faith
once (and but once) delivered to the Saints, Jude verse. 3 which he exhorts all,
Prove. 23.23.
earnestly to contend for. To the same purpose, Solomon the wisest of mere men,
cries, Buy the truth, but sell it not. Buy it at any price (as he the pearl,
Mat. 13.) but sell it at no price; one ray of this Faith, this Truth, is more
worth then all the world. See Prove. 3.13, 14 other merchandise cannot, but this
will certainly make you for ever Happy: Hear what wisdom it self says, Happy
is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding; For the
merchandise thereof, is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof, then fine gold. She is more precious then Rubies, and all the things
thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Length of days are in her
right hand, in her left riches and honor; her ways are ways of plea^^ntness,
and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon
her, and happy is every one, that retains her. How careful are your merchants
of the meanest commodities, if but Corn or Coals, etc. to see them safe shipped
in a good ship? much more, if laden with precious merchandise, Silk and
Velvets, Silver, and Gold, and precious stones: would any wise man trust these
in a rotten, leaking Ship? The application is easily made, Faith is this Jewel,
your consciences are the Ship; if you desire to bring your Treasure safe to
land, have a care of the Ship your conscience, that it be sound and safe; If
you put away a good conscience, you must needs make shipwreck of the Faith,
this incomparable Jewel. That Is the first consideration.

2. The Ship it self, is next considerable. A good ship is long in making, 2.
The goodness of the ship a good conscience.
great pains and costs in rearing and rigging of it, and the use and comfort of
it in a long and hard Seafare, is of great concernment, as a bad one fills with
great fears. A good conscience (which is here compared to the Ship) is a thing
long in making, and cost much to make it good, The blood of Christ to purge it
from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. much pains and labor to
keep it good, Act. 24.16. Herein I exercise my self, (...), to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. And for the use of it in
this our Seafare, where we meet with storms and pirates, and shelves and rocks,
etc. nothing more safe and comfortable then a good conscience; good with the
goodness of integrity, that will keep it good with the goodness of tranquillity:
A good conscience is a continual feast, Prove. 15.15. And our Apostle who was
(literally) in perils by Sea, as well as by land, 2 Cor. 11.26. and was often
tossed with the tempests of persecution, from the knowledge of the goodness of
his ship, could sing in a storm (as if he had been in Noah's Ark) This is our
rejoicing, the Testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity not with fleshly wisdom, we have had our conversation in the world, 2
Cor. 1.12. The Psalmist sings it out, Ps. 119.165. Great is the peace which
they have, who love thy law, and nothing shall offend them: or they shall have
no stumbling blocks (as the original bears it) Nothing shall offend them, is a
(...), more is meant then spoken; they are much pleased, delighted, ravished
with the peace of a good conscience: But who would venture to Sea in a torn,
cracked weather-beaten ship, having neither Sails, nor Anchor, nor ballast?
There is no worse hell on earth, then an ill conscience, especially in
troublous and suffering times. Witness Judas, Spira, etc. It is reported of
some that have run through all the Sects to the very Ranters, that they lie
under the horrors of hell, roaring and crying, there is no mercy for them: I
could wish they that first lead them out of the way might be sensible of this
wrong. Have a care therefore of this Ship, that is of so great concernment.

3. The passenger or Pilot of the ship, 3. The worth of the passenger the soul.
is of special consideration, to commend, yea command, the looking well to the
Ship, who is either saved or lost with it; If the Ship and Merchandise
miscarry, the person in it, is in danger of perishing with them: He that is
careless of a good conscience, does not only loose his Merchandise, the Faith,
but himself also, even his own soul; That Is a dreadful place, 2 Pet. 2.1, 3.
False teachers shall privily bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them (as some now do) and bring upon themselves swift destruction. Whose
judgment now of a long time lingreth not and their damnation slumbreth not. In
the next verse to my text, there are a couple of Apostates, Himeneus and
Alexander delivered unto Satan, by a censure of excommunication, that they
might learn not to blaspheme. The Church for want of a settled government, has
not now this power, but God does it, immediately or mediately; mediately by
some Instruments of Satan. It Is reported, and by some confessed, that by
sorceries and potions, and such like Satan has really and actually had
possession of them; immediately God does it, by giving men up to their own
lusts; which is worse then if delivered into the actual possession of Satan.
That place speaks the very terrors of hell, to men that have put away a good
conscience, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved; for this cause God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie, that all they might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Therefore for the
passengers sake, your own souls sake, look well to the ship to keep a good
conscience, lose one, and lose both.

4. The sad examples of shipwreck in others.
4. The sad and lamentable examples of shipwracks, that are before our eyes, and
upon record; goodly ships and richly laden, that have miscarryed in sight of
the Haven. Here are two in the next verse, of whom is Himeneus and Alexander,
and 2 Timothy 2. Philetus and Demas, cap. 4.10. anciently, and thousands more upon
our own shore, lie wreckt and broken to pieces: who have not only split the
ship, a good conscience, but made shipwreck of the Faith, and are themselves
drowning in the Sea of perdition, if God be not the more merciful to them. Let
these be as so many Seamarks to us all, to cry, Hold faith, and above all, if
you will hold the Faith, get, and keep a good conscience. But some concern

2. To the Ministers of God.
2. The Ministers of God, who represent and succeed Timothy in his office, as
Pilots of the Church. It concerns them above others, to hold Faith and a good
conscience together; especially to hold the latter, if they intend to hold the
former. I shall propound but these considerations, to persuade to it, very
briefly.

1. The heart is very deceitful.
1. How easy a thing it is, for our hearts to deceive us, if not diligently
examined and observed: we may strongly believe we have a good conscience when
it is clean otherwise. Paul himself sometimes was cheated by his own heart, I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things, contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26.9. He thought it conscience, but it was
persecution: His conscience was mislead to maintain his old way, with
persecution of the professors of the Gospel. There is a way (says Solomon)
that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death, Prove.
16.25. There are many ways, which may seem to us, to be the ways of Christ,
which are in a more general notion, the ways of Antichrist. There may be
colored covetousness (as the Apostle calls it) or secret ambition, pride, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.
popularity at the heart, which may incline the judgment to some plausible and
advantageous errors of the times. Look well there to our consciences, there may
lodge in them some deceivable lust, which may deceive our judgment into error.
Mark how Paul searches and sifts his heart: The testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you wards, 2 Cor. 1.12. And again chap. 4.2. Having renounced the hidden things
of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God. That Is one.

2. The Apostle gives this charge to Timothy, 2. They by parts and place are
able to do much good or hurt.
not so much as a Christian or private man, as a preacher of the Gospel; his
place and parts called for more vigilance, to get and keep a good conscience.
Great parts of learning and eminence of place (as a leader in warfare, or a
Pilot in Seafare) if the heart be unsound, may enable men to do the more hurt,
by propagating, by defending and coloring over errors with a show of truth.
The greatest Heretics have been very learned, subtle men; able to dispute
their errors, and so to subvert the Faith of others. So we noted above, That
the Heterodox Teachers, were acute disputers, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. And elsewhere he
says, As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses (by their enchantments, imitating
the miracles of Moses) so do these (seducers) resist the truth, men of corupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.8. Simon Magus by the opinion
of his parts and greatness, drew multitudes of people after him, Act. 8.9, 10.
Hence the Apostle gives that caution, Col. 2.8. Beware least any man spoil you,
through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men.

3. They, if bad anderring, may carry many with them to hell.
3. Ministers of all others, had need to look to their hearts and heads, because
if they mislead themselves, they are able by their Authority and favor with
the people) to mislead many with them into hell. They are called Guides,
Leaders, Pilots (as we said at first) if those miscarry, they carry with them
thousands into destruction. The Scribes and Pharisees, made many proselytes,
making them two fold more the children of hell, then themselves. Those two men
named after the text, Hymeneus and Alexander, as also Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17,
18. who had made shipwreck of the Faith, Their word did eat like a canker,
saying, that the resurrection was past already and overthrew the faith of some.
Those Cretian seducers, subverted whole houses, Tit. 1.11. The venerable esteem
of many seeming Saint like Heretics of old, carried many thousands with them
into Heresy. And so they do now, their followers having their persons in
admiration for their seeming holiness, have gone after them blindfold, as not
thinking it possible, that such pious men coul err, or lead others into errors.
The leaders of my people cause them to err, and they that are lead of them are
destroyed, was once a complaint, and may be our caution. The words are rendered
by Tremelius, thus, Doctores populi mei, Isa. 9.16.
sunt seductores, The leaders of my people are seducers; But in the Original,
the words are more emphatical, They that bless my people are seducers, See Isa.
3.12.
and they that are blessed by them, are destroyed. They by their flatteries
pronounced the people blessed in their erroneous and destroying ways;
notwithstanding the threats of ruin to them, by the true Prophets of God; and
when they thought themselves blessed, in a blessed state, they and their
Prophets were swallowed up in a common destruction. Woe to the seduced, but
tiwice and twenty times woe to the seducer; he that brings in damnable errors to
deceive and destroy others, he brings upon himself swift destruction. His fire
shall be so much hotter in hell, as he has more disciples after him, as so
many faggots to incense the flame. Let Ministers then look well to the Faith,
to keep it sound, and if they will keep and hold the Faith, above all keepings,
keep a good conscience.

3. A word of direction to all, and I have done; 3. Directions to preserve from
this shipwreck.
How we may preserve our selves from the Apostasy of the times, and prevent
this common shipwreck of the Faith. There are (as has been hinted) three
things, that do betray men into error, in these times, ignorance, pride, and
hypocrisy; the contrary to these, are the preservatives of the Faith;
knowledge, humility, sincerity, of each a word, and but a word.

1. Sound and well grounded knowledge of the truth. 1. A skillful Pilot, sound
knowledge.
An ignorant and unskillful Pilot will easily endanger the ship. You heard
before, who they are that are commonly the prey of seducers, unlearned and
unstable souls, says Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.16. therefore unstable, because
unlearned. They are children (says Paul) that are carried away with every wind
of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. and simple women, that are led captive by seducers, 2 Timothy 3.6. untaught, unprincipled people, never catechized in the fundamentals
of Religion. Hence that of the Apostle, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell
in you richly, in all wisdom, and Col. 2.2. He prays for them, that their
hearts may be comforted (or strengthened) unto all riches of the full assurance
of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the
Father, and of Christ. A superficial, notional knowledge, is easily shaken; it
must be (...), the full assurance of understanding, that comes to an
acknowledgement of the Mystery of God, not the hystory only; an ignorant soul
among seducers, is like a ship at Sea, without a skillful Pilote.

2. Knowledge alone, is not sufficient, knowledge puffs up, 2. Store of
Ballast, true humility.
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.1. But there must be the Grace of Humility as
ballast to poise the ship. It Is pride (you heard) that carries men into error,
pride of parts, of gifts, etc. God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble. The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way,
Psalm. 25.9. It is not more ordinary then just with God, to give proud men over
to their self-delusions. He delights to b^fool those who are wise in their own
eyes. They set their wisdom against Gods, and he sets his wisdom against them,
and blinds them with their own wisdom. Whatever parts, or gifts or abilites
men have, let them labor the more to be humble and lie low. He that in a
blustering wind lies on the ground, is safe, whereas he that sets himself upon
the house top, or on a pinnacle, is in danger to be blown down, and to break
his neck. In a word, a man of much knowledge, without Humility, is like a ship
at Sea with full sails, but without ballast; every gust of wind is ready to
overturn it, or run it upon a rock.

3. A strong Anchor, sincerity.
3. Sincerity is the chief, that secures all, unrighteousness of heart (that's
the good conscience in the text) is like the Anchor to a ship, that stays it
in a storm: So the Psalmist prayed, Let uprightness and integrity preserve me,
Psalm. 25.21. the reason is added; for I wait on thee. When the truth is much
obscured by Heretics, that he cannot see his way; there is a promise, Unto the
upright there arises light in the darkness, Psalm. 112.4. God has promised all
blessings to the upright, See Psalm. 25.12 Him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.
they are his delight, Prove. 11.20. The high way of the upright, is to depart
from evil, he that keeps his way, preserves his soul, Prove. 16.17. He that
walks in his upuprightness, fears the Lord: but he that is perverse in his
ways, dispiseth him, Prove. 14.2. And how just is it with God, to despise that
man that fears not God, but is perverse and hypocritical in his ways: of all
men, God hates an hypocrite, and will one time or other uncase him. Hence it is
observable, that many weak Christians, for knowledge, but sincere and upright
in heart, persevere and outstand all the errors of the times, when many of
great knowledge, and learning and parts, but open or secret hypocrites, do
Apostate from the truth. Above all then get a sincere and upright heart, to
walk up to your knowledge, that will keep both the Faith, and your selves. I
shall allude to the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 13. verse. ult. There are these three
preservatives of ^he Faith, knowledge, humility, sincerity, but the chiefest of
these is sincerity. This is that good conscience, in the text, made good by
sound and saving knowledge much bettered by humility, and preserved in both
those by sincerity. Let it be it every one of our prayer, Oh let my heart be
sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed, Psalm. 119. verse. 80. And Oh that
my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes: then shall! not be ashamed, when I
have respect unto all thy Commandments, verse. 5, 6. And I shall conclude with
my prayer too; Do good, O Lord, to those that are good, and to them that are
upright in their hearts. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways,
the Lord will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, but peace shall be
upon Israel. Amen.

FINIS.

