Ward Mayor.
Martis nono die November. 1680. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli secundi, Angliae,
etc. xxxii.
UPon the motion of Sr. Thomas Aleyn, Knight and Baronet, and Alderman, now
made unto this Court, This Court does desire Dr. Cave to print his Sermon
preached at Bow-Church, on the Fifth instant, being the Anniversary day of
Thanksgiving for Deliverance from the Gun-Powder-Treason Plot, before the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the Right HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens of LONDON, At S. MARY-LE-BOW on the Fifth of November, MDCLXXX. By
William Cave, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of Great
Allhallows, London.

Origin. contra Cells. lib. 3. p. 115. (...).

LONDON, Printed by M. White, for R. Chiswel at the Sign of the Rose and Crown
in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE Right Honorable Sr. Patience Ward LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON,
And to the Court of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
When I first engaged in this service, I did it with some reluctance, not out
of any unwillingness to the thing it self, but the consciousness of mine own
unfitness for it. And when I received the commands of your Court for the
Publication, I found in my self a greater reluctance; not that I knew any thing
in the Sermon that feared the light, but because I had seldom seen printing of
Sermons attain the desired effect, being generally thrown aside, and the most
useful and innocent discourses oftener entertained with spiteful and
disingenuous reflections, than improved to the real purposes of Religion. But
in this I overruled my self, lest I should seem to contemn Authority, while I
am professedly pleading for obedience to it. If any thing herein may minister
to public use, confirm men the more in the Protestant Religion, and awaken an
honest and prudent care against those, whose principles and practices, as well
as their interests, naturally tend to destroy our Religion, and to disturb our
quiet (especially that of this great and honorable City, so intolerable an
eyesore to them) if it may attain these ends, it is the utmost that can be hoped
for from the mean endeavors of

Right Honorable, Your most Faithful and Obedient Servant, William Cave.

ACT. xvii. 6. These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither
also.


SO inveterate are the prejudices of Education, so prevalent and uncontrollable
the force of a long prescription, that though there had been nothing else to
encounter, Christianity was sure at its first setting out to meet with a
vigorous opposition both from Jews and Gentiles. The Gentile-world combined
their whole power against it, and set themselves to run it down, as a novel and
an upstart Sect, that came to undermine their ancient Religion, that had so
long governed the minds of men. But none pursued it with so fierce and
implacable a malice as the Jews, who having been for several ages trained up in
an unmeasurable reverence and veneration for the Mosaic institutions, thought
themselves deeply concerned to make head against that Doctrine, whose avowed
design it was to abrogate their whole Temple-ministration; and to change the
customs that Moses delivered. Upon this account having imbrued their hands in
the blood of its Founder, and treated him with all the instances of contempt
and cruelty, they resolved to follow home the blow, and if possible, to banish
his Disciples and Followers out of the world; whom therefore they sought in all
places, partly by open violence, partly by arts of falsehood and insinuation to
expose to the severity of the laws, and the rage of the multitude. And such was
the case of Paul and Silas in this Chapter, who being engaged in their
Evangelical travels, were come down to Thessalonica, the Metropolis of that
part of Macedonia, where in the Jewish Synagogue S. Paul managed the cause of
Christ with so much eloquence and strength of reason, ( ver. 2, 3.) that not a
few of the Jews themselves, but especially vast numbers of the Greek proselytes
(who were not enslaved to opinions and principles, to parties and interests)
came over to him, ver. 4. But the Sun that melts the wax, hardens clay; his
Sermons having a quite contrary effect upon the obstinate unbelieving Jews, who
not being able to resist the clearness of his arguments, betook themselves to
force and clamor, the last refuges of an impotent and a baffled cause. So
gathering to themselves the refuse of the common people, v. 5. they blew up the
City into a tumult and uproar, and assaulted the house where the Apostles
lodged: but missing them (who had prudently withdrawn themselves) they seized
Jason the Landlord, and as many of the Christians as they could meet with, and
dragging them before the Magistrates of the City, loaded them with no less than
conspiracy and treason, crying out with a rude noise and clamor, Here are the
men, that are the common incendiaries of all Countries, that wherever they
come, undermine the peace and prosperity of humane society, that erect imperium
in imperio, a Kingdom contrary to the Laws and constitutions of the Roman
Empire, and not content to have filled other places with confusion and
disorder, are come here amongst us to violate our peace, and embroil us in
intestine feuds and quarrels, These are the men, that having turned the world
upside down, are come hither also.

A heavy charge; and if true, enough to disparage the credit of any Religion in
the world. But thanks be to God the charge in this case was as false and
groundless, as the design of it was spiteful and malicious; the behavior of
these holy men having in all places been as harmless and inoffensive, as the
Doctrine they preached was peaceable, and beneficial to the world; however some
have since for very bad ends dressed it up with another face, and made it look
more like the fiery Doctrine of Mahomet, than that of our meek humble Savior,
the Doctrine of the Prince of peace.

In speaking to these words, I shall do these three things,

First, Show, that this has been an old charge upon Religion and the Professors
of it, to be disturbers of the public peace.

Secondly, That Christianity is so far from being justly obnoxious to this
charge, that of all Religions it best secures the interests of civil Authority,
and the peace of the world.

Thirdly, I shall enquire whether there be any part of the Christian Church at
this day justly guilty of this charge.

I. It has been an old charge upon true Religion and the professors of it, to
be disturbers of the public peace. For the enemy of all righteousness knows no
better way to render them obnoxious to Sovereign powers, than by representing
them as enemies to Government, and inconsistent with the prosperity of the
Civil State. Princes are exquisitely tender and jealous of their Crowns, and
the blessings of public peace are infinitely dear and valuable to every honest
and sober man, so that it is no wonder if they be apt to look shy upon any
thing, that has but the character of sedition and disloyalty (though never so
unjustly) stamped upon it. And this way has in all ages been found successful.
The Israelites in Egypt had a hard hand kept over them, because suspected of
attempts against the Government, and that under a pretense of Religion and
worshipping their own God, they would rescue themselves from the cruelties of
the house of bondage. David was traduced to Saul as a Conspirator against his
Crown and dignity, and Elijah to Ahab as the troubler of Israel. The Chaldean
Courtiers represented Daniel and his Companions as peevish opposers of the
King's Proclamation. By the same artifice Haman laid a train to blow up the
Jewish Nation, by telling Ahasuerus, Esth. 3.8.
they were a people that kept not the Kings Laws, and that therefore it was not
for his profit to suffer them, (...), a perverse and unsociable generation,
(...), Ap. Joseph. Antiquit. l. 11. c. 6. p. 375. (...). ibid.
(as that Emperors Edict represents them) an ill-natured people, cross to the
Laws, and disobedient to their Princes, disaffected to Monarchy, and the
affairs of the Empire. No man ever gave greater demonstrations of a just
submission and deference to Authority than our blessed Savior, and yet was
himself arraigned, condemned, and executed as an enemy unto Caesar. How often
were his Apostles accused for being ringleaders of a faction, men that talked
strange words of one King Jesus, and acted contrary to the decrees of Caesar?
And in the primitive times nothing more common than to find the Heathens
charging Christians to be traitors to the Government, and the pests of humane
society, and that they were hosts humani generis, the common enemies of
mankind. Vid. Justin. Mart. Apol. 11. p. 58.
Nor could they under their bitterest sufferings so much as comfort one another
with the promises of a Kingdom reserved for them above, but the officers that
overheard them, immediately traduc't them to the Prince as ambitious affectors
of the Empire.

A calumny, than which nothing can be more absurd and senseless. For Religion,
where it is not more pretended than practiced, Adv. Colot. p. 1125.
is (as Plutarch truly styles it) the ligature of all Communities, and the
security of Laws; and a City, says he, may as well be built in the air without
ground to stand on, as a State be either constituted or preserved without the
supportment of Religion. Orat. ad Aug. ap. Dion. in Vit. Aug. p. 490.
Upon this account the great Statesman Maecenas prudently advised Augustus,
(...), by all means and upon all occasions to advance Religion and the worship
of the gods, as the strongest Bulwark against conspiracy and treason. Nor is
this founded only in the nature of Religion, but in the justice of the Divine
Providence, which usually rewards piety and virtue (especially in public
Societies) with peace and plenty, and a flourishing state and condition in this
world. To which purpose Cicero lays it down as a maxim of State, Omnia
prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos. Cicer. vid. de not. deor. lib. 1.
That a people that have a care of Religion must needs be prosperous, and can
never be unhappy, till they become irreligious: and he tells us, that the arms
and instruments, by which the Romans conquered the World, were not so much
strength and policy, as Religion and piety. And it is no more than what the Wise
man observed long since, Prove. 14.34.
that it is righteousness exalts a Nation, while sin is the reproach of any
people.

II. Christianity is so far from being justly obnoxious to this charge, that of
all Religions it best secures the interests of civil authority, and the peace
of the world. Which will be abundantly evident, if we consider these three
things.

1. The express and peremptory Laws, which Christ and his Apostles have given
in this matter, commanding us in words as plain as words can tell us, to study
to be quiet, to be humble and gentle, 1 These. 4.11. Romans 12.18. Ephesians. 4.31. Romans
14.49.
and as much as in us lies to live peaceably with all men, to put away strife,
and clamor, and evil speaking, and to follow after the things that make for
peace; to obey Rulers and Magistrates, to honor their persons, revere their
power, and quietly live under the protection of their Government, to give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as unto God the things that are
Gods; Romans 13.1, 2.
that every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for that there is no power
but of God, and that the powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation; therefore ye must needs be
subject not only for wrath but also for conscience sake. Observe, let every
soul, of what rank, quality, or degree soever, (...), says Chrysostom upon
these words, though thou art an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a Prophet, or
whatsoever thou art, thou must be subject: it being plain (says he) that these
things are commanded (...), not only to Laymen, but to Bishops, to Priests, to
Monks, Persons under the severest discipline of Religion. A man that considers
how careful this good Father is to bring the Clergy within the verge of this
command, would be apt to think, he clearly foresaw, and particularly set
himself against the tyranny and usurpations of the Sea of Rome. And indeed he
has so fenc't it in, that, unless the Bishop of that Church can pretend to be
greater than Apostles, Evangelists or Prophets, there is no starting-hole left
for him to escape. But what speak we of Apostles or Prophets, when it is now for
several ages notorious to the world, that he opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God, or is worshipped, and has not scrupled to usurp the
very titles and royalties of God himself. And because whatever power the
Bishops of Rome pretend to, must be derived from S. Peter, let us in the next
place enquire what direction S. Peter himself gives us in this case, and we
shall find that both the Apostle of the Jews, and the Doctor of the Gentiles
write and speak the same things, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves unto
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as
supreme, or unto Governors, as those that are sent by him, for the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; for so is the will of
God, etc. It Is a Law that has a peculiar stamp and signature of divine
authority upon it. How far they who insolently claim to be S. Peter's
Successors, agree with this doctrine, we shall see by and by. But lest men, who
naturally love an unbridled liberty, should take occasion to forget this duty,
S. Paul has made it a solemn and standing part of the ministerial office (...),
to be their Remembrancers in this case, Tit. 3.1.
put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
Magistrates. Lastly, These commands thus plainly delivered, thus frequently
inculcated, are to be complied with not only out of principles of fear, but of
conscience, and are bound upon us with the considerations of no less than
eternal happiness or misery in the other world.

2. The true genius and spirit of the Christian Religion is opposite to nothing
more, than to disturbance and disorder; for it is a spirit of meekness and
humility, not thinking of our selves more highly than we ought to think, but in
honor preferring one another; a spirit of love and gentleness, of justice and
integrity, that renders to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Wherever
Christianity is cordially complied with, it begets the most sweet and benign,
the most peaceable and benevolent temper of mind, represses all hasty and
indeliberate transports, and suffers not the man's spirit to be ruffled with
passion by every trivial affront or injury that is offered to him. It enables us
to be patient toward all men, and to bear provocations with a generous mind,
to carry our selves toward those that wrong us with all kindness and
gentleness, and to be ready to do them all the good we can. It Is not enough
that we do not fly out into the excesses of an extravagant revenge, the
Christian spirit is something more, it is to treat our enemies with all the arts
of softness and good nature, to interpret their actions with candor and
ingenuity, to love their persons, though we condemn their vices, to study their
amendment, to pray for, and promote (what in us lies) their comfort and quiet
in this, and their happiness in another world. It teaches us to be content with
our place and station, and to take up with that portion, which the wisdom of
the divine providence has allotted to us, levels pride and ambition, and makes
us willing to abate of our own private interests, when it may conduce to the
peace and prosperity of the public: it naturally begets a mighty regard and
reverence for Superiors, a dread of their power, a veneration for their
authority, and a readiness to sacrifice our estates or lives for the common
safety. This is the true life and temper of Christianity, and he that can be
religious without this, must be a Christian by a contradiction. And therefore
when the two sons of thunder were hot in fetching down fire from heaven to be
revenged upon those Cities that would not entertain them, our Lord takes them
up, and tells them, Luke 9.55.
you know not what manner of spirit you are of; you little consider the nature
and design of that Evangelical institution, which I am come to set on foot in
the world, such passionate wildfire as you breath after, does but little suit
with the mild and gentle spirit of the Gospel. The sum is this, Were men duly
influenc't by the power of that Religion which they profess, the world would
soon be blessed with the most happy scene and state of things, Governors would
rule peaceably and securely, subjects obey freely and quietly, and every man in
his capacity would be in some measure as happy and prosperous, as himself, or
other men could make him. And that there was a time, when such a spirit
eminently ruled in the breasts of Christians will appear, if we consider,

Thirdly, The temper and practice of the ancient Christians in the first and
best ages of the Gospel, when men really were what they pretended to be, when
they lived and loved as brethren, honored even their Heathen Magistrates, paid
their tributes, obeyed their laws, served in their wars, and prayed daily for
their prosperity and safety. Such an instance of universal charity, modesty,
and obedience was our blessed Savior, readily paying tribute, though it put
him to the expense and charges of a miracle, freely owning Pilats authority to
be from heaven, and cheerfully submitting to his unrighteous sentence: such
were his Apostles, who though unjustly scourged before the Council, gave not an
ill word or look, but went away rejoicing; and when Herod had barbarously
killed one of their number, and designed the next day to send another of them
the same way, what course did the Christians take in this case? fire the City
about his ears? hire a Ruffian to stab him, or a Physician to poison him? oh
no, they opposed with nothing but prayer to Heaven. See Prim. Christ. Part III.
chap. 3. and 4. where the practice of the ancient Christians in this matter is
fully represented.
And the same were the Christians in succeeding times, as I could show at
large, would the time; and your patience, give me leave. Tertullian assures us,
That in their Church Service they daily prayed for, and in their constant
practice promoted the happiness and prosperity of the Empire; that the
Christian was an enemy to no man, and much less to his Prince; and both he and
the rest of the Christian Apologists do upon all occasions vindicate the
Christians as the truest subjects, and best friends to the Empire. Where they
could, they obeyed actively, where they could not, they were careful in
patience to possess their souls. And therefore when Julian the Apostate urged
his Army, most part made up of Christians, to wicked counsels, and the
practices of Idolatry, they withstood him only with prayers and tears, because
(says Nazianzen, Orat. (...) in Jul. p. 94.
who lived at that time) (...), they accounted this the only remedy in times of
persecution. Nay Julian himself (whom none can suspect as over favorable to
Christians) gives them this testimony, that if they see any one mutinying
against his Prince, (...), Eragm. Ep. p. 528.
immediately they punish him with the severest penalties.

Nor were they thus submissive and patient merely for want of power, and
because they knew not how to help it; no, they could quietly dye at the
Emperors command, even when they had power lying at their feet, whereof the
Thebean Legion, Vid. Eucher. Comment. ap. Sur. September. 22. and prim. Christ.
ubi supr. c. 4. p. 331, etc.
consisting of at least six thousand six hundred faithful and resolute
soldiers is a never to be forgotten instance; who being commanded by the
Emperor Maximian to do sacrifice to the gods, upon their refusal were
commanded to be decimated, their general Mauritius exhorting them to dye like
Christians, and not to oppose tho with power by their side: Orders being
renewed a second time, they unanimously returned this generous answer, We
acknowledge Caesar that we are your soldiers, and took up arms for defense of
the Empire, nor did we ever betray our trust, or forsake our station, nor
should we stick now to obey your commands, did not the laws of Christianity
forbid us to worship devils, and to approach the polluted Altars of your gods.
We see you are resolved either to defile us with Idolatry, or to terrify us
with a decimation; go on, Sir, as you have begun. Know, we are all Christians,
our bodies we subject to your power, but we reserve our souls entire for Christ
our Savior. Nor is it despair that makes us thus resolute against you, we have
arms you see, and yet make no resistance, choosing rather to dye than to
overcome, and to perish innocent, than to live rebellious and revengeful.
Exasperated with this invincible resolution, the Emperor orders a second
decimation, which doing no good upon them, he commanded the whole Army, Horse
and Foot to break in, who cut them off as in a moment. And thus they died with
their swords in their hands; when being so many and so advantageously posted,
they might have preserved their lives by force of arms, or to be sure have
sold them at the dearest rate. But alas, the rising up against their Emperor,
the propagating the faith by fire and sword, the deposing and assassinating
Princes for the sake of God and holy Church, were practices not more expressly
condemned by the doctrine of the Gospel, than they were strangers to those
innocent and happy times. And this brings me to the third thing I propounded to
enquire into, and that is,

III. Whether any part of the Christian Church at this day be justly guilty of
this charge? And here without further preface I lay down the charge at the door
of the Church of Rome, which in this great instance of Religion has so woefully
debaucht the purity and simplicity of the Christian faith that it is become now
quite another thing, than what it was when it first came from under the hands
of its Author. A Church, that in this regard looks more like a Council of War,
or a School of the arts of Treason, than the Court of the Prince of peace, or
the house of the God of order. A Church, the principles of whose Religion (as
they have now modelled it) if heartily embraced, and duly improved to their
just and natural tendences, are plainly inconsistent with the majesty and
security of Sovereign Powers, the happy government of the Civil State, and
indeed with the quietness and good order of mankind. So true is the
determination which the wise King James makes in this matter, Speech to both
Houses of Parl. p. 11.
that as on the one part many-honest men seduc't with some errors of Popery
may yet remain good and faithful subjects; so on the other part none of those
that truly know and believe the whole grounds and School-conclusions of their
doctrine, can ever prove either good Christians, or faithful subjects. But that
I may not seem without just reason to fasten so heavy a charge upon them, I
shall as briefly as I can show these two things.

First, That the principles taught and belived in the Church of Rome are
immediately destructive of the safety and authority of Princes, and the peace
of humane society.

Secondly, That the practices of the men of that Church have been all along
agreeable to their principles.

I. The principles taught and believed in the Church of Rome are immediately
destructive of the safety and authority of Princes, and the peace of humane
society. And here not to insist upon their doctrine of the Popes absolute
Infallibility, of the punishment of heretics (whom they devote to the most
horrid penalties, both in this and the other world) their cancelling the most
solemn oaths, and that they bind no longer, if dispenc't with by the Pope, or
than it is for the interest of the Catholic cause, and declaring that no faith
is to be kept with heretics; their doctrine of auricular Confession (whereby
they screw themselves into the secrets of Princes) and that the most enormous
villainies are to be concealed, if delivered under the Seal of Confession,
Binet. Jesuit. ap. Casaub Epist. clxx. (ad Front. Duc.) p. 209. vid. p. 206.
etc.
which is not to be broken up (say some of them) tho the lives of all the Kings
in the World lay at stake; their exempting the Clergy from the jurisdiction of
the Secular Powers, whereby infinite frauds, murders, and villainies are
securely committed; their doctrine of aequivocation and mental reservation in
the most serious and important cases; their vows of obedience to their
Superiors, whereby they are obliged to attempt the most horrid and unnatural
actions, without enquiring into the reason, or boggling at the barbarity of
them: all which and abundant more instances that might be given, strike at the
very vitals of peace and order among men. To pass by also the blasphemous
titles, and exorbitant preheminences which their Schoolmen and Canonists
ascribe to the Pope, as that Kings and Emperors are his Slaves and Vassals,
See multitudes of testimonies to this purpose cited by Dr. Crakanthorp in his
Treatise of the Popes temporal Monarchy, chap. 1.
whom he may command and cast down at pleasure; that they are inferior to the
meanest Priest, who is as much above a King, as a man is above a beast, and
that as much as God Almighty excels a Priest, so much does a Priest excel a
King. Besides these, they directly maintain and teach, that the Government of
the whole world both in temporals and spirituals is, at least in order to the
good of souls, committed to the Pope, all Regal authority depending on him;
that he may not only punish, but deprive Kings of their Countries, and bestow
their Kingdoms upon others; that if a King be an heretic, he forfeits his title
to his Crown and dignity, yea though he be but negligent to extirpate heresy,
or to execute justice, whereupon the Pope may absolve his Subjects from all
duty and allegiance to him, in which case they are bound not to obey; that this
Papal sentence once passed, he may be expelled, or killed by any, yea any one
of his own sworn subjects may take away his life: nay, that in some cases the
people are not bound to stay for the Popes decree and declaration, but may of
themselves rise up and dethrone such Princes, and that they are obliged to do
so in point of conscience, and upon pain of their souls; and that such
proceedings as these are agreeable to Nature, Law, Scripture, and the practices
and precepts of holy men, and that he that doubts of it wants common sense. All
which scandalous and damnable propositions (and there are infinitely more, and
some worse perhaps than what I have mentioned) are one or more of them in
terminis maintained by Defenssid. Cath. l. 3. c. 23. n. 1, 16, 21. and l. 6. c.
4. n. 14, 18, 19.
Suarez, De rep. Eccles. l. 3. c. 4. 48, 49. Controv. Angl. p. 115, 133, 135.
and alib. saepe.
Becanus, Comment. in 1.2. Aqu. did. 152.. 8. and alibi.
Vasquez, Examen praef. monit. R. Jac. p. 49, 55, 103, 142, 143.
Coquaeus, Aphorism. Confess. in verb. Clericus. princeps. Tyrannus.
Emanuel Sa, De Haeres. c. 30. p. 293, 296.
Santarellus, De Reg. and Reg. instit. l. 1. c. 6. p. 58, etc. c. 7. p. 63, etc.
Mariana, Defens. Bell. T. 2. col. 1153, etc. adv. Reg. Brit. c. 6, 7. def.
Apol. Gall. p. 591.
Gretser, Tom. 3. disp. 5. q. 8. punct. 3.
Valentia, by Cardinal Letter about Devent. p. 27, 28, 30. and in Resp. pro
Cathol. adv. persecut. Angl. passim. vid. c. 2, 4, 5. ext. in concert. Eccl.
Cath. in Anglia.
Allen, Controv. 3. q. 5. artic. 2. p. 710, 711.
Stapleton, De Visib. Monarch. l. 2. c. 4. de clave David. l. 1. c. 6. p. 26.
c. 9. p. 57. l. 2. c. 10. p. 99.
Saunders, Quiet and sob. reck. p. 80. Letter of the Oath of Alleg. p. 18, 19,
80, 85. Philopat. (sive ejus sit, sive Creswelli) p. 106, 107. it.. 158, 160,
162, 221.
Parsons, and hundreds more. I shall a little more particularly instance in
Bellarmin, because he is the most professed Champion of the Papal cause, and
being a man of great wit and Learning expressed himself as cautiously, as he
well could in this matter; yea so cautiously, that Pope Sixtus V. was once
resolved to have condemned and suppressed his writings, because attributing too
little to the Papal authority, as the Cardinals themselves told mine Author Gu.
Barcl. de potest. Papae. edit. 1609. c. 13. p. 101. etc. 40. p. 329.
; and yet even he De Romans Pontif. l. 5. c. 6. col. 889. etc. 7. ib. etc.
says roundly, that the political Power, not only as it is Christian but as
it is Civil, is subject to the Ecclesiastical, so that the Pope may in order to
the good of souls govern and dispose of temporal Princes, alter Kingdoms, take
them away from one, and give them to another; that if a King be an Infidel or
an Heretic (and we know what they mean by that, nay he particularly reckons the
Kings of England among his instances) and seek to draw his Dominions to his
sect, it is not only lawful, but a duty in his subjects to deprive him of his
Kingdom. And whereas, says he, the primitive Christians attempted not the like
on Nero, Dioclesian, Julian, or the rest, it was not it seems that they boggled
out of a sense of duty, but only quia deerant vires temporales, because they
wanted means and power to effect it. A bold piece of falsehood, Fuligat. vit.
Bell. l. 1. c. 2. p. 17.
and a sufficient confutation of what the Writer of his Life affirms, that he
could not remember that he had ever told a lie in his life, or disguised the
truth by fraud or sophistry. If it be here said (as sometimes they do, when
pincht with these objections) that these are but the opinions of their private
Doctors, and not the public and standing declarations of that Church; to this I
shall briefly return these three things by way of answer.

1. That this is a most gross and senseless evading of the argument, for
whether their Church publicly declare this or not, it is these private Doctors
that steer men's Consciences, conduct their practice, and that diffuse the venom
into all parts of the Christian world: and if the mischief be done by virtue of
these hellish Principles, Princes murdered, Kingdoms invaded, and the
foundations of Government overturned, it is little matter whether it be done by
connivence or command; as if the family be destroyed by the servants scattering
of poison in every corner, it is but a trifling excuse that the Master of the
house did not command, but only stand by and see them do it.

2. These pernicious doctrines are publicly taught in their Schools and
Universities, and Books of them printed in all Countries, approved, licenc't
and recommended, and suffered to pass without control; the very worst of them
never censured, condemned, or burnt by the supreme authority of that Church;
which in all reason, justice, and equity they were obliged to do, did they not
allow and own them.

3. (And which will fully answer this matter) Most of these detestable
principles are extant in the body of their Canon Law, See the Bishop of
Lincoln's Book called Principles and positions approved by the Church of Rome.
which is their public rule and standard at this day; are determined in the
Breves and Bulls of their several Popes, who have solemnly denounc't those
things ex Cathedra; and what is higher yet, are in effect found in the Decrees
of their own General Councils: I instance in two: Ann. 1215. the Council of
Lateran (whereat were present the Pope, the Patriarchs of Constantinople and
Jerusalem, seventy Archbishops, four hundred and twelve Bishops, eight hundred
Abbots and Priors, besides Ambassadors from most Princes in Christendom, this
Council) decreed, that Heretical Lords and Rulers should be Excommunicated;
their Vassals absolved from their obedience, their Lands seized, and disposed
of to Catholics. In the general Council at Lions, Ann. 1245. the Pope by advice
of the Cardinals and Council, and by a definitive sentence pronounced there,
deposed and deprived the Emperor Frederic, discharged his sworn Subjects from
their Allegiance, Excommunicating all such as should obey or favor him,
commanding the Princes forthwith to proceed to a new Election: all which is
inserted into the Acts of that Council. To be short, so evident is the case,
that some of their greatest Champions more candid and ingenuous than the rest,
have plainly confessed, that if the Pope have not such a power of Excommunicating
and deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from their Fealty and Allegiance,
See Card. Perrons Harangue among his Works in French, p. 635. Lessius (seu Gu.
Singletonus) Discuss. Decret. Conc. Later. p. 46, 90, 100, 123. but especially
the Jesuits Loyalty, printed 1677. the first Treatise.
their Church having all along challenged and exercised it in her supremest
Tribunals, must be fallen into a damnable error both in faith and practice,
and consequently must cease to be a true Church: that therefore the belief of
it is an article essential to it, and to assert the contrary, is an opinion
erroneous in faith, temerarious and impious. But if their Church must needs
stand or fall with this principle, let them look to that; it is in the mean time
evident enough, that the principles they believe and teach are in the tendency
of them immediately destructive of the safety and authority of Princes, and the
peace of humane society. But alas that is not all, nor the worst of the case.
These pernicious doctrines are not mere Scholastic subtleties, dry and barren
speculations, but impregnated with life and power; and accordingly

II. The practices of the men of that Church have been always agreeable to
their principles. And for the truth of this I might appeal to the Records of
all Nations in Christendom, those volumes and Martyrologies, which the iniquity
of these men's principles have filled with tragical and lamentable stories. What
miserable havoc have they made in Germany, where (to pass by other things) the
Emperor Henry the Fourth was so persecuted by Pope Hildebrand and his
Successor (with Curses, Deprivations, Armies and Rebellions) that he was even
wearied out of his life, forced at last to resign the Empire, and (tho in vain)
upon his knees to beg Absolution from the Popes Legate, and peace from his own
Son, whom they had raised up against him. The same and worse they did by
Frederic Barbarossa, by Otho the Fourth, by Frederic the Second, and by Henry
the Seventh, who marching with an Army into Italy to recover the Rights of the
Empire, is very credibly reported Sabell. Ennead. ix. l. 8. p. 794. Plat. in
Clem. v. p. 252. Naucler. Chron. Genesis xliv. p. 372. Volater. l. 23. p. 879.
Genebr. Chron. l. 4. Ann. 1305. p. 677.
to have been poisoned with the Sacrament. Nor did the Emperors enjoy any
tolerable quiet from Rome, till Charles the Fifth heartily espoused the Papal
interest, ever since whose time the Emperors have been almost entirely swayed
by the Councils of the Jesuits. An order of men born for the destruction of
mankind, whom therefore the wise State of Venice banished out of all their
Dominions, Histor. Interdict. Venet. l. 3. p. 71. Eng. Edit. p. 138.
professing they did it for this reason, because they had been the authors and
instruments of all uproars, seditions, confusions, and ruins that had happened
in those times in all the Kingdoms and States of the Christian world. To which
let me add what their Martyr Campian (who was hanged at Tyburn) expressly tells
us, Epist. ad Council. Reg. Angl. x. ejus Rat. praefix. in Concert. Cath. and
alib.
that all the Jesuits in the world have long since entered into Covenant, never
to cease their attempts upon us, which they despair not to take effect, so long
as any one Jesuit remains in the world.

In France the poison of these principles has wrought no less vigorously and
effectually: Pope Zachary deposed Childeric III. who was thereupon thrust into
a Monastery, and the Pope bestowed the Crown upon Pipin the Major-domo of his
Palace. Lewis VII. was interdicted, and forced to submit. Philip the Fourth so
vexed with the oppositions of Pope Boniface the Eighth, that for three years
together he scarce had one quiet hour. After the Reformation the Zeal of Popery
grew more fierce and bloody. In the Parisian Massacre were slain there and in
other parts of France to the number of above thirty thousand Protestants. The
news whereof arriving at Rome, Thuan. lib. 53. ad Ann. 1572. Tom. 11. p. 837.
the Pope presently convened the Cardinals, and went in a solemn procession to
S. Mark's Church, there to give public thanks to God for so great a blessing
conferred upon the Sea of Rome, and the Christian world, and resolved for this
reason chiefly that the year of Jubilee should be immediately proclaimed, that
all Christendom might rejoice for so great a slaughter of heretics: and the
whole solemnity was concluded with shooting off the Great Guns, Bonefires, and
all other expressions of the greatest triumph and rejoicing. What miserable
ruins, slaughters, and devastations were made by the confederates of the Holy
League for many years together? And in the midst of all, Henry the Third, a
Prince of their own Communion, stabbed by Jaques Clement, a Dominican Friar,
encouraged thereunto by the Sermons of the Jesuits, and particularly by his
Father Confessor, who promised him a Crown of Martyrdom, if he died in the
attempt, but if he survived, that he should be made a Bishop or a Cardinal.
Boucherius de fusta Abdicatione Henrici III. edit. Lugd. An. 1591. Franc.
Veron. Apol. pour Jehan Chastel. aliique vid. Thuan ad An. 1589. T. 4. p. 460.
and An. 1594. T. 5. p. 519. Ann. 1604. p. 1124.
And the fact magnified as noble and heroic, justified in Printed Apologies,
and Books written on purpose to prove, that it is lawful so a private man to
kill a Tyrant, though there be neither sentence of the Church nor Kingdom
pronounced against him. Orat. Sixti V. habita Sept. 11. 1589. printed first at
Rome, then at Paris, An. 1589. by Authority of the Holy Union, and approbation
of three Sorbon Doctors, and since often Reprinted, vid. Thuan. ib. An. 1589.
Nay 'twas approved and applauded by Pope Sixtus V. in an Oration made on
purpose in the Consistory, wherein he compares it to, and prefers it before
that of Judith's killing Holofernes, and more than once and again affirms, that
that great and miraculous work was to be ascribed only to the particular
Providence of God, without whose especial aid, he says, it could not have been
brought to pass. The like unhappy fate overtook his Successor, the great King
Henry the Fourth, whom Ravaillac (who had sometimes been a Monk) stabbed in his
Coach with a poisoned knife, and at his Examination boldly confessed he did it,
because the King did not take Arms against the Hugonots, and that his making
War against the Pope, is the same as to make War against God, Seeing the Pope
was God, and God was the Pope.

'Twere endless to pursue the stories of Foreign Nations: and happy had it
been for us, had they kept there. But tho nature seems to have secured us
pretty well against external invasions, yet these restless and daring men after
all the villainies they have done in other Countries, have put their hellish
designs aboard, and are come hither also. I pass over their infinite Treasons,
Disturbances, and Rebellions, precedent to the Reformation. No sooner had Henry
the Eighth thrown off the Romish Yoke, but a Bull of Excommunication was
thundered out against him, and that followed by no less than three Rebellions at
home, contrived and carried on by the counsels and artifice of the Popish
Clergy; and little less there were in the short Reign of his Successor. In the
long and happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Vid. Cambden. Annal. Elizab. ad Ann.
1569, 1570, -- 79, -- 80, -- 83, -- 84, -- 85, -- 86, -- 87, -- 88, -- 94, --
98. Bishop Carleton's Thankful Remembrance of God's mercies, per tot. Foulis
Popish Treasons, etc. l. 7. c. 3, 4, etc.
few years passed over her head without some considerable attempt either
against her life or Government: Ann. 1569. came out Pius V. his Bull of
deprivation against her, whereupon succeeded two Rebellions in the North, the
chief whereof was headed by the Earls of Westmorland and Northumberland. The
next year Stuckley by the help of the Pope and Spaniard invaded Ireland, where
Saunders the Jesuit, the firebrand of that Rebellion, for want of success fell
mad and died. This was not well over, when Campian and Parsons came hither, the
two first Jesuits (would God they had been the last) that ever arrived in
England, who set themselves to blow up the Nation into an open flame. Two years
after Somervile inflamed by the Writings of the Jesuits, crowded with a drawn
Sword into the Queens presence, and having set upon one or two that stood in
his way, confessed 'twas his intent to have murdered the Queen, and for fear of
telling more tales, was three days after found strangled in prison. About the
same time Throgmorton and some others conspired against her, with design to set
up the Queen of Scots. Ann. 1585. William Parry Doctor of Law, set on by the
Jesuits, the Popes Nuncio, and by the Pope himself, undertook to kill the
Queen, but his heart failing in the attempt, he was taken and Executed. The
year after Babington and his accomplices held a consult at S. Giles in the
Fields to murder the Queen, and invade the Realm, for which seven of them were
hanged; and the like plotted by Stafford and others the following year. In
eighty eight was the famous, but unsuccessful Invasion of the Invincible
Armado. In ninety three Dr. Lopez a Portuguez, the Queen's Physician, was hired
for fifty thousand Crowns to poison her, which he confessed afterward. In ninety
six Edw. Squire being instructed in Spain by Walpool the Jesuit, and by him
furnished with poison prepared on purpose, undertook to poison the Queen's
Saddle, which he did, tho through the goodness of the Divine Providence it took
no effect.

King James succeeded to the Crown, and as an entail to that, to the hatred and
malice of the Popish party. To prepare the way, Parsons the Jesuit writes a
Book of the Succession to prove that he had no just title to the Crown; and
Garnet another of that Order procured two several Breves from Rome to exclude
him, See Sr. Edw. Cook's Speech at Garnet's trial. Relat. of the Gunpowd.
Treason, p. 159. and Garnet's Confess. at his Execut. p. 226.
or any of the next line, unless they were Roman Catholics; Watson and Clark,
two Secular Priests drew several of the Nobility and Gentry into a Combination
(which they sealed with an Oath of Secrecy) to surprise the King and the
Prince, and to force from him a toleration of their Religion for which they
were Executed. And now utterly despairing of any favor from that wise and
learned Prince, these malignant and devilish Papists, An. 3 Jac. R. c. 1.
Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, (as they are called in the very words of the
Act of Parliament for the observation of this day) entered into a black and
unparalled conspiracy, the Powder Treason (the deliverance from which we
solemnly celebrate at this time) wherein fire and darkness were summoned up
from hell to minister to the Execution, and no less than King and Kingdom,
Religion and Liberty, Estates and Lives designed at once as a Burnt-sacrifice
to their rage and fury. Psalm. 2.4.
But he that sits in heaven did laugh, the Lord had them in derision,
overruled the Plots, and disappointed the devices of the crafty, Job 5.12.
so that their hands could not perform their enterprise. In the Reign of King
Charles I. they still carried on the same design, and after all, a Jesuitical
Plot was set on foot (discovered by means of Andreas ab Habernfield) to murder
the Archbishop, Printed in Pryn's Romes Master piece. An. 1643.
and take away the King's Life. Their bloody and inhumane butcheries in
Ireland, (wherein above 100000 Protestants were barbarously murdered in cool
blood) are known to all. What hand they had in the troubles of this and the
neighbor Nation, how they voted at their consults, See Dr. Pet. du Moulins
Vindicat. of the Protest. Relig. chapter 2. p. 58. and his Reply to a Person of
honor, p. 4, 5, etc. and the truth of the charge more particularly cleared in
some paper (which I have read) of Dr. Bargrave late Prebend of Canterbury.
'twas for the interest of the Catholic Cause, that the King should dye, how
active and instrumental they were to promote the Councils that took away the
life of that excellent Prince, the world is not now to learn. And have they
dealt better with us in the Reign of his Successor, the King that now is? To
omit all other tastes they have given us of their good will, their horrid
conspiracy at this day (whereat we all stand amazed and tremble) contrived and
carried on with so inhumane and barbarous a design, is a sufficient evidence. A
Plot tho later in time, not inferior in malignity to any of the rest; and so
much the worse, because done against all the laws of kindness and gratitude, at
a time when the public rods and axes were laid asleep, and they lived secure
and undisturbed under the merciful connivance of the Government.

And tell me now after all this whether disloyalty and Treason, blood and
villainy be not in a manner incorporated into the present polity and
constitution of the Sea of Rome; and as Historians say of old Rome, that the
foundations of it were laid in blood, so whether Rome at this day be not built
up, cemented, and supported by the same bloody arts and methods. A
constitution, that with Saul pursues its enemies to rage and madness, and
breaths out nothing but threatening and slaughter against any that oppose it.
'Twas the happy character of the Christian Religion, that of old dropped from the
pen of an Heathen, nil nisi justum suadet and lene, Am. Marcellin. l. 22. p.
1626.
that it commands nothing but what is just, mild and gentle; whereas now were an
unbiast Pagan to take the measures of Christianity from what is ordinarily
allowed and practiced in the Roman Church, he would undoubtedly proscribe it
not only as a scene of childish Pageantry, but as a piece of the most exquisite
savageness and barbarity. In short, they are a race of men, who (as our Church
truly says in the Collect for this day) turn Religion into Rebellion, and
faith into faction, and who have managed the cause of the best Religion in the
world with the utmost advantages both of scandal to Christianity, and of
mischief to the world.

I could not pardon my self, if upon so fair an occasion I should not make this
further inference, that if Popery be so foul and odious a charge, we would be
very cautious upon whom we fasten that detestable character of Papists, or
Popishly-affected; lest we would the righteous with the wicked, and abuse
innocent and undeserving men, for no other reason perhaps, than because in some
few little things they are not of our mind. Were Cramner and Ridley, were
Hooper and Latimer, were these men Papists? if not, I beseech you let not any
be traduc't under that odious name, that act by the same principles, and are
ready to suffer for the same cause that they did. It Is time to lay aside our
feuds and quarrels, and unanimously to set our selves against the common enemy,
when Hannibal ad portas, there is an Enemy at the Gates, that seeks to do his
work with our hands, and would then rejoice in the ruin of us both. Let us
heartily join in a grateful commemoration of this days deliverance, and pay
our utmost thanks to heaven for a mercy, that preserved us a free and
unenslaved Nation, and which is more, preserved the Gospel to us, which is the
glory of a Nation. Consider, with what subtlety and arts of secrecy this work
of darkness was carried on: 'twas a mystery of iniquity, to unravel the
labyrinths whereof were a task fitter for a Secretary of the Prince of
darkness. Nothing of malice or mischief appeared above ground, no
demonstrations of turbulency or discontent, but all went masked under a smooth
brow; M. Sen. Controv. 22. lib. 3. p. 218.
that as he in Seneca, non ante intellexit proditionem, quam proditus sit, he
was in a manner betrayed, before he understood the Treason; so here, the design
was to take effect in a way, wherein human force and policy should be too late
to make resistance, and they who acted it should only stand behind the Curtain:
this being part of that very Letter, (which through the providence of God
proved the means of its discovery) that tho there should be no appearance of
any stir, yet they should receive a terrible blow, and none see who hurt them.

Lastly, Consider the infinite horror and villainy of the design; a design that
struck at the very vitals of the Kingdom, the liberty of the people, the glory
and purity of Religion, the life, honor, and happiness of King, Prince, Peers,
and the representative commonalty of the Nation all at once. This was no petty
wickedness, 'twas a monster of Conspiracy (as the great Thuanus ingenuously
confesses) whereto no age or Nation ever brought forth a parallel. Ad Ann.
1606. lib. 135. T. 5. p. 1215.
Nothing would serve their turns, unless Kings and Princes (whose lives have
been always even by the most barbarous Nations held Sacred and Venerable) and
the whole beauty and glory of such a flourishing Church and Nation at once fell
before them, and that too by the most merciless and raging Element, and with
such unheard of circumstances of inhumanity, that nothing but the wit of hell
could have found them out. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel; may God for ever divide them in Jacob, and scatter
them in Israel: may that Almighty wisdom, power, and goodness, that has
hitherto superintended the happiness and security of this Nation, evermore
blast and thunder-strike their plots and projects, and turn the Counsels of all
such Achitophels into foolishness: that all men may fear, Psalm 64.9, 10.
and declare the work of God, and wisely consider of his doing; that the
righteous may be glad in the Lord, and trust in him, and all the upright in
heart may glory; while the Lord is known by the judgment which he executes,
Psalm. 9.16.
and the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Which God of his
infinite mercy grant for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

FINIS.

