INDEPENDENCY Further proved to be a SCHISM. OR, A Survey of Dr Owens Review of
his Tract of Schism;

With a Vindication of the Author from his unjust clamours and false
Aspersions.

By D. Cawdry Preacher of the Word at Billing Magn. in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1658.

To the Reader.
HOw unpleasing and distasteful the undertaking of the following Rejoinder was,
and is, to me; not only God, and mine own conscience, but also some special
friends, can witness for me: And that the rather, because I cannot (if I would
not wrong my Cause, and my self) but discover some personal weaknesses, or
forgetfulness of my reverend Adversary, upon his denyals of some things, which
(if there be any truth in reports) were known to be true. I could have heartily
ished, that the reverend Doctor had ken more time, than the spare hours of four
or five days, when he was pressed with more then ordinary occasions of sundry
sorts; and deferred the examination of mine till further leisure, when his
spirit was more sedate and serious: For I perceive, he was in some passion,
(which quickened that haste) at my Tract, coming out at that time, (a little
before the public Act) and that did cast a mist upon his judgment and memory,
which caused this abortive birth. I conjectured by his Epistle, what I might
expect in his Treatise, the heads whereof were these: 1. My manifold mistakes.
2. My presumptions, upon my own principles. 3. My casting reproaches on them,
with whom I had to do, etc. All which are answered in my following Discourse,
and therefore spared here. One thing he prepossesses his Reader with; That he
expect not any thing from this Tract, but what is necessary, for the refutation
of the Book, whereunto it is opposed; which is least ^f all performed.
Complaints there ^re good store, of personal wrongs, many times repeated, from
one end of the Book to the other; but little or nothing said to the vindication
of his Cause, against the Argumentative part of mine; as many others have
observed. He further says, He forbears all re-charge on the Presbyterian way;
as to the differences in judgment and practice among themselves, which are more
and greater, then any this Author has found amongst them. Truly it cannot be
denied, but there ^re too many differences amongst ^s, in judgment and
practice, (who caused them, I forbear to say) but with this difference, from
them and theirs, that ours are betwixt man and man, one man and another; theirs
are in one and the same man, differing from, and contradicting himself, in a
short space of time, as has been made appear elsewhere. Another thing he
would have his Reader expect, (the waiting for which, has caused this delay of
mine, at least in part) A vindication of Mr. J. C. from some unjust (so he
calls them) imputations of mine. Truly there wa^ nothing imputed to him, but
his inconstancy in his opinions, and self-contradictions, (as now to the
reverend Doctor) out of his own Writings. I heard of that Discours^ above three
years since, in the hand of one of the Brethren; and intended then, by him, to
be published (as it is now promised, or rathe^ threatened, by the reverend
Doctor to cast a slurre upon me, (as it i^ thought) which why it is thus lon^
silenced, I will not conjecture. Onel^ I wish those, that intend to rake i^ the
ashes of the Dead, to consider, ^hether they shall deserve any ^hanks for their
labor. I have no more to say to his Epistle, referring the rest to the Tract
it self. Farewell, and love Truth as well as Peace.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 4. a fine, read propagate. p. 8. l. 15. r. that. p: 12. l. 5. for
them, r. him. p. 13. l. last, r. invented. p. 38. l. 5. a fine, r. Anabap. p.
41. l. 2. a fine for easy, r. case. p. 50. l. 11. a fine after not, put in at.
p. 52. l. 17. after said, put, in. p. 55. l. 2. after brand, put in our. Ibid.
l. 3. after is, put in (no.) p. 71. l. 5. for singular, r. signify. Ib. l. 8.
a fine, r. secession. p. 72. Matthew. 18. in Marg. that Note should have stood
higher, about the middle. p. 73. l. 3. a fine after to, put in be. p. 166. l.
10. r. exceptions. p. 109. l. 8. a fine, r. formally and the same. l. 3. a
fine. p. 111. l. 1. for his, read this.

Independency further proved to be a Schism. OR, A Survey of Dr. Owen's Review
of his Tract of Schism.
CHAP. I.
IT is very true, which the reverend Doctor says; That considering the various
interests of Parties at difference, there is no great success to be promised,
by the management of controversies, though with never so much evidence and
conviction of truth. The present Sectaries of all sorts, give a sad instance of
this, not one of a thousand being reclaimed from their errors, by the clearest
demonstrations of truth, but rather growing worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived, as the Apostle did foretell us. There are therefore other ends
propounded to themselves, by those that undertake them, As the rendering an
homage to the truth, the safegarding of some weaker professors, from the
sophisms and violence of adversaries, etc. Which its well, if they can and do
attain. How little success the reverend Doctor expected, he told us in his
former Treatise of Schism, and now again professes, (as well he might, upon
such principles) That he was so far from hoping, to see speedily any visible
fruits, of the efficacy of the truth, he had managed, that he promised himself
a vigorous opposition; only, he was not able to conjecture, from what hand the
first assault of it would arise: That is, Whether from Papists, Episcopal, or
Presbyterians. The truth is, he has given them all a provocation, to an
opposition, by his new notion of Schism, (beside others) and I a little wonder,
that none other have done it, unless it be upon the old Maxim, Contra negantem
princ^pia non est disputandum. The notion of schism, in the nature of the word,
and use of it, by all parties hitherto, being a breach of union, in what kind
Mar. ^.21.
or degree soever. It was well observed by a learned man, (...). The rent is
made worse
that the reverend Doctor's notion of Schism was this: If my coat be rent, and
hang together by some threads; it is a Schism; but if a piece be quite torn
off, it is none. And indeed, if Schism be only a difference, in a particular
Congregation, (as the reverend Doctor will have it) and no separation from a
true Church, be justly accounted a Schism, (as he professes to hold) the
general agreement of all the forenamed parties, in the common notion of
Schism, and their concernment in it, (all of them supposing themselves, to be
truly constituted Churches) call for an opposition to him, for denying himself
and party to be Schismatic, in renouncing of communion with them, and
separating from them all; for they all concur, in the ancient and received
notion of Schism, viz. A breach of union, or a causlesse separation, from a
truly stated Church. The difference between them is only this, which of them
has the true Church state; which if it be determined, they all agree in the
conclusion: A breach of union with, or a causeless separation from such a
Church so stated, is a Schism. Thus the Romanists argued, as himself propounded
their argument of Schism, page 189. thus the Episcopal party, thus the
Presbyterians. But it seems, the reverend Doctor conjectured aright, that the
opposition was like to arise from some of the Presbyterian party, though he
mistook the reasons; The prejudices that they might fear themselves, and
interests, obnoxious to, by a reception and stablishment of that his notion of
Schism: Which what they could be, I cannot conjecture. If his notion were true,
it might be as useful to them, as to himself, in freeing them also from the
charge of Schism by others: But if it prove false, (as it seems to me, and
many) it will be prejudicious to our common cause, against the other parties,
to whose charge of Schism he did oppose it. Let him draw up his argument
against them, thus I suppose it must be framed: All Schism (in the Scripture
Ecclesiastical sense) is a division in a particular Church: But we have made
no division in (or separation from) any particular Church, (one of you pleading
your selves to be the Catholic the other a National Church), Ergo, We are no
Schismatics: They would quickly deny his major proposition, (for which he
offers no proof) Schism, in proper notion of the word, and intention of the
Scripture, is of larger, and more general extent; for any breach of union with
a true Church, of any degree. And if the proposition be not general, the
Syllogism is peccant in the very form, and so a Sophism.

But not content with that former reason, Page. 4.
he ( sleightingly enough) gives another: Men's contentedness, to make use of
their quietness, in reference to Popery, Socinianism, Arminianism -- confirmed
such thoughts in me. Whereas it is evident, that the men of the presbyterian
party, (even country Ministers, who want Academicall opportunities) have done,
and do as much contest against those, and other errors, as himself, or any of
his party. Few of the men of his way, having appeared in opposition to them,
(though too much for toleration of them) but contented to make use of their
quietness, to propogate their own design of Independentism; not so much as
caring to answer, or take notice, of what has been written against it. His
surmises (which he charges me with hereafter) are as strong, as his
conjectures; That his Treatise should be refuted, he heard it was judged
necessary at sundry conventions. And page 9. talks of my advisers; and once
more, of the promoters of my work page 181. whereof I know nothing. I can
profess, that I expected and hearkened, that some more able hand would have
undertaken it; and finding none willing, I ventured my own credit and thoughts,
to the vindication of the truth of our Churches and Ministry, to some good
progress, before any one man knew I had undertaken it. What acceptance his
Treatise found, with many learned and godly persons, (except of his own way) I
cannot conjecture: But this was the resentment of it, by all that I met with,
before I ever saw his Book: That by his new notions of Schism, and constitution
of a particular Church, he had not only freed his party from the charge of
Schism; but also unchurcht our Churches, and unministred our Ministers, and
denied our Ordination. And every one wished, that some body would undertake it,
as injurious to our Churches; but none would interest himself therein. I must
confess my own presumption, in what I have done, as taking the work out of
some learneder hands, whom it more concerned to answer it. The original charge
of Schism upon our Church, (which the reverend Doctor took upon him to answer)
being directed only to the two Universities, whose cause the reverend Doctor
has I think betrayed, by his new notion of Schism, as if that were the
judgment and answer of them all. As some others have found out, A new way of
justifying our separation from Rome, on principles of limiting the jurisdiction
of that Bishop, to a peculiar Patriarchate, and the like; as the reverend
Doctor told us, of Schism. page 192. Which new ways our cause needs not, but
is easily defended without them; and our plea will not be shaken to eternity,
as the reverend Doctor asserted, page 192. of Schism. But he conjecturing
right, (as he easily might, being told it) of the party in general, and of the
particular person, that was like, and ready to undertake him; he was as
confident, That he might relieve himself from his fears, and loathing to be
engaged in those contests, by these ensuing considerations which I shall
briefly consider.

Page 5.
1. He was fully persuaded, that what he had written, was, for the substance of
it, the truth of God, which he had good security he had in weakness
maintained, page 3. 1. No doubt, but he might fully so persuade himself; and
what Heretic, learned or unlearned, does not so believe? But what was my
design, but to undeceive him in this persuasion, as to many things by him
asserted? 2. What was that truth, he was so fully persuaded of? That Schism, in
the places of the Corinthians, where the word is only found, was a difference
or division in a particular Church, who ever denied it? or what is this to the
general nature of Schism? Is that all that Schism imports? Or, proves it, that
breach of the union of Churches, or causlesse separation from true Churches, is
no Schism? What force is there (I appeal to his Logic and Divinity too) in
this consequence, Schism, in the places cited, was a division in a particular
Church; Ergo, Nothing is a Schism but that; in Scripture notion. Yet this
notion, ^he reverend Doctor often makes use of, ^o avoid the charge of Schism,
upon himself and party, as I have elsewhere ^hewed.

2. He had (he says) laid in provision, against all contending about words,
expressions, etc. and every thing, though true, that might be separated from
the life or substance, of the notion or truth pleaded for: viz. The sentence
before noted, concerning the notion of Schism. He had indeed laid in a politic
petition of the question, that all Readers would be so favorable, as to grant
him his new notion, or else he could expect no good issue of his Treatise; for
so he professed, page 30. Unless men will condescend so to state it upon the
evidence tendered, I shall not hope to prevail much, in the process of this
discourse: And such I think has been the success. Can any rational man be
taken with this inference? This evil mentioned by the Apostle, is Schism;
therefore nothing else is so? Yes, (which to me is a wonder, in so wise a man)
the reverend Doctor is convinced by it, and resolved so to continue; for so he
said, Having before asserted this to be the chief and only seat of the
Doctri^^ of Schism, Of schism. page 42.
I am inclinable so to do and this I am resolved of, that unle^ any man can
prove, that somethi^ else is termed Schism, by some divine Writer, etc. I will
be at liberty, from admitting it so to be. Somethin^ was said to this in my
former Tract page 39. I add a little more; 1. His assertion, that this was the
chief and only place of the word Schism, in the Ecclesiastical sense, was
granted him; bu^ that it was the chief and only place of the Doctrine of
Schism, is now denied him; because the Apostle did here indeed, reprove and
check them for their Schism and divisions, but intended not to speak to the
doctrine, or full nature of Schism; that must be elsewhere enquired and found
out, either from the notion of the word (...), or other words of equivalent
sense. 2. He requires, that something else be termed Schism, by some divine
Writer; that is he expects, that he must have the same word, or else, though it
have the same nature, and be equally criminous, he is resolved, nothing else is
Schism, but a division in a particular Church, contrary to his own grant. page
21. of schism; "That that alone shall be esteemed Schism, which is in scripture
so called; or (mark that) which has the entire nature of that, which ^s there
so called. But (say I) other ^ords in other places, have the entire ^ture of
Schism, viz division in a church, and something more i. e. separati^ from it;
Ergo, that may be esteemed ^hisme, as I instanced in other words ^d places; to
which the Reverend ^octor says nothing.

3. "The whole weight of the little pile, turning on one single hinge and that
visible and conspicuous, etc. he promised himself, that he who undertook it,
would be far from passing it by, and set himself to the superstructure, etc.
This he repeats gain p. 76. That he laid the great weight of the whole, upon
this notion of Schism; that in that only place of the Corinthians, there is
mention of Schism in an Ecclesiastical sense. etc. To which I say, 1. If his
hinge of the whole, was so visible and conspicuous, I cannot but wonder; that I
alone should not see that, which to every considering person that should but
view the Treatise, page 6.
would be evident. And that he should so often charge me with ignorance of h^
design; of which anon. 2. I was ^ far from passing it by, that I grant^ them
this to be the only place; b^ not the full importance and nature ^ the word;
yea I endeavored to she^ that there was a degree of Separation, that place, as
to some Ministers and O^dinances; which how he has taken away we shall hear
anon, 3. Granting hi^ his sense in that place, I proved his consequence to be
naught The Schis^ amongst the Corinthians, was a div^sion in a particular
Church; From nothing else is schim, in the scriptu^ sense. Which consequence,
all cons^dering and rational men, that I speak with; do wonder to fall from so
great a Logitian and Divine. 4. This Notion ^ his, I knew well, was the Hinge
or Ce^tre of the whole superstructure; b^ the Circumference or lines, by way ^
consectaries, He says his first Chapter of the nature of Schism; contained the
foundation of many inferences Page. 52.
extended to a great^ distance, as thus: If Schism be only Difference in a
particular Church, the his party are no Schismatics; in sep^rating from, 1.
The Church of Rom^ 2. From our National, 3. Or Presb^terian Churches. Now the
Anteced^^ being by me demolished, as the hinge such consequences; the whole
super^^^ucture is fallen with its own weight, ^d his whole Treatise with it;
As wiser ^en then my self do think.

4. "He expressly waved men's Judgment, and Authority, old or late; and so
promised himself, security from such disturbance, etc. To which I ^^swered, The
Concurring judgment of all ^en, in all ages, of all persuasions, Page. 4.
^^rryes weight with it, especially when (...) agrees with express Scripture;
or re^ular and rational deduction: to which ^^e professed to stand or fall,
Cap. 1.5.3. To which he says just nothing.

5. Whereas he had confined himself to a bare defensative of some, Page. 6.
not intending to cast others from their places, (unless the Roman party) he
had some expectations that peace-loving godly men, would not be troubled, that
an apparent immunity from a crime, was, without their prejudice, manifested in
behalf of their brethren, etc. But he must know that his defense of some from
the crime of Schism, as it was too weak to bear it off, by the bare Notion of
Schism by him inverted; so it did cast an aspersion upon others of a false
Ac^usation, charging them with Schism; and besides, in the consequences of
that N^tion, did cast others (beside the Rom^ party) from their places, as no
Church no members of a Church, as shall a^peare ere long: but I appeal any of
rea^ godliness, and indifferent judgmen^ to determine whether he himself di^
not blow the Coal that gave fire to the dissension, by his new notions o^
Schism, and of a particular Church, etc

6. But he adds this more to hi^ thoughts, page 8.
That he obviated the facility of tendering a discourse to the purpose; by its
being led out of the common rode, wherein common place-supplyes would be of
little use. Truly that was likely to cause some Opposition; that the Reverend
Doctor^ went out of the Common rode, (where was no allowed way) by his Singular
notion of Schism; that never was gone in by any before him, nor I think will be
followed by any after him, (I only except another Notionist, Lud. Molin, in
another controversy in his Corollarium, p. 100. Who in approbation of this new
notion, tells us; The whole Christian world, from the Apostles times, never
knew of such a notion of the nature of Schism, till the Reverend Doctor taught
it them. And I realy believe him; only I think he ^ould have added, that the
Apostles ^emselves never knew of such a notion. What ever was said by me "about
minister's callings, Church Government, or the like, was occasioned by
him^^lfe, in his superstructures upon that ^eake foundation, as shall appear.

Whether the Reverend Doctor, has ^ven a plain and full return to what ^ay
seem of importance in my Book, page 9.
others must judge, and not we our ^lves; who do observe (all I meet with) that
little or nothing is said by him, to ^he Argumentative part thereof, but ^ome
sl^ghter velitations, to defend his ^wn new Notions; leaving the princi^all
parts untouched. This will appear ^n his Account of his thoughts, in the ^iew
of my Treatise; which he twice Recapitulates for failing, to give notice ^f the
particulars of it. I must take a ^eview of them.

1. He says, I am without any provocation intended or given, reviled from one
end of it to the other; and called partly in downright terms, partly by
oblique intimatio^ Satan, Atheist, Sceptick, Donatis^ Heretic, etc. I must
profess, when I first readd this charge, I stood amaze and astonished, that my
Treatise shou^ be charged with the crime of rev^ling whereupon I took it up,
and read ^ over again and again, to see, if I could discover so much weakness
or guilt^nesse in my self; and fearing my ow^ partiality, I consulted with
other lea^ned and godly persons, who had rea^ it, who professed, they found
nothin^ in it, but words of truth and soberness and such as might become a
Christian Adversary, as being sharp to the cause he opposed, but sufficiently
respectful^ to his person, whom he did oppose. But this is not the least misery
in Controversies, that what is intended against the way, is applied to the
person, and so provokes by accident to further strife. But for those
particulars, by him called revilings, I give him this account: 1. If I at any
time call him personally schismatic, which I think I do not, but only his way
and party to be schismatic, he knows I cannot avoid it, if I make good the
Title of my Book, supposing him to be an Independent, as he is generally taken
to be. And why nay not a good man be a schismatic, as well as those honest
Corinthians, whom ^oth the Apostle and himself, charge with the crime of
schism? If I have not ^roved his way to be a schism, I shall ^onfesse my wrong,
in calling of ^t, or him, Schismatic. 2. For ^he word Sectary, that follows
upon the former; if men by schism separate into fractions or sections, they
will deserve the name of Sectaries; and himself calls some men so. 3. For
Heretic, as it was more than I charged him or his way with, (speaking strictly
of Independents) so I never call them so; though I believe himself does not
deny, but some Independent Churches are Heretical. 4. For Donatists, I only
charged their principles upon his way, which if they be acknowledged to be
schismatic, (as they are, by all that are Orthodox, and by himself confessed
to be criminal at least) the parallel will fall upon them, whether I will or
no; as it does upon the Romanists, embracing and maintaining the same
principles. 5. For the word Pharisee, when he spoke, as I thought, too
contemptibly of Christians, the multitude, the wicked, and profane, I only
said, This sound^ too much of the Pharisee. But its known, they separate from
the best of our Congregations, as well as from such. My answer here, was just
the same, that the learned Doctor Hall gave to the Brownists, Apol. s. 28.
for like aspersions upon our Congregations. 6. As for those words, Atheist or
Sceptick, the first is but once used, page 15. in these words: He that denies,
that professed Christians may be compelled to the external profession of the
only way of worship, seems to me to be, if not an Atheist, a Sceptick in
Religion. What Is this to the reverend Doctor, or any man living, that does not
deny that my assertion? The word Sceptick is once more used, upon the like
supposition, page 187. 7. Lastly, the worst is, that I call him Satan; which I
no where do, in downright terms, nor necessarily, in an oblick intimation or
reflection: For 1. A man that says to a blasphemer, or other notorious
slanderer or curser, The Lord rebuke thee, (which were the words he excepts
against, and yet these not directly spoken neither) does not presently call him
Devil or Satan. 2. The cause of using those words, was very urgent and
provoking, as I thought, in his charging our Ordination to come from Antichrist
the Beast; which was in effect to deny or annull our Ministry and Churches: As
our blessed Savior did obliquely, yea directly, call a man as good as himself,
Satan, when he would have hindered him from suffering: Get thee behind me,
Satan, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, etc. 3. And what is
that less, (if not more direct) then calling me Satan, page 22? when speaking
of me, as carried beyond all bounds of moderation, and Christian tenderness in
offending; he adds, I no way doubt, but that Satan has his design in this
whole business. Jam sumus ergo pares. If this be reviling, from one end of the
book to another, let the indifferent Reader judge. Yea, some do say, (and I
could observe it) that the reverend Doctor, though he have given me very sweet
words and complemental; In this one p. 11* discovering sanguinary thoughts
against them page 11.
yet has secretly more reviled me, and endeavored to blast my reputation,
with godly men, than I have him. I may note it in some passages hereafter.

2. The next is no less bitter; The professed design of the whole, is to
prove Independency to be a great schism, and that Independents are
schismatic sectaries, the troublers of England. That it were happy for the
Nation, they were out of it. Or discove^ing sanguinary thoughts, in reference
to them. And these kind of discourses fill up the book, almost from one end to
the other. I have much ado to forbear to say once more, The Lord rebuke thee,
in the sense aforesaid. 1. For the first part, that my design was, to prove
Independency to be a great schism, and consequently Independents (whom I mean,
we shall hea^ anon) to be schismatic, I cannot deny, if I intended to make
good the title of my Book; and such kind of discourse must necessarily fill up
my Book, from one end to another. But I pray, am I the first, that has charged
them and their way to be schismatic? have not many learned and pious men
done it before me? and is this the first time that I have so charged it, that
it seems so novell to the reverend Doctor? And i^ they have, some of them, been
proved such, and sectaries besides, do not such trouble the peace of the
Church? Of some, I doubt not, he will confess it, and, with me, wish them any
where, rather then in England, and think the Nation happy in their avoidance.
Paul said of such, I would they were cut off that troub^e you. 2. But for the
latter part, Men whose tender mercies are cruel. p. 18.
My discovering sanguinary thoughts, in reference to them. I should hate my
self, if I were guilty of it, and shall appeal all Readers, when they hear my
words, whether they import so much; page 200. These new builders will gather a
Church out of no Churches, and begin a new one: It had been happy for Old
England, if they had all gone into New England, and laid the foundation of
their Churches amongst the Indians, and not to build upon other men's
foundations; and then tell us, They are building spick and span new Churches.
This was the worst I said, and but once only; as far from sanguinary, as from
filling up my Book, from one end to the other.

3. But he goes on; page 11.
No Christian care seems to have been taken, nor good conscience exercised,
from the beginning to the ending, as to imputation of any thing unto me, or
upon me, that may serve to help the design in hand. The design he told us,
was, to prove Independency to be a great schism; and, I must confess, my care
was, to make that way to appear as Deformed as I could, with reason and truth;
but as for his person, being to me as very a stranger as I to him; I was so
far from wronging him, by false or strained imputations, that I gave him his
due commendations, where I could; as appears by my p. 36. and p. 102. both in
approving, and applauding his discourse; and from one end of my book, to
another, giving him his due titles and respect. But let him instance, in those
conscience-lesse imputations upon him. Hence (he says) I think it is repeated
an hundred times, that I deny their Ministers, page 12.
Churches, and all Reformed, but our own; which is notoriously untrue,
contrary to my known judgment, to express affirmations in my book, etc. But
1. the Reverend Doctor speaks Hyperbolically enough, when he says it is
repeated, an 100 times, that he denies our Ministers, etc. He may do well to
number them, and see how far short the reckoning comes, 2. I confess, I took
it for granted; that the Reverend Doctor was a thorough Independent, in the
voice of all men; and I knew that Independents do deny our Ministers and
Churches, etc. If the judgment of the reverend Doctor be now altered, I shall
rejoice much, in the success of any Treatise, mine or others, to his
conversion, 3. But if he yet be constant to his Principles delivered in his
former Treatise, and vox populi be not a very liar; I shall not doubt if need
be, to say a thousand times, he does at least by consequence deny our Ministry,
and Churches; our Ordination and all, even our Church Membership. But of that
more fully anon.

I cannot here but observe one piece of policy, the Reverend Doctor has made
use of (observed also by others) beyond his Praedecess^urs, in this
controversy, to ingratiate himself, and way, with vulgar readers, to make
them seem the better. 1. That he is so free and frequent in Commending of me,
his adversary. p. 10 and 46. 121. and elsewhere; as Hierome said of Ruffinus,
He wrongs me with praises; Surely (they will think) he will never wrong the
truth, that does right to his Adversary, 2. His extraordinary Complements,
after the Mode of the times; may pretend to great Humility, considering the
distance betwixt him and me, a Reverend Doctor and Deane, and a poor country
Presbyter; such as these, Let him at any time give me a command to wait upon
him, p^ 19. I desire to know, when and where I may personally wait upon him, p.
39. ^ humbly beg of this Author, that h^ would favor me with a command, etc
p. 85. See also. p. 92.129.139.180 All most as often repeated, as those charged
upon me before; all which some would interpret for so many jeares, but I do not
so, 3. He has yet another policy, taking it pro confesso, that I am guilty,
and that he would have his Reader think so too; that is, his frequent prayers,
for forgiveness of my miscarriages, and his own forgiveness; which is
repeated in my observation, 5. Times, p. 14. 51. 124. 149. 180. As if he would
by such Charity, persuade me also, as well as his reader, that I had greatly
wronged him. And yet it seems that though his charity can forgive his wrongs,
yet it cannot forget them; for it is repeated often, (30 times at least) that I
wrong him notoriously; and frequent charges of me, with untruth, wrongs, lies,
etc. to make me odious to his Reader: yea there is more bitterness couched in
one sentence, after he had newly prayed for me, than is to be found in all my
books; this it is Until I saw this Treatise, page 14.
I did not believe that there had remained in any one godly, sober, judicious
person in England, such thoughts of heart; in reference to our present
differences, as are visible and legible therein and tells ^ne boldly, "I have
taken pains to cast oil on those flames, which it is every ones duty to
labor to extinguish. Whereas I did but cast water, as I thought, upon those
flames which he had unhappily kindled, by his new Notions.

But we have a second Review of my Treatise, wherein my M^stakes are presented
to the Reader, with respect to that influence they have into the argumentative
part of my discourse; viz. my ungrounded suppositions, as he calls them.

1. It is (says he) strenuously supposed all along, page 16.
that I deny all Churches in England to be true churches of Christ except only
the Churches gathered in the congregationall way, That I may distinctly answer
this; let it be considered, that (as I said before) I supposed the Reverend
Doctor, to be an Independent, upon the general vote of all men, and I knew it
to be the judgment of many; and the That this is the consequence of their
explicit Covenant, see what is the judgment of the Walachrian Churches: Haec
sententia private omnes Ecclesias reformatas, quae tali foedere non uniuntur,
vero Ecclesiastico ministerio, potestate Vocandi and Ordinandi ministros,
legitima sacramentorum administratione, Ecclesiastica jurisdictione, etc. Et
negat omnes in Ecclesiis islis baptizatos, rite and vere baptizatos este, etc.
Apollon. Consid. quarundam Controv. etc. page 23.
consequent of their declared principle, that no Churches are truly
constituted, bu^ such as are gathered in the Congregationall way. 2. took the
word Independent generally, as comprehending Brownists, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, wh^^ strenuously assert^ that we are no true Churches. 3. Though I
sometimes speak, as of the reverend Doctor his person, (especially, when his
notion is new and singular, as in that of schism, etc.) yet I intended
indefinitely, any kind of Independents, and not him distinguished from the
rest* They commonly deny our Churches. In a word, I respected his way, rather
then his person; all along my Treatise. What then? does the reverend Doctor in
his judgment, without equivocation, hold our Churches to be true Churches? We
are glad of his concessions, but fear, that he will be lost with many
Independent Churches, who hold us Antichristian; and believe, that his own
principles will confute his present concessions. But hear what he says, " I
now inform him, that a^l those surmises are fond and untrue, page 17. And tells
us, He shall as willingly engage in the defense of the Ministry, of the godly
Ministers in England, with the lawfulness of their Churches, as any what ever.
^g. 20. Though the words be ambi^ously spoken, I must take heed of ^pposition
or suspicion of insincerity, in ^is profession, lest he charge me with ^ew
surmises: What then does he scru^e at? I only in my Treatise have questioned,
the institution of a National Church. A National Church has (as ^e was told)
a double notion; it im^orts either an Hierarchicall Church, with subordination
of Officers, (which ^e says, I do not maintain) or a Church, where all the
Churches of a Nation ^gree in Doctrine and Worship, and ^elebrate it
accordingly, in the Presby^erian way. Which of these does he question? or
rather, which of them does he allow to be true Churches? Does he not renounce
and dispute against both, as Churches not truly constituted, and so, in the
judgment of Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, no true Churches, yea,
Antichristian? Do not his own principles infer this conclusion If any man has
nothing to show, but (...) successive Ordination, through, or fr^^ Rome, he
looks not on him, as a Mi^^ster of Christ. But all our Minister have nothing
else to show, (as valid) (...) make them Ministers, but their succe^sive
Ordination; Ergo, He looks upon them as no Ministers of Christ, an^
consequently, we have no Churche^ Will he engage in defense of such Ministry,
such Churches? But more ^ this again, ere long. And now I am no^ indebted to
give him any satisfaction (having done him no injury) he hader-posed himself to
the censure and displeasure of many godly Ministers, page 21.
Churches and Christians, before ever I saw (...) Book. And I go on to the next.

2. A second supposition (he says) is That what ever the presbyterian
Ministers and Churches be, he has separated from them, as have done all those,
whom he calls Independents. What saye^ the Reverend Doctor to this; Does no^
this reverend Author know, that this is denied by us? Is it nos sufficiently
disproved, in that very Treatise which he undertakes to answer? However, the
reverend Doctor himself, might not totally separate from us, holding compli^ce
in preaching or hearing, in our ^hurches, to what ends, he knows. ^et surely,
those Independents whom (...) names, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. (...) utterly
refuse communion with us, Antichristian, as no Churches, no M^^sters: Yea, many
of those who are ^agle, or singular Independents, not yet one so far as
Brownists or Anabaptists, ^o not so much as hear (much less re^eive the
Sacrament) in our Churches, ^nlesse some of theirs preach. And may ^hey not
justify it upon his own prin^^ples? Does he not confidently deny, any
separation from a Church to be ^chism? And in this place, does he not ^losely
justify their separation; The blameable separation must respect some union of
Christ's institution. page 22.
Now wherein have we (we, not I) separated from them, as to the breach of any
such union? I pray now, what is this, in true sense, but, we have indeed
separated from you, but without breach of any union of Christ's institution, for
you were not Churches united, according to his institution. Just as he pleaded
for separation from Rome, and from the National Church. And what follows
hence, but this, We are no true Churches, and their separation is just. Thus he
plead for all, Independents, Brownists, Anab^tists; for the plea is theirs, to
justify the separation. Some of them can com^ and hear in our Churches, but
up^ Robinsons latter principles, not as Chu^ches, or Ministers, but as gifted
brethren But hear him plead for himself: p^ my part, what has he to lay to my
charg^ I condemn not their Churches in gener^ to be no Churches. Nor do the
Bro^nists so, some true Churches they do a^low us, of the Independent dress; ^
least, See Dr. Hall Apol p. 52. Med.
comparatively, they say, we are no^ so bad as the Whore of Babylon. But h^
goes on: I never disturbed, that I kno^ of, the peace of any one of them, n^
separated from them. What? was h^ never of any particular Church, as member, as
a Minister? not of that i^ Essex? did he never separate from them, nor disturb
the peace of that, or some Churches, by raising divisions in them soliciting
proselytes out of them? Has he not by his book of Schism, cast fir^ into all
the Churches of England? Did he not labor to gather a Church, in his own
College, if report fail not? In his former book, and present defense, does he
not advise others, to come out of our ^hurches? Of schism, page 270. If all ^is
be true, his crime preceded his pu^hment, and he may be content to bear (...)
whilst I go on to the next.

3. He supposes throughout, that I deny, not only the necessity of a
successive Ordination; but, the lawfulness of it also. No, I supposed (and
proved) at he denies the lawfulness of our ^ccessive Ordination; by which I
under^^ood, not only imposition of hands, ^t the whole authoritative
translation of man, into the state of an Officer of the church. Now, does not
the reverend ^octor deny our Ordination as fully, as ^rownists or Anabaptists,
upon the same ^ound, because we had it successively ^om Rome? I repeat his
words again; If any man have nothing to plead for his Ministry, Of schism. p.
196.
but merely that successive Ordination, received through the Church of Rome, I
cannot see a stable bottom, of owning him so to be. If this be ^ot to deny our
Ordination and Ministry ^o, let the Reader judge. If he thinks (...) sufficient
to say, he does not deny ^ur Ordination, because he is pleased to ^ratifie us
with another plea, page 197. ^f schism; that he disclaims all thoughts of
rejecting those Ministers, as Papa^ and Antichristian, who yet adhere ^ that
Ordination, being many of the^ eminently gifted of God, etc. and submitted to
by the people, etc. This is s^ far from justifying our Ordination, ^ our being
Ministers by virtue thereof that it does the clean contrary: It tel^ us only,
That though indeed our Ordination do not make us Ministers, y^ we are not by
our Ordination so inc^pacitated, but that, notwithstanding it we may by
somewhat else be made M^nisters; viz. our gifts, and the people submission. And
if (when he says, (...) does not renounce his own Ordination his meaning be
this, that he does no deny, but that he was ordained, and ye^ holds, that
notwithstanding his Ordination, he may (upon some other account) be a Minister,
we wish he would have spoken out, and let others judge whether this be a
renouncing of hi^ Ordination or not.

page 24.
But the reverend Doctor seems to b^ turned Orthodox, in point of Ordination; I
say, it is according to the mi^ of Christ, that he who is to be ordaine^ unto
office in any Church, receive imp^sition of hands from the Elders of the
Church, if there be any there; and this to be done in a way of succession, that
the Churches may be perpetuated. Mark, Imposition of hands from the Elders of
that Church, not by a Presbytery for^aigne to that Church; If there be any
^here. But if none there, he tells us not, what is to be done then. Besides, he
^peaks only of imposition of hands, which he blamed others for) as if than
were all of Ordination, when as he told ^s, The Scripture compriseth in it, the
whole authoritative translation of a man into an Officer, differing from the
other as whole and part. And that succession ^e speaks of, ceases, when there
are no Officers in that Church, or a new Church (...) to be erected; then it
must fall upon ^he people, or I know not whom. But ^ow comes this change, and
how long? Was it not the reverend Doctor, that when some young men came to
advise with him, about their Ordination, diswaded them from it? Was it not he
that said, that he would maintain against ^ll the Ministers of England, there
was (...) Scripture no such thing as Ordinati^n? Was it not he, that when it
was ob^ected to him, desiring to be a Parliament Man, that he was incapable of
it, as being a Minister, would not answer, He was, or was not a Minister? this
was vox populi, at Oxford. And was not this to renounce his Ordination? What
then is it, that he does oppose? The denying (I suppose it should be the
deriving) of this successive Ordination, through the authority of Antichrist.
This fallacy does not become the reverend Doctor's learning, it is fallacia
compositionis. We derive our Ordination, not from Antichrist, but from such as
were truly presbyters, successively ordained, though with some corruptions:
This he was told again and again, was the answer of all our best Divines, but
he takes no notice of it: Yea, Luther, and our first Reformers, had no other
Ordination but such; will he look on them as no Ministers of Christ? Hear what
he says; Before the blessed Reformation begun, page 24.
and carried on by Zuinglius, Luther, etc. there were, and had been, two states
of men in the world, professing the name of Christ and the Gospel, as to the
outward prof^ssi^n thereof; the one in glory, etc. the other poor, etc.
Consider now, whether the reverend Doctor do not acknowledge the Church of Rome
to be a Church, professing the name of Christ and the Gospel, as to the
outward profession of it? which lately he did deny, and will again ere long,
page 26. And I ask, of what Church Luther and Zuingulius were, before the
Reformation? either of Rome or none; a corrupt Church, but yet a Church. But he
adds; As to the claim of a successive Ordination, down from the Apostles, page
25.
I made bold to affirm, I could not understand the validity of it, as
successive, which was derived to us, from, and by, the first party of men in
the world. I hope, if any Church can prove a successive Ordination from the
Apostles, it would be no prejudice, but an honor to it; as the Greek Church, I
suppose, does plead, and not from Rome. And if it was our unhappiness, to have
our successive Ordination through fouler hands, (if at least fouler then some
of the Greek Churches) yet truly Ministers, shall that invalidate our
Ordination? Must we be charged, to derive our Ordination from Antichrist, as
Antichrist, or from the Beast, as the Beast, because we had it from some that
were members, or officers of that (newly confessed) Church? That was it that
warmed my So he excused Austin against the Donatists, p. 166
zeal so much, as to tell the reverend Doctor, Of schism. page 25.
that he cast dirt in the face of our Ministry, and to be ready to say, The
Lord rebuke thee. Dare he appeal the Search^r of all hearts, he had no design
in all this, to cast dirt on any godly Minister in England, when as this is the
filth that is daily cast upon us, by his friends, the Brown^sts, Anabaptists,
and some Independents, not yet gone so far as others, Our Antichristian
Ministry? Bartlet, in his Model.
He called for satisfaction, for supposed wrongs; but what satisfaction will he
give, to all the Ministers of England, and other Nations, for thus revileing of
them, to say, They derived their successive Ordination, through the authority
of Antichrist. But (says the reverend Doctor) Might not another answer have
been returned, page 26.
without that wrath? This is so, or it is not so, in reference to this Nation:
If it be not so, and they plead not their successive Ordination from Rome,
there is an end of this difference. This is a pleasing notion to the reverend
Doctor, for he uses it twice more, once page 28. and again, page 130. But 1.
Might not the reverend Doctor have given a better resolution of the case, D.
Hal Apol. against Brownists, sect. 30. p. 508.
as all our Divines hitherto have done? Our successive Ordination is not
claimed from Rome as Papal or Antichristian, but from Rome, so far as
Christian, the Papacy being but the Leprosy of that Church. Must he needs take
the worser part of the distinction, and cast dirt on our Ministry, before
Papists, and all our Sectarian enemies? And was not that my answer, to which he
says nothing, but still goes on to provoke by scornful language. His Dilemma,
with its horns, intends to gore us on both sides; If it be not so, there is an
end of this difference, we are wholly agreed; and what need those exclamations?
page 28. That is, if we do not plead our Ordination from Rome, (and have no
other to plead) we have none at all, and so no Min^sters, no Churches, that
way. If it be so, that we say, we have our Ordination from Rome, then he
concludes us Antichristian, You have your Ordination through the authority of
Antichrist. To prevent both these, I distinguished as before: We have it not
from Rome as Antichristian, but from Officers of that Church, though much
corrupt. Are we now at all agreed, when he derives our ped^gree from Antichrist
and the Beast, and I derive it from Officers of that Church, which he rejects?
Calls he this an Agreement? I say it is from Rome, and he says so too, and so
the vulgar must believe, we are agreed. Dolosus versatur in universalibus and
hates Distinctions as evil doers do the light.

But I asked, why may not this be a sufficient foundation of our Ministry; as
well as for our Baptism? He asks me (as before) If it be so, and be so
acknowledged, whence is that provocation that arose from my Enquiry after it;
which may receive the same answer as before: The provocation arose from charging
us to receive both, from the Authority of Antichrist. And I asked him; Whence
he derived his own Baptism? To which he gives no satisfactory answer, but now
tells me (very strangely) I judge their Baptism good and valid; but to deal
plainly with him, not on that foundation. Upon what then? Might not the men
that received their Baptism and power to Baptize from that successive
ordination, receive also power to ordain? or does he so far join with the
Anapaptists, that any disciple, no-Minister, may baptize; or does he renounce
his successive baptism, as some (if not himself) have done their Ordination
from Rome? Hear his answer; I cannot believe, that that Idolater, murderer,
man of sin, had, since the days of his open Idolatry persecution and enmity
to Christ, any authority more or less committed to him from the Lord, nor over
his Churches. Change the Scene, and let him tell us; what he believes
concerning Christian Idolatrous persecuting Magistrates; Do they thereupon
forfeit their Authority over their people and Churches? Parcius ista: If he
say, its otherwise with Ministers, I put him the case of the Idolatrous
persecuting high Priests among the Jews; Were they presently Exauthorized upon
those miscarriages? nay, must not Antichrist sit in the Temple of God, 2 These.
2.4. that is, the Church; professing the name of Christ, and the Gospel, as to
the outward profession thereof; as he told us, p. 24. The Reverend Doctor has
endeavored to elude that text, (of Schism p. 154.), by a gloss or
interpretation of St. Austins de. civ Dei. l. 10. c. 59. That the words are
thus to be rendered; A setting up against the Temple of God, not a sitting in
the Temple of God; Estius, in loco.
and could be content it should so be taken for a present shift, which is by
Papists themselves rejected, as most improbable, who grant it meant of the
Church; that Ant^christ must fit in the Church, and by most, if not all our
Divines, so understood in the controversy of Antichrist, He must not be
looked for, without the Church, but within the bosom of the Church; Beza in
locum. Yea if the Reverend Doctor had consulted the text; he had found Austins
gloss the more improbable if not impossible; for the words are thus in the
Greek, (...), would this be a genuine sense; So that he as God, sets up
himself against the Temple of God? Besides that this would be a kind of
Tautology, having before called him (...) etc. And did he not tell us, that
such Churches as ours, may for ought he knows, be in Italy. p. 49? Lastly,
Said he not also, Grant the usually received sense, it imports no more, but
that the man of sin, shall set up his power against God, in the midst of
them, who by their outward visible profession, have right to be called his
Temple, that is, the Church: for are not they that make an outward visible
profession of Christ and the Gospel; rightly called a Church though corrupt
and wicked. Did not Satan dwell and ^ad his throne in a Church, Rev. 2.13. that
of Perganus? But enough of that. ^ut I said, he and his party would not ^ave
been pleased with Ordination from ^ Presb^yerie, though not from Rome: ^e asks
me angerly; I pray, who told you so? when, wherein, and by what means have I
opposed it? I acknowledge my self of no party. I have told him ^fore, when and
wherein and by what means he has opposed it; if he please ^o look back. I
only add, he opposed it, by assigning Imposition of hands only to ^he Elders
of a particular Church; and by offering to gather an Independent Church, as I
have been credibly informed. What need his charge of Transportation and
reflections upon him, page 27.
and that without due observation of truth and love. But, its worse, that he
charges me with an untruth, As if I acknowledged those first Reformers had
their ordination from the people; when as I speak the direct contrary. The
first Reformers, Luther etc. had not their ordination from the people, but from
Rome, p. 116. et alibi. I only excepted some Extraordinary easy, where no
Ministers were to be had for Ordinatjon, and that only for the first turn.

But he is as much displeased for m^ affirming, that he has renounced hi^ own
Ordination. page 29.
He asks Who tol^ him these things? I am now necessitate^ to tell him, that
all these things are false^ and utterly in part and in whole untrue ^ and he is
not able to prove one of them. My reasons, or rather Evidences of thi^ charge
of renouncing his ordination were these, 1. The world looks at him, as a^
Independent of the highest note; and I knew it is their judgment, that our
ord^nation is Antichristian; and if so, its time for him to renounce it. 2. I
know, from good hand, that some of the Brethren have renounced their
ordination; so I am told, They all renounced their ordination in England, Anat.
of Independ. page 23.
and ordained one another in Holland; when Mr. Ward was chosen pastor, and Mr.
Bridges Teacher at Roterdam, first Mr. Bridges ordained Mr. Ward, and then
immediately Mr. Ward again ordained Mr. Bridges. Thus one hand washes another,
and I might reasonably think; the Reverend Doctor had also renounced his. 3. I
had diverse times heard, that he declaimed against and dissuaded our ordination;
and I thought it not probable he would still retein it. 4. I concluded ^m his
own principles in his book of ^hism, that our successive ordination ^me from
Antichrist and the Beast as ^ore; and that those " That insist upon ^ that
plea, would (if he mistake not) keep ^ up in this particular what God would
have ^ pulled down, p. 198. of Schism. And ^ould he keep it up in himself? If
I ^ere so persuaded; I should renounce ^y Ordination to night, before to
mor^ow. 5. If this be not sufficient, let him re^ember what he said in the
presence of ^l or most of his own Canons, at a pub^ck meeting, speaking of his
Ordination ^y the Bishop of Oxford, in that place; That he valued it no more,
then that crum upon his trencher or near it, which he fillipped away. It may
be, his Canons will not affirm this to me (though to some others they have,)
but I shall put it upon this Issue; that if they will give it under their
hands, that they never heard him say those or such like words, I shall believe
the report was false. 6. I would appeal his own conscience, Does he believe
his former Ordination valid? Does he do any Ministerial act now, by virtue of
his former ordination? if not, what is that but a renouncing of his ordination?
If he do, he contradicts or condemns himself, reserving an Ordination, which
he a^counts Antichristian. And then, wh^ means those outcryes, I was nev^ yet
so dealt withal, by any man ^ what party soever: page 29.
Does this dealing b^come a Minister of the gospells etc. B^ whether those
Recharges upon me, ^ 30. be not utterly untrue, and unb^coming his Reverence
and piety, I lea^ to all indifferent Readers to judge, b^ what has been the
Language and ca^riage of my former discourse; and wh^ has here been returned.
This Chapte^ being a Recapitulation of my whole boo^ from one end to another,
has held m^ very long. I shall promise to be shorte^ in those that follow.

CHAP. II. In answer to my Appendix.
THis Chapter is a mere (...), if not in that the first is last* yet in that
the last is first. The Reverend Doctor indeed promised us, A^ speedy account of
the Closure of my book, p. 11. and in the Close of his former Chapter: but I
must confess, I did not ^t expect it; nor will I conjecture at ^s preproperous
vindication of his ^putation, as he calls it. Had not his ^ter book of Schism
recanted, if I may ^t say, contradicted his former judg^ent, I had not meddled
with it; I can ^cerely profess, my intention was ^t to blast his reputation,
or to cause ^ Person to suffer (to whom I was and ^ a very stranger, not
having, above ^ce, so much as seen his fa^e) but to ^event the prevalency of
his way, by ^e Author^ty of his person; to the draw^g off of some well meaning
people, Romans 16.8.
^ho are easily deceived by fair words, and personal respects; this I thought
^ight the better be done, by presenting ^o them the errors and Inconstancy of
^^e men, that endeavor their seduce^ent. The Apostle Jude describes Sedu^ers,
by such a Character; they are ^andring Stars, as in places, so in judgment
Inconsistent with themselves, and their own opinions. But if he mark ^t, I
did first in my precedent Chapters; ^ndeavour (with little success, I
confess) to show those persons, the errors of that way, before I discovered
the inconstancy of the person; and Inconsistency of his former and present
thoughts: A^sure we may have reason to suspe^ their judgment, who are so
changea^ in their opinions; having instances enough of men, that have run from
o^ sect to another, till they have lost themselves, and all Religion. But to
retu^ to the business in hand, the revere^ Doctor, after the proposition of
oth^ ways of excusing himself, for his inco^stancy, at length confesses the
fact, wi^ the ground and means of that alteration of his judgment.

1. The ground was this, the suitabl^nesse of his former principles to the
I^dependent way; page 34.
for so he says: Upon review of what I had then asserted, (i^ his former
Treatise) I found, that (...) principles were far more suited, to wh^ is the
judgment and practice of the Co^gregationall men, than those of the
Pre^byterians. This was the ground of h^ change, that I conjectured at, when ^
said, "Perhaps these princ^ples of his, the laid, might mislead others and
himself etc. page 237. Those principles were that gifts and submission of the
people were sufficient in some cases, to make ^ Preacher of the Gospel; not
having distinguished between a Preacher in a large, and in a stricter sense,
that is, be^een an Instructor (common to men ^d women,) and a preacher in
Office ^culiar to some. For neglect of which ^tinction, how easy was it for
men ^upposing the case to be now extraor^ary, and an intercision of all
ordinan^s) finding themselves (as they easily ^lieve) sufficiently gifted, and
a giddy ^ple, thirsting after novelties, willing (...) be taught by such
teachers, to take ^on them the Office of Preachers? ^his is so visibly the
Doctrine and Prac^ce of all the Sects, that he that runns ^ay read it. But the
Reverend Doctor ^d there laid down other Presbyterian ^rinciples, which are
irreconcilable ^ith his new congregationall way; as shall ^ppear.

2. The means of his conversion was his: Undertaking to read the Books ^ritten
on both sides (the congre^^tionall and the Presbyterian way) ^e fixed on one to
take under peculiar examination; which seemed most methodicall, page 3
and strongly to maintain that which was contrary to his present persuasion:
that was Mr. Cottons Book of the Keys; intending the confutation of it. But
contrary to his many Interests, he was prevailed on, to receive that a^ those
principles, which he thought to s^ himself in an opposition unto. And the
commonly it fares with those that undertake controversies, being before
prejudiced with the principles of that way as the Reverend Doctor professes he
wa^ But had he observed his own rule ^ examining impartially all things by t^
Word, comparing causes with cause^ etc. laying aside all prejudicate respect^
unto persons or present traditions, an^ considered the books written again^
that very Treatise, and no more; h^ might perhaps have been confirmed i^ his
Presby^erian way, as many learne^ and pious men have been. Wherea^ now there is
little hope of recoverin^ him back to his first Principles, for h^ tells me
That being by that means settled in the Truth, page 37.
he is ready to maintai^ it to me and others, and finds cause to rejoice in it,
in the day of the Lord Jesus. I shall only request him, that he would
impartially consider, what has been written against the Treatise of his
Conversion, before he enter into new contests with me or others, or publish
that tract of the Authors, which he threatened me with, in his Epistle: which if
he do, there is some hope he may re^rn to his former Presbyterian princi^es, as
others have done, without any ^eat prejudice to his reputation; he ^et
professing himself to be of neither, of ^o party, p. 27.

Before I consider his answer to my ^ppendix, I shall desire leave to pre^ise,
that my scope was not to help on with the proof, that Independency is a great
Schism, as he pretends p. 32. Nor ^et to cause his person to suffer, as I said
^ore; nor yet to confute that treatise ^ so, (though by the by, I might
disco^er some weaknesses in it): but to prove from it, his inconstancy and
inconsistencie with himself, who yet undertakes ^o convert others to, or
settle them in, the ^ndependent way: And I most of all ^onder, that he should
so confidently ^eny his change from what he then de^vered, and say I am
punctually of the same judgment still, page. 40.
when as he clearly ^rofesses his change in one particular, ^. 44. and that a
material one; And for ^he rest, there needs nothing to con^ince him of a great
change, but only ^ Scheme of his differences in judgment ^ow, from what he
asserted then; which ^ shall exhibit to him, at the end of his Chapter.

But before I do that, I shall only, b^ way of short strictures, animadvert
some few things. 1. That his judgment w^ altered, I proved thus: 1. He had, as
thought, upon the reasons before give^ renounced his ordination; at which ^
professes himself astonished to thin^ with what frame of Spirit, what negle^
of all truth and love, this business managed. And I must re-professe, the I
am astonished to think with wh^ face or spirit of truth, he dare deny i^ if all
be true that is reported. I confess, as he carries it, I cannot tell, whether
ever he was ordained or no, by ^ or Presbytery, (for he discovers it not and
then indeed, he cannot renounce wh^ he never had; as he sometimes argued i^ his
former treatise of Schism: If he wa^ not all ordained, and yet do Ministeri^
acts, his tract, I now consider, will condemn him: If he was, I think he hat^
done and said enough to argue his renuntiation of it. 2. My second proof ^ so
by him contrived, that I think he wa^ in a maze, when he writ it down; because
he thinks now, not only in a complete Church State, but when no suc^ thing can
be charged, that gifts and conse^ of the people, is enough to make a man ^
Preacher in office; both untrue and false in fact. Untrue indeed and false, in
^ords and fact: for my words were ^ese; page. 222.
He requires now no more but gifts and consent, and that not only in a
collapsed and corrupted Church, etc. but now, when neither negligence nor
ignorance, can, without injury, be charged upon our Church State; The
difference visible to every seeing eye, without ^y exagitation. And the thing
is true ^ word and fact; as shall appear. To ^y third observation, he says
nothing; Whether such a man, as he speaks of, so qualified, be a complete
Minister, to preach the Gospel authoritatively by way of Office, and to
administer Sacraments? ^his we know, is true in fact, of many ^f his way: some
things more there are ^ that Section, Sect. 3.
very considerably wor^hy of an answer; but he is not pleased ^o take notice of
them.

In the next place, he comes to his ^pinion of the personal in-dwelling of the
Holy Ghost in believers, and will neither admit of my explication of his ^ormer
words, nor acknowledge any ^ifference of his judgment now and ^hen. I have not
yet had leisure to ^onsider what he has published upon this head (not having
his book), but ^ cannot yet be convinced, to be of h^ judgment, nor many others
more jud^cious: I thought I had assigned some clear differences in the words
compare together; but he will not accept m^ pains. I shall now tell him of one
o^ two; 1. His judgment now is, that the Divine nature, or the Spirit of Go^
dwells personally in believers, and the the Spirit is the Soul that animate
Christ and believers: but then, I said the union of Christ and believers mu^ be
personal; for so is the union of Sou^ and body in man, So is the Union o^ the
Divine and humane nature in Christ 2. He said his former tract, that the sam^
Spirit is in Christ and us; but with thi^ difference; In him indeed dwells
the fullness of it; when it is bestowed on u^ only by measure: but in his
latter, o^ Schism, he says the Spirit dwells personally in believers; but
then (say I) we have the fullness of the Spirit, as well a^ Christ; his person
and fullness being inseparable. I might add, that the fulnes^ of the Spirit,
when ascribed to Christ a^ man, was not the person of the Spirit, (for then the
person of the Spirit also was interessed in the Mediatorship) but the fullness
of the graces of the Spirit, which we have only in a measure, 1 Cor. ^.8. To
one is given the word of Wisdom; to another knowledge; to another faith, by the
same Spirit. But if the ^irit personally be given to every be^ever, all these
should be given to one ^an, even as to Christ. But I for^ar at this time any
more.

As for his calling Ministers, by the ^me of Parochial Priests, it is not
^orth contending: he puts it off, neat^, " By what the Prelates esteemed and
called parish. Ministers which might ^ss very easily for an excuse, were it
^ot, 1. that many of the same reverend pi^s men, were then Parochial Ministers
that are now; and ill deserved the name ^f Priests. 2. That the same pious men
and Ministers, are till this day mocked and scorned by his Independent way, by
^he name of Priests, and worse. I might ^dde, that the Reverend Doctor speaks
^mbiguously, when he says, " I never called the Presbyterian Ministers of
particular congregations Parochial Priests. He may, or some may interpret it,
that he means, there were no Presby^erian Ministers in Parishes, under the
^relates; and then indeed he did not call them Priests: but enough ^ that.

For the remaining section of my Appe^dix, though there are many things, the
deserved a better account from the Reverend Doctor; as charging hi^ with clear
alterat^ons of his ^udgmen^ and some contradictions to himself; ^ passes them
over, page. 42^ etc.
some as untrue some as full of refl^ctions, s rmizes, a^ prognostications, And
be^ides, professes himself, since my exceptions, ^ be of the same mind, that he
was, witho^ the least a terations. Only in one thin^ (and the worst of all) he
confesses ^ change; page. 44.
As to the liberty to be allowed ^ them, which meet in private, who cann^ in
conscience join in the celebratio^ of public Ordinances, as they are
performed amongst us, I confess my se^ to be otherwise minded at present, tha^
the words there quoted (Sect. 16.) ^ express. That is to say, I do now allow
conventicles of all sorts of Sects who cannot in conscience join in public in
the celebration of ordinances as they are performed among us: For why should
not all have the same liberty of conscience (which all pretend) Anabapt^sts,
Quakers, and all, as he pleads for himself and party? And is not this obliquely
to brand public worship, as faulty? But this is more than he pleaded for, in
his book of Schism: that every man must follow his own light, and so gather
into new Churches, to the rending of the Church into a thousand pieces. Did
ever any true stated Church suffer such disorder? Will he allow this in his own
Church? Do they not bind all their members to continue with them, and not to
forsake them? Sees he not sufficiently the mischiefs of such liberty of private
conventicles? are they not the Seminaries of faction, Schism, Errors,
Blasphemies, and abominable profaneness. Let him answer his own cautions and
objections, with his judgment formerly upon them; with his own Latin
discourse, against such liberty pleaded for, by the Remonstrants. Does he not
see men pride themselves of their gifts, and create themselves Pastors in
separate congregations? Tells us he not, that such doings, page. 53.
will help to overthrow the very constitution of any Church, by confusion; or
the flourishing of it, by Ignorance; both which certainly follow such courses?
Says he not well; "This may be a means for men to vent their ow^ private
fancies to other; to foment an^ cherish errors in one another; to giv^ false
interpretations of the Word, ther^ being no way to prevent it? How wi^ he
answer these things? Do we not se^ the event of that his prophecy daily before
our eyes? And does he now com^ to countenance these things, and to contradict
himself, and yet tell us, that h^ is of the same mind still that he was and no
whit changed? May we not sa^ to him, as his servants to Pharaoh, Exodus 10.7.
with change of a word, Knowes^ thou not yet, that England, (the Church of
England) is destroyed; or as the Disciples to their Master, Carest thou not,
that we perish? But I forbear: and because the Reverend Doctor stands so
resolutely upon his assertion, that he is not changed, but of the same mind he
was fourteen years ago; I shall now present to him and the Reader, a Scheme of
his differences from himself, then and now; as follows.

^uty of Pastors and people distinguished
1. He spoke of ^o^e, as a col^apsed, corrupted Church in Italy, ^ag. 40.

2. Gifts in the ^erson, and con^ent of people, is warrant enough to make (...)
man a Preacher, in an extraordinary case only: page 15. and page 40.

3. He made the Union of Christ and believers, to be mystical, page 21. We are
so parts of him, of his mystical body, that he and we are become thereby, as
it were, one Christ. In him dwells the fullness of the Spirit, it is given to
us in measure.

4. In extraordinary cases, every one that undertakes to preach the Gospel,
must have an immediate Call from God, page 28.

5. The Church government, from which I desire not to wander, is the
Presbyterial. page 42.

6. Men ought not to cut themselves from the communion of the Church, to rent
the body of Christ, and break the sacred bonds of charity. page 48.

7. I conceive, they ought not at all, to be allowed the benefit of private
meetings, who wilfully abstain from the public Congregations, etc. page 51.

Of Schism.
1. He says, Rome we account no Church at all, page 156.

2 Denying our Ordination as sufficient, he says, He may have that, which
indeed constitutes him a Minister; viz. gifts, and submission by the people,
page 198. in our case.

3. He makes the union to be Personal, page 94, 95. It is in the person of the
Spirit, whereof we are made partakers. Ibid.

The form of the Church Catholic is the Spirit, whereby it is animated, as the
body of man by the soul, page 95. and 28.

4. Yet required no more of before, but gifts, and consent of people, which are
ordinary and mediate Calls. page 15. Neither is there any need or use of an
immediate call, page 33. Of Pastor and People.

5. He now is engaged in the Independent way

6. He says, Separation is no schism, nor schism any breach of charity, page
48, 49.

Review.
1. I do not believe, that Idolater, etc. had any authority in, or over, the
Churches. page 26.

2. I am punctually of the same mind still, page 40. yet had said in his first
Book, page 46. As to formal teaching is required, 1. Gifts; 2. Authority from
the Church; if he do not here equivocate.

3. Am I changed in this? No, page 40. If the Spirit personally dwell in us, we
have him in fullness as well as Christ, and not in measure.

The union of soul and body is personal; the union of man and wife is
mystical, not personal: Such is ours with Christ.

4. And to assure a man, he is extraordinarily called to it, he gives three
ways* 1. Immediate Revelation. 2. Concurrence of Scripture-rules. 3. Some
outward acts of providence. The two last whereof are mediate calls, page 30.
Past. and Peop.

5. As settled in the truth, which he is ready to maintain, page 36. and knows
it will be found his rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus. page 37.

6. There is not one word in either of those cautions, that I do not still own
and allow, page 44. Sure not without equivocation.

7. As to the liberty to be allowed to them, which meet in private, etc. I
confess my self to be otherwise minded. page 44.

CHAP. III. A review of his and my Preface.
THe reverend Doctor begins this Chapter with a complaint, (as his Book is full
of such, either causlesse or needless, complaints) of my repetition of his
words, of such as I could wrest, by cutting off one and another parcel, etc.
to serve me, to make biting reflections upon them, with whom I have to deal. To
which I shall return but this: 1. The testimony of an adversary is strong
against himself; To turn the point of his own sword into his own bowels, is an
allowed way of clearest victory; and more than this, I have not done. That
which a man condemns in another, may justly be applied to his
self-condemnation, if he be guilty of the same crime. If not guilty, it
concerned him to d^sprove it, and clear himself, and not to talk of biting
reflections.

2. If he could do the like from my words, As I doubt not, but he would "dress
me up in the like ornaments; so let him do it with like reason, if he can, and
spare me not.

He first falls upon the D^natists principles, improved not only by Romanists,
but by others, whom, I said, I yet named not; but (says he) its evident whom
he means; though hereafter he tells us, he knows not whom I mean. What thinks
he of their two principles, by me expressed, are they schismatic or no? To
give me satisfaction, (though with little hope of success) he professes
ingenuously, 1. If they were considered in reference to the Donatists, who
owned them; I say, they were wicked, corrupt, erroneous principles, tending to
the disturbance of the communion of Saints, and eve^ting all the rules of love,
etc. But then I would say, 1. What is the di^^urbance of the communion of
Saints, ^^d everting all the rules of love, but ^^hism, by his own definition
of it? and ^et it was not in a particular Church, ^ut from the Catholic. 2. If
others spouse the same principles, are they ^ot as wicked, corrupt, erroneous,
and ^^hismaticall principles in them, as in ^he Donatists? Thus they are
improved ^y Romanists, Brown^sts, Anabaptists, and some more strictly called
Indepen^ents. 3. And then I desire to be satisfied, why he (to free his own
party) labored to excuse them from schism, though he seem to make them
otherwise criminous; let him consider, if he did not endeavor it. The
objection was, that Austin, and others, charged the Donatists with schism, for
departing from the Catholic Church: What says the reverend Doctor to it?
this; I shall freely declare my thoughts, concerning the Donatists, Of schism,
page 164.
which will be comprehensive also of those other, that suffer with them in
former and after ages, under the same imputation: That is, unjustly called
schismatics, for the like separation. And in delivery of his thoughts of them,
charges them with other cr mes, but not with schism, for their separation. page
168.
To relinquish the c^tholick visible Church, is not schism, b^ a sin of another
nature. Upon wha^ ground, does he exempt them from schism, (as well as
Protestants and him self, by Romanists so charged) upon hi^ new notion of
schism? I take schis^ in this argument, in the notion and sen^ of the Scripture
precisely, page 192 That is, for division of judgment in particular Church. But
the Donat^sts division and separation, was in and from the catholic Church;
Ergo, no schism And yet behold his unhappiness, either in his forgetfulness,
or in his inconstancy, to his own principles! He seems to me to acknowledge
their schism, and them schismatic, in their separation, when he asks me
angrily, Do I plea^ for them? Review, page 120.
do I labor to exempt them from schism? Let the Reader judge. 2. If he intend
my judgment of them, (those principles of the Donatists) in reference to the
Churches of England, which he calls Independent, I am sorry he should think, he
has any reason to make this enquiry. I know not that man in the world, who is
less concerned in obtaining countenance to those principles, then I am. A fine
evasion to save him^^lf; let his Churches shift for them^^lves. I did not ask
his own particular ^^dgment, in reference to himself, (for did not yet charge
him to hold those ^rinciples) but in reference to many ^^dependent Churches in
England, which one those principles, and practice ac^ordingly. And he answers
for himself, that he is not concerned, in obtaining countenance to those
principles: obscure^^ enough. But its known too well, that many Independent
Churches do af^^rm themselves, to be the only Chur^hes in England, and none to
be true ^embers of a Church, but such as are ^oyned in membership by a
Covenant; which are the same in substance with those of the Donatists, and
equally now ^ranted, I think, to be schismatic.

But what thinks he of our Churches? For my part, I acknowledge the Churches in
England, Scotland, and France, etc. to be true Churches: Such, for ought I
know, may be in Italy or Spain. I must profess, that if this was sincerely
spoken, I should rejoice much in these concessions, in this vindication of
himself; but the words are so ambiguous, that I know not well, by which handle
to take them. I ask, Do all Independe^ Churches in England think so of them I
believe they will under-write, Mag^ster hic non tenetur; and rather renou^ him,
then assert so much of our Chu^ches. Do they not many, yea most (...) them,
account us Antichristian, as w^ said above? Do not his own principl^ contradict
his present concessions? And would ask, If we be true Churches, wh^ do they and
he separate from us? They most of them for certain, do separat^ from us, as no
Churches, no Ministers does not he so too? No; I have und^niably proved in my
book of Schism, (...) have separated from none of them. Thi^ was spoken to
above; and I shall take hi^ for no Independent, if he do not separat^ from our
Churches. But I pray, did he not plead for others, his party as wel^ as
himself; We have separated from no^ of them? from no true Churches in England;
why? because they are no truly constituted Churches; or, they were never
members of them, and so could not separate from See page 252. s. 35. It is
impossible a man should offend against that which is not, unless they will
say, We have separated from what should be.
them tha^ were not: See page 257. Or, not reformed according to the mind of
Christ. This evasion he (...) as spoken above, in this present ^hapter. But
this will come again ^e long, there something shall be said ^to it.

When I said, that a learned Doctor ^d, His whole Book, or the greatest part of
it, was one great schism: He ^^swers, I hope that is but one Doctors opinion,
because being nonsense, it is not fit it should be entertained by many. that
that one Doctor said, many ^ore do think; nor is it any nonsense, ^t usual
Rhetoric, to Scripture, and her Authors, so to speak, to call a ^ry
schismatic book, a schism, as to ^ll profligate sinners, by the name of ^ne,
and the like. The rest of this ^hapter, and the most substantial things ^erein,
wherein I required satisfa^ion, he overlooks; as those of enforcing ^^iformity
on the one hand, and tole^^tion of Religions on the other, which ^e pretended
to be one of them, the ^ay to peace; and some other pra^tises of Politicians,
with the success ^hereof, he thinks not good to take ^otice of, or to discover
which of the ^aies he likes best. And after some renuall of his former
complaints, o^ suppositions, and many notable lashes etc. he concludes this
Chapter thus So his first Chapter is discussed an^ forgiven. By which begging
of the question, he would persuade bot^ himself, his Reader, and me also, tha^
I am very guilty, and himself very charitable, to forgive me, as I note^ above.

CHAP. IIII. Of the nature of Schism.
FOr the better finding out of the fu^ nature of Schism in the Ecclesiastic^
sense and use thereof, I condescende^ to follow the Reverend Doctor to tak^ the
notion or notation of it, first in the n^turall and proper sense. There it is
take for a division or separation of a body into parts which all men know, may
admit^ degrees; and be either partial when the separation or rent is partial,
the part yet cleaving together for all that rent or total, when wholly and
quite divi^ed asunder. e. g. In a cloth or gar^ent cut or torn; it may be so
cut or ^orne, that it may hang together by ^ome threeds, or else be divided
into two ^istinct parts. Now it were ridiculous ^o say, if the cloth be rent,
and hold by ^ome threeds, it is a Schism; but if it be ^uite torn asunder, it
is no rent, but ^ome other thing. The scripture, as well ^s sense, intimates
these degrees of ^chism, when it says, the rent is made ^orse Matthew. 9.16. 2.
There is a body ^olitick, a City, or kingdom; and a ^chism may arise in them,
either in part, ^s when their Judgments are divided, at ^ome public assembly
as Joh. 7.43. etc. Or else when they are divided into ^arties, and fall into a
civil war; both ^hese met in the case of Jeroboam; first ^here was a
division in judgment, and ^resently after a secession of parties; which divided
the kingdom into two parties, and made two kingdoms of one; and the latter
was far the worser schism. And it were ridiculous in politics to say, the
first was a schism or Sedition, Lud. Moulin. Corollar. page 102.
the other none; yet this is asserted by one, in defense of the Reverend
Doctors notion of Schism; as well as by himself, 3. There is a body
Ecclesiastical, whethe^ the catholic visible Church; called the body of
Christ: or a particular congregation, which is a lesser body. The sam^ degrees
of Schism may fall here, either differences in judgment, at or without a
public Assembly; or separation into several Churches: and it were equally
ridiculous (as before) to say, division in the assembly is a Schism; but
separation into several churches, upon those divisions, is no Schism. Yet this
our Reverend Author, does assert; it may be some other crime, but Schism it is
not, p. 51. Other crimes a man may be guilty of, of Schism only in a Church.
Whence its evident, the Reverend Doctor begged the question from the beginning
when he took it, To denote (only) differences of mind and judgment, etc.
amongst men met in some one assembly, about the compassing of a common design,
p. 25. The ground whereof was; because the word is sometimes, (not always) so
used in those places of Scripture by him cited. Whereas in the very original
nature of the word, it may and does import, a further degree of separation,
into parties or Churches. And the inconsequence of the Reverend Doctor's
Enthymeme has already been discovered; Schism in the places cited by the
Apostle, was a division only in a particular assembly; Ergo Schism in the
nature of it, does not singular separation from a Church.

To prosecute this a little further, ^rue it is that Schism in the
Ecclesiastical ^se; signifies a separation good or bad, ^lameable or
unblameable, according to the Circumstances (as is confessed by himself, p.
218.) which may be thus considered. Schism in the Ecclesiastical use, is
either voluntary, or violent and forced.

1. Voluntary, which may be double, 1. from a false and corrupted Church, with
which a man cannot hold communion, without communion in their sins and this is
commendable, and commanded, "Come out from among them, etc. 2. from a true
Church; which may yet be twofold; as first, a simple succession of one or more,
upon just occasions, to join with another, of the same constitution: or a
separation into a new society, disowning the former, and renouncing communion
with it. And this is called a blameable Schism, generally by all, even
separatists themselves, who plead, they separate only from a false or corrupt
Church, not from a true one. If it shall be said (as it is by the reverend
Doctor) we separate not from a true Church, but only from some corruptions, in
it, which we cannot in conscience join with, in the celebration of public
Ordinances as they are performed among us, as he said, p. 44. The answer is,
that that is a misinformed conscience, which will rend the Church, the body of
Christ, by a causeless separation, as to themselves, especially having done
their duty to reform that corruption, as far as lies in them, according to
Math. 18.15. etc. Nothing but fear of sinning, justifies such a separation, as
is elsewhere proved.

2. Violent or forced, and that either by the sinful corruptions of a Church,
(with which a man cannot communicate without partaking in their sins) being
imposed on them by a prevailing party, Church reformation promoted on Math.
13.15. etc.
to enjoy communion with them; or by opposition and persecution, when pious
people, are either driven out, or kept out of communion with them, unless they
will submit to those sinful Impositions: And this Schism is the sin of those,
that any way force it, and they are the Schismatics, who caused that
^^paration. This has often been ex^emplyfied in the Church of Rome ^ our
Divines; We say, this Schism lies at their door, who not only have deviated
from the common faith, themselves; but do also actually cause, and attempt to
destroy temporally and eternally, all that will not join with them therein: Of
Schism. page 144.
and the Schism justly ^d at their door. Now our Reverend ^octor: 1. Denies any
thing to be ^^hism but a Division made by a mem^^r in a particular Church: 2.
Confi^^ntly affirms, that Separation from Church, true or false is no Schism:
^y which means he justifies, not only ^s own, and partie's Separation, but even
^ the Sectaries, and the Romanists also, their separation from the Primitive
^postolicall Church, in Doctrine, worship and discipline. They may be
Schisma^^cks for their intestine divisions, if ^^ey will acknowledge themselves
a ^^rticular Church, not otherwise; for ^chism is only in a particular Church:
^^d thus he, who undertook to Vindi^^te the Church of England, and his ^wn
party especially, from the charge and crime of Schism, by the Romanists, ^ath
justified them from being Schis^aticall, because they are no Church. ^ut now
upon the former grounds, we ^ay prove themselves to Schismatic; ^. By a
voluntary separation from true Churches, (with whom, we dare say, they may
communicate without sin and so consequently, causelessely re^ding the body of
Christ: 2. By the renounceing communion with us, to se^ up a Church of another
constitution, an^ so condemning our Churches, ipso fact^ as no truly
constituted Churches 3. By keeping out fit members from their communion,
unless they wi^ renounce communion with us, and joy in a Church Covenant with
them: The do not indeed drive us out by persecution, (blessed be God it is not
i^ their power; I speak of Brownists and Anabaptists and the Quakers and such
like I mean of the hand, but by tongue the do abundantly; by their cruel
mockings, and ungodly railings and reviling^ and by their heretical Doctrines,
an^ blasphemous errors, they keep us ou^ of their communion; and by persuasion
solicit strongly, to make proselytes and draw them into separation from tru^
Churches, which sure in Scripturall an^ right reason, amount to an heinou^
Schism in the Church. And how fa^ our best Independents are proceeded, i^ some
of these, let them consider. I sha^ give an instance or two, to make thi^
distinction evident. The first shall b^ that of Diotrephes, in Scripture, which
^he Reverend D^ctor says, p. 79. of ^chism, makes the nearest approach to ^
such a division, (from a Church) yet at ^ such a distance, that it is not at
all to our ^ purpose in hand. Let us try that a ^^ttle. I suppose the Reverend
Doctor ^ill not deny, but he made a Schism ^n that Church; but that was not
all; ^or note the particulars; how he made ^ot only divisions in the Church,
but a ^eparation from it: 1. He withstood the Apostle, and received him not: 2.
He reviled him, prating against him with malicious words: 3. refused to admit
those brethren (whom he knew to be fit members) which he sent unto that Church
to be adm^tted: 4. forbad and hindered those that would receive them: 5. and
cast them out of the Church. As proper ^ Schismatic as the Pope himself. For
(as we proved) they are Schismatics, who cause others to separate, either by
their ^^nful Impositions upon the conscience; or keep them out being fit; or
drive them ^ut by persecution, or cast them out by excommunication unjustly, as
well as those who voluntary separate themselves from a true Church. Next I shall
suppose a cast (which lately fell out in NEW ENGLAND, and may do in OLD
ENGLAND) If the Officers of ^ Church, or the people (if the power b^ in them)
shall raise causeless difference with some one or more members of Church, and
unjustly excommunicat^ them and cast them out of the Church would not this
Church be twice Schismatic? once in raising causeless differences in that
Church, and then b^ unjust casting out and separating such from the Church, by
excommunication, and is not here a Schism in separating people from a Church?
therefore schism is more then a division in a Church. The like may be said, of
keeping fit members out of a Church, denying them communion with that Church,
in the public Ordinances of God, unless they will submit to Impositions of
men, as I said before. And let the reverend Doctor consider, whether this be not
ordinarily done, by some Independent Churches; and, if he can, deny it to be a
schism, etc.

Having thus far discovered the nature and extent of schism, I shall now
consider, what exceptions the reverend Doctor has made to my second Chapter:
And first, I am charged with ignorance; The reverend Author understood me not
at all, in what I affirmed. Truly I thought I had understood him, and others so
understood him as I did; and we mistook, it was long of himself. ^e said, The
thing whereof we treat, is a disorder, in the instituted Worship of God; that
is, as I understood it, and others with me, either in the matter of ^^stituted
worship only, (and in nothing else) or only in the time of cele^rating
instituted worship. Both these ^enses of his words were given me by himself;
the first, in Sect. 23. The differences must be occasioned by, and do belong to
some things, appertaining to the worship of God. Who would not take it thus,
Schism is a difference made ^n the worship of God? The other, Sect. 9. It lies
wholly within the verge of one Church, that met together for the worship of
God, etc. And page 25. in general, It denotes differences of mind and judgment
amongst men, met in some one Assembly, etc. Which he repeats again in his
Review, page 56. Differences amongst men, met in some one Assembly, etc. and
gives it for the importance of the word. Let Us now hear his own sense; I say
not, that schism in the Church, is either about institute Worship, See page 91.
By the Worship of God I intend, the whole compass of Institutions, and their
tendency thereto, etc. If he speak properly now, I am sure he spoke obscurely
before.
or only in the time of Worship but the thing I treat of, is a d^sorde^ in the
institutes Worship of God and so it is, ^ the being an^ constitution o^ any
Church, be a part of Gods Worship Had he thus expressed it at first, I profess
(and so do others) I should less have understood him; for what means he That
schism is only a disorder in the divisions of mind and judgment, about the
being and constitution of a Church* and that as it is a part of Worship? I
appeal all Readers. Who, but himself would have found out this mystery, in
those words? Said he not, page 27* They had differences amongst themselves,
about unnecessary things? Is the institution of a Church, as a part of Worship,
an unnecessary thing? The question was, whether schism import only a
difference in one Assembly, and do not imply also, a separation into parties,
upon those divisions. page 54.
Hear what he says; I do here inform him, that if he suppose, that I deny that
to be a schism, where there is a separation, and that because there is a
separation; as if schism were in its whole nature exclusive of all separation,
and lost its being, when separation ensued; he has taken my mind as rightly,
as he has done the whole design of my book: That is, I understood him ^ot at
all. I must confess, I did so sup^ose, that he did deny separation to be
schism, restraining it (as he did often) to ^ivisions in a Church, not allowing
se^aration from a Church, true, or false, ^o be a schism. Well then, he grants
^ome separation, and because there is a ^eparation, is a schism; and so we are
^greed. No, because I have not proved ^, (from the places cited) I am desired
not to make use of it. page 35.
Let us re^iew the places cited by me and him; ^ shall instance only in two,
the first, Act. 14.4. The multitude was divided, and some were with the
Apostles, and some with the Jews: That is, said I, They divided into parties.
The reverend Doctor approves not this criticism; The utmost intended, seems to
be, the sideing of the multitude, some with one, some with another, whilst they
were in a public commotion. Let the Context be consulted. I said something to
it, in page 40. and now I add; It seems to me to be meant of schism, in an
Ecclesiastical sense, (though by him brought as a political schism, page 24.
for thus it stands: The Apostles entre^ into the Synagogue of the Jews, verse.
1^ (which was a Church-Assembly) the^ a commotion or dissension was made, b^
the unbelieving Jews, against the brethren, verse. 2. whereupon the multitud^
was divided; first, in minds and judgments, (...); then into part or companies,
and some were with the Apostles, some with the Jews; which cannot well be meant
of, being or sidein^ with the Apostles, in judgment only but in society also;
as the like phrase i^ used in a like case, in a difference between the
Philosophers at Athens, and Paul, Act. 17.33, 34. Paul departe^ from them.
Howbeit certain men cleaving unto him, believed, etc. Clav^ unto him, not only
in their judgments, but in their company, following him upon his departure.
This will be more evident in the next Text. Act. 19.8, 9. Paul entering into the
Synagogue, spoke boldly for three months, etc. But some being hardened, and
unbelieving, speaking evil of that way before the people; Paul departing from
them, separated the d^sciples, teaching daily in the school of one Tyrannus.
Which schism ^r separation was violently forced by the ^urbulent Jews, as I
said of the other ^ostance page 41. And so the sin of that ^^hism, was justly
imputable to those ^ewes, driving out the Apostle, and ^orcing that separation.
All that the re^erend Doctor says to this instance, is, that I confess in the
margin, that the word there used, is (...), Both the words signify to
separate, or part into pieces, as Synonyma's.
which has no relation to (...). But that is nothing to the purpose; for Paul
was ^ot guilty of that schism, but the Jews, who enforced him to make that
separa^ion, as I said above. The Romanists are ^udged schismatics by ours,
because ^hey drove and cast us out of communion, by such like dealing with us.

I confessed indeed, that in the Ecclesiastical sense, the word is only used
in ^he, 1 Cor. 1.9. etc. (I except now the places newly managed, where the one
has the word and the other the matter of Schism) but I do not confess that
therefore from thence the proper use and importance of it, is to be learned,
page 56.
This is put upon me; for I rather say, the full importance of the word, is not
here to be learned: the word in its proper notion, signifies a breach of union,
or a separation into parts; in what degree so ever. And that the Reverend
Docto^ beggs the question is evident, because he inferrs, That Schism being so
taken in those places, Ergo it signifies n^ more in the nature of the word, or
thing* He knows, I denied both the Antecedent and the consequence; the
Antecedent by manifesting that there was more in their Schism, than only a
D^vision o^ minds: there was division into parties a separation with respect to
several Ministers, I am of Paul etc. and to one Ordinance at least, the Lords
supper: the Consequence, because the word signifies besides, any sinful breach
of union, by separation from a true church. For the Antecedent, he answers;
first to that of betaking themselves to diverse Ministers, 3. things, page 67.
1. It is not separation in the Church, by men's divisions, continuing members
of that Church, that he denies to be charged with Schism. But if there was any
separa^ion in the church, that's more than he did grant at first; and made
Schism only a division of mind in that Church; and if he grant any separation
in that Church, its as much as I desire; for I undertook to prove, there was
more among them, than a bare division of ^inds, a degree of separation, which
the ^postle there charges, as part of their ^chism; and this the Reverend
Doctor ^ a manner yields, p. 58. For when I ^id, granting him his special
notion, this ^ the way on one hand to free all ^hurch-separation from Schism
etc. He ^nsweres " This is denied: which to me ^^ports, that some separation
from a church is Schism; which is contrary to ^s notion, that Schism is nothing
but a ^vision in a church, 2. The disputes amongst them (says he) about Paul
and Apollo's, cannot possibly be understood to relate unto Ministers of
distinct congregation among them; Paul and Apollo's were not so, and could not
be figures of them that were. But there is little weight ^n this, when as the
Apostle first says ^xpresly; He had in a figure transferred these things to
himself and to Apollos for their sakes etc. 1 Cor. 4.6
And then the ^ifference of gifts, that was in Paul and Apollos might suffice
to make up that ^gure, as the Apostle adds; That ye might learn in us, not
to think of men (your Ministers) above that which is written; that no one of
you, be puffed up for one against another: see, Chap. 3.5. 3. He adds Men may
cry up some one Minister of one congregation, some of another, and yet neither
of them separate from the one, or other, or the congregations fall into any
separation. I^ may be so; but its very rare to find it so and in this case of
that Church, where there were envying, and strife and divisions, Chap. 3.3.
about their Ministers, its most probable it was not so but people might and did
choose their own Teachers, with neglect, and sleighting of others: sure we are,
we find it ^ now; many by having men's persons in admiration, have separated
from on^ Churches, by crying up some one Minister, some another, and renounce
communion with us. Its very probabl^ it was so then; men that had itching
ears, heaped to themselves Teachers after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4 This
breeds envyings and strife amongs^ Ministers, when others steal away their
Members, and bring sleightings and contempt upon their persons and Ministry ^
and at last, a lamentable separation, as w^ see at this day. What ever he says
against that probability of separation, i^ little worth; for I did not
unde^take (as I said) to prove a separation from that Church, but a separation
in that Church, as to some Ordinances, viz. the Ministry, and Sacrament of the
supper; of which in the text.

I said, there was a separation as to parties, in that Church, at least as to
one Ordinance of the Lords supper: The answer is, page 69.
It is acknowledged there were disorders among them in the administration of
the Lords supper; that therein they used respects of persons: they tarried not
one for another: That they separated into several congregations, is not in the
least intimation signified. This is as much as I undertake; that which he
calls, using respect of persons in that Ordinance, excluding the poor, that I
call a separation, (not from) in that Church, as to a party: This was certainly
part of their schism, rebuked by the Apostle. We see this done at this day, not
only by some of his party, who will sometimes hear with us, but not receive
the Sacrament with us; but also by some of our own, (if we may call them so)
who admit all their Congregation to prayer and preaching, but for the Lords
Supper, separate themselves into another Congregation: Is not this a schism? He
knows whom I mean.

That in the Church of Corinth, ^ thereabouts, there was more then on single
Congregation; I proved, first, from himself, who said, They had siding in
their solemn Assemblies; not one, bu^ many. page 61.
He evades this, by saying, ^ suppose, one particular Congregation may have as
many solemn Assemblies as there are times wherein they assemble* And may it not
be true also, of the several places of their meetings? For that the numerous
company of Believers a^ Corinth, could all meet in one place, is most
improbable, if not impossible. Besides, the reverend Doctor will not deny, that
the Epistle was written to the Church of Cenchrea, a distinct Church from that
at Corinth; then were there at least two distinct Assemblies. To which he says
only this; Is there any mention, that that Church made any separation from
that of Corinth? etc. That was not to the purpose; I brought it to prove, there
were more particular Churches in Corinth, or thereabouts; and that, it does
perform. Now is it probable, that there should be a Church in that little
Village, and but one in that great City of Corinth, where were innumerable
believers? I instanced therefore in that 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep
silence in the Churches. Not ^ne, but many Churches at Corinth. It may be, he
will answer as before, with re^pect to the several times, not the several ^laces
of their meetings: But that is pre^ented, by that which I newly said. For sure,
it might be applied to the Church of Cenchrea, as well as to that ^t Corinth,
supposing it to be but one Congregation: Let your women keep silence in both
your Congregations, when ever they meet. But enough of that.

He pretends indeed to have proved, and to be confidently resolved, it was but
one single Congregation; for proof, I find none, but what I also suppose I had
disproved, page 30. To some things whereof, he says nothing: But he is so
liberal, as to forego that proof. page 63.
Is it any thing to my present design, though there were twenty particular
Congregations in Corinth, supposing that on any consideration, (...) Church?
And here he ass^^t^ me ^he is more troubled with my not ^^^^^s^anding the
business, and design he manages, then with all my reviling (...) The like he
redoubles, page 7^. And will suppose the Church to be of what kind I please, if
I will acknowledge it ^ be the particular Church of Corinth* As for my
revilings, the charge is unjust, and I have said enough to it. But* Did he
consider the prejudices, that will fall upon his cause, He defined Schism, to
be a causlesse difference, amongst the members of any particular Church, that
meet together, or ought so to do, for the worship of God, and celebration of
the same numericall Ordinances, etc. Of Schism, page 52. Can a particular
Church, of many Churches, so meet together, to the same numericall Ordinances?
when he granted these things? For 1. Supposing there were many Churches in
Corinth, and that but one Church, it would plead strongly for a Presbyterian,
nothing for an Independent Church: That one Church was governed in common, by
the several Elders, the Apostle writing to them all. 2. Then it were easy to
infer, what I have asserted, that the differences were not in one particular
Congregation, but between Churches and Churches, about their Ministers. 3. That
if a Church of many Congregations, may be collectively called one Church, then
there may be separations of one Church from another, as well as divisions in a
particular Congregation; and so schism will extend further, then he would have
it. e. g. Supposing the Church of England to be National in a right sense, and
so ^lled a particular Church, with re^pect either to other National, or the
^niversall Church; can there be no ^hismaticall separation made, from the
National Church of England, in the fal^ng off of one or more Churches, to
A^abaptism, or the like? but they must se^arate from the Church of England, and
^yne themselves to some Church in Holland, or elsewhere? If there may; ^hen,
separation in a Church, as well as ^eparation from a Church, may be called
schism: For I have proved, there was a ^ separation in the Church of Corinth,
as to some Ordinances, and that is charged by the name of schism.

But to prevent my future mistakes of his principle, he tells me, what I must
demonstrate, if I will evert it; page 65.
That the schism charged on the Corinthians by Paul, consisted in the
separation from that Church, whereof they were members, and congregating into
another, etc. No, that which I was to manifest, was, 1. That schism is more
then a division in a Church; Even separation from a Church, is schism. 2. That
there was more in that schism at Corinth, then a bare division of minds; there
was, if not a separation from it, into another Church, yet a separation in it,
as t^ some Ordinances. Or rather, I was, 1. T^ disprove his new notion; that
schism is nothing, but a division of minds in a Church 2. To prove, that
supposing that schis^ charged on the Corinthians, was n^ more, but a division
in a Church, ye^ it follows not, that nothing else wa^ schism; which how I
have performed let others judge.

And now we are come to Clement Epistle, written to the Church of Corinth forty
years after, when they were again fallen into the like schism. That schism, the
reverend Doctor said, was only, the difference in the Church. This difference
in it, Clement calls every where, their schism, Of schism, page 33. Nor are
they accused of schism, for the deposition of their Elders, but for their
differences amongst themselves: Which may prove a great mistake of his, which
thus I demonstrate from Clement's Epistle: First, in general, he calls it,
"That abominable and ungodly sedition, at the beginning: Afterward, brands
the Authors of it, The heads and leaders of a detestable strife and faction, is
the pride and disorderlinesse of their spirit; whom those Corinthians fol^owed.
And afterward more particular^y shows, wherein that schism consi^ed; viz. in
casting out of their honest Presbyters: Who have of a long time had a good
testimony from all men: Such, we think, cannot with any justice be cast out of
their Ministry. And repeats ^t again, and again; Foul, beloved, and very foul,
are the reports, and unbeseeming, etc. that the most stayed and ancient Church
of the Corinthians, by the means of one or two persons, should rise up in
sedition against their Elders. Indeed it will be no small sin unto us, if we
cast off those, who have unblameably and holily, undergone the duties of their
Episcopacy. Then (a few lines between) follow those words, cited by the
reverend Doctor, (...), etc. For we perceive, (...), ye have removed some, who
performed their Office well, etc. How removed them? by casting them out, (as he
said before) or by deposing of them, as the reverend Doctor expressed it in both
his Books. Now I demand, whether this deposition, or casting out of their
Elders, be not the chief part of the schism, which Clement charges upon them?
and whether it be not as great a schism in a Church, f^ the people, to cast
out, or depose the godly Elders, as voluntarily themselv^ to forsake a true
Church, and to set ^ another Church, by substituting oth^ Officers in their
places? which is mo^ probable they did, though the reveren^ Doctor would not
take upon him t^ know it, page 32. Of schism. This supposed, to be intended in
the wor^ (...), which sometimes signifies t^ lead away, sometimes to drive
away, o^ remove, or depose; as himself expound^ it, by casting out, a little
before. The reverend Doctor understood it other wise; What he meant by his
(...) etc. he declares in the words foregoing where he calls the Elders that
were departed this life, happy and blessed, as no^ being subject to expulsion
out of their Offices. But I doubt, the reverend Doctor mistakes the coherence,
which seems to me rather to look at those former words, (those by him cited
being rather a parenthesis) It will be no small sin unto us, if we cast out
those, who have unblamably and holily undergone their duties of Episcopacy;
(...) or (...); for, or but, we perceive, that ye have cast out, driven out,
expelled, or deposed such from their Ministry, etc. This was their charge, this
was part at ^east of their schism, and the chiefest part thereof. There was not
indeed (for ought I perceive) any separation voluntarily made from it, by any
of the members thereof; but there was plainly a separation made by men, acted
by pride and madness, in casting out, and deposing of their Elders; and they
were the schismatics, (as I said) that forced that separation. Let the learned
judge.

The rest of this my second Chapter, for thirteen leaves together, the reverend
Doctor thinks good to pass untouched, by some of his ordinary language; of my
prejudices, mistakes, extravagances, reflections, mean affections to
Independents; that I have not made the least attempt, toward the eversion of
what he had asserted, etc. That I have not made good the title of my book,
though I scarce forget it, or any thing concerning it, but its proof, in any
whole leaf of my Treatise. Which imputations, how false and sleighting they
are, above all in my whole book, others must judge. Could I avoid reflections
upon Independents, when I had to dea^ with him, who is an Independent, and
pleads their cause? Did I only intend to deal with him, and not rather with
the whole party, whose persons he sustains, and interests himself in their
judgment, when he commonly speak^ in the plural number, We have separated from
none of their Churches? and many the like. And could I prove their way to be
schismatic, till I had vindicated the notion and nature of schism? Is not
this whole Chapter spent in tendency thereunto? But he again complains; That I
should so slightly pass over that, whereon I knew, that he laid the great
weight of the whole? What was that whereon he laid the whole weight? Was it,
That that place to the Corinthians, is the only place, where there is any
mention of schism in the ecclesiastical sense? Did I not (upon second
thoughts) instance a place or two, (which I have now more enlarged and
confirmed) where the word was used in the one, Act. 14.4. and the nature of
schism employed in the other, Act. 19.8, 9. in an ecclesiastical sense? Have I
not clearly proved, that there were more Churches then one, in and about
Corinth, to which that Epistle was written? And considering the multitude of
Believers in Corinth, is it not ^probable, if not impossible, that they ^ould
all meet in one place, to make ^e Church? Has the reverend Doctor ^swered any
thing to this? Was I to love, That the evil reproved, was separation from it?
No, but that there as more then a division of minds in that ^hism, even a
separation in it, as to some ^rdinances; which if it be proved, as I ^elieve it
is, confutes his new notion, That schism in its nature, and in that Church, was
nothing but a division of minds, upon which the whole weight ^f his structure
is laid. But enough of his before, let others judge.

One thing I cannot but take notice ^f, That I would have it granted, page 78.
that because schism consists in a difference amongst Church Members, therefore
he that raises such a difference, whether he be a member of that Church, or any
other, or no, page 43.
(suppose he be a Mahumetan, or a Jew) is a schismatic. 1. Did not prove he
might be so, both from his own description of schism, and also by an instance
of those, that came from Jerusalem, and stirred up divisions in ^he Church of
Antioch? 2. For his pa^enthesis, is it not otherwise professed by me, page 55.
An Heathen cannot b^ a schismatic? Did not the reveren^ Doctor wink hard, when
he would no^ see this? After all this, he charges it ^ a crime upon me, That I
plead for t^ old defin^tion of schism, as suitable to t^ Scripture, after the
whole foundation ^ it is taken away. How is the foundat^on of it taken away?
not by his noti^ of schism; for though that schism ha^ been only a division in
a particul^ Church, with respect to their mind and judgments; yet it follows
not, tha^ schism, in the full nature of it, is nothing else. Let him prove the
consequenc^ if he can, and not make himself ridiculous to all Divines.

But did not I instance in other words which may and do signify separation
into parties, as well as difference o^ minds? and those used in the same plac^
of Scripture. What thinks he of (...), 1 Cor, 3.3. may not that signifi^ a
division into parties? page 39.
What of (...) made a synonymon by the Apostle himself, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. with
(...) I hear that there are schisms, for ther^ must be heresies also amongst
you. Now I made it evident, that that word signifies separation into several
sects; not divided only in opinions, but in Schools also, amongst the
Philosophers; and why may not schism include as much? Besides, I gave other
words, that ^mply a sinful schismatic separation; that, Act. 20.30.
Seducers, that speak perverse things, (...), to draw away disciples after them,
from the Church. That of Heb. 10.25. (...), Not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together. And that, Jud. v. 19. (...), separating themselves. All which
imply a sinful ^reach of union, and a causeless separation from a true Church;
which is the old definition of schism.

There are many things more of great ^mportance in this Chapter, which I cannot
but think it hard measure, to be ^o slighted and despised, as to an an^wer.
But the reverend Doctor is so ^namoured with his new notion, and so over-joyed
with his (...) of invention, that if you will not grant him that, ^e professes,
to look for no success in ^is work, as I said above. But I shall ^ustly
require and expect, in his next ^ndertaking, a better account of them. There is
but one thing more I shall take notice of, in the conclusion of this Chapter,
that is, about the aggravations of schism: First, those that are given by
others, which I re-enforced; not because I hoped, that he would dispute with me
about them, (for I see, he can avoid disputing about things, of greater
concernment to him) but because I found him disputing against them, as I
thought, causlessely. Then for his own, he may, without any leave from me, lay
what weight he will upon them; encouraged (he says) by my approbation of them.
Truly, all the approbation I gave, was, that I could agree with him therein.
But, to tell him the truth, it was rather, because they were true, than that
they were so pertinent and proper, as those vindicated by me: For as for the
three first, that it is a despising, 1. Of the authority of Christ. 2. His
wisdom. 3. His grace: What has he said, that is not competible to the
aggravation of any other sin almost, as well as schism? The same aggravations
may be applied to our civil dissentions: The last indeed is the most proper,
viz. Its constant growing to farther evil, in some, to Apostasy it self; its
usual and certain ending in strife, variance, debate, evil surmisings, wrath,
confusion, disturbances, public and private, are also to be laid all at its
door. And that is my ^dgment, of their present Schism.

CHAP. V.
THe reverend Doctor is still peremptory, that the separation of any ^an or
men, from a true Church, or of ^e Church from another, is not ^hism; he means,
"In the precise signification of the word, page 80.
and description of the thing, as given by the holy Ghost. ^esides what is
said, to disprove that ^se of the word, and description of ^e thing, I shall
now add; 1. He can^t say this of all separation from a true church, for he has
granted some such be schism, as I showed above, from ^s 58 page, where he
says, "It is denied, Who told him, that raising causlesse differences in a
Church and then separating from it, is not in my judgment schism? p. 147.
that his notion of schism is the way, to free all Church-separation from
schism: Ergo, ^ome Church-separation schism, as I conceive. 2. In the next page
81. he says, That separation from Churches is oft-times evil, is readil^
granted. And before, he said, Caus^lessely to separate, is no small evil, p.
70 Then a causlesse separation from ^ Church is evil; and why? but because it
breaks the union of the Church, which is the very definition of Schism,
commonly given. Which if it be true, ho^ could he say indefinitely, the
separation from a true Church is not schism? For no body says absolutely, that
all separation is schism; but a causlesse separation is schism; upon this
reason, because it violates and rends the union of the Church, the body of
Christ. 3. If h^ shall stick to the notion of it, in the place of the
Corinthians, that there wa^ only a division in the Church, an^ therefore
separation from the Church is no schism, it is incumbent on him t^ prove that
consequence, which yet h^ has not done. In a word, I ask, Wh^ is division of
minds in a Church a schism I believe he must answer, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Because it i^ a breach of union, of Christ's appointment, who requires members
of Church to be all of one mind. And is i^ not an appointment of Christ, that
the members of a Church be united, as to ^he performance of the same numericall
Worship? Then by parity of reason, it ^ollowes, that to break that union
caus^essely, is also a schism. Is not this a ^auslesse and worthless
vitilitigation of ^he learned Doctor?

I brought 1 John 2.19. for a blameable ^eparation from the Church; They went
^ut from us, as (said I) is the manner of ^chismaticall spirits; they stay not
till ^hey be cast out, but go out, and become ^he head of a faction. He
ventures to ^ay, All Writers expound it of apostasy: They may do so, but not
excluding ^chism or heresy; (...).
for the same phrase of going out is used, Act. 15. of those that ^aised a
schism at Antioch; yet were not ^hey apostates, not denying Christ, but ^oyning
Moses with Him. But I contend not.

He is as confident, that of the three places by him brought, for blameable
departures from a Church, none of them come under the head of schism. I said,
All, or some of them do. Here I must first rectify a mistake in the reve^end
Doctor, which he pleases himself with; viz. That he (not consulting the
Errata's) reads mind for include. I said Some of them included the nature (...)
schism, at least, as precedaneous to the separation. Upon which mistake, h^
sports himself, and adds; Whatev^^ the matter is, page 82.
I do not find him speaking so faintly, and with such caution through his whole
discourse, as in the place. Truly I spoke so cautiously, for his reputation,
not any end of my own because some, one at least, of the place speaks of no
separation at all; viz. tha^ from 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.2, 6 as I prove
to him; but he will not see For the first, that of Heb. 10.25. which he takes
to be meant of apostasy; I proved his mistake from the Context clea^red, from
others, and from himself who formerly glossed it, neglecting the public
Assemblies; and also because apostates may be schismatics, and something more.
For the third, Jude verse. 19 I proved the separation to be schismatic, from
the nature of the word (...), and the judgment of learned Interpreters: To all
which, the reverend Doctor thinks it safest to say nothing. And I must tell him
once again, ^ag. 86.
It was not incumbent on me to prove, that such a separation is called schism
in Scripture, and is as such a thing condemned. But that such a separation,
has the entire nature of schism ^n Scripture, though not the name, according
to his first proposal; and that I suppose I have abundantly proved.

When I said, the pinch of the question is this, Whether a man, or more, may
separate from a true Church, upon a true or false plea, of corruption in it,
and set up another Church, etc. He cries out, I do not know, that I was ever
necessitated, to a more sad and fruitless employment, etc. Is that the question
in present agitation? etc. Was not this scruple started by himself? 1. In
giving his definition of schism, to be only a division of minds in a Church,
and not any separation in or from it. 2. Did he not vigorously assert, in this
very Chapter, page 77. Of schism; and here again, page 83. That for a man to
withdraw, or withold himself, from the external communion of any Church,
upon plea of its corruption in Worship, Doctrine, or Discipline, etc. is not
called schism, etc. Did it not now come to be the cause of my question, which I
rightly stated, as I thought, and others think, between us and him, and his
Independent associates? Is not their separation from us, the ground of all our
differences? Can common honesty disallow this state of the question? Or can he
truly deny, that they have made any separation from us, or that they do not
deny our Churches? What was said before, must be again repeated; I spoke not
only of himself, but of many Independent Churches. Neither was my question
propounded in Hypothesi, as respecting them; but in Thesi, of any separation
from a true Church. Whether a man, or more, may separate from a true Church,
etc. and set up another Church, etc. as before. And have I not proved also
before, that they and he, (if he stand to his principles) have, and do deny our
Churches* and Ordinances? Has any man a face or conscience to deny this
charge? clamet Melicerta perisse Frontem de rebus.

The remainder of his Animadversions on this Chapter, is for the most part
nothing, but a repetition of those things, which he has often charged; of
mistakes, and surmises, etc. which have ^een once at least fully answered. I
shall ^nely lay hold of his promise, twice ^^ade; That if I can prove against
him, he should have added, or his party) a breach of any union, instituted by
Jesus Christ, that with all speed, he will retreat from that state or thing, by
which he has done so, and (in a kind of scorn) submit to the discipline
thought meet by me, etc. Truly I think, I have proved, that they have separated
from us, and ^roke the union of our Churches; and in ^o doing, (if he will, as
he does, ac^nowledge us true Churches) they have made a breach, upon an union
of Christ's institution, without which, we are no true Churches. And now I shall
expect the performance, of so solemn a promise. But for the contract or
condition adjoined, That in my next reply, I deal not with him, as I have done
in my former, neither as to his person, nor as to the differences betwixt us. I
shall promise, and have performed it; for upon review, of what I formerly have
done, I find, that I have dealt fairly and respectfully with him, though
perhaps sharply, as in a zealous defense of truth. And if he have (as he has)
dealt more uncivilly with me in this, I shall no^ retaliate, but only
vindicate the truth as a friendly and christian adversary.

CHAP. VI, VII.
THat I may not multiply or continue controversies everlastingly, (a^ the
reverend Doctor causlessely charge^ me) though there be some things said i^
this Chapter, not so accurately delivered but just acceptions might be put i^
against them; yet I shall forbear to exagitate them, and proceed to the next*
And therein, because the main substantial points of our difference are already
discussed, and many things repeated, which have been spoken to, I shall only
make some strictures, or animadversions, upon some passages in every Chapter,
that the reverend Doctor may see* what might have been excepted, and lest he
should think himself slighted or neglected, in my passing over the following
Chapters, though he has slighted most of the argumentative part of mine, and
many things of some concernment, that required an answer.

Page 101. The union of the Catholic visible Church, in the profession of the
saving doctrine of the Gospel, not everted by any of the miscariages, errors,
or opposition to it, formerly recounted; the breach of this union is apostasy,
and so no schism. To which many things were ^nswered by me, to which little is
said; what is, shall be presently considered. That which I now add, is this: 1.
That the reverend Doctor opposes apostasy to schism, as if they might not both
meet ^n one. The consequence is like the former; It is apostasy, Ergo, it is no
schism; whereas they differ (at least sometimes) only in degrees. 2. That he
supposes, that there is no breach of union of the Catholic visible Church, but
only apostasy, which is usually taken for a total relinquishing of the
Christian faith. 3. That in giving those three properties of apostasy, he also
supposes, that any one of them denominates a man apostate. Whereas I have
proved, a breach of that union may be, 1. When a man believes not some one, of
the saving doctrines of the Gospel, and yet be no apostate, 2. That a
Christian may be scandalous, and yet a member still, and so no apostate. 3.
That a man man err in some necessary truth of the Go^pell, and profess that
error for a time and yet be Orthodox to the rest, and s^ no apostate. And in
all these cases of difference, with the Catholic visibl^ Church, there may be
a schism, o^ breach of union, and no apostasy. To hi^ questions then, I say; 1.
I grant, tha^ the Catholic visible Church, is a collection of all professing
Christians* 2. To be of such, as profess the doctrine of the Gospel, and
subjection to Jesus Christ. 3. But I do not say, that every error in doctrine,
or d sobedience to some command of Christ, is apostasy, or (as he calls it) a
dissolution (total) of that union, as to the interest of any member by it, in
the body. 4. I have, and do charge some degree of apostasy, upon some of those
Churches, which are called Independents, and shall be able to defend my charge.
5. I do prove, that the breach of that union, if partial only, is not
apostasy, (which is a total forsaking of the faith of the Gospel) but rather
a schism, which in his own definition, is a division in opinion and judgment.
p. 94 and 99
Lastly, I have manifested more than so, that one of the truths of ^he Gospel,
which all Christians are ^ound to, is, the joint exercise of the ^ame
specificall Ordinances, to subjection ^o the same discipline; and, where it is
^ossible, to the exercise of the same numericall Worship, which himself
granted, Of Schism, p. 205. s. 7. and again here, page 109. when he says, to
my words ^fore; All this was expressly affirmed by me before; it is all If
every professor be virtually bound by his profession, to those duties, what
needs an explicit consent to bind them again?
virtually contained in their profession, so far as the things are revealed in
the Gospel. Whereupon I inferred, that the denial of the members of the
Catholic Church, to join in the same numericall Ordinances, was a breach of
that union, and so a schism, and not apostasy. What excepts he to his own
grants? Only as to the celebrating of the same numericall Ordinances, I cannot
grant, that they are obliged hereunto, as formerly considered members of that
Church, nor shall, till this reverend Author shall think meet to prove, that
particular Congregations, are not the institutions of Jesus Christ. If he mean
by, formerly members of that Church, that professors, qua professors, of the
same faith; or believers, qua believers, are formally members, and obliged
thereunto, he granted before what now he denies, page. 205. s. 7, of Schism.
And what I believe concerning the Institution o^ particular congregations by
Jesus Christ, I gave him my thoughts in my former, page. 131. viz: the same
which he granted; Every Christian is bound to be of some particular
Congregation, not of this or that: this is only of Institution; the rest is
prudentiall: to which the Reverend Doctor said nothing in its place; let him
now review it.

page. 111. He says, As for those in Act. 19. which had not heard, whether
there were an Holy Ghost or no; its probable they were ignorant of the
miraculous dispensations of the Holy Ghost, rather than of the person of the
Holy Ghost. I shall only return, That whatever the matter is, I find him not
so cautious in all his Books; its probable, rather than. etc. For the words are
more plain and full, than to be so eluded; for they were baptized in John's
baptism only; who did not Baptize into the name of the Holy Ghost for ought
appears: and so they might not have heard at all, of the holy Ghost.

There are other particulars in his ^hapter deserving some Animadversi^^ ^ but
either they have been spoken to ^fore, or they are (...) to the busi^^sse
before us, and I shall not draw the ^ any longer.

page. 116. Only something may be ^^d to what he says, of the subjects of
christ the Head of the Church, which I ^^d, some wicked men may be; He asks.
Are indeed those persons any better than Mahumetans, as to Church privileges?
shall their Baptism avail them? is it not ^null to them? shall such Parents
give their Children any right to Church privileges? All these were prevented
^^d answered by me, p. 95. 96. of which ^e Reverend Doctor takes no notice: ^^t
repeates the same objections. And ^^stly asks, Does the Apostle any where call
such persons brethren? What use is there of excommunication, if wicked persons
be no members of the Church, and are ipso fado unmembred, etc. as I said, page.
96.
God forbid we should imagine these things so to be. When as the Text by me
produced ^xpressely calls such, brethren: 1 Cor. 5.^1. If any that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, etc. If that may be eluded ^he other cannot: 2 These.
13.17. Count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. I expect that
he an^wer my arguments.

p. 119. He says, I am not with trouble that I cannot understand, w^^ he
means, by placing my words so, a^ intimate, that I say, not only that ^
Church of Rome is no particular Chur^^ but also, that it is no Church at all;
though it might in his judgment mine, be any Church, if it be not a pa^ticular
Church: Surely the Revere^^ Doctor cannot but understand the di^ference between
saying, Rome is no pa^ticular Church, and, no Church at all* The mist is of his
own making; th^^ will not distinguish of the word partic^lar Church; which may
be taken either for a national or patriarchal Church, as b^ himself it was,
page. 121. of Schism; or for a particular Congregation, which is the^^ ordinary
notion. Now though ROM^ may be said to be no particular Church as a
Congregation; yet it may be (and is b^ others) taken for a Patriarchal
particular Church: which is much more than to say, it is no Church at all: But
he says, I affirm the same that he does, in my page. 113. when I say the
Hierarchicall Papal Church, is not a Church of Christ's institutions. I meant
(as I explain my self elsewhere,) that the Papacy or Papal Church, and the
Church of ROME, are two distinct things, differing ^s the Leprosy and the
hand; yet I do not ^ay, the hand is no hand, because of that ^eprosie; as he
says, ROME is no Church, because its Papal, etc.

Page. 120. Do I undertake the cause of the Donatists? do I labor to exempt
them from Schism? are these the ways of peace, love, and truth, he walks in?
^ appeal all Readers, whether he did not ^abour to exempt the Donatists, from
^chism, p. 164. though he condemned ^ll their practices as other crimes? And
did he not undertake to exempt some others from Schism, (he knows whom) that
suffer with them, in former and after ages, under the same imputation? And was
it not upon his own new notion; because Schism is only a division ^n, not from,
a particular Church? Yea was it not Schismatic for them, to cast Cecilianus
out of the Church, renouncing communion with him, and the Church of Carthage
also? ibid. p. 17. 18. The World has hitherto judged it so; and the Reverend
Doctor is now come off to that opinion, when he says "Do I labor to exempt
them from Schism? which (the Rhetorical Interrogation affirmative, being
resolved) is negative I do not labor to exempt them from Schism; Ergo they
were Schismatics in that separation. And once more, A sep^ration from a true
Church, is sometim^ Schism, as well as division in it; But h^ says, angerly it
seems; Sir, I have no singular notion of Schism, but that which Pau^ long since
declared, I pray, what was Paul's notion of the Schism amongst the Corinthians?
was it, that (which is yours) that Schism was only a division in a particular
Church? no; but that their Schism was a division in, that Church (with a degree
of separation in it, as to some Ordinances as I have proved) not, that that
comprehended the full nature of Schism; and if the notion of Schism was not at
all under consideration in reference to the Donatists, I desire him to look
back to the objection which he undertook to answer; was it not the charge of
Schism? if not that, what else? Not Schism, but the union of the Church
Catholic, and the breach thereof. And what is the breach of the union of that
Church, (in his notion) but Apostasy from the truth of the Gospel? And would
this be a congruous answer to the charge of Schism; to say, the Donatists were
not Apostates? Did they renounce the Gospel? Nothing less: but renouncing
communion with the catholic Cuhrch, and making themselves the only Churches in
the world, they were by all men in all ages till now, accounted not Apostates,
but Schismatics: But too much of that.

Page. 123. I and my party, (that is the Phraseologie, this Author in his love
to union, delights in) have broken the union of their Churches. I pray, is it
not as equal for me to call them a party, as for them to separate from us,
and make themselves a party, renouncing communion with us? They went out from
us not we from them: But it is denied, We have no more broken the union of
their Churches, than they of ours: For we began our reformation with them on
even terms, and were as early at work as they. Let the READER now observe,
whether the REVEREND DOCTOR do not either make, or own a p^rty; (we) which he
blamed in me? But I add: 1. If he look at himself, he began not his
reformation till after -- 44. when his Tract of Pastor and People came forth,
then he was a Presbyterian: yea till 46. when he preached before the
PARLIAMENT; then he was a Presbyterian, and (as I hear) pleaded for that way:
2. If he look at the Independents that went out of ENGLAND, they at first
disliked nothing but our ceremonies, and desired no Reformation, but a liberty
of conscience from those snares, as the rest of the honest non-conformists did,
who separated not; a Presbyterian-reformation would then have contented them:
but in a little time, the seeds of Brownism were sowed amongst them; and, for
that, they were charged with Schism from the beginning thereof, by moderate
pious men amongst us, 3. They (nor the Reverend Doctor) have not yet
demonstrated their way to be a reformation, but a deformation of our Churches;
though sometimes for shame of the World, they call us true Churches; which they
contradict by separating from us, and renouncing communion, as Churches, with
us: 4. when we began to reform, (by authority of the Magistrate, which they
did not) some of his party cast all the blocks they could in our way, and
gathered Churches from us. And though he deny it, that they (he says, we) have
separated from all the reformed Churches, as no Churches; and himself with them
in his principles, if not in practice; is so fully demonstrated above, to all
reasonable men, that I wonder that he should expect recompense and
satisfaction, for calumniating-accusations and slanders, which are proved
truths; and talk of his forgivness of one, that never wronged him. For the
parallel of Independentism and Donatism, how much he or his party is concerned,
let others judge.

Page 126. He cavills at my first proof, that there may be a b^^ach of union in
the Catholic visible Church, if the form of it were faulty. But what is
wanting to make up a perfect Syllogism, might easily have been supplied, from
the former discourse, by himself, if he had pleased; thus: 1. Schism is the
breach of union in a Church, of Christ's institution: But the Catholic Church
is a Church of Christ's institution; Ergo, there may be a schism in the
Catholic Church. 2. There may be differences in matter of faith professed,
which is the union of the Catholic Church; Ergo, there may be schism in the
Catholic Church, which not arising to apostasy, must needs be schism, as I
proved above: And he must evade, by one of those answers which I presented to
him, page 115. or else must beg the question. For a close of this; Can there be
any breach of union, in the nature of the word, in the language of Scripture,
or in reason or common sense, which is not a schism, more or less, according
to the degr^e of that breach of union? But to the second, he says, Two
professors may fall out, and differ, and yet continue both professors still;
Paul and Barnabas did so, so Chrysostom and Epiphanius, etc. This breach of
union in Paul and Barnabas, professors of no particular Church; that of
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, of several Churches: Act. 15.39 (...).
Was it not a fault in one party? both could not be in the right. What, will he
call that breach of union? Surely not apostasy, (for they were, he says,
professors still) they were far from renouncing the profession of the Gospel,
either of them. What then was it, but a schism, and sinful separation in one
party? And nothing hinders to call it so, but only the reverend Doctor's new
notion of schism, to be only a division in a particular Church.

Page 128. and the two following pages, are filled with little to purpose, but
with charges, of evil surmises, reproaches, false criminations, wranglings,
impertinencies, bitterness of spirit, etc. which are almost an hundred times
repeated, but not once proved: He concludes with the guilt of one of my
charges, that is, falsehood, when he says, I am glad to find him, page 120.
renouncing Ordination, from the authority of the Church of Rome, as such: For I
am assured, that in so doing, he can claim it no way from, by, or through Rome;
for nothing came to us from thence, but what came in and by the authority of
that Church. I might cry out of mistakes, calumniations, or equivocations, etc.
for neglecting to observe my distinction, given before and after; before: They
baptized and ordained, not as Antichristian, not as Bishops, or Romish Priests,
but as Presbyters. After, in the next page; They did it as Officers, not as
Officers of that Church, that Papal Antichristian Hierarchy. From whence I
said, It is false then, that (which he had charged, page 199.) that Ordination
is pleaded, from the authority of the Church of Rome, as such: That is, as
Antichristian. And I say again, his last words are false; That nothing came to
us from thence, but what came in, and by, the authority of that Church, if he
mean, the Antichristian Church of Rome. To conclude, he often professes, he
has not renounced his Ordination, by an English Bishop; that Bishop had his
succcessive Ordination from some that had it from Rome. Yet he could
distinguish a double capacity of those Bishops, one as Lord Bishops, page 227.
another as Ministers of the Gospel, etc. page 231. Now if he renounce not his
Ordination, he will deny, that he received it from Bishops, as such; but from
them as Ministers of the Gospel. And may not we distinguish so of the Romish
Bishops? is it not ordinary for all our Divines so to distinguish? What
perverseness is this! The business about Ordination of our Ministers, required
his judgment and answer; but he thinks best to wave it, though it was started
by himself, p. 196.

Page 131. I am causlessely quarell'd (...), for calling his description of a
parti^ular Church, a definition; and he says, He waved contests about accurate
definitions, which usually tend very little, to the discovery or establishment
of truth. Both which, I wonder at, in so great a Logician: For 1. Is not a
description in Logic called, an imperfect definition? (...). The contests
amongst men, often^imes grow from want of a perfect defi^ition. The true Genus,
and proper differentia, being the clearest way to discover, and establish the
truth. And this is evident, by his own description of a particular Church: Is
it not a definition, consisting of a Genus, a society of men called by the
word; and a differentia, the joint performance of the worship of God, in the
same individual Ordinances, etc? Did he not make the form of a particular
Church to be, The observance and performance of the same Ordinances of Worship,
numerically, etc. page 236. And do not both those make up a definition? Whether
it be accurate or no, is now to be considered. And that it is not a perfect or
full definition, or description, appears from what I said, page 123. because it
is applicab^^ to the Church invisible, and to the visib^^ Catholic Church, as
well as to a part^cular Congregation. Each, or all ^^ these, may be described
to be a soci^ty of men, called out of the world, by t^^ Word, etc. according to
all the part^culars of his description, as has bee^ evidenced by me, and
acknowledged b^ himself above? And I added, The such societies are all our
particular Congregations; and so, as true Churches a^ theirs. To which he says
but this "That was not the thing in question. If i^ was not there, it is (he
knows) a question between them and us; and my inference was rational, from
his description, A particular Church is a soc^ety, etc But ours are such; Ergo,
true Churches and consequently, not (without schism to be separated from.

Page 132. Concerning the explicit covenant, so much urged by them, h^ says, I
am not at all concerned in it; ^ purposely waved all expressions concerning it,
one way or other, etc. But did he not give us the form of a particular Church,
page 215.
and the union of it, to consist in a joint consent of the members, to walk
together, etc. see page 142. of Review? ^t not by them made the very form of
^articular Church, without which, M. Hooker Survey
^an can no more be a member of a par^ular Church, then a woman can be ^th a
man's wife, without her explicit ^nsent? I noted the difference of his
^pression; one while he said, The form a particular Church, was the joint ^sent
of the members; another while, It is the joint observance of all Ordinances of
worship, numerically, etc. Now ^ evident, that these are not the same ^ing;
there may be a joint observance the same Ordinances numerically, by ^embers of
several Churches, mee^ng together; yea, by members of the ^atholick Church,
yet of no particular church, by joint consent. And this latter, ^e joint
performance of the same Ordi^ances of worship numerically, is the ^rm (if it
have any) of a particular church, differencing it from the other. ^his
diversity of expressions, the reve^end Doctor puts off; first, with a
sleigh^ing sentence, Id populus curat scilicet; and then evades, by asking;
page 144.
Is it the command of Christ, that believers should so do? Is not their
obedience to that command, their consent so to do? Is it the duty of every one,
to join himself some one of the Churches? Can any do so, without his
consenting so to Is this consent any thing, but his vol^tary submission, to the
Ordinances worship therein? Let me ask but so like questions; What Is all this
to purpose? what to an explicit coven^ or consent, which they require? M^ not
all this be done implicitly, and the sufficient, in their own confession, make
a Church? Did not he say, ^ this was virtual y contained in their pr^fession so
far, See p. 145. As an express consent, etc.
as the things mentioned ^ revealed in the Gospel, page 10 When a man first
professes himself Christian, he virtually and implicit promises to do all
those duties, whi^^ concern him, in any relation to his fello^ members, and
Minister: What ne^^ then, to lay so much weight upon an e^plicite Covenant,
(unless sometimes in prudentiall way, when a Church renew the general
Covenant; or to bind me faster, to what they were bound to before, but
neglected) I say, what need i^ there, to lay the whole weight of Church-
constitution, (as no Church without it) upon an explicit covenant ^en the
implicit is confessed sufficient. ^hese things should not have been ^ved, or
slighted by him, that makes ^^e form of a particular Church, to be ^oynt
consent: by which, if he mean ^t an explicit consent or covenant, speaks
nothing to the difference be^een us, and ratifies the constituti^^ of our
Churches, as well as his ^wn.

Ibid: "I think no one single congregation is wholly completed according to
the mind of Christ, unless there be more Elders than one in it; there should
be Elders in every Church. What means ^e by Elders in every Church? a Pastor
and a Teacher? can he prove the Apostle ^ft two such Elders in every Church? ^r
are both these so necessary in every church, that without them, it is no
church? Or does he mean, every Church must have, beside those two, ^uling
Elders in it? Can he prove there ^ere such at EPHESUS, Act. 20.17. and they
sent for, by the Apostle; He ^peaks to them as more than one or two, ^ou all,
v. 25. He may tell us in the next, ^ow many Elders, according to the mind of
Christ, complete a Church; and ho^ he will reconcile the whole differenc^ as to
their and our Churches: Anat of Independent page. 26.
remembering this, that as Mr. Simpson had ^ Ruling Elders, nor did approve of
the^ in his Church: So I do not know whither the Independent Church at Oxfor^
have any such Elders, or no.

Page. 134. I am so far from confirming baptism subjectively to a part^cular
Church, that I do not believe, the any member of a particular Church was ever
regularly baptized: Baptis^ precedes admission into Church-membersh^p, as to a
particular Church: the subject of it, is professing believers, and the^ seed,
whether joined to any particula^ Church or no. I must confess, I know not how
to take these words: 1. I^ seems at first sight to conclude, tha^ himself and
the generality of Christian in ENGLAND were never regularly baptized, being
baptized all, in some particular Church: 2. It sounds something
Anabaptisticall, that a Church is made of baptized persons; baptism precedes
admission into Church membership, (say they also) as to a particular Church;
and denying Infant baptism to (...) valid, they re-baptize men, before they
^mit them members of their Church: Of Schism p. 85.208. These Churches were (by
Jesus Christ) made the only Seat of that worship, which in particular he
expresseed his will to have continued until he came, etc.
This is contradicted by the brethren ^ NEW ENGLAND, who make a ^^rticular
Church only, the Seat of all ^^dinances, and none to be regularly bap^^zed,
that are not baptized in a parti^ular Church: 4. The same is asserted ^
himself, page. 106. of his Review: particular Churches, being by the will of
God appointed for the Seat of Ordinances. Then, unless baptism be no Church
Ordinance of God, it must be done in a ^articular Church. But he says, for his
present mistake, I shall not complain seeing that some occasion may be
administered to it, from an expression of mine; which we find to be this: Christ
has given no direction for any duty of worship, but only to them and by them
who are so joined, Of Schism, page. 206. s. 10. Whereupon I asked, whether
baptism was a part of worship? If so, how could he reconcile this with what he
said before, that members of the Catholic Church are initiated into that
profession by Babtism: For if a professor of the catholic Church only, may be
baptized, how is a particular Church, the Seat of all Ordinances? and so to be
performe^ by them that are so joined? To rectif^ not mine, but his own mistake
he no^ says: Baptism is so to be performed ^ them, that is a Minister in or of
them Page. 136. How easily might I mistake when himself mistook, and lead me
ou^ of the way: And will this make me ever the wiser? The thing he had to prov^
was the necessity of every believer's joining to some one particular Church, ^
enjoy the Ordinances of the Gospel: Thi^ he proves, "because Christ has given
n^ direction for the performance of any duty of worship of Sovereign
institution, bu^ only in them (the particular Churches) and by them, who are so
joined. He mends it, till it is the worse again? If he would imply, that a
Minister in or of a particular Church may perform those ordinances, without
those congregations (which only was to purpose) he contradicts himself for
saying, A particular Church, is the seat of all Ordinances: If he mean, those
Ordinances of worship, are to be performed only by a Minister of a particular
Congregation, what shall become of the people? and what made the words, so
joined here? Does it ^ot concern them to w^^^hip God? Or ^ay a Minister perform
any acts of wor^hip, out of a particular Church? That I said, was denied by men
of his way, that ^ Minister is such to any more than his ^wn Church: He asks
me; Who told me he denies a Minister, to be a Minister to more than his own
Church, etc. page. 135. I have been told (and I pre^ume he will not deny it)
that when the Learned DOCTOR WALLIS, had brought to him as Vicechancellor, that
Question to be defended negative, in the ^espers of the public Act at Oxford,
^654. An potestas Ministri evangelici, ad unius tantum Ecclesiae particularis
membra extendatur, this Reverend Doctor said thereupon, that Doctor Wallis had
brought him a challenge, adding, that if he did dispute upon that Question, he
must dispute ex animo. And if this be true, as I presume it is, what need I be
further told, that he denies a Minister to be a Minister to more, than his
particular congregation? I have also been told further (which I presume he will
not deny neither) that when Doctor Wallis's? Thesis on that Question, was since
pri^^^d, this Revered Docto^ did employ, or at least encourage (an Amanuensis
of his) Mr. Stubbs of Christ* Church (now advocate for Mr. Hobs) to write
against it: Though indeed, when that work written, was found a Scurrilous
rid^culous p^ece (for so I hear, h^ is since pleased to style it) he did no^
think fit to let it be made public, because (they were his own words,) h^
would not have that cause suffer so much as to be defended by such a Pen. I
have h^ard more, to this purpose, but I forb are: Only I shall (to show his
Incon^^ancy to himself) let the Reader know how liberally he now grants,
Ministerial Acts may be performed not only to the members of the Catholic
Church, but to the visible members of the world also. I leave him and his
friends to debate and reconcile themselves one to another in this.

Page. 136. Prayer and reading the Word in private families are parts of
wor^hip, but not merely and purely of Sovereign institution: These are
expressly commanded, D^ut. 6, 7, 8, etc? I shall not follow him in the rest;
only whereas he complements with me in so high a ^ode; p. 139. I would humbly
entreat this reverend Author, to send me his reasons, whereby it may be
confirmed, viz. that there must be particular Churches, ^or every professor to
join with, one or other, for the celebrating of public Ordinances. I as
humbly desire him to ^view my 132, page. etc. and to consider my reasons, if
they be not as good ^s his and what therein is of Institution.

3. Preaching to convert Heathens is not (as described) a duty of worship in
all cases; and when it is, it is to be performed by a Minister. What means he
by those words, as described? my words were, preaching to convert Heathens and
then to baptize them; is it not a duty of worship belonging to a Minister? is
there any preaching properly so called, that is not a duty of worship? or may
any do it but a Minister? Romans 10.14. In his Tract of Pastor and People; he
allowed, in extraordinary cases, any man that had gifts and a people willing to
hear him, to be a Preacher; Is that one of the cases, when preaching to
convert Heathens is not a duty of worship, and ^ot belonging to a Minister? Or
is it that parenthesis of mine, (and then to baptize them, when converted) that
makes it a duty of worship, and to be performed by a Minister? I humbly
conceive, this answer is somewhat obscure* and satisfies not my fourth,
concerning himself, when I asked, By what authority he himself Preaches, and
Prays too? and with the Parliament, etc. Or are not those, there done, parts
of worship? which he calls an invid^ous enquiry, and so passes it by. It
required an answer, whether he accounts those to be particular Congregations,
that are mixed and unjoyned? Whether he performed those as duties of worship, as
a Minister; and by virtue of what Ordination, if he have not renounced it, as,
he says, he has not? especially, if he was not Ordained in a particular
Church? Of which, in the next.

Page 138. My judgment is, that ordinary Officers are firstly to be ordained,
in particular Churches. I only ask, in what particular Church himself was
ordained? and if he was, whether he ^id not first renounce his former
Ordina^ion by a Bishop, which he has so often ^enyed to have done? For I do not
expect him to say, he is an extraordinary Officer. And if ordinary Officers be
only ordained in a particular Church, ^t would be resolved, how he can do any
Ministerial act, to any other particular Church, or to the Catholic Church,
or World, which he granted above? And then, how those that are members of that
particular Church, are not confined to him, as well as he to them? Pastor and
Flock being such Relata's, as Husband and Wife. This piece of Independency was
a matter of great contest in new England, by one that was no child in those
things: whether the practice of those in old England be otherwise, I know not;
if it be, I doubt, it is only to such members, as are of some Church of the
same constitution; which is something less, but no whit better, as to our
communion with them.

Page 140. If the discourse about the intercision of Ordinances, and all
Church State, was an impertinency, it was his own fault, to start it thrice
page 85. and 211. and 271. and a great fault to wave it here: Only, we have ^
promise, That in convenient time, h^ may offer somewhat further, toward the
investigation of the mind of Go^ therein; and it becomes me to wai^ his
leisure: "It is not a matter to be tosse^ up and down, in this scambling chase*
Yet, as I said, he insinuated in his question, that England was unchurched, and
the Churches planted here did cease to be; and tells us, by what act God did
unchurch them: But now waves to answer all my seven questions, (which required
an answer) but the last; to which a sufficient reply is made, (where it was
unseasonably brought in) upon his first Chapter, Ad. p. 21.
to which I refer him. Only I take notice, of his introduction to his answer,
with thanks for the civility of the enquiry, in the manner of its expression.
My words were these, Whether our reverend Author do not in his conscience
think, there were no true Churches in England, till, etc. which puts me into a
suspicion, that the reverend Doctor was offended, that I did not always (for
often I do) give him that ^^tle, of the reverend Author, or reverend Doctor;
which made him so cry out, He was never so dealt with, by any party, as by me;
though upon review, I do not find, that I gave him any uncivil ^anguage,
unbeseeming me to give, or ^im to receive: And I hear, that some body has
dealt more uncivilly with him in that respect, which he took very ^ill.

Page 148. For my part, I am not acquainted with those Independents, which
allow no communion of Churches, but what is prudentiall. It seems, the reverend
Doctor is little acquainted with the principles of the Independents, in new and
old England; yea, he considers not the very name of an Independent Church,
which what does it signify, but an Independency, or non communion of one
Church with another, as Churches, as I noted, page 155. at least of divine
institution. The rest, what is it but prudentiall, or communion of members of
the Catholic Church? And I shall only propound this to his consideration: 1.
Whether if there be any communion of Churches, as Churches, (which he grants,
or else equivocates) there be not a breach of that communion and union, (and so
a schism) When one Church refuses to hold tha^ communion with another, which
ought to be between them; which before, and now, he denies: it is no schism,
properly so called: Unless he mean, it is not properly so called, with respect
to his new notion of schism. But now he is upon the common notion of schism, a
breach of union or unity; and then it is a schism, to refuse that communion,
which ought (by divine appointment) to be between them. 2. They having
acknowledged our Churches to be true Churches, and then some communion to be
due to us, as Churches; how can they separate from us, and refuse communion
with us, without a breach of union, and so without schism? unless he mean,
they allow communion of their own Churches, by institution of Christ, but not
with ours; no not so much as prudentiall, as Churches. 3. Many Independents
(and the reverend Doctor with them) seem to hold, that communion of Churches by
Delegates, in a Council or Synod, is only prudentiall, and not of Christ's
institution; and then he may mean, there is no breach of union, in refusing to
hold that communion, because it is not an union or communion of Christ's
institution. To conclude this, how little reason the reverend Doctor had, to
cry out of outrageous injury done him, in those words of mine; Is not the
design of his Book to prove, if he could, and condemn us as no Churches? Let
the world be judge. When he has often told us, that in separation from us,
they have broken no union of Christ's institution; as I have often said. And
here tells us, I have no more separated from you, than you have done from me:
Of schism, page 218.
Which how unreasonably (I will not say, outragiously) falls it is, I say again,
let the world, and Saints, and who will, be judge. And then consider, what need
there was, of his forgivness, of all my reproaches, revilings, etc. which
appear to be none. But though I am unjustly charged all along, with such
miscariages, the reverend Doctor shall have a place in my heart and prayers.
And so much of his ninth Chapter.

Page 146. What Independentism is, he does neither here declare, nor do I know
what it is that he intends by it; the name is invidiously broached, and
disowned by them to whom it is ascribed, etc. But 1. The reverend Doctor is
very forgetful, of what he says; for he told us once before, page 47. Though
he name not that party, yet it is evident whom he intends. And once again, page
148. What Sect it is, any man may judge, that takes the least view of his
Treatise. My Treatise was intended against all sorts of Independents, and
against himself as one of them; for they all plead their Congregations to be
Independent, having all Church Power within themselves, that denominates them
all Independents, See Anat. of Indep. p. 37, 38.
though they otherwise differ one with another. 2. That invidious name, however
disowned by them, was first of their own invention, and by practice, (as well
as by the former Doctrine) arrogated to themselves. 3. They all agree also in
separation from our Churches; they unchurch our Churches, unminister our
Ministers, etc. page 148. With such I deal. He asks, Is this Independentism a
schism, properly so called? I hope he did not expect, that I should plead for
it. I deny that I unminister their Ministers, etc. How he can with conscience
deny this, of most of the Sects of Independents, I much wonder; not only
Anabaptists, but some of his own way, not yet gone so far, do separate from our
Churches, unminister our Ministers, etc. And his own principles do the same,
and will ere long lead him thither, as I have abundantly proved. But what means
he by Independentism?

Page 149. If by Independentism he understands, the peaceable proceeding of any
of the people of God, in this Nation, in the several parts of it, to join
themselves, by their free consent, to walk together in the observation of all
the Ordinances of Christ, appointed to be observed in particular Churches, so
to reform themselves from some disorders, wherein they were entangled, being
not able in some things, to join in the presbyterian way of reformation,
without judging and condemning them, as to the whole of their station and
Ordinances; when it shall be proved schism, it shall be attended to. The like
is repeated again, page 160. with some little difference; for such, only he
pleads. Now to speak in the reverend Doctors mode, I humbly beseech this
reverend Author, seriously to consider, what he has said, and whom he pleads
for: 1. Whether he do not plead for all the Sects in the Nation, as to the
whole of this, (except one particular, of which by and by)? Do they not all
plead a peaceable proceeding of (themselves) the people of God, to join
together by their free consent, to walk together in the observation of all the
Ordinances, etc? to reform themselves from disorders, as not able to join in
the way of presbyterian ^eformation? etc. 2. Will he call that a peacable
proceeding, which ^s done without the authority of ^he Christian civil
Magistrate, and ^o the disturbance of all the Churches of the Nation? 3. Were
it granted, that in the first constitution So he seems to mean, page 160. when
he speaks of Members of the Catholic Church, both invisible and visible, to be
joined in particular Churches.
of a Church, people might, by their own free consent, join to walk together,
etc. Is this course tolerable in settled Churches, without confusion, and
overthrowing of the very constitution of Churches, etc? as he said elsewhere,
Duty of Pastor and People, page 53. (to which I have spoken, in the end of my
second Chapter above) unless he will deny us now to be true Churches. May not
the members of his own Church, upon some d^sorders of it, (as they can easily
conceive) have the same liberty to separate from them, and join by free
consent together, to set up another Church? Nay, do they not take that liberty?
and notwithstanding all the bonds and fetters of free consent, and explicit
covenant to continue with them, desert them upon this very principle, and join
themselves with Anabaptists, and other Sects? 4. And do they not all break the
last condition, judging and condemning the present way of reformation, as to
the whole of their station and Ordinances? Will the reverend Doctor put out the
eyes of all men, but his own? Lastly, Nothing but apparent sin, in the way of
performance of moral duties, can excuse the withdrawing from them, when
occasion of enjoying is offered. Robins. Treat. of lawfulness of hearing
English Ministers, page 6. See also page 17. and his Apol. page 87.
I leave it to his own consideration, whether it be lawful for people, that are
members of true Churches, (as ours are acknowledged to be) upon some disorders
in a Church, or pretense of reforming themselves, to separate from that Church,
and to erect another; when as they have done their duty to reform it, in those
disorders; notwithstanding which, they may without sin, communicate with that
Church? but rather to break true Churches into pieces, than to bear with some
inconveniences. And I ^esire a president of such a practice in ^cripture or
story.

Page. 156. When they and we began to reform, thousands of the people of God
in this nation, had no reason to suppose themselves to belong to one particular
Church rather than another; they lived in one Parish, heard in another. If they
did not suppose themselves to be of some particular Church, it was their error
and their fault; their error because all the people of the Nation, were
confind to that Church where they lived; and liable to censure for leaving that
Church, for partaking of Ordinances; and the Ministers for admitting them:
Their fault, because they were bound by way of duty, both by the Laws of the
Nation, and also by the Law of God, to be of one or other particular
Congregation; as the Reverend Doctor has often asserted: and this d^sorder to be
of no one congregation, would not be endured in any of their members. The
bondage only was that they are obliged to be members, where the Ordinances,
were not at all or sinfully administered: In my eighth Chapter, he leapes over
above twenty leaves a^ once.

Page. 154. I had said, our Churches under the Prelates, were not capable of
reduction to the primitive institution; whereupon he professed he could not
look upon such societies as Churches of Christ. Which (said I) was to unchurch
all our Churches, since the Reformation: He answers, The Churches of ENGLAND
were capable of that reduction under the Prelates, though in some things
hindered by them, from an actual reducement. Does this become the Doctor's
ingenuity? So are the Churches of ROME capable* potentia remota, to be reduced
to the primitive institution: but so hindered by some body, that he that should
go about it, would find the^ actually incapable of such reducement: So are our
Churches capable of such a reduction; and it is probable, had been reduced to
the primitive institution ere this, but he knows we have obstructed it: as I
told him before: yea that perfect liberty for reformation, or rather toleration
of all Religions, is the greatest Impediment to our Reformation; and whilst it
continues, will render us more incapable of Reduction to the primitive
institution: Whilst our people have so much liberty to be of any, or no
Religion, no R^formation is possible; and yet we are potentially capable of
that reduction: And the Reverend Doctor's advice, given before and now again,
page. 270. of Schism? that people take some other peaceable way, to make
themselves partakers of those purchased privileges, etc. comes both too late,
for they have done it already by separation from us; and also unreasonably,
because if it be taken, it renders us more incapable of that Reformation
desired, by withdrawing the best and most reformed of our members from us, and
leaves us but few beside those that hate to be reformed.

Page. 166. Beside the radical union (as he calls it, page. 96. of Schism?) of
the Church Catholic: invisible in it self, and with its head; there is (as he
tells us also, page 97.) "another consequentiall union, with peculiar reference
to the members themselves, and that is the mutual love of all those united in
the Head; toward one another, etc. Now though he cannot break the radical
union with the Head; he may break the consequentiall union or consequence of
that union, which consists in mutual love. Paul and Barnabas fell into
difference, and separation one from another; yet were, no doubt, true members
of the Invisible Church, (though not of any particular Church) and this was at
least some degree of breach of that mutual love and peace, that ought to have
been between them; hereupon it was that I said, unless the Reverend Doctor
think there are no members of this Church in ENGLAND, but these that are of his
formed particular Congregations, I fear he will be found to break the union,
that ought to be between them. He is grieved he says, at this my declaration;
because the union of the members of this Church in this sense, consists in
their joint union to, and with Christ their head, by one spirit, concealing the
other, of mutual love, which I intended: Now when the Reverend Doctor or some
Churches of his party, have separated from some whom they acknowledge truly
godly; and keep them out of communion with themselves, in their Churches,
unless they will give a consent to be members of that Church, by an explicit
covenant (he knows where this was practiced) I shall say again, here was a
breach of union, that ought to be between the members of that catholic Church:
It is not his saying, that he does not think, all the members of that Church
are comprised in their Churches or ours, that will help it (who made the first
division, they or we, is well known): but it is the denial of communion with
such members, on the terms aforesaid, that breaks the union of mutual love,
between those members.

Page. 167. I had said; By gathering Saints of the greatest magnitude, they do
what they can to make the Invisible Church visible. He answers: It is confessed
we do so; This, with al^ that lies in us, we draw them unto. And truly, it is
our care and endeavor to make all our visible professors, invisible true
bel^evers: But this is not their way: They do not, (as we do) labor to make
b^re professors (mere natural men, of their own Congregations) to be real
belie- (verse for they pretend to admit none such, if they know them) but they
un^easonably and unjustly gather, or rather steal, our best professors, and
real believers, to make a Church visible, of invisible members, a Church of
all elect ones. Which course, as it is not to be exemplified in all Scripture,
or story; So it is forespoken by Christ himself, not to be accomplished; who
has told us, the Wheat and the Tares, the Goats and the Sheep, must be mixed
together in the Church, till the great day of final separation? and we doubt
not, but they find the impossib^l^ty of effecting that design, when they and
the world sees, they have in their Churches some hypocrites, and some as loose,
as in some of ours: And their arrogance, in presuming against the p^edictions
and providence of Christ, to build a Church, that should reach unto Heaven on
Earth, has been fearfully blasted (as another Babel) with confusion, by their
members, falling into damnable errors, and abominable profaneness, as I said
elsewhere. Even some Independent Churches, which he too much countenances, if
he be not a member of them, may easily be proved, in his own judgment to be
heretical, if Arminianism, and some points of Popery, be with him accounted
Heresies: I need not instance.

Page 168. As to the worship established in this Nation, for the substantialls,
we are all agreed in: I suppose, he will not say, a relinquishment of the
practice of it, is a schism; if he do, I know what use some men will make of
his affirmation, though I know not how he will free himself, See p. 171.
from being Schismatic. Truly, as easily, as the reverend Doctor can free
himself from that charge of schism. We have not relinquished the Worship,
established by Law, as to the substantialls of our Worship, (the Episcopal men
join with us, and we with them therein) but in the external formalities, and
ceremonial circumstances of that worship; which (as he says somewhere) were
laid aside by other hands. But they renounce communion with us, in the
substantialls of worship, and erect other Churches; and that we judge to be
schismatic.

Page 169. When most of us received our new birth in England, through the
preaching of the Word, neither they nor we, as to the practice of our ways,
were in England. For them indeed, the practice of their ways of separation,
were not in England; but our way of parochial Congregations, and the
substantialls of our Worship, in the Word preached, whereby they were
regenerated; and the Sacraments administered, whereby they were nourished; were
then in England as much as now: Yet from these they separate, and deny
communion with us. For the success of their Ministry, as Independents, I see
little fruit of it, but schism and separation; nor can they look for any, as
Ministers; all their gathered members, being before converted, (as they suppose
and desire) by our Ministry: See Anat. of Indep. p. 25 f.

Page 172. That in England, under the Prelates, there were true Churches, and
true Ministers, though in much disorder, as to the way of entering into the
Ministry, and dispencing of Ordinances, I freely grant. Which were they? That
he tells us, page 173. Here I let him know, that I assent unto that sum of
all that he has to say; namely, (which were my words) that the true and
faithful Ministers, with the people in their several Congregations,
administering the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ, whereof Baptism is one, was,
and is, the true Church State of England, from which I am not separated. Who
would not think, the reverend Doctor were a Convert, from the way of
Independentism, acknowledging all this, and denying separation? Will all
Independents yield thus much? Can many of them say, They are not separated?
What reserve the reverend Doctor has, that he is not yet entered a member into
one of their Churches, or that he has not totally renounced his Ordination,
(and that but for some disorder only, or some addition of human prudence, in
his entrance into the Ministry) or lastly, that he sees some weakness, if not
falsnesse, in his principles; That successive Ordination from Rome, as a
Church, is Antichristian, as from the Beast, I cannot tell, nor wiser men then
I; but sure we are, that most Independents are of another mind, and will not
thank him for these concessions, being not able to justify their separation
from our Churches, if all the reverend Doctor has said, be true.

Page 147. Yet he says, It is incumbent on this Author, to prove, that we have
been members of some of those particular Churches, in due order, according to
the mind of Christ, to all intents and purposes of Church Membership; and that
we have in our individual persons, ra^sed causlesse differences, in those
particular Churches, and so separated from them, with the condemnation of them.
I promise you, this will be an hard labor, having so many things to prove at
once, of the same men; when if I prove not some one particular, he will still
deny the whole. But since the reverend Doctor puts himself amongst them, I
doubt not, but to make all good upon his party, (they made the division into
parties) if not upon himself. First, upon his acknowledgment before, that our
particular Congregations, were, and are, true Churches, it is evident, that
they have been members (yea, some of them Ministers) of our particular
Churches, or of none. 2. For the due order of being made so, I hope, some
little disorder in the institutions of Christ, does not make a nullity in them,
though he explains not what he means by due order. 3. According to the mind of
Christ. As for substantialls, we can affirm it, if not in circumstantialls,
wherein scarce any Church on earth, will be found faultlesse. 4. To all intents
and purposes of Church Membership. Surely our Christianity, and covenant in
Baptism, bound us to all the duties of Church Membership, though we may fail,
as to performance of them. 5. That, in their individual persons, they have
many of them, actually, or really, by separation, raised differences in our
Churches, whereof they were members; is too evident to be denied, by
conscientious men. 6. That they (many of them, whatever the reverend Doctor
has done) have separated from us, renounced communion with us, is as clearly
evident. 7. And that with condemnation of our Churches, as Antichristian, etc.
is also too notorious to be denied. And then the conclusion follows.

Page 176. I said, the reverend Do^or, by his indulgence of liberty to all ^en,
to follow their own light, in ^bmitting to any way of Religion, ^emed to me to
be a Sceptick, in his ^ay of Independency. He asks; Why so? this will gratify
all Sects, Quakers and all, with a toleration: How, I pray? It is schism, not
toleration, we are treating about. Where the rear end Doctor confounds what I
dis^oyned: He first seems to be a Scep^ick, (which I prove by that which
follows, Does he believe his own way to be the only true way of Christ, and
yet tolerate other ways?) or he seems to gratify all Sects, Quakers, etc.
with a toleration, and leaves them to judge, what is, or is not, according to
the mind of Christ, etc. To which he says, Pray, Sir, who is appointed to
judge finally for them? why then should they be denied their liberty? May he
not say as much for Popery, Anabaptism, or any Sect, and so grant an universal
toleration, (which he seems to do, in his Epistle to his Sermon, before the
last Session of Parliament; Who is a pointed to judge finally for the^ why then
should they be deny their liberty?) He must remembe^ we are not speaking of
circumstan^alls, about the worship of God wherein several Churches may diffe^
without schism; but of the substa^tialls of Doctrine, Worship, and Di^cipline,
prescribed by Christ in the Gospel, which are of necessary observation, for
all Christians. And Christ has limited all to one Truth one way of Worship,
one D^scipline (as we both suppose he has) certainly every man is bound to get
into that way of Christ, and not left to his own light, to judge finally for
himself, or to choose or refuse a wa^ of Christ, by his own liberty; and may be
compelled to the external profession of Christ's way, in all those particulars,
which utterly destroys his tolera ion. What answers he to my question? Thus:
How if I should say, that our way, and their way, for the substance of them, is
one way? But so he might have said of their way, and the Episcopal way, for
the substantialls of Religion, they were one way; and yet I suppose, he will
not grant the members of his Church, liberty, to judge of, and to choose the
Episcopal way; or if our way and theirs be nearer one another, he will hardly
grant them liberty, to come into our way, because he judges their way, They (of
N. Eng.) answered, They could not grant any form of Government, but one, seeing
there is but one way laid down in the Word, and that unchangeable. Answ. to 32.
Quest.
to be according to the mind of Christ, and not ours; page 178. And this, he
says, he is ready personally to maintain to me. But why does he not publicly
discover and maintain this, to all the Churches of the Nation, before he set
upon the practice of it? and puts us off with delays and designs in hand;
which when we shall see, we know not. That he has run from several ways, is
not to be gainsaid, from Episcopal to Presbyterian, from that, to
Independentism, etc. is no calumny, though it may be to his reproach, which I
cannot help. If his way be the only way of Christ, I asked, if every man be
not bound to come unto it, and not upon any conceited new light to relinquish
it? He answers; Truly I think M. C. himself is bound to come into it (surely
not till he give me bette^ light, that it is the way of Christ) yet I do not
think, that his not-so-doing makes him a schismatic. But if I were convinced,
that it was the only way of Christ, I should think my self schismatic, in
not submitting to it; as I do him, for renouncing the Presbyterian way, which
once he was convinced of, to be the way o^ Christ. However, it concerns him
most, in the alteration of his judgment and practice, to demonstrate clearly,
his is the way of Christ, and not ours, or else we shall judge him
schismatic in that separation. This he promises again and again, page 163.
and 181. in his conclusion of all: In expectation and earnest desire whereof, I
rest.

FINIS.

