CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS, Upon the New League or Covenant, As it was explained by
a Divine of the New Assembly, in a Congregation at LONDON. Written and sent
unto him in a Letter by some of his Auditors. With a Copy of the said COVENANT.

Ezekiel. 17.15. Shall he Prosper? shall he escape that does such things? Or shall
he break the Covenant, and be delivered?

BRISTOLL, Printed for Rich. Harsell, and are to be sold by him in Bristoll,
1643.

Imprimatur

Tho: Bristol.
Feb. 20. 1643.
Certain Observations, upon the new League or Covenant.
SIR,
ALthough it be a thing much to be pitied and lamented, to see and to hear
daily, with what confidence some things of no small concernment, such as Oaths
and Covenants, are pressed upon men's Consciences by some; and by others
swallowed with as little straining; yet it is not much to be wondered at.
Temporal respects of profit, favor, credit, and worldly fears of
discountenance, losses, persecutions, by opposing the stream of times, have a
strong influence upon men's proceedings, and provoke them to draw on in their
attempts begun, though with galled Consciences. And it is manifest from the
holy Scripture, to be Gods way of taking vengeance upon men's perverseness; that
when as (for atchieving of any end whatsoever) they will needs seek to stifle
some evident light, and dispense with some necessary parts of their obedience
they are given up to strong affections, whereby the heart is darkened, as with
some mist cast before them, the eyes sometimes are. Now he that considers what
force Imagination has upon the body needs not think it strange, that affection
should so far prevail upon the mind, as to make a man mistake the truth, to
fore-judge the cause that he defends, and to venture upon every course, as just
and lawful, if it be expedient for promoting the design; and may have some
plausible pretenses and excuses to bear it out. Which being so, we appeal to
your self, (or any considering man) whether it may not justly be presumed, that
in this matter of Oaths and Covenants (which we all know to be sacred bonds,
and to impose a strong tie upon the conscience) the eagerness, yea, violence
of some men in urging such Oaths, does proceed from their strong affection to
that cause, and their deep engagements for defense thereof: And then whether
the example of the chief Contrivers, and Promoters of these Oaths, (men
perchance reputed of, amongst the vulgar for their wisdom, zeal, and piety)
does not prove justly Scandalous, to the weaker sort, by drawing them into
those grievous sins, of rash, unjust, or false swearing, whiles they rely
upon these men's judgments, with too much easiness; or else are so much
over-pressed with the fear of some damage, imprisonment, loss of goods and
livelihood, that they are unawares, brought to do that, against which their
conscience finds reluctance. If it were a thing hard to be believed, we could
name you the men (for we have heard it from the mouths of many) who can give
no other reason for their entering into this present Covenant, besides the fear
of losing all they have. Sir, we that present you with these lines, have sadly
thought on these things, and do from our hearts pity the dangerous estate of
many thousand souls, that by the example, and persuasions of Ministers, and
others in esteem amongst them, are driven into those Briars, which are likely,
one day, sorely to vex, and wound their Consciences. And therefore out of the
tenderness we bear to our own souls, that we may not deprive our selves of
that internal quietness (which can only make us happy in this world) nor
endanger our everlasting Peace, we are afraid to venture hastily upon that
wherein it is of such dangerous consequence to err, namely the binding our
selves by Oath or Covenant. We must desire you to entertain this candid opinion
of us, That we are no Opposers of Parliament, and their Authority, no Curious
or Captious Fault-finders, not wedded to singularity, or in love with our own
brainsick Fancies; but such as see and consider how apt men are naturally to
go astray, and do therefore endeavor to use all the helps that can be to guide
us: We resolve to lay aside all self-love, affection, prejudice, passion, and
to look upon things, with as clear, and impartial eyes, as flesh and blood may
promise, through divine assistance. We are very much grieved, that we should be
thought not to see that which others take to be as clear as the light, when as
yet we are willing to submit to whatsoever shall be evidenced to us from
Scripture, and right Reason; and shall be thankful to any who shall be the
happy instruments to reduce us from error, (if so it be an error with you, to
be fearful of plunging our selves into damnation) We therefore had access to
you, when you undertook the explaining of the Scottish Covenant, (as it is
called) yet (it so falls out) that in stead of satisfaction, we found more
scruples from it, then before your explanation. We hear you are a Member of
that grave Assembly, and so we thought you might be able to say as much as
could be said in defense thereof; but we must tell you, That in your discourse,
we observed some things fell from you contradictory to your own principles;
some things in this Oath which occasion the greatest doubting you past by and
dissembled; sometimes you made use of such open Fallacies, as the weakest
Member of your Assembly would have thought scorn to have been puzzled with: In a
word, most you delivered, seemed so weak and groundless, that the fruit of
that days hearing might very well be only this; to confirm us in an opinion
of the unlawfulness of this Covenant, and in a resolution of never taking it.

The part of Scripture, which you made use of, for making way to your
explanation of this Covenant was, Deuteronomy. 29. where is contained the Covenant
that Moses in behalf of God, renews with Israel, after that which was formerly
made in Sinai, where they covenanted with God to receive his Laws and Statutes;
There Moses, to induce them to it, makes a recapitulation of the great things
that God had done for them; and (as you express it) speaks unto them, as if
some father should speak unto his son whom he is to bind as an Apprentice,
after some time of trial had of his Master; Lo, you have had trial of your
service, and the goodness of your master thus long, ever since you came out of
the land of Egypt, and will ye now indent with him to serve him, and to be his
people? you applied it to us of this Land, in this or the like manner; We have
had trial of the goodness of God, above these fourscore years, ever since the
time of Reformation; And then you extol the goodness of God to this Land, and
that deservedly; Never people enjoyed such favors as we have done; great
mercies, great deliverances, as any Nation under Heaven? Good Sir, we are glad
to hear there was ever any Reformation amongst us: we had thought we had been
still in Egypt, under the bondage of the man of Perdition, when we hear the
reputed Zealous men of this age cry out of our Doctrine, Discipline,
Government, Liturgy, as Popish and Antichristian. It Is rare, (we must
confess) to meet with so much ingenuity in the Sermons of most that go your
way. Well, it is confessed by you, There is a Reformation amongst us, and such
a one as has been countenanced with many excellent favors from above, (such
as are, deliverances from imminent dangers, from open violence, and secret
treachery of the enemies of our Religion; settled Peace and tranquillity, the
renown of this Nation far and near,) which have made us a glorious Church, as
any in Christendom: (For though afterward in your discourse you took occasion
to cry down those that cry up this Church for a glorious Church, yet you had
little reason for it, so long as you confess this Church to have been honored
by Almighty God with extraordinary favors, which are as precious ornaments,
and add an outward luster to her inward beauty and comeliness, and so make
her glorious:) then it is strange we should be so extremely weary of this
present Government, under which we have enjoyed such mercies: The benefits that
have accompanied it might still be encouragements to us to submit unto it,
especially when (as wise men know well enough) alterations in Public matters
are so dangerous: for, suppose there were something in our Government or
Discipline to be reformed, (as in the best ordered Polity that can be,
something, upon good reason established at first, may in time grow burdensome
and inconvenient:) yet are these of such moment, as rather then bear them, you
will engage the Kingdoms in a most desperate War, and venture the ruining of
Church and State, the desolation of the Land, nay, the shaking of the very
foundation of Religion, by means of such Heresies as grow apace in such
confused times as these. Calvin is searce of your mind, who (though
disaffected to some of our Ceremonies and Liturgy, yet) is so moderate as to
call them, toler abides ineptiae, trifles that might be born with, rather then
cause a greater misch of of Schism or Sedition. And certainly, for any to
think that the reforming or removing these trifles (as he calls them) is able
to countervail half the bloodshed, and other mischiefs that are come upon us,
is altogether unchristian and inhumane too, and savours of an heart, that has
yielded it self to be ruled by the spirit of perverseness and disobedience. The
disease is far more tolerable to us, and less displeasing unto God, then such
a kind of remedy. God bless us from such Physicians, whose mediernes put us
into a far worse condition then ever our maladies could.

But not to infist long upon that where your self made but a short stay: After
you had laid this part of Scripture before the people, (though indeed it makes
nothing for you, yet you are so consident as to allege every place that
mentions but the name of Covenans, as pleading for you) then you pass to a
general division of this Covenant, into the Title and Contents. The Title,
viz: A folemn League or Covenant; there you lay down the nature of a Covenant,
which you define thus, A bond, whereby any one binds himself unto another, for
the performance of something mutually agreed upon by eath party. Here, by the
way, we doubt whether each particular in this Covenantis agreed upon by both
parties. He to whom we bind our selves, is God, and of his consent, we have no
other way to judge, but by his will revealed: and if we search the whole Book
of God, we shall not be able to find any probability of his consent, that we
should enter into a solemn League for abolishing those Laws, and that form of
Government under which we live, without the consent of Him that by Gods
special Ordinance is appointed our Sovereign Lord and King. Befides each point
of this Covenant is not agreed upon amongst your selves; For, how many be
there, who are enjoined to enter into this League, that know not what the
Doctrine or Discipline of Scotland is, that they must defend; they hope,
perchance, it is good, because commended to them by men reputed wise and underst
anding: but what rashness is it in the mean time, for men to subscribe to that
which they know not; and therefore must needs doubt, whether it may be done or
not. Nor are all agreed about the abolishing of Episcopacy. If not the
greatest, yet surely a great part of this Kingdom, are well opinioned of that
Office and know that the pre-eminence of some above others in the Clergy, is
consonant to the word of God, and the examples of the parest times; and that
Prelacy is used very injuriously, when it is ranked amongst those ugly and
hateful names of Papery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, of
purpose to make it appear alike evil, with those whose company it is enforced
to keep: and that, what is amiss therein, may with less labor, and more
advantage to the State, and Religion both be Reformed, then the whole Fabrich
be taken down. Nor yet are all of those who stand for the abolishing of
Episcopacy, agreed about this [Reformation according to the word of God.] No
question but the Independants, when they take this Covenant, have another
meaning then the Presbyterians have, thinking that their Discipline is only
warranted by the word of God; and then, what mutual agreement is there, or
what Consent in the raking of this Covenant, amongst those several sorts that
take it; though the Contrivers of it have dealt so subtily, as to put it into
such general terms, that there might be no bogling on starting aside, but that
each sort might take it, though intellding several senses.

After this definition you pinoced to the division of a Covenant into Sacred,
Civil and Mixed; which difference the nature of the Subject puts upon them, as
being Sacred only, or Civil only, or partly Sacred, and partly Civil. This
present Covenant you call Sacred, though you have no warrant from the Title,
that is set before it, (where it is only called [A Solemn League or Covenant:]
nor yet from the matter or contents thereof. For the four last Articles of this
Covenant, contain things merely Civil, (as will easily appear to any
indifferent judgment.) And as for the other two, which concern Preservation of
Religion in Scotland and Reformation in England: Religion, we grant, is Sacred,
but as for defending, preserving, resorming, they properly belong to the Civil
Magistrate, and are effected by that power that God has committed to him. So
that we cannot persuade our selves, that you should think it to be agreeable to
the truth, to call this a Sacred League, only you perceive that otherwise it
might be some disadvantage to the cause. The name of Sacred sets it out with
greater credit, and makes it more readily to be embraced. But yet it is fit to
be examined, whether or no, you and the rest of the Confederacy, are not guilty
of laying snares, and scandals for your Brethrens Feet, when (that you may the
sooner draw them into this League) you persuade them, It is no other but a
Sacred Covenant, such a one as Israel, and their Governors made with God, to
receive his Laws, and to be his people; and such a Vow as we make in Baptism
to renounce the Devil, and the other Enemies of our Salvation, and to give up
our selves in a constant, and sincere obedience; When it is as clear as the
Sun, it is nothing else, but a League amongst your selves, for strengthening of
your party for defending of that Cause they have undertaken: and the main scope
and intention is the subversion of the present established government. And what
need have we then, poor people, to look to our selves, when we have gotten such
pernicious guides? for however, we are now persuaded, That this is nothing else
but a Sacred Vow to reform and repent, and give up our selves to be Gods
People: yet when as we shall have entered into this League, we shall be pressed
to those actions, which we apprehend under the horrid shapes of Sedition,
Rebellion, Unjustice, Sacrilege. We shall be urged then in a tumultuous way to
root out Episcopacy, which we have heard to have continued in all Christian
Churches since the Apostles times, and bekeve it to be very good, if good men
manage it. And this must be done too, against the Authority of our Sovereign,
by taking up Arms, which tend either to destroy him, or else to compel him to
consent; whom notwithstanding, we have heretofore sworn, that we do acknowledge
Supreme in all causes both Ecclesiastical and Temporal: If you dare speak out
Sir, you cannot but confess this to be the chief intention of this Solemn
League and Covenant.

From thence to the Anatomizing of the body of this Covenant, wherein you
observe; first, the Preface, secondly, the Substance; thirdly, the Conclusion:
And in the Preface; first, the persons Covenanting [We Noblemen, Barons,
Knights, Gentlemen, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all
sorts:] Great names indeed, and a goodly train to draw on more Company; yet we
suppose here are but genera singulorum, not singuli generum; some of all sorts;
not all, by a great many. God be thanked there be some right Noble and
Christian Spirits, that cannot, withal the dread of Tyranny, be frighted from
their Allegiance to their Prince, and care of discharging a good conscience
toward God: But will rather suffer the spoiling of their goods, and the loss
of all that is dear unto them, then be induced to join in this Confederacy. But
yet we can spy no King amongst this goodly train, and it seems there is none
indeed, by such bold attempts as these are. And hence grows the necessity of
this League: The quondam Subjects, having broke assunder the bond of their
Allegiance, which ties Subjects together amongst themselves, and all unto their
Prince, hereupon they find themselves to be somewhat too loose, and so seek to
bind themselves together again by this mutual League. Yet it is much that the
King cannot be made to enter into League with these Noblemen, Barons, Knights,
and Burgesses, against himself, as well as he is heretofore feigned to take up
Arms with them against himself.

But at last by chance the King comes in [living under one King] surely there
was a fault in Printing; for the King is under. [And being of one Reformed
Religion,] We wonder Sir, how all the Members of the Assembly can take this
Covenant whilst this Clause is in, or how all men in this great City should,
which for multiplicity of Religions is become another Amsterdam.

The next thing you fasten upon in the Preface is, the general ends, which are
four. The first is the glory of God, according to that of Luther; In nomine
Domini, etc. [having before our eyes the glory of God.] There be a great number
now a days, who make fair pretenses of having the glory of God before their
eyes; when their actions witness against them, That they have not his fear
before their eyes. It is an usual thing to see men row one way and look
another: And as usual is that Solecisme which the Stage Player once committed;
who pointed to the earth, when he spoke of Heaven. Was God ever more
dishonored then now he is in his Word, Worship, Ordinances, in men's
unchristian, if not inhumane Carriages toward one another. Well, the world may
be blinded, but God is not mocked: He will have his glory from us in the end,
without or beside our intention. His Wisdom knows how to turn the sins of men,
(and amongst them their hypocrisy) to his glory. But in this, we only condemn
some men's actions; we judge no man's heart; let every one stand or fall to his
own Master. The next is [the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ] There
is loud talking now of advancing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and setting him
upon his Throne; of purpose sure to dazzle the Peoples eyes, with these glorious
Titles which are put upon this present Cause. The Kingdom of Christ, as we
conceive, is this; That Sovereignty, and rule that Christ by the power of his
Word and Spirit does exercise in the hearts and lives of Christians, beating
down those sinful lusts that oppose themselves, and enclining the hearts of
men to Faith and to Obedience: so that when we give up our selves to be
governed and ordered by his precepts, then we submit to his Scepter, and
advance his Kingdom. Now alas, how is his blessed example in the most part
slighted? how unworthily are those Pearls of his heavenly doctrine trampled
under foot? It were an argument of Malignancy now to press upon the
Conscience, those rules of self-denial, of following Christ, of making Peace,
of forgiving offenses, etc. It is too mamifest there be many deprived, some of
liberty, some of livelihood, for no other crimes, that the world can charge
them with, but, thus seeking to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Next comes in [The honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty] witness those
slanders we daily hear and read from Pulpits and Pamphlets, which tend to no
other end, but to bring contempt and hatred upon that Sacred Majesty,
concerning whom we ought to make conscience of our thoughts.

The fourth, and last of these godly ends, is [The Public liberty, safety and
Peace of these Kingdoms.] What? by entering into a League, to engage the
Kingdoms in a most desperate War, and bringing in a foreign Nation to increase
our miseries? A pretty riddle; to preserve the Liberties and Peace of the
Kingdoms by destroying them.

Next in order are the Motives or Inducements to this League; this the first,
[Calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, and Practices
of the enemies of God against the true Religion] What then? must we cast out
one Devil by another; nay, by casting out one, possess our selves of seven
worse? we say nothing in defense of this sort of men: we abhor their counsels;
and say as old Jacob did concerning his two sons, Genesis 49.
My soul shall not come into their secret place, nor be joined with their
assemblies: Their wrath is fierce, their rage is cruel, their poison is rank
and deadly, they are enemies enough and they bear a tyrannous hatred againstour
Church; but we could wish there were not other troublers of Israel besides
them; such as are among us, but are not of us; that oppose Rome, and yet uphold
her; that by their attempts and practices, excuse the practices of the Romish
Synagogue; and (as if she were not impudent enough already) add more brass to
the forehead of that Whore of Balylon. We wonder Sir, what the Protestant
Party shall be able hereafter to object to the Popes Factors, the Jesuits, for
their treacherous Plots, for destroying Kings, undermining States, raising
Sedition, exempting Subjects from their obedience, when as our present
proceedings in that kind, may justly stop our mouths, and make us blush with
shame, as having equalled, if not in some sort exceeded them. You say, What you
do now is for Religion and the Gause of Christ: and they as much, That what
they attempt is for Religion and the Catholic Cause, and so the issue of the
controversy will be the same.

Another motive is, [The deplorable estate of Ireland, the distressed estate of
England, and the dangerous estate of Scotland] For Scotland, we know not, nor
hear of any dangers attending them besides Fears and Jealousies, which being
hansomely managed, by the politic contrivers of this War, may draw such
dangerous consequents upon them as ours have done upon us. For Ireland and
England, their condition is sad and lamentable, and the course that is now
taken is no means at all of curing them, but of making their wounds more deep
and ghastly.

A third motive is, [The failing of other means, Supplications, Remonstrances,
Protestations,] And yet what one thing was ever denied by His Majesty which was
fitting for a King to give away, or for Subjects to require. All the security
for Religion and Liberty that could conveniently be made, was fairly offered.

The fourth and last motive is [The practice of these Kingdoms in former times,
and the example of Gods people in other Nations:] It Is marvel you gave no
instance in your Explanation; it will be hard to find one in all our
Histories, that may be a president for such a Covenanting as this: we have
heard of none more like it, then that League of Association, which the
Anabaptists in Germany made for strengthening of themselves against opposition;
which they had cause to fear: or that la saint Ligue, the holy League, of late
years in France; and sure you will be ashamed to make either of those your
pattern. But as for the example of Gods people in other Nations, you instance
in the Covenants that Moses made; and Ioshuah, Iehoida, Josiah, Nehemiah, etc.
Custom of sinning how impudent it makes men to be? strange that you should not
be ashamed at length, to make such gulls of poor simple people, to delude them
with such notorious falsities, and so deceive them to their destruction; and as
strange that the people should endure any longer to be thus perniciously
abused: Let any man but of the meanest understanding, search where these
Covenants are registered, and compate any of them with this; Deuteronomy. 29. 2 Chronicles.
15.12. 2 King. 11. 2 King. 22. Nehem. 9.
he shall easily perceive a vast difference, both for the manner, and the
matter. In those Jewish Covenants, we find the whole Nation Covenanting, and
not some particular Faction: The Prince or supreme Magistrate (as Moses and
Joshua were) consent and call the people to their Covenant: not some of the
People bandye themselves together against their Prince, and others of their
Fellow Subjects: In these Jewish Covenants, the matter was so apparently just
and good, that none could question it: The matter of this Covenant seems so
unjust to many, and is of it self so dubious and suspicious, that most men must
be pressed and urged to it, and threatened for refusal, when indeed a Vow or
Covenant should be voluntary. To conclude, (as it may be collected from those
places) this is the sum and substance of the Covenants the Jews made with God;
viz: To be the Lords people; to have nothing to do with Baal; to abhor the
Idolatry of the Nations; to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Statutes, and
his Judgments, with all their heart, etc. If this were the substance of this
Covenant now enjoined, he were not worthy to live upon the earth that would
refuse it.

It appears therefore sufficiently to every considering man, how little reason
there is from any of these motives to induce us to enter into this League or
Covenant.

So from the Preface to that which you call the substance of this Covenant. The
first branch of the first Article whereof is this; [we shall endeavor in our
several places, the preservation of Religion in the Church of Scotland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government] This you said was no more then
desiring the good of Gods Church, according to that, Psalm. 122.7, 8. And if
that be all, may they long enjoy it; we shall pray for the peace of Jerusalem
in general, in special for them, they are our Brethren and Neighbors; we
wish them prosperity, and shall seek to procure their welfare. But we would
fain be resolved of this: Whether or no, when we vow the preservation of
Religion in the Church of Scotland as it is now established for Discipline and
Governmens, we do not bind our selves by Oath, to preserve unalterably that
which is alterable of it self; and may be altered upon occasion, if the
necessity of the Church requires? seeing it is held by all the soundest and
most learned, That forms of Discipline and Government, may be altered at least
in many things that appertain unto them; and we find by experience daily that
some Laws and Orders which were good at first, afterward do grow inconvenient.

The next branch in that first Article is, [ The Reformation of Religion in
England and Ireland] In our Protestation, we vowed to maintain and defend the
Doctrine of the Church of England; now we swear to reform that Doctrine; surely
this is somewhat preposterous: first, we should have reformed it, and then
after we knew what it was, maintain and defend it. This, for ought we see, is
no better then the taking of Gods name in vain. 1, we swear to maintain the
true reformed Protestant Religion; which might well seem a strange expression:
we used to know is by the name of Protestant, which does implie, Reformed; but
it seems it is not enough Protestant, till it be again Reformed; and then it
must be truly Reformed, before it can come to the power and purity. Then we
must swear to reform it, though which way it must be done, or how far this
reformation must proceed, we know not: Then if this Reformation please not
unconstant heads, there must be another League for Reformation; This is plainly
to swear to we know not, or care not what.

[The Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government]
Here Is all out of frame it seems, nothing right; yet there is nothing in the
Doctrine of our Church expressed in the 39. Articles and Homilies, but all
consonant to the harmony of the Confessions of other Churches: The greatest
Corruption in Doctrine that is amongst us, is in that point of Obedience to the
Prince, as they shall find, who read the Homilies against Rebellion and
Disobedience. And for Discipline and Government, what is amiss therein has
rather proceeded from the fault of these that exercise it, then from the
Discipline it self.

But you cry out and say, [It must be no longer dissembled; A great many things
there are to be reformed; A great deal of Superstition to be cast out; Defects
in the Liturgy and in the Government.] Sir, it is not fair to bring a general
Defamation, when you have no special charge. We wonder you have sat thus
long, and framed no Articles of impeachment against the Liturgy, that the world
may see how true this Accusationis. But the Liturgy is used just as the
Ministers are; accused, silenced, sequestered, yet never called, nor heard to
speak in their own defense. Certainly this could not but be (we know not,
whether advantageous to the Cause or not) yet a means of more satisfaction to
the minds of men, if you had expressed, what particulars you except against in
our Discipline and Worship. For though we daily hear our Liturgy cried down as
Popish; our Ceremonies, as Superstitious, rags of Antichrist, etc. yet it is
by such as we have little cause to resign our understandings to, unless we
could see their minds more calm from passion. For while we behold them boiling
to such uncharitableness, their discourse must needs be frothy, and their
brains as empty of sound judgment, as their tongues are full of bitterness.
We cannot but think them to be led with a blind zeal, when they call light,
darkness; and know not to distinguish betwixt gold and dross. The Letany,
they say, is conjuring, because we pray to be heard by Christ's Nativity and
Circumcision, by his precious death, etc. a childish cavil: and the Burial,
Popish; because there is no Scripture from one end to the other, that prayers
were said at Burials. It may be your self is convinced, with some such
powerful argument (for we hear you neglect the form appointed,) which if it be
so, we may well be afraid to entrust the reforming of our Religion into such
weak hands, though you are vouchsafed the titles of Godly and Learned.

[According to the examples of the best reformed Churches] And who shall judge
which are the best reformed? what hinders that this Church should not be as
well reformed as any, unless because it seems not to be so far removed from
some Ceremonies used in Popery: we know that virtue consists not in the
furthest distance from one extreme, but in a prudent mediocrity between both;
so that Church is best reformed, that keeps a distance in her Worship, as well
from Irreverence and Profanesse, as Superstition. The wise Reformers of this
Church had an eye to this; It was their principal care to abandon Popish
Superstitions; yet so as by decent orders established, to procure a reverent
respect unto Gods service.

The last branch of this Article is, [To endeavor to bring the Churches of God
in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity of Religion,
confession of Faith form of Church Government, etc. That we and our posterity,
may as brethren, live together in Faith and Love] We are glad to hear any thing
of Love, which is grown so much a stranger, that we had thought the very name
of it had been quite buried in forgetfulness. God only is he that can unmask
the heart, if men dissemble; But let the world judge how little you seek this
in earnest, when you have blown up such sparks of dissension; as have set these
Kingdoms in a combustion, and rent in pieces Cities, Villages, Families; and
are these the works of those that endeavor to live in love?

But Sir, is it not possible to retain Christian love and unity, in the
difference of Rites and Customs, and outward accidental forms of Worship and
Government? Calvin. respons. ad Versipellem Mediat.
Did not the Eastern and Western Churches retain Communion, notwithstanding the
Difference about observing Lent and Easter? Hear him whose judgment we doubt
not, you much approve, and that is Master Calvin. As concerning rites in
particular, Augustine: Ep: ad Cassula:
(says he) let the sentence of Augustine take place, who leaves it free unto
all Churches to retain their own Customs: yea sometimes it profits, and is
expedient, that there should be a difference, lest men should think that
Religion it tied to outward Ceremonies. [Possble, therefore, perchance, you
will grant it is; but not so easy:] Well then, it will the more commend our
Christian dispositions, that we can retain true brotherly love, where it is
hard to be retained. To conclude, we wonder how those men dare speak of Love,
who have raised and fomented the most unnatural division that ever was: or how
their hearts can be affected at all with Christian Charity, who think the
abolishing or changing of those things they contend for in this Reformation,
worth so much Christian bloodshed, besides the ruining of the happiness of
the Kingdom, and endangering the very substance of Religion.

The second Article [That we shall in like manner endeavor the extirpation of
Popery] The most warrantable course that could be taken for this end, the Kings
Majesty, (to whom this care belongs in chief) was pleased, long since, to
commend to the two Houses; that is, That the Children of Papists might be
brought up in the Protestant Religion; and why was it not then accepted? But if
this extirpation must be by murdering or banishing all of that Religion,
depriving them of their Estates and goods, in which by the law of God and man
they have Propriety, we doubt whether it may be done without manifest breach of
the sixth and eighth Commandments. Now we must swear, That we will extirpate
them; yet the manner how it must be done is not expressed.

[Prelacy, that is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters, etc.] Here Prelacy is set between Popery and Superstition, and so it
is handled in that unworthy manner, that our Savior was by the spiteful Jews,
when he was Crucified between two Thieves, that so he might be thought as
notorious a Malefactor, as those were with whom he suffered. Now this question
may well arise from hence; How those men (your self, as we suppose, and others)
who have taken Sacred Orders, shall be dispensed withal for their Oaths of
Obedience to their spiritual Governors, and their several subscriptions to
the present established government, (which employed an approbation:) unless to
pull down Prelacy, you care not to uphold Popery, by dispensation of Oaths; as
some of no small account amongst you did in the case of the Soldiers taken by
the King at Brainceford.

Besides, you must needs grant, That the Oath of Canonical Obedience, binds,
so long as Prelacy stands; and Prelacy stands after this League or Covenant
taken: notwithstanding so many Barons, Knights, and Burgesses have vowed the
extirpation of it, (for when they vow the extirpation of it; that does imply It
is not yet extirpate, nor abolished;) Well then, suppose this, (which may very
well be supposed) that your Diocesan, or Bishop, shall command you by all means
you lawfully may, to countenance Episcopal Government, and to uphold it; and
in your Sermons, (as occasion shall be, to show how agreeable it is to the word
of God, and to the first and purest times; if you obey him not, you are
forsworn, by reason of that Oath you made to obey him and his Successors, in
their lawful and just Commands: and on the other side, if you do obey him, you
are forsworn too, by taking this new League and Covenant, wherein you have
vowed the extirpation of Episcopacy. It will trouble you Sir, to wind your
self out of this Dilemma.

But because shame will not suffer you to declaim with such violence and
bitterness (as some of your Brethren do;) against that which formerly you have
approved; you told us, in your Explanation, you would say no more of this
Government, then was the censure of the Parliament in that Ordinance of theirs
for calling an Assembly of Learned and Godly Divines: And there is a fourfold
Charge against Episcopacy, (yet God forbid that all the Charges there drawn up
should be true:) First, that it is evil, But whether in se, or in effectu, you
will not dispute, you told us: We will excuse you, Sir; We perceive you were
not made for disputing, that have learned to distinguish no better. Whatsoever
is evil in it self, must needs be so in the effects; For an evil Tree cannot
bring forth good fruits, you know who said it. And whatsoever is evil in the
effects, is so in it self also, by that known Maxim: Quod efficit tale est
magis tale. So that if Prelacy be evil one way, it must as necessarily be so
the other. And if it be not evil in se, it is not at all evil; and so you may
well save the labor of disputing, the question falls. But to prove it evil,
some way or other, you added this [Certainly, if it were good, so many godly
Ministers had not suffered under it] To answer that; First, it is well enough
known, That when the Discipline of the Church, or Laws of this Land (though not
to the height of severity) have been executed against those, whose tongues are
the trumpets of Sedition; it has been their custom to cry out of Cruelty and
Persecution; and in the mean time to persecute worse with the sting of their
tongue or pen, those whom they conceived were the authors or occasioners of
their punishment, though deserved most justly, by their breach of Order and
Christian Unity. And the miserable confusion of these times does show
sufficiently, how dangerous it would have proved to the State to have passed by
such Incendiaries, with connivence, and indulgence.

Secondly, suppose that some men in the Prelacy, have unjustly vexed some Godly
Ministers; yet a Member of the Assembly (as you are) may (we hope) have so much
skill, as to distinguish the person from the Office: and not to slander the
calling with the imputation of that, which is the fault of those that bear it.
But it has been observed long since, that amongst other devices you have to
make this worthy calling others you use to rip up the faults of Governors,
with exceeding sharpness; nay, you impute all the faults and mischmeanours
abounding in the world, unto this form of Ecclesiastical Government, under
which we live: when as indeed these faults arise from humane frailty, and the
common depravation of our natures; and have been and will be always complained
of more or less, what form of Government soever shall take place. And you may,
with the like show of reason, impute those errors and corruptions which we
find reproved by the Prophets in the commonwealth of Israel, unto that form
of Jewish Government of which you cannot deny, God him self was author, as you
may charge the Office of Episcopacy with those misdemeanors and abuses that
are found among us.

But secondly, It is charged by that Ordinance [to be offensive and
burdensome:] We verily think it is, to those whose haughty minds disdain to
see any above themselves, and whose stiff necks can hardly endure to be yoked
with any, though the easiest kind of Subjection and Obedience. To such
Monarchy it self is burdensome; And if (to satisfy their desires) they should
be suffered to cast off that, any other Government would quickly be as
burdensome.

Thirdly [it is an hinderance to Reformation says that Ordinance and so say
you:] No marvel indeed, if Reformation be to extirpate Episcopacy: What? you
seek to root out the Bishops; and the Bishops seek what they can to uphold and
maintain their calling. This the Law of self-preservation teaches, that
Supreme Law, that teaches you also, now to take up Arms against the King.

Fourthly it is charged, [to be prejudicial to the State and Government of
this Kingdom.] As wise a man as any Member of either House thought otherwise
when he said, No Bishop, no King. But how is it prejudicial? You endeavor to
show us, in your Explanation. [The state of this Kingdom (say you) is
Parliamentary, and the Parliament and Prelacy are not well consorted; there is
Antipathy between them] Now you have confessed the truth by chance, that the
world may bear witness of your loyalty: that you have no thoughts to diminish
His Majesty's just Power and Greatness: No, by no means, though you exclude
him, from bearing the chiefest part in Government. The government of this
Kingdom, you tell us is Parliamentary, with which Prelacy is not well
consorted. So that the Bishops must needs be cast out for their Antipathy. Let
the King look to himself; his turn will be the next. But to end our Answer to
this Charge; Let this worthy Office be laden with all the slanders that envy
can cast upon it; let it be charged as deeply as the Earl of Strafford, or the
Archbishop of Canterbury; yet, you cannot be ignorant, That the Antiprelaticall
party, (which you side with) has been often challenged to show any Church
since the time that the blessed Apostles were conversant upon earth, that has
been ordered by any other but Episcopal Government, besides some in these last
times, which for insolency, pride, and contempt of all good order, are found to
be the worst: and they never yet were able to do it; nor ever will be.

In the next place is [Superstition] That is, (as you say) whatsoever it used
in Gods worship, without express warrant from the word. This description is so
large, that a Gown or Surplice, a Rail about a Table, a gesture of kneeling,
or standing up, etc. will come within the circumference of it: and indeed most
of you, in your popular Sermons use to bring each of these under the lash of
Superstion. It had been right, if you had said; That whatforever is brought
into the Church of God, and held as a necessary part of his Worship, without
warrant from the Word, that is Superstition: So that is a superstitious opinion
which is hold by many of your party, when they make one gesture effentiall and
necessary to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, namely, Sitting, and condemn
the other of Kneeling to be Idolatrous.

Next to Supersitition, is [Haeresie, Schism, etc] Here you instance in
Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Antinoinianisme, Anabaptisme. There be some too,
(as we hear) in the holy Assembly, that deny the Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son; What call ye them? must they pass for Orthodox?
But you gave no instance for Schism; yet never more plenty; never was the bond
of Communion of Saints, broken into so many pieces, because of a Rite or
Ceremony; when as yet we all agree in one Faith, have received one Baptism,
acknowledge and worship one God and Savior. Oh Sir, Schisine, was too near you
to discern it well. If you know what Schism is; namely, the breach of
Christian Unity, and had but looked wishly upon your self, you would have
condemned your self. Who can be more guilty of Schism then your self and your
Party is. You make and take a Covenant here, which tends to make a new Schism
in the Church and State, at least to make the old one wider; and yet color it
over with a pretense of swearing against Schism.

It is therefore worth the noting, how well this Covenant is kept by those that
have power to extirpate these evils that grow upon us; To instance but in the
Antinomians, It is well known there be many that Preach that Doctrine, and
their Auditories frequented with multitudes of followers, yet where is the
endeavor of extirpation, or any restraint at all? where is any stopping of the
mouths of such as speak things they ought not? No, when we urge this; we are
told, The time is not yet and they serve for the present to advantage the
Cause, and promote the great design in hand, and therefore must be born with.
But what a wicked policy is it in the mean time, for any end whatsover, to
suffer so many souls to be poisoned with erroneous Doctrine, when there is
power to hinder it. Thus where there is little Conscience made of taking
Oaths, there will be as little of keeping them: Or it may be those who have
learned to dispense with Oaths, have also got that other Jesuiticall trick, of
equivocating; and so they reserve, when they take this Covenant, that it shall
not bind them, ad semper, to endeavor the extirpation of Heresy and Schism;
but only prostaturerum, when it shall be no longer advantageous and
serviceable for their ends.

Now we come to the third Article, that contains three things. First [To
endeavor to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments:] They are like
to be preserved and defended well enough, by those that know them better then
we do; when they make it their privilege, daily to command our Estates and
Lives. Next, [The liberties of the Ringdoms:] And that will be an hard matter
for us to do, viz. to preserve our liberties, when we shall have sworn to
enslave our Estates and Lives to the arbitrary disposal of our
Fellow Subjects. Then, because he is Minor universis, in the last place comes
in [the Kings person and Authority, which must be preserved and defended in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,]
and no further, we suppose you mean it, though you are loath to speak it out.
For if so be he stands not in defense of Religion and Liberties; or if you
conceive he does not, then your general tenent is, That he may be resisted,
and you confirm it by your practice. God bless His Majesty, and send him a
safer Guard, then you have been, or are like to be; you have endeavored all you
can to bring his Person and Authority too, into a dangerous Estate. And surely,
if he, by whom Kings Reign, and who will undoubtedly maintain those, whom he
has made his Deputies, had not been his special Guardian, he had been long
before this destroyed.

It follows, [That the world may bear witness of our Loyalty:] The world sees,
and good men's hearts lament, the little Conscience that is left of Loyalty,
when they hear His Sacred Majesty, reviled daily and made contemptible to the
people, both in jest and earnest, by Pamphlets and Preachers. Certainly they
that know but in gross what belongs to Royal Majesty, cannot but see the
Kings just Power and Greatness by this time much diminished. Is not the power
of Arms, with which the Law has entrusted him taken from him? and so he is
disabled of doing that, which his Office does chiefly call him to, that is, to
protect and defend his Subjects; so that in this one particular, you will
scarcely be able to justify your Loyalty, unless helped out with some of
those, (or such like) distinctions, which necessity has taught this age to
make use of, to defend Rebellion. So you can defend his Authority and yet
destroy his Person; resist him as a man, not as a King, ye can do that and more
too; you can defend Religion by courses utterly condemned in that Religion.

The fourth Article, [To endeavor the discovery of Incendiaries, Malignants,
and evil Instruments, etc.] And who are they [such as divide the King from his
people:] And such too, as divide the People from their King. Such as Sheba and
Absalon were in Israel. Now who are in more esteem with the City and
Parliament, then those who have been the chiefest Incendiaries of this War.
Strange it is, that those who sound Alarms as far as Scotland, and seek to
engage this Kingdom more desperately in this unnatural War, should be judged
good Instruments and Well affected, and those that Pray and Preach, and
endeavor by all good means for Peace at home, should be counted Incendiaries,
and Malignants? It is our chief comfort, that there is a time to come, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be manifest, when every one shall receive according
to his works. Before that time the Peacemakers must not look for their
promised blessing.

The fifth Article, concerns [The endeavoring that the Kingdoms may remain
conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity] God grant they may: but
yet the Scots invading this Land with an Army, is thought by the wisest to be
contrary to the Articles of Pacification; and so no likely means to preserve
the Union of these Nations firm.

The sixth Article, concerns, 1. [The assisting and defending all those that
shall enter into this League or Covenant, in what they shall do for the
maintaining and pursuing thereof:] This might a great deal more easily have
been swallowed, with such a limitation, as was once or twice used in the
Protestation; that is, [so for at lawfully I may] and so for as they shall
lawfully pursue this Covenant. But it seems that any way of other men's
pursuance of this League, and any way of our defending them in this pursuance,
will be accounted lawful.

Then two things are specified, against which we are to Covenant. First,
[Defection to the contrary part:] Apostacy indeed from the truth, and a good
Cause; when we have once given our hands, is very wicked. And this Cause is
evermore in your dicourse, taken for granted, to be such; The Cause of
Religion, and a Cause that so much concerns the glory of God. But how if your
attempts and practices appear unto us to be against Religion, against
Allegiance to our Sovereign, against evident commands of Scripture, then this
Cause must needs be a dishonor unto God; and so to persist in this League or
Covenant, against the Conviction of our Consciences, would be a certain sign
and symptom of an heart given up to a reprobate sense. But if you would have
men to be so constant and resolute in what they have undertaken, you should
take care before hand to resolve them well in these doubtful cases, and not
suffer them to meddle with such serious matters as Oaths and Covenants are, but
upon mature deliberation, and well grounded judgment, which all that enter
into this Covenant, profess they do, though most of them, perceive not so much
as the general scope thereof: besides they are unsatisfied in some points, and
find reluctance in themselves; yet are drawn into it, either by example, or
else by terrors. And is there like to be constancy in such minds as these?
you fear therefore, that some who have taken this Covenant at all adventures,
should afterward chance to see some mischief in it, which formerly their have
would not let them see, and therefore you add this as another cord to hold
them fast unto you for ever slipping back.

The other thing against which we must Vow, is [Detestable Indiffirevey, or
Neutrality in this Cause which so much concerns the glory of God, etc.] There
you bring in that of our Savior, He that is not with me, is against me. But
still you make use of that old Fallacy to ensnare us; you beg the question,
taking that for granted, which is still in controversy, viz. That this Cause
is Christ's, and those with him, who stand for you, and those against him that
oppose you. And those who are not strongly affected, to, and violent promoters
of this Cause, you reckon amongst Neuters and luke warm Laodiceans, who are
neither hot nor cold. True it is, lukewarmnesse in Religion is odious to
Almighty God, who accepts no service, but what comes from the sincerity and
fervency of our love. He cannot endure the heart that is divided, that halts
between two opinions, and that serves two Masters. But Sir, you Comment besides
these Texts, when you make the not joining our selves with you, and the
slacknesse in promoting your designs, to be this detestable Neutrality, and
Indifferency, so odious to God and man. For it is evident how you have
strengthened your selves by Faction, and making parties among the people; by
countenancing all sorts of Sectaries, and Schismatics; by exploding those that
concur not in opinion with you, and exposing them to the violence of the
distempered, and raging multitude; by raising Tumults, and fomenting Sedition,
amongst the unquiet people; besides we see daily, how unchristian other of your
proceedings are, how unjust your desires, how partial, and far from equity are
your judgments: And can we then safely join our selves with you, when as we
profess our selves to be Christ's followers; and see evidently, that these
ways you take, can never be warranted by those precepts of life that our
master Christ has set us? Do not all men cry out of this as a most unnatural
War? Does it not appear to common sense, to be most unnatural, for Brethren,
and Christians, of the same Kingdom, of the same Reformed Religion, to be set
upon violence, murder, cruelty, and to thirst for blood? And how can we then
side with you, but we must needs partake of your sins, and add to the
fomenting of a most unnatural war? And though that may be a forcible motive to
a carnal mind, which you tell us afterward: [If Neuters, we are abhorred on
both sides, and out of the Protection of both:] This will be slighted of a
truly magnanimous Christian, who cares not to displease all the world so he may
please his Maker. So long as we are under the shelter of a good conscience we
have God our Protector, and then what though all the powers of earth, and hell
should bandy themselves against us? If earthly powers cannot or will not
protect us, it may suffice that we are under the Care and Providence of a
merciful and powerful God.

But we hear every day, in your language, to be heady, and violent, is to be
zealously affected; and so to be peaceable, is to be Neuters. So that will
prove Neutrality, which Saint Paul commends, Moderation; and that Wisdom Saint
James describes, which is Peaceable, and Tractable, to be Peacemakers will be
Neutrality, and yet such are on Christ's side, for he promises them a blessing.
When think you Sir, should there be use of these precepts of Christ and his
Apostles if not now? A wonder it is to us, that this should be the cause of
Christ, and yet those that defend it have so little of the mind of Christ.

But to persuade us to be constant and resolute, you take occasion in your
discourse to persuade us, that yours is the right and just cause; and to prove
it you argue thus [where there is godliness, on that side is God and Christ;
but on your side is all the godliness, and therefore God is on your side; and
so the Cause you defend is his:] To answer that; first, we are so charitable as
to think, that many honesthearted, and good meaning people, being seduced into
errors, (as who is free, and especially, where there be the sincerest hearts,
there is most danger of seducement, unless there be the sounder judgments)
are drawn to side with you, by the persuasions of some Preachers, or example of
others, of whose integrity they are well persuaded; we are not to judge the
cause by those that defend it, but rather, by the certain rule of the word of
God; which (God knows) is the error of many poor souls in this present
difference; they look at the men first, and then judge the Cause to be such as
those men that stand for it seem to be. He that shall read the History of the
Anabaptists in Germany, shall find that they scarce were exceeded by any
living; in that abundant humility, strictness, sanctity, zeal, devotion, which
appeared in them. These were taken in the world as pledges of their harmless
meaning; and did rather procure them pity, then provoice harsh usage. The worst
that understanding men conceived of them at first, was only this, Oh quam
honesta voluntate miseri errant, with how good a meaning do these poor souls do
evil? yet afterward what Vipers proved they both to Church and State? This
may suffice to show, that it is a false rule of judging a Cause by those that
stand for it; when as they may either deceive by hypocrisy, or else be
deceived by weakness.

But secondly, you seem to be too unjust and Pharisaicall, whilst you arrogate
all Godliness unto your Party. What think you of those good men, that are
some of them at this present with the King, some in prison, some deprived of
their goods and livelihood for making conscience of sedition and disloyalty,
yet have always been reputed spotless and unblameable, and are the same men
still that ever they were; and some of them are renowned in foreign countries
for their learning and their piety.

And thirdly, you look upon your selves with an over-partiall eye; when you can
see nothing but godliness and godly men on your side: what think you Sir of
Prince Griffith, and Col. M. (two godly Members indeed) not to mention more;
these two are known well enough by their brave exploits; otherwise we should be
tender of their credits. And for your Soldiers, that fight for this holy
Cause; those who have had experience of their carriage in places where they
have been Quartered, do think they can scarce be exceeded by the most profane
rabble in the Kingdom for drinking and swearing etc. And for those that Preach
for the Cause, they most of them make a gain of godliness, and so can easily
put on a form of godliness. In a word, is there any man that will comply so
far, as to preach, or fight, or speak for the promoting of your designs any
way discountenanced or discouraged; let his impiety, profanesse, and deserts of
severity be what they will?

It follows in this sixth Article, [I shall zealously and constantly all the
days of my life continue in this Covenant, and seek to promote it against all
opposition:] It were to be wished, that this Zeal were not so much talked of,
unless it were better understood. It is but a passion of the mind, and so of
it self, (as all passions are,) neither good nor evil. And therefore it is
used in a bad sense, Zelos pikros, bitter envying. Iam 3.14. Zeloi Envyings.
Gal. 5.20.
as often as in a good. If it be without Charity, it is but that which the
Apostle calls (bitter envying) If without knowledge, but blind zeal; and so
apt to do much mischief, howsoever able to do little good. If without
discretion, it is but rashness, and headiness. It were much safer therefore
to teach the people how to moderate their Passions, then to take care to stir
them up. To persuade them to be zealous, and not together to instruct them how
to regulate their zeal, that it may be charitable, just, and orderly, is but to
teach them to be violent, seditions, tumultuous, etc. And when they are such,
do not many think themselves to be most zealous? Did not Paul in the time of
his ignorance think he breathed of the spirit, when he breathed out threatenings
against the Church? Art. 9.
Did not Iehu brag of zeal, when his ambition led him forth to such attempts,
which God reckoned but as cruelty and injustice? Hos. 1.4.
And is not most of the zeal of these times set on edge with desire of revenge,
pride, or covetousness: witness that greediness in the men of this
generation, and that unjust possessing themselves of the Estates, the Lands,
and Livings, of those whom they Malign, yet call them Malignants? So when they
stuff their Prayers with Cursings and Bitterness; are they not thought to
breath Zeal, pure Zeal? when they slander the footsteps of Gods anointed, load
those that consent not in opinion with them, with those hateful names of
Malignants, Popishly affected; expose them hereby to violence, spoylings,
plundring; when they profane the places of Gods public worship, tear in pieces
the Service-books; do such things as a Turk or Pagan would make conscience of;
are not these things accounted the blessed fruits of Zeal? There is so much of
this Zeal already, as makes the jealousy of God to burn against us; This Zeal
may we justly rank in the number of those sins, for which we are to acknowledge
our selves to be truly humbled, in the latter part of this Covenant. But it may
be feared, the most are so far from being humbled, that they account that which
indeed is their shame, to be their glory. And therefore God may justly lash us
into better minds, until we see our selves there to be most guilty, where we
think we are most justified.

So, to draw to a Conclusion. The lastis the best part of all this Covenant,
and the most needful, namely [To acknowledge our unfeigned desire to be
humbled for our own sins, and the sins of this Nation; and to endeavor a real
Reformation of our selves, and others under our power and charge:] Here be
certain National sins reckoned up, against the first table of the Law, [as
that we have not, as we ought, valued the inestimable benefit of the Gospel
nor labored for the Power and Purity of it, etc.] But if we look over again,
we shall find other National sins also amongst us, against the second
Table: (if we take National in Doctor Taytoms sense, In his Book against
Prelacy.
for sins established by a Law.) So Disobedience of Subjects to that
Ordinance God has set over them; of Children to their Parents; Servants to
their Masters; are not these by new unheard of Votes and Ordinances made
lawful? Is not Sacrilege, Rapine, Plundring, Bloodshed, speaking and
receiving slanders established by a Law? These are National sins therefore,
and such too as have a loud cry in the ears of the Almighty, and lay such a
guilt upon this Land, that we cannot expect he should settle these Churches in
Peace, until they be some way or other explated, either by our repenting, or
his revenging.

And as for the Prayer in the close of all, wherein [you beseech God to bless
your endeavors with such success, as may be safety to his people, and
encouragements to other Churches to do the like?] He that shall duly observe
the passages of Divine Providence on both sides, since these broils began, how
it has fared with the King beyond all expectation; to what strength he grew
upon the sudden, notwithstanding all the endeavors to alienate the hearts of
his Subjects from him what Victories he has gotten; what Towns he has gained,
reducing the Northern and Western parts of this Kingdom unto their former
obedience; and that when you had possessed your selves of his Magazines, and
strongest Towns and Forts, your selves, for them off part, have been defented,
foiled, lost what you held, put to great streights for Men and Money,
notwithstanding a rich and populous City wholly at your devotion, will conclude
certainly, there is little encouragement for you to go on in your designs,
much less for other Churches to take example by you, and to enter into League,
or Association, against those powers God has deputed over them, and to join
together in such attempts, which tend so much to the dishonor of God, the
Scandalizing of the Profession of Jesus Christ, and the ruin and overthrow of
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

Sir you need not much wonder to see a writing come to your hand in this
manner, considering the Violence and Tyranny under which we live; when it is
almost Capital to make any scruple or objection which may question the
Infallibility of that great Court, or be a means to retard their proceedings in
the grand design. And we could not so much confide in you, as to have recourse
unto you, and express our doubts by way of Conference, when we hear of many
that are so fiercely carried on in promoting of this Cause. That they have
vowed to betray their nearest friends, that shall but speak to the prejudice of
it. Besides, we are come near to that pass, that the Roman State was in
Domitians time, when, (as Tacitus writes) ademptum esset per inquisitiones
loquendi audiendique, Commercium; two men cannot without suspicion and danger
talk together; nor dare one neighbor disclose his doubts, and ask the advice
and counsel of another. More then that, we have by this means taken a more
exact view of the several branches of this Oath, together with your
explanation of the same. If now you have any thing to return to these things,
(which we much doubt) we shall expect your Answer in some public manner, that
so the benefit may redound to more; and what you shall do in this kind, we
shall accept with all Candor, as it becomes Christians, and

Your Friends.

Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that before these Observations could with
convenience be conveyed into the hands of that Divine of the Assembly,
mentioned in the Title, who by his explaining and pressing of this Covenant
gave occasion to them, he was taken out of this life; yet (as Charity binds
us) we must hope that, before his departure hence he had space, and grace to
repent of his errors, and of this in special, one of his last, though
doubtless, none of his least commissions. If these Animadversions, upon that
Covenant (such as they are) may be a means to keep any (who are yet free) from
entering into a League so unlawful, so unchristian: or to reduce any, who
through weakness have been drawn into it, that so they might see and forsake
their error, and not by obstinate persisting add another offense unto the
former; He that collected them with that intention, and now presents them to
the Public view, will account so good effects an abundant requital for his
pains.

A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation, and defense of Religion, etc.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included;
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption, are
of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the
Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last,
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and
Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter
Ruin and destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the Example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I.
That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches, And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, directory for Worship and Catechizing; that
we and our Posterity after us, may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and
the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III
We shall with the same sincerity, reallity, and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness.

IV.
We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Article.

VI.
We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor
of the King, but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us, and our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy
indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And
this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that
great day when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly
beseching the Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to
bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragement to the christian Churches groaning
under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join in the same,
or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms
and Commonwealths.

FINIS.



