CERTAIN DISQUISITIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS Representing to the Conscience the
unlawfulness of the Oath, entitled, A solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation etc.

As also the insufficiency of the Arguments used in the Exhortation for taking
the said Covenant.

Published by command.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1644.

CERTAIN DISQUISITIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS Representing to the Conscience the
unlawfulness of the Oath, entitled, A solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation, etc.
We Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King, and being of one
reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts,
and practices of the enemies of God against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

SEeing it has pleased the composers of this Covenant to set it forth with an
Introduction, which contains that which (it seems) prevailed with them, and
they expect should work upon the three Kingdoms to take the following
Covenant; it will be behoofefull in the first place to reduce the conscience to
a clear and strict examination upon the contents of this Introduction; and
then if it shall find that all things therein be true, and withal sufficient
to that end for which they were premised, ( viz. to infer a necessity of
swearing to all things contained in the following Articles) the conscience will
be directed to follow that dictate: But if it fail in either of those, we must
betake our selves to other considerations to be guided by. We will therefore
sincerely propound the contents of the Preface, as near as may be according to
its method, joining together matters of the same kind: And then we shall find
the discourse of the Preface to be resolved into these principles.

1. The glory of God, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the
honor and happiness of the King etc. are to be aimed at and endeavored. 2.
Especially when they are endangered. 3. The means therefore necessary toward
those ends are to be used, which are either Supplication, Remonstrance etc. or
making war. 4. The former are first to be used, but if they fail, then the
latter.
These are the universal Maxims, whereon (by application to the present
condition) the taking of the Covenant is enforced: The three first then being
granted, they subsume, that having used the former, and failing of success, we
are all necessitated to use the latter, viz. To swear to join with the Scots in
Arms, which is the general, and to those particulars after mentioned in the
Articles.

That such joining in arms is the general end of the Covenant, will appear
by comparing the sixth Article of the Covenant for mutual assistance and
defense of one another, with the 14 Article of the Instructions, wherein the
imposers of this Oath appoint to be read (publicly at the time when the
Covenant is read) the Declaration of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland
joined in Arms for the vindication, etc. In which Declaration, the taking this
Covenant is made one of the grounds both of their confidence (as they say) that
this war wherein they are so deeply engaged is of God, and of their
resolution (which they profess) with courage and constancy unto the end to do
their part.

Whosoever therefore is not persuaded in his conscience, either that all these
means mentioned, and all other such like have been used, and have been
rejected; or upon supposition that they had, yet doubts of the consequence
(viz. that such an Army may be leavied, and such a war managed) cannot
without deadly sin (though disengaged from oaths for any of the following
particulars) upon the former principles take this Covenant. But not to insist
hereon, we will briefly run over the several places of the Preface, and
consider the natural intimations from them; only supposing for example, the
end of this Covenant to be the assistance, or at least, consent in this present
joining in arms, applying it to men of the Church of England.

I, A. B. living under the King.] This cannot reasonably be a motive an end of
all strife: And a public Oath propounded to a Nation or Nations, is for the
ending of public strife and divisions: and of any public strife of a Nation
or Nations, under one King (properly so called) the King is the supreme Judge
in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as civil (as is evident by the Law of
God, 1 Pet. 2. And to us moreover by the Law of the Land, 24 H. 8. c. 12. by
the doctrine of the Church of England Art. 37. the book of Homilies, and
establish^d Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.) And therefore such an Oath and
Covenant may not be entered into without and against the allowance of the King,
who is the supreme Judge even in the supreme Judicatory it self.

Being of the Reformed Religion] established in the Church of England, the very
mark and Character of which, as differenced from Popery and other Sects, has
been chiefly, that it has always maintained, That it is not lawful in any
case (not in the danger of their Religion) for subjects to take up Arms
against their lawful Sovereign.

Having before my eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the kingdom of
Jesus Christ.] Here the consideration of the mind requisite toward the
judgment of conscience will be this; whether by this war, considered with
its circumstances, the glory of God, etc. is more apt to be advanced then by
peace: wherein, although reason might easily conclude, yet it will be much more
certainly guided, if we shall examine those precepts which Christ and his
Apostles have laid down, toward the accomplishment of those ends here
proposed, and try whether they do suggest or intimate any thing toward such a
war; If they do not (or if the contrary) the conscience having before its
eyes the glory of God, etc. will not be induced to take this course for the
advancement of it. For the rectification of conscience in this case, it will be
requisite to consider this war to which we are enjoined to contribute, by
whom and against whom it is undertaken: Where, if the conscience find it to be
unlawful in the undertaking, it cannot lawfully consent or assist, viz. If it
be no ways lawful for such as we are moved to join with, to take up Arms
against such as we should be sworn to oppose; If it might possibly be lawful
in the first undertaking, it could no otherwise be but as it should be a
necessary means to procure a just peace; and the determination of conscience
in this case will depend upon the consideration of the conjunctures of things
at the undertaking, and all the time of the continuance of this war: and if
peace with truth might have been, or may be established without it, (much more
if this means shall be found opposite) the conscience cannot without sin assent
to this war: Here the mind is to examine the several propositions, motions,
overtures, etc. which have been and are made by both parties, and according to
them to judge.

The happiness and honor of the King and his Posterity.] Here we are to
consider, whether, or what this action of ours will contribute toward the
honor and happiness of the King and his posterity. And because it is not
easy to discover any foundation of such honor and happiness etc. besides,
that the managers of this party with whom they would have us to join, have
never particularly declared the way how these ends shall be or are advanced by
their war (although it is one of their most common expressions:) the safest
way (at least the most natural) for the conscience is to raise a judgment of
what is likely to ensue upon what has preceded (since these undertakings) upon
the same Principles: where it is to consider, whether his Honor or Contumely
have been increased by and since these wars. And so for the happiness of
Himself and his Posterity, consider whether if these men be upon the same
design with those who gave him battle at Edgehill, Newbery etc. what those
designs made toward the happiness of him, and his Posterity.

The true public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdome] If Liberty,
unless thereby be meant freedom from our ancient Laws, and from the settled
happy government of Church and State, whilst we may fear to be put under
uncertain new ones? Secondly, Safety, whether the danger of ruin do not
outweigh or equalize the hopes of safety. Thirdly, Peace, whether this be the
only, the likeliest, or indeed any probable means of procuring Peace? Seeing
there are but two ways obvious by which this course should procure it, viz.
Victory, or reducing the King to yield to their desires. Here the judgment of
conscience will be grounded upon this, Whether the King be no way but by force
inclinable to a just Peace?

Wherein every ones private, etc.] This is subordinate to the former

Calling to mind the practices of the enemies of God against the true ] Here
we are to consider and reckon up, who and of what sorts are the enemies of the
Church of England, of which we are, and which is established by Law, to which
we have subscribed, and what party in this quarrel is openly professed for it,
has equally declared against all sorts of its enemies, and which is not; and
accordingly, etc.

Whereof the deploreable estate of Ireland, etc.] Consider whether of it) to
the King, or the malice of the Papists stirred up by those who (they say) had
declared an intention of their utter extirpation? and secondly, where afterward
the impediment of succor to those of our Religion lay?

The distressed estate of England] whether that profession which is established
by Law, be distressed by the King or by Sectaries?

The dangerous estate of Scotland] Wherein was their danger after all things
were settled with them and who brought them into that danger? that party which
we should swear against, or themselves?

After other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestation, and Suffering]
This which is here di^joyned from the rest of the motives, and cast into a
Parenthesis, is indeed made the only foundation of this way of proceeding, and
puts the only case wherein such a way of covenanting, etc. can be imagined to
be lawful: So that if these means have not been both before, and ever since
the undertaking of this design sincerely and effectually endeavored (by the
intimation of this introduction it self) this course is not warrantable; and
there are other principles of Scripture and our Religion which are to be
examined if they have been used such as infer, That it is not lawful in any
case whatsoever to resist with Arms the lawful power by God set over us. Now
whether these means have been and are to used, it will best appear by
considering who has sent the Messages for Treaty toward Peace, what has been
declared by both parties of certainty, and particularly touching Religion, Law,
and Proviso's for tender Consciences; and comparing together the several
Remonstrances, Protestations, and Sufferings. Though all hitherto had been
used and rejected, consider if the overture now lately made by the Kings party,
might not (by the mercy of God) be a means to produce Peace etc. if the
business be managed as it ought. And according to the results of these the
conscience must conclude.

For the preservation of our selves and our Religion] The Religion wherein we
are grounded and to which the Clergy has subscribed, in the Religion of the
Church of England comprised in the Liturgy, Articles, Book of Ordination, and
Homilies of our Church, confirmed by our 35. Article: consider whether the
Covenant be a means ordered in reason to preserve these from ruin.

According to the commondable practice, etc.] If this Kingdom have done so,
that cannot resolve the conscience: But consider whether ever in the like case
the like war was commenced; if any one had been propounded, the conscience
would the more easily have determined; but seeing there has not, it must run
over the Chronicles. In the mean time in such cases as are found, it may
anticipate instances to the contrary (as in Queen Mary's days and those of
Henry the 8. when there was more just reason in respect of Religion, if there
might be any, then now is alleged) and other Arguments, such as the Doctrine
of the Church of England ever since the Reformation, and the like, to equipoize
this which is asserted gratis; and if after disquisition this be not found
true, the conclusion of the conscience will be according to those premises.

According to the example of Gods people, etc.] This is of the same

The sum of all is, That if all and every of the materials of this Preface
(in as much as concerns the Premises) were true, our consciences cannot
assent to the consequence, that it is lawful for us as Subjects of the Church
England (though we had not sworn or subscribed to some particulars, against
which some of the Articles are contrived) to assist the Scots, or consent to
them in this war, which assistance is the general end of this Covenant.

Secondly, there is not any one member which does conclude any thing to our
consciences to move us to take it, neither in the complication do they
conclude.

Thirdly, there is not any particular member of it which does not either
directly, or by considerations naturally suggested by them and altogether
unforced, prevail with us to the contrary. So that till every one of these
obstacles and scruples be taken off, we cannot without violence to our
consciences take this Oath:

That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
Article 1.
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
and Government, against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government; according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our posterity after us may as brethren live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

In the first Article are we to be sworn to endeavor the preservation of the
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of the Church of Scotland absolutely, or with
this added as a restriction, against our common Enemies? By whom do we not
rightly conceive to be meant the common Enemies to the Churches of England,
Scotland, and Ireland? That those words, [ against our common enemies] are to
be taken restrictively it may be thought, because they otherwise should have
been vainly added; and that by common Enemies those are meant, the necessity of
the Grammatical sense implies; there having preceded no other division, to
which this community can refer, besides that of England, Scotland and
Ireland, in the Preface. So that the word Our must refer to We in the
beginning of the Preface, whose only distribution which can refer to common
here, is that of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. Is not
therefore the true sense of this part of the Article this, viz. I will
sincerely, really, constantly, through the grace of God, in my calling against
those who are enemies (for example) both to the Articles of the Church of
England, and those of Scotland, both to our Liturgy and their directory for
worship, both to our Church Government and to Presbyteriall Government,
endeavor to preserve their Articles, manner of worship and Presbytery? If thus
it be, these things are to be considered; If the imposers of this Oath are
assured in their Conscience, that the Doctrine, Worship etc. of the Church of
Scotland, can infallibly be proved out of the Word of God, why would they have
us swear to endeavor (in our calling of the Ministry) to preserve it with a
restriction against some men only, and not absolutely and indefinitely?
Whether is this so free from the scandal of respect of Persons, as an oath for
the impartial defense of Truth does require? If they doubt it cannot be
infallibly proved, how can our Brethren of Scotland, without spiritual
Tyranny, desire an Oath to be imposed upon us Ministers of the Gospel of
another Church, to endeavor sincerely, really etc. in our calling (viz. by
preaching, disputing, or otherwise) the preservation of it thus far?

Secondly, how can we take an Oath to endeavor the preservation of that
Doctrine which we neither know what it is (as it now stands) nor are told in
any Declaration or Exhortation to us? nor were bound to know or search (no
opportunity offering it self?) How then can this Oath be by us taken in
judgment? Or since we doubt thus, though in general, how can it (not being of
Faith) be other then Sin? Whether are we not, if any thing shall be by us
hereafter found in the Doctrine of Scotland contrary to sound Doctrine, bound
to endeavor by the second Article to extirpate it, and by the first to
preserve it? As for their Discipline and Government, so much as we understand
of it (though otherwise we never interposed, yet being now called to give our
consent to it, or reason to the contrary) we profess it to be such as that we
dare not bind our selves by Oath to endeavor its preservation constantly and
indefinitely, for all time to come, till it be evidenced unto us that it has
been in any time before until this our last age. If it shall here be replied,
that we are required to endeavor the preservation of their Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government, only against our common enemies, that is, of us of
the Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and so the preservation of it
only so far as we all agree; this we cannot conceive to be the adequate
sense of those words, especially according to the intention of the imposers.
For it is clear (as we have already touched) that our common Enemies are not
only they who are adversaries to us in that wherein we all three do agree,
but those also who in such things wherein we differ amongst our selves, are yet
by opposing themselves to us all, our common Enemies; against whom therefore by
this Oath we should be bound to preserve to each that also wherein we differ
amongst our selves. Moreover, that that Sense is neither the only, nor the
chief Sense intended by the Imposers, we have cause to think: because if so
restrained, our Brethren of Scotland (in favor of whom we conceive this part
of the Article to have been proposed) would be no whit secured against the
fears of innovations from England, if we were only sworn to preserve unto them
those things wherein we all agree at the entering this present League and
Covenant.

Thirdly, we desire to know why our Brethren of Scotland should desire it to be
imposed upon us by Oath to maintain the Articles of their Religion, so far
forth as has been said, since our Mother the Church of England never yet has
imposed upon us by Oath to preserve her own known Articles, but has testified
her moderation to all, in that she has required subscription only of all men
which were admitted into holy Orders, or Ecclesiastical Benefice, or to
degrees in the University? And yet this was lately judged, since the sitting of
this Parliament, to be too harsh an imposition upon younger Students at their
admission to degrees, and the urging of it suspended. And we know not whether
ever it was in use before this age, even in any not corrupted Church, to
command men to swear the maintaining the Articles of their Religion, much less
their Discipline and Church government.

As to the second thing in this first Article to which we are to swear, How can
any who are persuaded that there is nothing in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, which is not consonant to the Word of God, without vanity swear to
endeavor the Reformation of it according to the Word of God? especially since
we have lately protested to defend that Doctrine of the Church of England? And
how can any who reverently believe this Church to be in respect of her
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government established by Law, no less
perfect then any of the Reformed Churches, swear to endeavor its reformation
in all those, according to the example of the best reformed Churches? And here
by the way we cannot but take notice that this part of the Article is so
framed, as if there were nothing in the Doctrine etc. of the Churches of
England and Ireland to be preserved, and nothing in theirs of Scotland to be
reformed.

Moreover, the best direction for Conscience in examining what is here meant by
Reformation, will be to consider those instances wherein in the following
Articles is declared the Reformation, and then if persuaded that there is any
thing there expressed (as instances of reformation) which is not according to
(much more if against) the Word of God, how can we take this part of the Oath,
at least in the sense of the Imposers?

As touching the third thing, an endeavor of Uniformity etc. the
considerations for direction of conscience will be the same with the second:
For we are required to swear to endeavor an uniformity, and that in the
reformation before mentioned, and after that reformation; so that in whatsoever
sense or kind the reformation by them mentioned, and after described, is not to
be undertaken, in the same our endeavor for uniformity is not lawful.

Lastly, in the taking of this first Article, we should (as we conceive) make
our selves guilty either of rash swearing, or of perjury; and that from the
necessary consequence of the complication of these two clauses, wherein first
we should swear to preserve the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government against our common enemies. And
secondly, to bring the Churches of the three Kingdoms, to the nearest
conjunction and uniformity in those particulars among ourselves: If we
endeavor in our callings (but by prayer) to alter any thing in the Church of
Scotland, wherein our enemies are theirs also (though therein we differ amongst
our selves) we commit perjury, because we swear to preserve it. To effect
therefore the nearest uniformity in those particulars in the three Kingdoms, we
are sworn to endeavor to bring the other two Kingdoms to the nearest
conformity to the Church of Scotland. Now how can we swear to regulate by a
rule, and to reform by a form, which we fully know not, (and much less know to
be a fit rule or form) without rash swearing? sure we are, we cannot swear it
in judgment, and for ought we know, not in righteousness.

That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, Article 2.
endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on
that Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever
shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness;
lest we partake in other men sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

How can we swear to this part of the Covenant, who do believe that to
endeavor the extirpation of Church Government by Bishops is an act utterly
unlawful for all several places and callings (and especially ours) by the Law
of God and this Land, and to swear it much more sinful. And are we not here
bidden to covenant and swear to endeavor the extirpation of Church Government
by Bishops? To us either the words are ambiguous, (and to ambiguities we may
not swear) or rather (for we are loath to charge the words with ambiguitie) the
Grammatical sense (according to which the Oath is to be taken) speaks so: for
as to what we hear by some said, that only our Church Government in aggregato,
by all those Governors together in a collective sense taken formally, is to be
endeavored to be extirpated, and not each there mentioned: first, Such
interpretation given out is private only, and not by the authority of the
imposers; and secondly, those words [ and all other, etc.] do manifest that all
the formerly mentioned particulars (in the parenthesis) are to be construed
distributively, so far forth as to the extirpation of them. To omit that the
word Prelacy there interpreted more properly agrees to Archbishops and
Bishops, then to the rest there mentioned, and a Prelacy they would be without
them, because preferred before Presbyters: and if it no more were meant to
ejure Bishops then Presbyters or Deacons, since as well Presbyters and Deacons
make up part of our Church Government, as it now stands in aggregate, whether
might this Oath be taken, had they also been included? Lastly, is not their
practice for whose satisfaction this Covenant should be taken Intelligentia
verborum ex causis est assumenda dicendi, H^^ar. l. 4. de Tr^^.
(added to the common sense of mankind in the like manner of speaking or
understanding such speeches) evidence enough to us that we cannot take this
Oath and Covenant, unless we will swear to endeavor the extirpation of
Church Government by Bishops.

If this be so, we desire to know, first, whether it be lawful for subjects to
swear such a Covenant as directly contradicts the oath of their Sovereign at
his Coronation, as this second branch of the Covenant does, binding us to
endeavor the extirpation of the government of our Church by Bishops? For that
our Sovereign has taken as contradictory Oath is evidently manifest by the
last clause of the oath which the Kings of England take at their Coronation:
when after many other gracious promises which the King makes to his people, one
of the Bishops reading to the King before the people concerning the Canonical
privileges of the Church, and beseeching him that he would be the Protector
and Defender of the Bishops and the Churches under their government, the King
answers in these words [ With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant
my pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches
committed to your charge, all canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice,
and that I will be your Pretectour and Defender, to my power, by the assistance
of God, as every good King in his Kingdom in right ought to protect and defend
the Bishops, and Churches under their government.] Then the King arises, and
at the Communion Table makes a solemn Oath in the presence of the people, to
observe the premises, and laying his hand upon the book says [ The things
which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, so help me God, and the
contents of this Book.] How can this Oath then for the extirpation of
Church Government by Bishops be consistent with the Oath or Honor of our
Sovereign, which we have so solemnly protested to defend in the late
Protestation? How can we with a solemn Oath enter into such a Covenant to which
we may neither swear without our Sovereigns consent, nor yet can lawfully
desire nor have his consent? How sad were our condition, were the King willing
of himself to violate this Oath? But what should we have to answer, should we
by taking such a Covenant, this way necessitate (so far as in us lies) His
sacred Majesty to violate his Oath so solemnly sworn at his Inauguration?

Secondly, that to endeavor the extirpation of Church Government by Bishops,
is a sin against Divine Law, all those Arguments and Authorities convince,
which prove that Bishops are of Apostolical institution, and unalterable, and
consequently Divine; which we shall unfold in these Propositions: First, that
their institution stands grounded upon our Saviors own Action and Institution
of the Apostles. Secondly, that Christ and his holy Spirit, by his Apostles
appointed Bishops. Thirdly, that Christ the Son of God, and the Holy Ghost
afterward confirmed and approved Bishops, and their Commission and power which
the Apostles had appointed.

For the first, we say their institution is grounded upon our Lords own
instituting and ordaining twelve Apostles, above seventy Disciples; who says
to these his Apostles, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. Eandem
illis imponit personam, ac idem juris assignat. Calvinus in locum. (...)
Chrysostomus in locum. (...) Ammonius in locum.
St. Joh. 20. 21. As in other ends of his mission so how not in this, which we
know they did according to his pattern? As he was sent by his Father therefore
to ordain one order of Teachers of the Gospel superior to another, (which we
know, because he did so ordain.) So also sent he his Apostles to ordain (which
accordingly they did, and whatsoever they did by Christ's example therein, they
did by his Commission here given) in an imparity, Bishops succeeding the
Apostles above Presbyters subordinate, as the seventy Theodoret. in Luc. 10.
.

That Bishops succeeded the Apostles in the ordinary part of their function, as
it is the judgment of the most ancient godly Fathers, Viz. Irenaeus ib. 3. c.
3 Tertul. de praescrip. c 36 Cyprian ^p 42, and 61, and 69 Council. Carthag anno
258 sub Cypriano. Theodoret. l. 4. c. 18. Ambros. de dignsacer. c. 2. Augustine.
in Ps. 44. and Ep st. 42. and de verbis Domini Sermon. 24. Hieron. ep. ad Marcel.
advers. Montanum, and epist. ad Evagr. Greg. mag. Hom. 26. in Evang.
Theophylactus in Matthew. 16. Pacianus ep. 2. ad Sympro^ian. And all those which
aver the Apostles to have been Bishops, (though more also) vid. Cyprian. ep 65,
and ep 68. Epipha. contra haeres. l. 1 haeres. 27. Ambros. in Ephesians. 4. and
sermon. 50. The supposed Ambrose in 1 Cor. 12, 28. and so much some of them
thought proved from Acts 1. 20.
that Bishops, we say as contradistinct to Presbyters were the successors of
the Apostles; so is it manifest from Scripture, since power Episcopal, (as it
is now taken in this dispute) which we shall prove to have been given by the
Apostles to Bishops, and to them only after the Apostles, was undeniably in
the Apostles, and for a while held in their own hands without communicating it
to others. That the Bishops were afterward instituted by the Apostles
themselves, which so many ancient Authous have averred. viz. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
and l. 4. 63. and l. 5. c. 20. Ignat. ep. ad Antioch. Tertul. adversus Marcion.
l. 4. c. 5. and de praescr. c. 32, and 36. Clemens Alexan. l. de divit.
salvand. apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 17. Eusebius. lib. Eccl. hist. 5. c. 6. and l. 3. c.
11, etc. 23. Irenaeus apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 10. S. Hieron. de script. Eccl.
Chrysostom. hom. de Ignat. tom. 5. Council. Constant. 5. act. 2.
And namely by the Apostolical Authority of St. Paul, and their institution,
part of holy Scripture is made good, in that the power and Office of a Bishop
(as the word is now taken in the Ecclesiastical notion) is prescribed in the
three Epistles of St. Paul, to those two famous Church Governors Timothy and
Titus, particularly the Office and power of a Bishop (as it is now taken
contradistinctly to the Office of a Presbyter) in these Texts, 1 Timothy 1. 3. 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20, 21, 22. 2. Tim. 1. 6. Tit. 1. 5, 11. Tit. 3. 9. 10: (and some
others) and these Texts thus interpreted by Antiquity 1 Timothy 1. 3. Theophyl.
and Oecumen. in locum, 1 Timothy 5. 19. Epiphanius haeres. 75. n. 15, and Theop.
in locum, v. 20, 21. Idem in locum, and Hemmin. in locum, v. 22. The supposed
Ambrose in locum, a Tim. 1. 6. Hieron. Oecumen. Bucer. in locum Tit. 1. 5.
Oecumen. in locum, v. 11. Chrysostomus in Tit. 1. Hieronimus in Tit. 3. 9. 10.
Ambros. lib. 5. de fid. s. Trinit. Bucer. Calvin. in locum.
. And as the office prescribed there is Episcopal, so these two appointed to
this prescribed office of a Bishop by St. Paul himself, 1 Timothy 1. 3. 2 Timothy 1.
6. Tit. 1. 5. Yea by the holy Ghost, say Chrysostom. Theophyl, Oecumenius: by
divine Revelation says Theodoret of Timothy. And that these two were Bishops
according to the Ecclesiastical notion of the word now used, ancient Fathers
plentifully witness. For Timithy Epib. haeres. 75. Eusebius lib. 3^. c. 4.
Hieronimus de script. Eccl. Chrysostom. hom. 2 ad Epist. Pilip. and in praefat.
in 1 Timothy the supposed Ambrose in praefat. in 1 Timothy Polycrates apud Phot.
Biblioth. Leont in council. Calced. Prim. in praefat. in 1 Timothy and in 1 Timothy c.
4. add Sedul. in 1 Timothy 1. 2. For Titus, see Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4. Hieronimus de
script. Eccl. dictus Ambr. in praefat. ad Ep: Tit. Theodoret apud Oecumen. in
praefat. ad ep. Tit. Theodoret apud Oecumen. in praefat. ad Tit. Theophyl. in
praefat. ad Tit. Oecumen. in Tit. 1. add Sedul, prolog. in epist. ad Tit.
Moreover this superiority to office Episcopal to have been fixed and
continued to the day of death is evident, as from Church History, so also from
1 Timothy 6. 14. where (...) is the same with (...) in the beginning of the
Epistle 1 Timothy 1. 18. and includes in it the whole charge given by St. Paul to
Timothy in this Epistle. Vid. Theodor. in 1 Timothy 6. 14 (...) Nempe ea quae
scribo.
From which Text also it is manifested, that his Office prescribed was not
personal only, but to descend by succession unto the coming of Christ (...)
Oecumen. in 1 Timothy c. 5. See also Ambrose in 1 Timothy 6.


Thirdly, this Office and power Episcopal, that it was afterward approved and
confirmed by the Son of God himself immediately, and by the holy Ghost, will
be proved from Revel. c. 1. and. 2. and 3. Where by the seven Stars, the Angels
of the seven Churches, according to all reason, from the Text it self, and by
the testimony of Antiquity Saint Augustine ep. 162. and in the Comment on the
Revelations under his name, Hom. 2. The supposed Ambrose in 1 Cor. 11. 16. and
in Apoc. Oecum: in Apoc: 2. Arethas in Apoc. 1. and among the Moderns, Marlorat
in Apoc. 2. 1. Bullinger Council. 9. in Apoc. Paraeus in Apoc. 1. 20. Dr
Reynolds conference with Heart. c. 8. divis. 3. Pet. Molinaeus in his marginall
Notes.
are seven Bishops of those seven Churches understood (which Ecclesiastical
story mentions to have been in the Church long before this time) as so many
Angels and Apostles Theodoret in 1 Timothy 3, 1. Pacianus epist. 2: ad Sympronian:
of the Churches; such as was Polycarp, the Angel, the Bishop of the Church of
Smyrna, made Bishop of that place by the Apostles themselves thirteen years
before this book of the Revelation of St. John was written: and Onesimus
probably the then Bishop, the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. Their Office,
Power, and Commission are there intimated to have been Episcopal, and charged
upon them by Christ, in that five of the Angels are charged as blameable, and
accomptable for the faults of both Presbyters and people; and therefore surely
were trusted with authority over Presbyters and people, to have corrected and
censured them. Particularly, Episcopal power is intimated there, chap. 2. of
the Revel. verse. 20. and that power of excommunication is sufficiently grounded
on the 14 verse, Mr. Perkins in locum, affirms. Their mission to that office
also, as it is there confirmed by the Son of God, and by the holy Spirit: So
also, to have been at first from God is in their title implied: For Angels sent
forth for the Churches sake are never said in holy Scripture to be any's
Messengers but Gods; and if his Messengers or Angels, then sent by him. That
their superiority was fixed, not weekly, or annual, is clear, as from the
Ecclesiastical History of Polycarp, and Onesimus, so also from the Text it
self, c. 2. 10. Where the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, as Angel of the
Church, is bidden to be faithful (in his Office surely) until death (...) 1b:
v: 26:
. Nor was it personal only but describing the Office of the Angel of any
Church (in like laudable or blameworthy state) unto the coming of Christ (as
it is implied v. 24. and 25. of the second chapter.) For what is said to them,
so long as there is any that has an ear to hear, he must hear, c. 2. v. 3.
Nor did the personal blameworthy carriage of the Angel of the Church of
Sardis, c. 3. v. 1, etc. or of the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, v.
14. 16. hinder Christ's approbation of their Office, who are in regard of their
Office (not of their personal Excellency) styled the Angels of the seven
Churches, and the Stars in the right hand of the Son of man: both which styles
that they are there singularly appropriated to these successors of the
Apostles, ought not to seem strange, since the twelve Apostles are confessedly
meant by the crown of twelve Stars, Apoc. 12. 1. And St Paul the Apostle of us
Gentiles, speaks of himself received as an Angel of God, Galat. 4. 14.
Summarily therefore out of holy Scriptures thus we reason, Many Presbyters and
Preachers in one Church, and one chief, having eminency and power over all
Presbyters and people therein, proves the Office of a Bishop; but so holy
Scripture witnesses were in Ephesus, many Presbyters, Act. 20. 17. (or if they
were Bishops in the sense now disputed, some of them at least, as Irenaeus
thought, l. 3. c. 14. we need go no further in the argument) and more
afterward surely, and yet one chief Pastor or Bishop over all, such as was
Timothy in his time, and the Angel of that Church (whosoever he was) mentioned
Rev. 2. 1. So also in the Church of Pergamus, there were diverse Teachers, true
and false, c. 2. v. 13, 15. one Angel Governor in chief, v. 1. For be it that
all the Presbyters of each of the Churches might well have been called Angels
Job 33. 23. and Malach. 2. 7.
, yet that one among them (in each Church) in such a compatible community of
name is so called by way of eminency, proves an eminency in the one so called:
which must either be of personal excellency above all the rest (and this who
can show us in the Angel of the Church of Sardis, Laodicea, or Thyatira?) or
else (and rather) of Office and power, so as John Baptist was called an Angel,
Malac: 3. who was more then a Prophet; and St. Paul received as an Angel, Gal.
4. 14. who was more then a Minister, and our Savior Christ is called Michael,
Apoc. 12. 7. with his Angels fighting under him. One objection more we shall
take notice of, viz. the pretended necessity of understanding by each of the
Angels there a collective body, from c. 2. v. 10. and 24. But this is
manifestly clear to be no necessity at all from the like manner of speaking of
the holy Ghost 2 Chronicles. 28. 1. and to the 5. Compare and judge. And therefore
it is not lawful without any necessary reason, to depart from the literal and
determinate individuation of one chief spiritual Church-governour, in each of
the seven Churches: for otherwise, as Tertullian speaks lib. de carne Christi,
cap. 13. Omnia periclitabuntur aliter accipi quam sunt, and amittere quod sunt,
dum aliter accipiuntur. Yea there is not only no necessity, but much in the
Text which does resist such an interpretation of a collective body: for it
should be either an Angel put for the whole particular Church; and this cannot
be, seeing the Angels and the Churches are accurately distinguished c. 1. v.
20. Or an Angel put for the whole collection of the Presbyters; but neither may
this be admitted, inasmuch as in the same 20 verse the Angels are called (...)
seven, no more; and (...) not (...) stars, not constellations, as Suidas
distinguishes the words. You have our reasons from these Scriptures, why to us
it seems that to swear to endeavor the extirpation of Church Government by
Bishops is to swear to endeavor the extirpation of that whose Root is in holy
Scripture; and to swear to endeavor (which we tremble to think of) to wrest
these Stars out of the right hand of the Son of man, who is also the Son of
God. For in his right hand are they held, the Angels of the Churches, Revel. 1.
16, 20.

As Church Government by Bishops has been evidenced by holy Scripture, so was
it also the judgment of the ancient godly Fathers, that it was an institution
Apostolical and Divine; (...) says Theodoret, l. 4. c. 18. by St. Cyprian,
ep. 55. the power of Episcopacy is exegetically called, Ecclesiae gubernande
sublimis and divina potestas: and epist. 27. Dominus noster Episcopi honorem
disponens in Evangelic. And anon after, ut omnis actus Ecclesiae per Episcopos
gubernetur: cum hoc itaque divina lege fundatum sit, miror quosdam audaci
temeritate etc. and epist. 65. Episcopos and Praepositos Dominus elegit: And
anon after, Deus Episcopos facit. Athanasius epist. ad Dracontium says, that
he who contemns the function of a Bishop, (...) and that the Office is of those
things (...) etc. (...): Ignat. epist. ad Magnes. (...) Idem Ignat, epist, ad
Ephesians. Oecumen. c. 9. in Tim. 4. (...) Theophylact. and Oecumenius found
Bishops upon Ephesians. 4.11. and on Hebr. 13.17. Oecumenius and Nazianzen in
Apologet. in 1 Pet. 5. vide Hegesippum apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22. and
Chrysostom. in Tit. 1. Hom. 2. Saint Ambrose de dignitate Sacerdot. c. 2. and
6. Isidor. Pelusiot. lib. 2. ep. 125.

Further, out of the holy Scripture we might allege according to Saint Hieroms
interpretation, that this distinction between the Bishops and his Presbyters
was signified in Moses and the 70. So Hierom in Tit. 1. the distinction of
Presbyters and Deacons, to be that which was under the Law of the high Priest,
Priests and Levites. So S. Hieron. Ep. 2. ad Nepotianum and Ep. ad Evagrium;
and before him Ignat. ad Philadelph. Clement. ep. ad. Corinth. Chrysostom. Hom.
20. ad pop. Antioch. and after Leo ep. 66 Isidor. Hisp. de officiis, Eccles. l.
2. c. 5. and 7. That the eminent dignity and office of Bishops was prophesied
of, Psalm. 45. 16. where Bishops are meant, say S. August. in loc. Comment.
called S. Hieroms in locum. S. Cyril. of Alex. in loc. Theodoret in locum.
Ruffinus in locum: as the other of Presbyters and Deacons were prophesied of,
Isaiah 66. 21. And further, for imparity of Teachers in the new Testament, that
answerably to Prophets in the old, and sons of the Prophets, among some that
served in the Gospel, some were as Fathers, others serving with them as sont.
So also that we read of Builders and Master Builders in Gods building, 1 Cor.
3. and we read also among those builders of (...) etc. (...) etc. (...) etc. 1
Cor. 12. 28. (...) Hebr. 13. 17. and under them (...) Luc. 22. 27. But for the
confirmation by Scripture of the office of a Bishop, we adhere especially to
the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and those seven Epistles, Apoc. 1, 2, and 3.
And if it be acknowledged of institution Apostolical, and approved by God but
temporary only, the contrary will be made manifest, as from the proper light
of the Texts alleged, and from the forecited Text, 1 Timothy 6. 14. So also from
this Proposition which we avow: No Constitution Apostolical received by the
universal Church perpetually in all ages, unto this age of this controversy,
can without scandal and dangerous consequence be called Temporary; the
universal practice of the Church practicing continually and perpetually an
Apostolical Institution, being a most sure Commentary that it was no temporary
institution. Forasmuch as we are taught by the holy Ghost in divine Scripture,
that contention in what the Law of God is pretended not to be express, may be
warrantably taken off by the custom of the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16. See
Theophylact. in locum. Custom, I do not say any, but of the Churches of God,
i.e. Primitive, also Universal, Perpetual, interpreting the controverted Law
of God, whether Natural, as verse. 14. or Positive, by no less reason.
Whereunto agrees well the rule of S. Augustine, contra Crescon. lib. 1. c. 32.
and contra Donat. l. 4. c. 24. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia etc. and ep. 86. ad
Casul. and epist. ad Januarium 118. si quidtota hodie etc. and Vincent Lyrin.
adversus haereses, c. 2. etc. 3. Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus etc.
And if not by such traditive interpretation from the custom of the Churches of
God, according to the Apostles rule, how shall we convince contentious
gainsayers, that the sense of those Texts, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing
them etc. Matthew. 28. and those other of baptizing the household of Stephanus,
and of the keeper of the prison, 1 Cor. 1. Acts 16. or any other Scriptures, to
be a divine warrant (as they are) for Baptism of Infants? Or the sense of hoc
facite etc. Luke 22. to imply a divine right of Presbyters only to consecrate
the Elements of the blessed Sacrament? or the sense of those Texts, John 20. 1,
19, 26. Acts 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. Revel. 1. 10. or Psalm 118. 24. or of any
other Scriptures to be a divine warrant for the translation of our one day in
seven from the seventh day of the week to the first? Or on the other side, how
shall we convince those of the Church of Rome, that that Apostolical divine
Precept, James 5.14. as to the anointing the sick with oil was a temporary
Precept only, but negatively from the interpretation of the custom of the
Churches of God? Since miraculous gifts were also conferred by the laying on of
hands, which yet was not temporary, Heb. 6 2.

Now that this Apostolical institution has heen universally practiced, and
perpetually in the custom of the Churches of God of all times and places
(excepting only some narrow place and time of this age of this controversy)
and that in Churches founded by different planters, by all the several
Apostles and others sent by them, as well those Churches which have in several
ages rejected the Antichristian Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome over all the
Church, as others; and that order preserved by God from extirpation, through all
the ten persecutions, and descending in each Church or City by particular
continued succession: as for example, 27 Bishops from S. Timothy to the time of
the Chalcedon Council, as was declared there, act. 11. that in all times,
primitive and following, Bishops have been chief in Ecclesiastical government,
in Councels, in Martyrdom, in Piety, in Learning, in the conversion of Nations,
in the mighty confounding of Heresies and Heretics; we believe we are able
(if any deny) to make good. And first here for the Primitive Churches, we
allege all the forecited Testmonies of Antiquity, proving Bishop to have been
instituted by the Apostles themselves, vide supra. Yea and early, within the
Apostles times there having been not only three Bishops of Rome successively,
Linus, Cletus, and Clemens: and within Saint John's time of life, four Bishops
of Alexandria successively, Saint Mark, Anianus, Abilius, and Cerdo; three
Bishops of Antioch, Saint Peter, Evodius, and Ignatius; two of Jerusalem, Saint
James and Simeon; all while Saint John the Apostle yet lived, Eusebius, hist
eccles. lib. 3. cap. 12. But also Saint James made Bishop of Jerusalem soon
after the passion of our Lord, says Saint Hierom. de Script. Eccles. After the
Ascension of our Savior, says Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 1. before Saint Stevens
Martyrdom, for Saint Steven was Deacon to James Bishop of Jerusalem, says
Ignatius epist. ad Trall. and the ancient Author of the Epist. ad Heronem under
his name; and that James himself was martyred after he had governed the Church
of Jerusalem 30. years, says Saint Hierom. de Script. Eccles. And as Saint
Hierom affirms, James the Apostle to have been the first Bishop of Jerusalem,
in Gal. 1. So also Peter to have been the first Bishop of Antioch, in Gal. 2.
And Mark the first Bishop of Alexandria, in Prooem. in Matthew. who died six
years before Saint Peter or S. Paul (says Saint Hierom. though therein he
dissent from Irenaeus lib. 3.) 35. years before Saint James the Apostle;
besides therefore nine recorded as Bishops in holy Scripture, Timothy and Titus
Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, and the seven of the seven Churches in Asia;
besides two Apostles Bishops, viz. James of Jerusalem, and James Bishop of
Jerusalem ^, Council. genesis Constantinop. Can. 32. Clemens apud Eusebius. l. 2. c.
1. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 21. and l. 2. c. 22. and l. 7. c. 14, 15, 19. Aug. l. 2.
contra Lit. Petil. c. 57. contra Crescon. l. 2. c. 37. Epiphanius contra
Ma^ich, sect. 66. and haeres. 78. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. cap. 15. hom. 38. and
hom. 33. in Act. 15. 23. and Hom. 46. in Act. Hieron. in Gal. 1. and Epist. ad
Evagr. and de Script. Eccles. Theophylact. and Oecum. in Gal. 2.
Peter of Antioch, Origin. hom. 6. in Luc. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 22, 35, 36. and in
Chronico. in A. D. 38. S. Hieron. in Gal. 2. and l. de Eccles. Script.
Chrysostom. hom. de trans. Ignat. Theodor. dialog. 1. Greg. l. 6. Ep. 37.
and one Evangelist, Mark of Alexandria Eusebius. l. 2. 15. 24. Hier. prooem in
Mat. and de scr. Eccles. and Ep. ad Evag. Greg. l. 6. Ep 371,
: there are also nine other (in all 21.) recorded in holy Scripture (all which,
except two of the seven Angels, are there registered for Saints) who (if we will
believe as credible records of Christians as any other humane Records
whatsoever) were Bishops before they died, viz. Clemens Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
Optat l. 2. cont. Parmen. Tertul. de praesadversus haeret, S. Aug. Ep. 165.
and Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. Optat. l. 2. cont. Parmen. Aug. Ep. 165.
Linus made Bishops of Rome successively by Peter and Paul. Evodius Eusebius. l.
3. c. 22. and the Author of the Epist. ad Antioch. under Ignatius his name.
Bishop of Antioch by Peter and Paul. Dionysius the Areopagite Bishop of Athens
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22. and l. 3. c. 4.
: Archippus Amb in Col. 4. Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 7.
Bishop of the Colossians: Epaphroditus Theod. in 1 Timothy 3. and in Phil. 2.
Primasius in Phil. 2. Pacianus Ep. 2. ad Sympronian.
Bishop of the Philippians: Epaphras Ambros. Col. 4.
Bishop of the Colossians: Gaius Origin l. 10. in Ep. ad Romans c. 16.
also Bishop of the Thessalonians: Trophimus Epist. comprovin. ad Leon.
Bishop of Arles: To which you may add (the two and twentieth) Antipas Bishop
of Pergamus, if we will believe Paraeus in Apoc. 2. proving it out of Arethas
Caesariensis, in Apoc. 1. and Onesimus Bishop of Ephesus, Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians.
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 35.
if he were not the forementioned Angel of the Church of Ephesus, when Saint
John wrote his Revelation. To omit to speak here of other Bishops, who were
Scholars and Auditors of the Apostles, Ignatius of Saint John Eus. l. 3. 35.
S. Hieron. de. Script. Eccles. Theod. dial. 1. Felix 3. Epist. ad Zenonem.
made Bishop of Antioch by Saint Peter; Papias Hieron, de Script. Eccles. and
Eusebius. l. 3. cap. 35. 39.
Saint John's Scholar, Bishop of Hierapolis; Publius and Q^adratus Hieron.
ibid. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.
Bishops of Athens, Disciples of the Apostles; Simeon the son of Cleoph^^
Hegesippus apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22. and Eusebius. l. 3. c. 11.
Bishop of Jerusalem (after James) and the Kinsman of our Lord.

This order of Bishops which began (though the first we read of in Scripture be
Timothy and Titus) in Saint James of Jerusalem, or Saint Mark of Alexandria,
continued thorowout all the following ages of the Churches of God, in which
Bishops have been the most reverend Martyrs, such as Ignatius, Polycarp.
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, Cyprian of Carthage, and more then 30. of the first
Bishops of Rome successively both in Episcopacy and Martyrdom. Of Bishops also
especially did consist the first four general Councels, received by all the
reformed Churches, the confounders of the maine heresies touching the second
and third persons in the blessed Trinity; and by an Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz.
cap. 10. next to the canonical Scriptures, made the rule of judging Heresies:
who also in Council gave judgment for the inviolable practice of the Church
in this order: the general Council of Nice providing, Ne in una civitate duo
sint Episcopi, Cant. 8. The general Council of Constantinople adjudging to
Bishops the power of Ordination, Can. 2. and Can. 4. in the case of Maximus.
The general Council of Ephesus distinguishing betwixt the Bishop and the rest
of the Clergy. Can. 7. and confirming the Bishops jurisdiction, Can. 5. The
general Council of Chalcedon determining, Can. 29. (...)

For as much then, as in the first Article we are required to swear to
endeavor the reformation of Religion according to the Word of God, and the
examples of the best reformed Churches, surely we may not in the second Article
swear to endeavor the extirpation of Church Government by Bishops, and so to
forsake the government grounded on the Word of God, and to forsake the example
of all the ages of the Primitive Churches, then which we conceive no late
reformed Church will pretend to be more pure, and to whose examples they do or
ought to endeavor to reform themselves.

But after all this, it will be said, that this government by Bishops is ejured
only, as it interprets Prelacy, which word if it have been translated Regimen
Tyranicum, the Translation as far exceeds the truth of Grammar, as the
Prelates are accused to have exceeded their lawful power; forasmuch as Prelacy
in its original, and acception of ancient Authors ( Praelati we say, not
elati) imports but lawful preeminence and power. So is Timothy called by
Gregory de Cura pastor: p. 2. c. 11. Praelatus Gregi; and the word Prelate is
often honorably mentioned in our Laws, 9 Ed. 2. and 24 Hen. 8. and is no more
then the Title Praepositi mentioned also with honor by St. Cyprian Epist. 10.
and 55. and 65. Augustine. de civitate Dei, l. 20. c. 9. or Antistites, S. Cypr.
ep. 69. and Sancti Antistites, S. August. ep. 162. and diverse words in
Scripture used, signifying equivalently such preeminence, but let it not be
told indeed in other Churches, that any other is here abjured then Regimen
Tyrannicum.

But are we warranted by the following style of Hierarchy? Does that word
import originally and anciently any other then a sacred government? was it not
accepted and approved in it self by Mr. Calvin. lib. de necessitate Eccl.
reformandae, Talem si nobis Hierarchiam exhibeant in qua sic emineant Episcopi,
ut Christo subesse non recusent, etc. ut ab illo tanquam uno Capite pendeant,
and ad ipsum referantur, etc. tum vero nullo non anathemate dignos fateor, qui
non eam reverenter summaque obedientia observent.

Moreover, how can we in the same Article abjure Church Government by Bishops,
with Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness, (as there it follows) yea Prelacy
even before Schism and Heresy, etc. when as Bishops have been in all ages the
chief confounders of heresy and heretics, such was Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria of the heresy of Arrius. Cyril of Alexandria of the Nestorian
heresy. Caelestine Bishop of Rome, Augustine Bishop of Hippo, Prosper Bishop
of Rhegium, Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspi, of the Palagian heresy: and many more
in all ages of the Church before and since. Nor was there found any one
Christian, thorowout all the Primitive and purest times of the Church, for
above five hundred years after Christ, who thought it fit to abolish Church
government by Bishops (much less to ej^re it) save only one heretic, Aerius,
so censured by Epiphanius, Haeres. 75. and by Saint Augustine, Haeres. 53.
whose speech savoured of madness, says Epiphanius; for he had said, What is a
Bishop differing from a Presbyter? Et infra (...)
and the occasion of it Saint Augustine lets us know, lib. de Haeres. c. in
Aerium; Aerius being a Presbyter, is said to have been vexed, because he could
not get to be ordained a Bishop, and thence arose his envy: Epiphanius
witnesses as much, Haeres. 75.

Secondly, as to Schism, Saint Hierom the one and only Father alleged, as
denying the divine Institution of Bishops, yet held them necessary to repress
Schism, and then surely most necessary, when Schism does, as in these our
days, most abound: For avoiding of Schism, Saint Hierom witnesses, Episcopacy
was thought necessary long within the Apostles times, even as early as it was
said by some, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo etc. and therefore says in his
Dialogue, Adversus Luciferian. Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate
pendet, cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in
Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot Sacerdotes. S. Cyprian also Epist. 55.
Non aliunde haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam etc. and so
also lib. 4. epist. 9. Unde enim Schismata and Haereses obortae sunt and
oriuntur, nisi dum Episcopus qui unus est praesumptione contemnitur? etc.
Master Calvin also himself upon Philipp. 1. 1. Fateor quidem ut sunt hominum
ingenia and mores, non posse ordinem stare inter verbi Ministros, quin reliquis
praesit unus. So that we cannot apprehend the abjuration of Episcopacy to be a
mean to that unity in this Article mentioned, That the Lord may be one, and
his Name one amongst us, but rather the continuation thereof, according to the
counsel of the holy Martyr S. Cyprian, Unus Deus, unus Dominus, unus
Episcopus; and that of Ignatius ad magnes. (...)
Subjecti estote Episcope and vobis mutue, ut Christus Patri, ut inter vos
divina quaedam sit unio.

Next, Profaneness is here also to be cast out with Episcopacy; yet who may
not fear Gods Judgments, if he deny the detestable growth of profaneness
since the contempt of that Apostolical institution of Episcopacy? So that this
Article as to Bishops extirpation we must refuse, upon that close upon which
others take it, lest, as it is said, we should partake in others sin, and
consequently in their plagues.

Thirdly, because neither can we swear to endeavor the extirpation of that
part of this Church Government by Archbishops, an Ecclesiastical constitution,
so confessedly ancient; nor that part of this Church Government by Deanes and
Chapters, that is, a society of grave Divines, of Presbyters joined to the
Bishop in his see of residence, as assistants in Council and Government: as
James Bishop of Jerusalem had his resident Presbyters, Acts 21. 18. and
consulted with them, verse. 20. According also to the ancient general and
continued custom of the Church of God ever since the first Christian Emperors
time; and moreover endowed with means given to them by the last Wills and
Testaments of many (which it is not lawful for us to endeavor to annull,
Hebr. 9. 17.) and by the gifts of many other Donors, who had true propriety in
their goods, and might and did transfer the undoubted property to those to be
enjoyed by the right and liberty of the Subject; especially such endowments
having been consecrated and devoted unto God for pious uses, and which may not
therefore by us (as we conceive) be endeavored to be alienated, Prove. 20. 25.
Numb. 16. 38. And as to the exercises of piety, so also to the encouragement of
the most excellent part of learning, the study of divinity and of holy
Scripture.

We shall with the same sincerity, Article 3.
reality and constancy, in our several Vocations, endeavor with our estates
and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments,
and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with
our Consciences of our loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to
diminish His Majesty's just power and greatness.

Because in the third Article, whereas we are required, and that in the first
place to bind our selves absolutely without limitation expressed, To preserve
the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms;
and were likewise tied simply and indefinitely to defend the Kings Person,
State, and Honor, by the Oath of Allegiance and the late Protestation; here
when we are bidden to swear to defend his Majesty's Person and Authority, it is
added [ In the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of
the Kingdoms] therefore this manner of swearing we dare not admit, till it be
publicly declared by the Imposers, that the meaning of those words is not (as
to some it may sound) that I bind my self to preserve and defend his
Majesty's Person and Authority so far forth as he shall preserve and defend
true Religion and the Liberties of the Kingdoms: Since by the holy Scriptures
of the old and new Testament, by the Law of Nature and Nations, by the Oath of
God, and by true Religion, we are bound to endeavor the preservation and
defense of his Person and Authority, though he were a persecutor of the true
Religion, and an abridger of our Liberties, such as were Saul and Nero in their
times. And surely a larger Declaration of our endeavors simply to defend his
Person, is at this time necessary, when through the divisions of the Kingdom
his sacred Majesty is so endangered; and that his Majesty has often
complained of affronts offered to his person; and has complained also, that
some have endeavored to kill his Person in two set battails; and that there is
nothing more frequent in the minds and mouths of some Shimei's, then that the
King is popishly affected. A Papist in his heart; and therefore some furious
Zelot may not only upon these surmises conclude himself exempted (in case)
from the duty of preservation and defense of his Royal Person, but also
mistake it as a debt to this Covenant, even to offer violence to his sacred
Majesty. May not therefore some such fuller Declaration and explication of our
duty (when we will by Oath profess it) seem necessary to the end here
proposed, That the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our loyalty?

We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, Article 4.
or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the
reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the people,
contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the supreme Indicatories of both Kingdoms respectively,
or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

Whether are not all those to be accounted to us as Malignants, etc. by
hindering reformation of Religion (and consequently to be discovered that they
may receive condign punishment) whom we know to endeavor in their places and
callings, the continuation of Church Government by Bishops, and the
preservation of the whole frame of government (as it now stands by the known
Laws of this Kingdom established) administered according to the right intent of
those Laws against all alteration, till it be by act of Parliament (enacted by
his Majesty's personal consent, and both Houses) altered and changed?

Secondly, we demand how far forth we are here to be sworn to endeavor the
discovery of all that have been or shall be Malignants etc. Is the son hereby
engaged to betray his father, the wife her husband, the servant his master? and
to accuse them as Malignants and evil Instruments by hindering the reformation?
If so; has the Law of God, of Nature, or of the Land ever commanded it; except
in the case of high Treason? Where God enjoined to the Jews the discovery of
those who should entice them to serve other gods (a sin surely as detestable
and heinous, as to be such as here are to be accounted Malignants etc. by
hindering the reformation of Religion) thus we read, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy brother
the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom,
or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee, etc. thou shall not
conceal him, but thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death: where it
may be observed, That all the persons there by God so particularly recounted in
the Text, not to be concealed, they are only such as are in a collateral
equal degree, as the brother not to conceal his brother, the friend his
friend; or of some inferiority, as the husband his wife, the father his son:
But there is expressed no such injunction, That the son was to reveal his
father, or the wife her husband: so tender was the God of nature of the
respects due to those by whom he has bestowed upon us our Being, Life, and
Livelihood, or whom he has made a head to others; that he did not command
inferiors should give in an accusation against such their superiors, even in
crimes which the Law judged should be punished with death.

Thirdly, whereas we have in the late Protestation vowed to maintain the
liberty of the Subject, and also are required to bind our selves in this
Covenant to preserve the same (if the liberties of the Kingdoms include the
liberty of the subject.) Yet contrary hereunto (as we conceive) we should bind
our selves to endeavor that our fellow subjects may be brought to punishment,
either such as their offense shall deserve, or such as not only the supreme
Indicatories of both Kingdoms, but any other also having power from them for
that effect, shall judge convenient; by which we should endeavor to put power
(arbitrary surely, since it is not restrained according to the Laws of our
Land) in some other then the supreme judicatory, viz. some deputed from them,
who may judge it covenient (if what they shall judge convenient may be their
rule) as well sometimes to exceed the Letter of the Law, made by the supreme
Judicatory, as otherwhile to mitigate it: Yea who may proceed against such
Malignants where the Laws are wholly silent, and neither have given name to
their fault, nor prescribed any punishment?

And whereas the happiness of a blessed peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our progenitors, Article 5.
is by the good providence of God granted unto us, and has been lately
concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according
to our place and interest endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm
peace and union to all posterity; and that justice may be done upon the wilful
opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent Articles.

Concerning the happy peace between these Kingdoms lately concluded, we
earnestly prayed and desired that it might have been continued, and pray that
it may be renewed; and are sorry heartily, that contrary to the Pacification
made by His Majesty and both Parliaments, and contrary to the solemn Faith
given, there is at this time a miserable War begun again between an Army of
that Kingdom entering ours, (without and against his Majesty's consent and
Declaration) and the Forces raised by His Majesty, who (we have heard) has
much deprecated their entering in, alleging vehemently that their late solemn
Faith and Pacification: So that shall it not be in us also Protestatis
contraria facto, to bind our selves in this Article (as willingly we would) to
endeavor the continuance of a firm peace and union, and in the next to assist
and defend those who declare, that in pursuit of this Covenant they now enter
into this Kingdom with an Army? which if we look to the late Act of
Pacification, and may for our selves judge and discern what it is, since we are
required to swear thereto, appears in its self an action as contrary thereto as
War to Peace. So that this Covenant would bindus to endeavor that which it
makes us to abjure.

We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Article 6.
Liberty, and peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter
into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and
shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combination,
persuasion, or terror to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed union and
conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our
selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause, which so much
concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the
King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly continue
therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power,
against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be
timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of God.

Whereas we are in the sixth Article required to Covenant in this common cause
of Religion (which is described in the first Article, A reformation of Religion
in England and Ireland) that we will assist and defend all those that enter into
this League and Covenant against all opposition, and that in the close it is
implied, that we should endeavor to do what we are able to suppress and
overcome whatsoever opposition; we conceive it to be against the whole current
of the Gospel of Christ, the practice and Doctrine of all Primitive
Christians, whom the world has ever esteemed for blessed Saints and Martyrs,
and lastly repugnant to the Doctrine of the best reformed Churches, (to which
we here should swear to conform our selves) to endeavor a Reformation of
religion by force of Arms against the supreme Magistrat's consent.

Secondly, May we swear never to suffer our selves to be withdrawn by
whatsoever persuasion from this League and Covenant, since the reasons
persuading us to it are in no wise Demonstrative? What if hereafter we shall
see better reasons, and stronger motives to forsake it, then we have now to
take it, or shall have then to keep it? will not then our consciences better
informed force us to break our Oath (an Argument that we sinned in taking it)
or our Oath bind us contrary to our consciences so informed, (which is
impossible?) What if (as now the King, so) future Parliaments disallow this
Covenant, and oppose it, shall we then be obliged to continue therein, and to
assist and defend all those that so continue against all opposition, though it
shall be contradicted by the same Authority by which it is now imposed upon us?

Thirdly, Where we are required to bind our selves never to make defection to
the contrary part; whether by the contrary part is not to be understood all
that are against this Covenant? If so, will not these words following, [
Against all opposition, against all lets and impediments whatsoever] include
His Majesty's opposition? And then, as we have said, we are in the close
impliedly supposed, That we will endeavor to do what we are able to suppress
and overcome any part whatsoever of the contrary part opposing it self; which
since it seems not to except His Sacred Majesty, how will this be consistent
with the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Laws of the Land, 5 H. 4.
25 Edw. 3? Secondly, how with the Word of God, when we are taught by St. Paul,
Romans 13. That whosoever shall resist the higher Powers, shall receive to
himself Damnation? and in case of contrary conflicts of these higher Powers
among themselves, from the reason included in the object, the damnation will be
(without repentance) to those that resist the Highest: and among the higher
powers, (if St. Peter may interpret St. Paul) the King is Supreme, and all
other Governors are sent by Him, 1 Pet. 2. 14. Vid. Angl. Confess. art. 37: and
Scotican. confess art. 24. ideo confitemur and profitemur, quod qui supremae
autoritati resistunt, usurpantes quod ad illius munus pertinet, illi Dei
ordinationi resistunt, ideoque coram illo innocents esse non possunt.
For our selves therefore, if His Majesty should use the Sword committed to him
unjustly, we must take up St. Ambrose's words, conc. 1. contra Auxentium,
Dolere potero, flere potero, potero gemere, adversus arma, milites, Gothos
quoque Lachrymae miae Arma sunt, talia sunt munimenta Sacerdotis, aliter nec
deb^o, nec possumresistere.

Fourthly, were there nothing in the Law of God, or of this Land forbidding us
of the Kingdom of England to enter a Covenant of mutual assistance and
defense, without and against the allowance of the King, yet it would be
unlawful for us to join in this Covenant, since we are required here not only
to join with one another, but with the Scots also in a Covenant of mutual
assistance and defense; to whom, if by a law of their Land all such Covenants
and Leagues be forbidden as seditious, we, if we knowingly covenant to assist
and defend them in such a League, contract to our selves the guilt of sedition.
Now to the Scots (in the second part of that Act of Parliament holden at
Linlithgow anno 1585.) are forbidden all leagues or bonds of mutual defense
which are made without the privity and consent of the King, under the pain to
be holden and execute as movers of sedition and unquietness. This we read
objected by the Divines of Aberdeen, but could never yet see any satisfying
answer made thereunto.

Fifthly, Whether will not men think themselves bound by this part of the
Covenant, all the days of their lives to continue so far zealously united
against the contrary part, as to reject all overtures of Accommodation, and
reconciliation; till they be suppressed or overcome, and so our wounds become
incurcable?

Sixthly, This Covenant (as we conceive, under correction) cannot be wisely
taken by any man affected to this cause; for should they not here swear never
to yield themselves, though debelled, and unable to withstand the common Enemy,
viz. the Forces raised by the King? nor ever to lay down Arms, or cease active
resistance? But if it should please God to give the foresaid contrary part
power of conquest, and consequently Ius victory, should they not bind
themselves by this Covenant never to submit themselves to Gods Will and
Judgment against them? and so exclude all Christian patience and suffering in
afflictions, and tie themselves (though unable) actively to resist, plot,
disturb and overthrow all such who shall so have power over them hereafter, all
such Governors and governments, which it may please God (as they must confess
for a punishment of their sins at least) to place over them, which thing we
conceive to be against the Law of God, reason and Nations.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins, etc.]

What the Conclusion Concl.
suggests we have also considered, and profess our selves ready to join with
our brethren in the necessary humbling of our selves under the mighty hand of
God, and in the confession of our sins, (though in a public set form and
prescribed, such as we conceive this former part of the Conclusion to be) our
purpose also, desire and endeavor, through the grace of God, to amend our
lives; and touching those words here mentioned [ In all duties we owe to God
and man] we profess and declare, that did we believe in our consciences, the
above-written Articles of the Covenant not to be repugnant to our duties which
we owe to God and man, (in the particulars specified relating to His Majesty
and to the Bishops of our Churches, by God set over us, and otherwise) we
should gladly have gone along with our brethren therein.

Secondly, since this Oath expressly professes, what also all lawful promisory
oaths must include, that it is to be made in the presence of Almighty God, the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall
answer at the great day; we trust our just refusal will, or ought to be better
interpreted, even by the Imposers themselves, then those men's detestable
hypocrisy, who enter this League, and make this Oath, with mental
reservation; others as far as lawfully they may, and saving all former Oaths;
yet others, as far as it is agreeable to Gods Word, or in their own sense, or
according to the sense of the Preacher, scandalizing thus our Christian and
reformed Religion, with Jesuiticall mental reservations, reserving in their
minds a sense contrary to their words (which are instituted to signify our
minds) and contrary to the mind of the Imposers, (even in the judgment of
their own minds) sufficiently signified in the words of the Covenant: and
indeed, mentem injuratam gerunt; reserving this Popery in thus swearing, while
they swear to extirpate Popery. We profess to know no other legitimate sensing
of our Oaths, but men's deferentis, Quacunque art verborum quis juret, Deus
tamen qui conscientiae testis est, ita hoc accipit, sicut ille cui juratur
intelligit ^sidorus. Perjuri sunt, qui servatis verbis expectationem eorum
quibus juratum^^,^ecepe^u^^t, Augustine. ep. 224 ad Alipium.
(and that declared before the taking of the Oath, not in a post-Declaration)
and the Grammatical common sense of the words without limitation other then
what is expressed; according to the rule of St. Augustine. Juramentum debet esse
pressum, and expressum: By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. How also can any lawfully take an Oath, the matter
whereof he judges to be unlawful, so far as lawfally he may? Be we not
deceived, God is not mocked; May we swear to lie, steal, or commit adultery so
far as lawfully we may? Is it more sinful to go about to do it, so far as
lawfully we may, then so to swear it? He that so swears, swears with judgment
against his judgment, and to unrighteousness without truth, and condemns
himself in that which he allows.

Thirdly, to swear, saving all former Oaths, to what we judge to be opposite to
our former lawful Oaths, is to delude both our former and present Oath; to
warrant, that we may without scandal abjure (in words, not in heart) what we
have sworn before to keep, because we have sworn before to keep and never to
abjure it; to make vain (as far as in us lies) the great and dreadful name of
God, the wholesome end and use of Oaths, and particularly to destroy the end of
this present Covenant, if the takers intend not what the Oath intend^; and may
also hereafter (saving this present Oath) swear to the contrary. For the
present be it considered, that whereas this Oath is a League for unity; if each
may take it in their own sense, its end will be none; and we as far from joint
union of assistance as before. For, swearing to assist all who enter into this
League, if we think our selves bound to assist only the takers in our own
sense, then we may happily be tied to assist none hereby, for perhaps our own
sense is peculiar and different from all others, and probably from most, for
most take it in the common sense of the words.

Lastly, if one end of this Covenant be, that (if it succeed) it may be
encouragement to other Christian Churches (in like case) to join in the same or
like Association and Covenant; we judge it necessary to admonish our selves and
others, that if in this we offend, we also lay a stumbling block of offense
before the faces of so many Christian Churches now and hereafter, who are here
invited to follow our example. Should we not therefore sadly consider, whose
example in this action we follow, before we give and invite others to follow
our example? Ought we not wisely to fear, lest by this we expose our brethren
of the reformed Churches beyond the Seas, to the jealousy of their several
Princes under whom they live, and become guilty of the provocation of all those
evils, wherewith Princes in prevention of what is here suggested to their
Subjects (if not declared against by them) may aggrieve our brethren of the
reformed Religion? And also, have we not cause to question with our selves, how
the example of entering a covenant mutually to assist and defend one another,
when there is declared a joining in Arms, without and against the consent of
the supreme Magistrate, how this example (we say) will make, as is here said,
to the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths? Now the
Lord of Peace himself give unto us, and to all the Churches of God, Peace
always, by all means.

Amen.
An Exhortation to the taking of the solemn League and Covenant, etc.
IF the power of religion, or solid reason, if loyalty to the King, etc.
IF it had not been intimated that the Authors of this Exhortation were the
Assembly of Divines, (as they are styled in the 14 Article of the Instructions)
and expressed, that the end of it was the satisfying of such scruples as may
arise (and that by the same Authority by which the Covenant it self is to be
imposed) it could not have given the conscience of any man either so much
license to examine the discourse with strictness and severity, or so much
satisfaction (one way or other) in the examination; seeing there is scarce any
other end of writing which necessarily obliges to a discovery of all the
consequences and the principles of a discourse, and there is no such outward
encouragement to the conscience toward satisfaction, as when it shall consider
that it is examining an Exhortation and a Defense, the Authors of which have
been chosen, the work appointed, and after the performance twice publicly
read, and considered, and lastly ordered to be published by them who are the
managers of the Cause for which this Exhortation and Defense is made. But this
being the declared end, and those the Authors, it will not stand with the
opinion of the faithfulness of those men toward the Cause it self, to imagine
that they reserve to themselves clearer and firmer principles, upon which they
are able to enforce the taking of the Covenant, then those they have here
expressed: And consequently, if upon just examination it shall appear, that all
the truth that is by them laid down is not sufficient to infer their
Conclusion, they may be more tender of those who are of different persuasion
from themselves, though they shall (notwithstanding their endeavors) persist
in their opinion, nay though they should hereby gain a degree of adhesion to it.

The conclusion which they would infer is the taking of the Covenant, and the
general end of that, as expressed in the Covenant it self and in all the
Declarations which concern the same, is (in our calling) the assistance of
those of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland joined in Arms, etc. against the
Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant party: in a word, to assist, or comply with
those English and Scottish Forces, against the Forces raised by the Kings
personal command. This being the case wherein the scruples (by them spoken of)
are supposed to be removed, that their Arguments to that end might be
effectual, it was necessary to their end, that the present case should have
been clearly and particularly laid down, considering that the discovery of
strong and not doubting presumption and supposall of that part which is
defended, though it might produce a degree of confirmation in those who are
(though not so strongly) of the same opinion, yet can it not in reason be
reputed a means to take off scruple from a rational adversary. This being
necessary in it self for a true and thorough resolution of conscience in the
case, it cannot be denied but their discourse is imperfect in it self, and
consequently they may as well have erred in assuming to themselves all that is
holy and perfect, and esteeming of the adverse party as of people bewitched and
besotted, hoodwink't and blinded, etc. nay, as the dregs and scum of the
people, and in affirming the name and countenance of His sacred Majesty to be
captivated, and prostituted to serve all the lusts of such men; and in setting
in opposition the King and those that be faithful in the Land.

But seeing that it is possible that a case may be so clear and plain to all
men, that it may without any great damage be omitted in a discourse made for
the resolution of the conscience; it will concern the conscience however
impartially to set before its eyes the present question, and then to examine
the discourse of this Exhortation, upon which the determination of conscience
will naturally follow.

To propound the State of the question impartially (though not according to the
utmost truth of the case) it will be enough, if it be made up of truths
confessed and undeniable.

1. Scots and English are Subjects to the King. 2. Of the same Protestant
Religion, the professors whereof do not differ in fundamentals. 3. Their
joining in Arms, (as is alleged) is for the vindication and defense of their
Religi^n, Liberties, and Laws. 4. Against the Popish Prelaticall, and Malignant
party. 5. By these are meant the Soldiers raised by the King.
On the other side:
1. The King is our lawful Sovereign, 2. Of the same Protestant Religion. 3.
He has protested and engaged himself with all solemnity (as at the receiving
of the holy Eucharist, etc.) to preserve and maintain the Protestant Religion,
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdoms and Parliaments. 4. That he has sent
many Messages for Treaties toward Peace, both before and during the time of
these wars, and expressed a desire of making the people witnesses of the equity
of his proceedings. 5. He has declared his will against both the Scots and
English, who take up Arms in this Cause.
Out of these principles (whereas many more might be added in behalf of His
Majesty) let the question be, Whether it may be lawful and necessary for
subjects to covenant together, without and against the express will of their
lawful Sovereign, to join in Arms against the Forces raised by his command,
and that for the vindication and defense of that which he has by all possible
obligations engaged himself to maintain and defend, and for security of his
people has desired that differences might be composed by Treaty, and that the
world might judge of his proceedings in it.

If this be a true state of the question (at least so far as is here expressed)
the next labor for our Consciences will be to examine whether any argument in
this exhortation (upon supposition that they all were truths in themselves) do
infer a lawfulness and necessity to covenant in our case, all things
considered; and if it be evident that they are not sufficient, it may be a
motive to abate the confidence of the composers of it (whosoever they were in
particular) and to procure an examination of their own principles and actions,
wherein they may possibly see that they have not either in their own actions,
or in their judgment of others, proceeded so exactly according to the Law of
conscience and the word of God.

Now, although we are confident that there is not in this exhortation any one
argument which the Assembly it self will undertake so to contrive, as that it
shall conclude for a necessity or a lawfulness of taking such a Covenant in
such a case (all things considered) and consequently the whole business, which
was of necessity for vindication of our selves from sottishness etc. is
already done; Yet that it may without any danger of prejudice or error appear,
that we are not guilty of such a presumption as we have excepted against in
them, we will, as briefly as may be, examine their whole discourse, and
evidently (unless indeed we be bewitched to think so) discover what is untrue
or uncertain (if any thing of those kinds shall occur) and what is insufficient
in their Exhortation, after we have by way of Apology premised, that we will
not all answer them in the manner of the delivery of the reasons. We have (as
we hope) prevailed against those affections which might have arisen upon those
expressions which concern our selves, and (though with far greater difficulty)
against that indignation which followed upon the apprehension of those (not so
very reverent) expressions and reflections upon his sacred Majesty, so far as
not to suffer our judgments or consciences to be withdrawn from a just and
mere examination of the truth: having seen in them, that zeal and confidence
(however they are excellent affections in those who are sufficiently grounded
in an unfallible truth, yet they) do in no measure help toward a discovery of
truth or a removal of scruples in a case of conscience.

The whole discourse was intended by the Authors of it, to consist of
persuasions, and resolutions of scruples, and is immediately resolved into an
introduction and the body of the discourse.

As for the Introduction, it contains a collection of many places, from whence
the composers thereof presume that the necessity of taking this League might be
enforced. But seeing it carries not clearly in it self any discovery of the
consequences, it could not in reason be premised to any other discourse, then
such as in the process should clear that which was there presumed; and seeing
the following discourse is no way ordered to a clearing of those inferences, so
that the design of him who made the introduction is no further prosecuted, we
may here indeed observe an instance of the variance which is said to be in the
Assembly, but are no ways helped in that which was the fundamental intention
of the whole (the resolution of our scruples) which by the serious
consideration of those things here reckoned up, we profess to have been
exceedingly strengthened upon us; and that by such inference as may be
gathered, if not clearly seen, by this ensuing parallel.

If the power of Religion, described and practiced by our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, and expressed in the most heroical actions of the primitive
Christians; or if solid reason informed by the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and assisted by the light of the examples of holy Saints and Martyrs,
and by a perfect information of the beginnings and proceedings of our present
miseries, and of the standing known Laws of the Land; If loyalty to the King,
and piety to their native Couatry, or love to themselves, and natural
affection to their posterity; if the example of men touched with a deep sense
of all these, such as have been the most eminent among the Clergy for piety and
learning, the Instruments (as it is confessed) used by Almighty God for the
preservation of our Religion against all its enemies, who, with many others,
the most worthy of the Laity, have cheerfully and constantly been spoiled of
their goods, and suffered a long and tedious imprisonment, and are and have
been ready to suffer death it self in the present cause of his Sacred
Majesty; or if extraordinary success from God thereupon, such as was
necessary to raise his Majesty from a state of despised weakness to a power
able to resist, and probably able to debell all the Forces which his enemies of
three Kingdoms can procure. If any or all of these can awaken a Nation hitherto
stupefied and blinded, and thereupon imbroiled in the miseries which have
attended upon this war, to see and embrace the sovereign and only means of
their recovery; there can be no doubt or fear, that they will enter into a
League with those who have lifted up (under what pretense soever) their hands
against his Sacred Majesty, but they will rather repent them of their former
disobedience, endeavoring to reduce their brethren to a labor for
reconciliation and pardon from his Majesty, at least to an acceptance of
those proffers for Treaty toward accommodation, which he so often makes; and
in case they shall be by any pertinaciously refused, join themselves with his
Sacred Majesty in his just defense.

Having thus done with the Introduction, it follows that we examine the
Discourse it self, which proceeds in this method:

First, to propound the motives to persuade men to take the Covenant.

Secondly, to answer the objections or scruples which might hinder, etc.

Here, before we begin to examine the strength of the motives themselves, we
observe the different apprehensions of the framers of it; for, whereas he who
framed the Introduction did, it seems, imagine that the taking of the Covenant
might be enforced from the positive Law of God, and the Law of Nature; the
other, who was to lay down the Motives, was so far from that, as to esteem it
necessary toward the same end, in the first place to insinuate the example of
themselves of the Assembly, and others who had already taken it.

The strength of their persuasive Arguments is this:

First, This Covenant is already taken by the two Houses of Parliament, by the
Assembly of Divines, the City of London, and the Kingdom of Scotland.

Secondly, It has been already seconded from Heaven by blasting the Counsels,
etc.

Thirdly, It carries in it self such a convincing evidence of Equity, Truth,
and Righteousness, as may raise in all enflamed affections to take it; which
is proved, because

There is [almost] nothing in this Covenant which was not for substance either
expressed, or manifestly included in the Protestation of May 5. 1641.

Ergo, whosoever are not wilfully ignorant, or miserably seduced, must
infallibly take this Covenant.

For the first of these Arguments:



Secondly, we have reason to believe that far the greater number, both in the
City of London, and the Kingdom of Scotland, could not take this Oath in
judgment, as being not able to discern of the righteousness or iniquity of
some of the Articles, especially that which concerns Episcopacy, so that a
chief strength of this Argument from Example, consists in the example of
themselves who are of the Assembly, and made this Exhortation. And then we
conceive, they cannot justly accuse us either of immodesty or presumption, if
we shall openly profess that they have not in this first Essay of theirs (at
least which we know to have been published) given evidences of so great
Judgment, Learning, or Integrity, as may warrant or encourage us in matters of
Religion and cases of Conscience, to subscribe to the authority of their
example.

That it has been seconded from Heaven, etc. it cannot conclude to the
Conscience, till it be sufficiently proved; neither can that be without a
revelation of the Counsels of God, which if the Composer of this part has
obtained, it was requisite to the end propounded that he should have made it
appear; till when it may be believed, that those instances where the signature
of Gods Judgments may the most plainly have been discovered, have fallen upon
those who have had the greatest share in the raising and managing of those
Arms, for the maintaining of which this Covenant is ordained.

So then the whole force of their persuasion will depend upon the third
Argument, and the proof of it, which (to avoid any error in examining) shall
be again propounded:

There is (almost) nothing in this Covenant, which was not for substance either
expressed, or manifestly included in the Protestation, May 5. 1641.

Therefore this Covenant goes forth in its own strength, with such convincing
evidence of Equity, Truth, and Righteousness, as may raise in all not wilfully
ignorant or miserably seduced, inflamed affections to join in the Covenant.

Resp. 1. We are not able by all those ways of reasoning, to which we have
hitherto been used, to discover the inference which is here made. If by the
strength of their solid reason it may possibly be made to appear, yet we are
confident the dependence is so deep and secret, that it ought not (to the end
for which this discourse is declared to be intended) have been left unrevealed.

2. Whereas the Argument of the evident Equity, Truth and Righteousness of
this is taken from the agreement of it with that Protestation, we will assume
the matter of that Protestation to have been (in the judgment of this
Assembly) Equal, True, and Righteous; from whence it will follow, that if this
should, according to their principles, either immediately or by necessary
consequence contradict that Protestation, therein they must confess it to be
unequal, false, or unrighteous; and wherein soever it does positively dissent
from it, there the Truth, Equity, and Righteousness of it must be confessed to
be here no way proved; this being premised, let us compare together this
Covenant and that Protestation.

There we protested that we would with our lives, etc. defend the Doctrine of
the Church of England [indefinitely] which is undoubtedly contained in the 39.
Articles, which (in the further Articles of impeachment, Jan. 17. 1643. by the
Commons assembled in Parliament against the Archbishop of Canterbury) are
styled, The 39. Articles of the Church England established by Act of
Parliament; and in the six and thirtieth of those Articles it is avouched that
the Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, confirmed by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such Consecration and Ordering, and has nothing in it ungodly.
This book asserteth, that it is evident to all men, diligently reading holy
Scripture and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles times there have been
these Orders of Ministers in the Church, Bishops, Priests, and `Deacons, which
Officers were evermore bad in reverent estimation. Wherefore we there protested
with our lives, etc. to defend that it is not ungodly (therefore not false
Doctrine) to say, That diligent reading of the Holy Scriptures will help to
make it evident, that from the Apostles times there have been Bishops, which
could not be, unless the Scriptures did testify, that in the Apostles times
they were. One of the Prayers also ( and lex orandi lex docendi) thus begins;
Almighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy Holy Spirit have appointed
diverse orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy servant
now called to the work and ministry of a Bishop; and the elected Bishop is
afterward required to profess, That he is persuaded that he is truly called to
this Ministration according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ. And by
consequence we there did protest to defend that also; and consequently (upon
their own principles) it is unequal and unrighteous to swear to the
extirpation of them.

Again, in that Protestation there was nothing concerning the endeavoring the
preservation of the Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship of the Church of
Scotland, the Reformation of the Doctrine of the Church of England. Moreover,
in that we protested absolutely the defense of the Kings Person, according to
our Allegiance, which here we do not absolutely swear to, to maintain the Laws
of the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and only to defend one another so far
as lawfully we may, which here are omitted. Many other differences may be
observed. If yet they shall say, that there is nothing (almost) in this which
is not in that, or nothing of moment (which must be the meaning, if their
Argument be of any force at all) it may not be thought unreasonable, if we
desire (with leave from His Majesty) to renew that Protestation, that we may
be thereby excused from this League and Covenant.

After the proposal of their persuasive Arguments, they proceed to the taking
away of scruples, not all, or most of such as might arise to the contrary (as
appears by that which we have humbly represented against the Covenant it self)
therefore such as they have chosen out (probably) because they conceived
themselves best able for their Answer. The scruples which they suppose, are
such as concern either the King or the Bishops.

They begin with the extirpation of Bishops, where first they design to prove,
that they may, and ought to be extirpated; and after they address themselves
to answer one special objection. We will therefore in order propound and
examine the weight and truth which is in their Arguments.

The first is but an intimation, Some say this Government was never formally
established by the Laws of this Land at all. If this were true, which some say,
the Argument were not of so great force toward the taking away of this
government, as it would be of power to confirm us in the belief we have of the
venerable institution of this Government, when we shall consider that our
Predecessors, who have been the Authors of our Laws, had such an esteem of the
government by Bishops, that they thought it altogether needless formally to
establish it by Law. Now that this (if any positive) consideration might be a
ground of that which is here intimated (if true) appears, in that if it were
true that it were not formally established, yet is it so interwoven with many
of our Laws, that they and it must stand or fall together. So that here again
we may desire of them to be tender of us, who have protested solemnly with our
lives to defend the Laws of the Land.

2. The life and soul of it is already taken away by an Act, etc. so as nothing
of jurisdiction remains, but what is precarious in them, and voluntary in those
who submit unto them.

1. We cannot acknowledge that any essential part of Episcopacy (such as that
which is the life and soul of it must be) is, or can be taken away from our
Bishops, whether it be of order or jurisdiction; however the outward coercive
Power communicated to it by the secular arm, has been in the times of the
famous Persecutions, and may be again divided from it. 2. For the Act of this
present Parliament here mentioned, we do believe that there was more taken away
in it, then was intended by the major part of both Houses at the passing of it:
This we gather out of those words of his Majesty in his Declaration, Aug. 12.
And whether that Act was penned with that wariness and animadversion, that
there was not more determined by it, then the major part of both Houses
intended at the passing of it, let themselves judge. 3. However that were, we
cannot conceive it reasonable, that their temporal lurisdiction should be
taken away (as was suggested) that they might the better intend their
Spiritual, and then an argument made to take away the Spiritual part of their
Government also, because the former is already parted from them.
That their whole Government is (at best) but a humane constitution.] If there
be no fallacy in these words, it is necessary that whole be taken materially,
as it includes each several part, and not formally only; and then we answer,
That the Government so far as to the superiority of Bishops above Presbyters is
(at least) of Apostolical constitution, as is proved in our reasons against
the second Article: and consequently (as to that which is here spoken of) it is
not lawful to be taken away.

Fourthly, It is such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of Parliament,
not only very prejudicial to the civil State, but a great hindrance also to
a perfect Reformation; Yea, who knows not? etc.

We know the danger (and if indeed we did not) yet the honor and respect we
bear to the very name of Parliaments would not suffer us to question the
judgment of the two Houses; only in this case which so nearly concerns the
Church of God, we crave leave to represent, that we do not apprehend how that
should be in it self prejudicial to the civil State, together with which the
State both anciently and of late, we conceive, has flourished, and enjoyed a
Political happiness beyond most of the Nations of the earth. Neither how that
should be opposite to a perfect Reformation, which in our Consciences we are
persuaded (and we think may as clearly be proved as most matters in Divinity)
was instituted by the Apostles and constantly obtained in the purest times of
the Primitive Church, to which we conceive a Reformation ought to be squared:
and indeed the chiefest Instruments and Defendants of that Reformation which we
(by the mercy of God) enjoy, having been Bishops, some of which were Martyrs,
as Bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer, Ferrers, Jewel, Bilson, etc. We
cannot see to what Reformation Episcopacy can be a hindrance, unless to such a
form as supposes that Episcopacy must be extirpated.

Which moved the well-affected thorowout this Kingdom, long since to petition
this Parliament (as has been desired before in the days of Queen Elizabeth and
King James) for a total abolition of the same.

In this which is intended for a proof the fourth Argument, seeing it is
presumed that those who have petitioned for the abolition of Episcopacy, are
and have been well affected; For a judgment of that we do only represent,
that the same in the days of those renowned Princes, by those famous
Parliaments held in their times were rejected as Ignorant and Seditious. And
whereas it is said, the well affected throughout the Kingdom, etc. It does, and
may appear, that since the sitting of this present Parliament (and that after
discountenance given to that party) more then four and forty thousand men of
quality have petitioned for the continuance of our present Church Government:
besides the City of London, the Counties of Dorcet, Kent, Surrey, Westmorland,
Cumberland, Southampton, Lancaster, Cornwall, Oxfordshire, Berkeshire,
Wiltshire, the six shires of North Wales, and besides the two Universities: all
the which have petitioned for the same.

The restriction (or what else) is here laid down that we are not by this
Covenant bound to offer violence to their persons, we pray may be observed by
those who have taken this Covenant, or shall hereafter enter into it; for us
who are so persuaded as we have expressed, it would have been a greater
satisfaction, if we should have been to swear to bring the persons of any who
have offended to a just and legal trial, so that their Office might have been
continued, then to extirpate the Office, with an intimation only that we are
not necessitated to offer violence to their persons.

That which follows, is to take off the only scruple which they would suppose
to remain, the oath of Canonical obedience, wherein Clergymen have sworn to
obey the Bishops, in licitis and honestis; we will propound their Arguments.

1. They which have sworn obedience to the Laws of the Land, may yet endeavor
their abolition in a lawful way. Therefore they which have sworn to obey the
Bishops may endeavor the abolition of Bishops.

We do not see this consequence from the Law to the Lawgiver, or the Authority
it self from whence the Law is derived.

It follows upon this Hypothesis that they who have sworn to obey the
injunctions of Bishops, may endeavor in a lawful way the alteration or
abolition of those injunctions; but to infer their conclusion, the Hypothosis
must have been, that notwithstanding our Oath made to obey the Laws made by the
King and the two Houses of Parliament, we may endeavor to abolish the King and
both Houses of Parliament.

Their second Argument is this:

2. If Ministers or others have entered into any Oath not warranted by Gods Word
and the Laws of the Land, such Oaths call for repentance, not pertinacy in
them. Ergo, notwithstanding the Oath of Canoxicall obedience, Ministers may
endeavor the extirpation of Bishops.

We believe, that to have cleared this consequence, they ought to have proved
that the Oath of Canonical obedience is not warranted by the Word of God, or
the Laws of the Land, which seeing they have not done, the scruple,
notwithstanding this Argument, will still remain.

Having thus done with Episcopacy, they proceed to such scruples of conscience
as they suppose may arise from that which concerns His Majesty; And there the
design is to prove, that this Covenant may be taken, notwithstanding the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance already taken, and notwithstanding the want of His
Majesty's consent.

1. This Oath binds all, and more strongly engages them to preserve and defend
the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms; therefore,

It does not cross the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.

We answer, 1. The Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance were ordained against
those, who would not have denied to swear in these very words, To preserve and
defend His Majesty's Person and Authority in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion and liberties of the Kingdoms; Therefore notwithstanding this
Argument, this Covenant may cross the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance.

2. That this Oath may be taken without His Majesty's consent, they would prove
by examples, either Modern, or out of Scripture, as

1. The Protestation May 5. was taken without His Majesty's consent.

We did not think we took it without his Majesty's consent, and one reason we
will express in their words of the same Paragraph, Because His Majesty did not
except against it, or give any stop to the taking of it, albeit he was then
resident in person at Whitehall.

2. Ezra and Nehemiah, Ezra 10. Nehem. 9. Neh. 1. being vassals, and one of
them meniall servant to Artaxerxes, drew all the people into a Covenant,
without the special Commission of the Persian Monarchs.

The Covenant into which Ezra drew the people is expressed Ezra 10. 3. to have
been to put away all the strange wives, and such as were born of them,
according to the counsel of the Lord, and of those that tremble at the
Commandment of God, and that according to the Law.

And that of Nehemiah, (Nehem. 9. and 10. 29.) is expressed to have been a
Curse and an Oath to walk in Gods Law, which was given by Moses the servant of
God; and to observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord, and his
Judgments and his Statutes.

The Commission of Nehemiah, (besides what is mentioned Nehemiah 2.) cannot be
denied to be the same which Ezra had obtained, which is expressed Ezra the 7.
In the 7 of Ezra, v. 26. we find this as a part of his Commission: Whosoever
will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be
executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Wherefore we cannot but extremely
wonder that these Covenants here mentioned, should be said to have been entered
into without the consent of the Persian Monarchs; an Assertion to us so
exceedingly inconsiderate, that our apprehension of the failings in it cannot
in a few words be expressed.

As for that of Hezekiah, which follows at some distance, we might answer, that
it is not, nor can it be proved out of the Scripture, that the keeping of the
Passover was not consented to by Hoshea King of Irael. However, if the revolt
of the ten Tribes were indeed a rebellion, as it is believed by many of the
most famous Divines Cyril. Alexand Calvin. in Hosea 8. 4. vide also the Fuller
answer to Dr. Fern.
, then why might not Hezekiah justly send Proclamations to them, to join with
him in a Covenant, although the King of Israel should positively have dissented?

But not to insist upon negative Answers, or any thing which may be
controverted, we answer: 1. That act of Hezekiah, was a bare invitation. 2.
That to which he invited them was not a League or Covenant, but (that which the
Law of God enjoined) the observation of the Passover: which was some years
after the Covenant mentioned. 2 Chro. 29. 3 That it was at that time when
Israel had not the face of a Kingdom, their King being in captivity under the
King of Assyria. Which two latter answers are jointly proved by this following
Discourse. The Covenant was made in 1mo Hezekiae, 2 Chronicles. 29. the Passover was
not celebrated till after the captivity, 2 Chronicles. 30. 6. There was no captivity
mentioned till after this first year of Hezekiah. Therefore the Covenant and
Passover were not kept in the same year; and therefore also Hoshea was in
captivity, before this invitation of Hezekiah. The last of the premises (which
only can be doubted) is thus proved, because the first time expressed (which
we read in Scripture) of Salmanasers coming up against Israel is the fourth
year of King Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 9. It no wise follows therefore from this
act of Hezekiah and the men of Israel, that it is lawful to impose, or enter a
Covenant, without the consent of the King.

Now, after these instances of Scripture, they betake themselves to modern
examples, from whence they would infer more then a bare lawfulnes to enter a
Covenant without the Kings consent, viz. an allowance of Subjects joining in
Arms against their Sovereign, which they would warrant from the actions of Q
Elizabeth, K. James, and our gracious Sovereign. Here we must indeed
ingenuously profess, that we have not been sufficiently exercised in passages
of State, to give a full satisfaction in all these particulars; wherefore we
shall not of our selves interpose at all, only briefly speak to their
instances.

1. As concerning the assistance of, and the confederacy with the united
Provinces, we shall transcribe for satisfaction, a part of a Declaration of Q.
Elizabeth, who first entered upon their Assistance; the Declaration is
entitled, A Declaration of the causes moving the Q. of England to give aid to
the defense of the people afflicted and oppressed in the low Countries. This
Declaration was put sorth, 1585. and in the 8, and 9. pages it has these words.

And furthermore, as a good loving Sister to him, and a natural good Neighbor
to his Low Countries and people, we have often, and often again, most friendly
warned him, that if he did not otherwise by his wisdom and Princely clemency
restrain the Tyranny of his Governors, and cruelty of his men of war, we
feared that the people of his Countries should be forced for safety of their
lives, and for continuance of their native Country in their former state of
their liberties, to seek the protection of some other foreign Lord, or rather
to yield themselves wholly to the Sovereignty of some mighty Prince, as by the
ancient Laws of their Countreys', and by special privileges granted by some
of the Lords and Dukes of the Countries to the people, they do pretend and
affirm, that in cases of such general injustice, and upon such violent
breaking of their privileges, they are free from their former Homages, and at
liberty to make choice of any other Prince, to be their Prince and Head. The
proof whereof by examples past is to be seen and read in the ancient Histories
of diverse alterations of the Lords and Ladies of the Countries of Brabant,
Flanders, Holland and Zealand, and other Countries to them united, by the
States and People of the Countries. And that by some such alterations, as the
Stories do testify, the Duke of Burgundy came to his Title, from which the
King of Spains interest is derived.

Upon these principles it it evident that then the Queen and Kings of England
in joining to the assistance of or confederacy with the low Countries, have not
joined with Subjects in Arms either against or without the consent of their
true undoubted Monarch.

2. As touching the assistance of the French Prosestants of Rochell by our
gracious Sovereign that now is, we shall only reply (not insisting upon the
Charter of Rochell granted to them by Lewis the 11.) that we are fully
satisfied, that no argument can be drawn from thence, except by those who would
raise a dispute of His Majesty's Title and Interest in the Kingdom of France.

3. As for the Scots, we expected that all further mention of their former
actions should have been prevented by the Act of Oblivion. Yet seeing these men
have undertaken to make an advantage against His sacred Majesty, even out of
His acts and expressions of Grace and Clemency: we answer, That forms of
Pacification and reconciliation, are not to be interpreted any further then to
the reputation of the party to whom the reconciliation is made (you have not
done so, or so, i.e. you shall be to me as if you had not) so as out of His
Majesty's expressions in the late pacification with the Scots, to conclude his
approbation of the course then taken by them, or to take a warrant for their
present undertaking, seems to be alike, as if they should conclude that it was
lawful for other Churches to use St. Paul as the Galathians had done, by
accounting him their enemy, because (by his own confession) they had done him
no injury, and should gather that out of his Act of pacification with them,
Gal. 4. 12. Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, I am as ye are, ye have not
injured me at all.

The sum of all is this: The Assembly of Divines in their exhortation, have
neither concluded any thing positive for a lawfulness, or necessity of taking
this Covenant, nor taken away any of those scruples which they propounded to
themselves; they have neither proved that Bishops must or may be extirpated,
nor taken off the scruple from the Oath of Canonical obedience: They have
neither cleared the objection from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, nor
proved by any example recorded in Scripture, or by any undoubted warrantable
practice, that it is lawful in any case whatsoever, without the Kings consent,
to enter into any whatsoever League and Covenant: So far have they been from
proving that it is necessary or lawful to enter into this League, the state of
the question being such, as we in the beginning have evinced it to be. So that
should we enter into this covenant, it would be impossible to conclude our
innocence therein from the innocence of Mordecai and the jews here mentioned
out of Esther 9. Their innocence was clear indeed, (but how would ours be so?)
in that they resisted not the higher power, or the Arms commanded by him
otherwise then by Fasting and Prayer, until the King granted them leave to
gather themselves together, and to stand for their lives, which before they did
not assume, for no want of sufficient strength to have defended themselves, (as
is usually in the like cases objected) which is evident from their after
sufficient strength by themselves to defend themselves, cap. 9.

Thus having examined the strength of their Reasons and Allegations, we think
it still true (not only pretended, as the Exhortation has it) that Clergy men
(above all others) may not covenant to extirpate Church government by Bishops,
both because of their Oath (as has been proved) and simply considering the
nature of the thing, in respect of the Reasons already by us alleged; and
because Presbyters, if here they err, they err most dangerously and
arrogantly, swearing (in effect) to endeavor to extirpate all order of
spiritual Church Governors above themselves, to endure none such (if they can
help it) superior to themselves. The danger we had rather such should hear
from St. Cyprian, Epist. 10. Quod enim non periculum metuere debemus, de
offensa Domini, quando aliqui de Presbyteris, nec Evangelii, nec loci sui
memores, sed neque futurum Domini Iudicium, neque nunc sibi praepositum
Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub Antecessoribus factum est, cum
contumelia and contemptu praepositi totum sibi vendicent? What also will they
think of that ancient and reverend Canon (the 35. among those 50. commonly
called The Canons of the Apostles) (...) If any one ordained Bishop be not
received, not through his own will, but through the wickedness of the people,
let him remain a Bishop, but let the Clergy of that City be barred Communion,
because they have not been better instructors of so inobedient a people. By
which also it appears, that those lay men deceive themselves, who think that
the Clergy only need scruple at this Oath, at least in the second Article
thereof; we must tell them of Ignatius his rule, Epist ad Magnes. (...) Nothing
ought to be done without the Bishop, by Presbyter, Deacon, or Layman. If
therefore (according to the Preface of this Covenant) we set the glory of God
before our eyes, the same Ignatius gives us this other excellent monition,
Epist. ad Trallian. (...) etc.
It becomes each of you, and especially the Presbyters, to cherish the
Bishop, to the honor of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Printers Postscript to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, a Copy of the foregoing Disquisitions accidentally coming to
the hands of some, at whose command I am, was thought fit to be published,
though without the knowledge and approbation of the Authors. The fitness of
the subject, the worth of the work, and a peculiar relation to the Authors (if
I mistake them not) may be a sufficient motive hoth for their command and my
undertaking. Consider it seriously, and if thou art not yet engaged in the
Covenant, this will confirm thee in thy resolution against it; if thou art,
this by the assistance of Gods grace may bring thee to a timely repentance. I
cannot but admonish thee this one thing, viz. That I have gone exactly
according to the Copy, even in those phrases which resemble the Genius of the
place where it was composed, more then where it is published; only the faults
which have escaped, I desire may be imputed to me and those many transcribers,
through whose hands it passed before it could come to mine.

FINIS.

