THE CEREMONIES, Form of Prayer, AND SERVICES USED IN Westminster-ABBY AT THE
CORONATION of King JAMES the First and Queen ANN his Consort. Performed by Dr.
Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.

WITH An Account of the PROCESSION from the PALACE to the ABBEY.

Ascending the Throne. Interrogation of the People. Descending to the Altar.
The Hymn, Veni Creator. The Litany. The Anointing of the King. The Inrobing of
the King. Blessing the King. Ascending the Throne. Enthroning of the King.
Homage by the Peers. Ceremonies touching the Support of the Crown. The Holy
Communion. Descending to the Offertory. Kings Speech to the People. Ascending
the Throne. End of the Communion. The Offertory. The Sermon. The Kings Oath.
The Surplice, etc. The Close Pall. The Sword. The Armil. The Crown. The Ring.
The Offering of the Sword. The Scepter. The Rod. Ascending the Altar of St.
Edward the Confessor. The Crown and Robes of St. Edward the Confessor put off.
The King in his Robes goes back from the Abbey to the Palace to Dinner.
With the Coronation of King CHARLES the First in Scotland.

Never before Published.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall.
1685.

The Ceremonies, Form of Prayer, and Services used in Westminster-Abby at the
Coronation of King James the First and Queen Ann his Consort, July 25th. Anno
1603.
1. THE Person that is to Anoint and Crown the King, is the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.

2. The place is the Church of Westminster, to which it is by diverse Charters
granted to be the place for the Kings Coronation, and the Repository of the
Regalia.

3. The time (if it may well be) some Sunday or Holy Day.

The Preparation.
1. There is a Stage set up, square, close to the four high Pillars, between
the Quire and the Altar, Railed about, which Stage is to be spread with
Tapistry, and the Rails of it to be Richly covered.

2. It is also to have Stairs, out of the Quire up to it: and down from it to
the Altar, other Stairs Eastward.

3. There is a Throne of Estate for the King, to be Erected on the said Stage,
adorned in all points as is meet.

4. There is also another Chair of Estate for the King, to be set below by the
Altar, on the right side of it, and a Fald-stool, with Cushions for the King to
pray at.

5. There is a Traverse also to be made in St. Edward's Chapel, for the King
to disrobe himself in, after the Ceremonies of his Coronation ended.

The Evening before the Coronation.
1. The Evening before the Coronation, the King is to be put in mind to give
himself a certain space to Contemplation and Prayers.

It appertains by Office to the Dean of Westminster, to remember His Majesty
of this and other Observances.

2. There is then also to be delivered by His Majesty's appointment, to such
Persons as he shall like to assign to carry them; 1. The Regal. 2. The Paten.
3. The two Scepters. 4. The Rod with the Dove, 5. The Spurs.


3. There is then also to be delivered to His Majesty the Tunica, or Shirt of
red Silk, with the places for the Anointing opened, and looped close, which he
is to wear next over his Shirt.

The Morning of the Coronation.
1. It is to be provided, that all the Regalia (that is, King Edward the
Confessors) Crown and other Ornaments, together with the Ampul, wherein is the
Oil, with which Anciently the Kings and Queens have been Anointed, be laid
ready upon the Altar.

2. It is to be provided, that the Crown and other Robes Royal, which the King
is to put on and wear after the Rites of the Coronation ended, be brought and
laid ready in the Traverse within St. Edward's Chapel.

3. There is Cloth to be spread on the Ground from the Palace-Hall Door unto
the Stage in the Church, for His Majesty to tread on all the way, by the Heir
of the Lord Beauchamp of Bedford, Almoner for the Coronation-day.

The Receiving of the King into the Church.
1. The Archbishop and Bishops of the Realm then present, together with the
Church and Quire of Westminster only, are to meet the King at the Palace-gate,
in Procession-wise.

2. Two Bishops assigned by the King, are to bear the one the Regal, the other
the Paten.

3. After them, three Peers (by the King likewise to be appointed) are to bear,
the one the Scepter with the Cross, the other the long Scepter, the third the
Rod with the Dove.

4. After them the three Swords to be born by the Earl of Chester, Huntingdon,
and Warwick.

5. After them, a Peer, by the King appointed to bear the Spurs.

6. Then the King under a Canopy born by the Barons of the Cinque Ports. The
King supported by the two Bishops of Durham and Bathe.

7. The Dean of Westminster is to be by to inform the King in those things that
concern the Solemnity of the Coronation.

The King is to be received into the Church with an Anthem.

BEhold, O Lord, our Protector, and look upon the face of thine Anointed,
because one day in thy Court is better than a thousand.

The King passing up the body of the Church, and so through the Quire, goes up
the Stairs unto his Throne of Estate, and there reposeth himself.

The King set in his Throne, the Archbishop going to every of the four sides
of the Stage, viz. North, South, East and West, (the Marshal of England going
before him to all the said places) asks the People if they be willing to
accept of the King as their Sovereign, that he may be Anointed and Crowned: In
these words.

The People demanded if they be willing.
Sirs, here I present unto you King James, the Rightful Inheritor of the Crown
of this Realm; wherefore all you that be come this day to do your Homage,
Service, and bounden Duty, be ye willing to do the same?

Or thus,

Sirs, here present is James, rightful and undoubted Inheritor by the Laws of
God and Man, to the Crown and Royal Dignity of England, with all things
thereunto annexed and appertaining, Elect, Chosen, and Required by all three
Estates of this same Land, to take upon him this said Crown and Royal Dignity;
whereupon you shall understand that this day is fixed and appointed by all the
Peers of the Land, for the Consecration, Enunction, and Coronation of the said
most Excellent Prince James. Will you serve him at this time, and give your
wills and assents to the same Consecration, Enunction, and Coronation?

Or thus,

Will you take this Worthy Prince James, right Heir of the Realm, and have him
to your King, and become Subjects to him, and submit your selves to his
Commandments?

This while, the King standing up, turns himself to every of the four sides,
as the Archbishop is at every of them speaking to the People.

The People signifying their willingness, by answering all in one voice, Yea,
Yea, God Save King James. The Quire sings the Anthem.

LET thy Hand be strengthened, and thy Right Hand be exalted. Let Justice and
Judgment be the preparation of thy Seat, and Mercy and Truth go before thy
Face. Glory be to the Father, etc.

While the Quire sings the Anthem, the Archbishop goes down to the Altar,
and revesteth himself there.

The Archbishop being there ready, the King, supported by the two Bishops, (as
before) and attended by the Dean of Westminster, goes down from his Throne to
the Altar.

The King's Offering, and the Sermon.
There he makes his first Oblation, which is a Pall and Twenty Pieces of Gold.

After the King has Offered, he kneeleth down at his Fald-stool.

The Archbishop says the Prayer.

O GOD which do visit those that are humble, and do comfort us by the light
of thy Holy Spirit, send down thy Grace upon this thy Servant James, that by
him we may feel thy presence amongst us, through Jesus Christ.

Then does the Sermon begin, which the King hears in his Chair of Estate by
the Altar on the South side of it.

The Sermon being done, the Archbishop goes to the King, and asks His
Majesty concerning his willingness to take the Oath, usually taken by his
Predecessors.

The King (showing himself willing therewithal) arises and comes to the Altar.

The Archbishop ministers the three first Questions, and the King answers
them severally. Scilicet.

Archbishop. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath Confirm to the
People of England the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England,
your Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely, the Laws, Customs, and
Franchises, granted to the Clergy by the Glorious King, St. Edward, your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
Established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the Prerogative for the Kings
thereof, and the Ancient Customs of this Realm?

King. I grant and promise to keep them.

A. Bish. Sir, Will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your
Power) both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?

King. I will keep it.

A. Bish. Sir, Will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion to
Mercy and Truth to be executed to your Judgment?

King. I will.

A. Bish. Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and Rightful Customs
which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have? And will you defend and uphold
them to the Honor of God, so much as in you lies?

King. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops read this passage to the King.
Our Lord and King, We beseech you to pardon and to grant, and to preserve unto
us, and to the Churches committed to your Charge, all Canonical Privileges,
and due Law and Justice, and that you would protect and defend us, as every
good King to his Kingdoms ought to be Protector and Defender of the Bishops and
the Churches under their Government.

The King Answers,
With a willing and Devout Heart I promise and grant my Pardon; and that I will
preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your Charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice, and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom in right ought to Protect and Defend the Bishops and
Churches under their Government.

Then the King arose, and was led to the Communion Table, where he takes a
Solemn Oath in sight of all the People, to observe all the Premises, and
laying his hand upon the Bible, said, The things which I have here Promised, I
shall perform and keep; So Help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

After the Oath thus taken, the King returns to his Chair of State again.

The Archbishop begins the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, and the Quire sing it.

The Hymn ended the King kneels down at his Fald-stool, and the Archbishop
says this Prayer.

WE beseech thee, O Lord holy Father, almighty and everlasting God, for this
thy Servant James, that as at the first thou broughtest him into the World by
thy Divine Providence, and in the flower of his youth, have preserved him until
this present day, so thou will evermore enrich him with the gift of Piety,
fulfill him with the grace of truth, and increase him daily in all goodness in
the sight of God and men, that he may joyfully receive the Seat of supreme
Government, by the gift of thy supernal Grace; and being defended from all his
Enemies, by the wall of thy Mercy, he may happily govern the people committed
to his charge.

After the prayer done, begins the Litany to be sung by two Bishops.

Let us Pray.
O Almighty and everlasting God, Creator of all things, Ruler of Angels, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who did cause thy faithful servant Abraham to
triumph over his Enemies; did give many victories to Moses, and Joshua, the
Governors of thy people, did exalt thy lowly servant David unto the height of
a Kingdom; did enrich Solomon with the unspeakable gift of Wisdom and Peace.
Give ear we beseech thee unto our humble Prayers, and multiply thy blessing
upon this thy Servant, whom in lowly devotion we do consecrate our King; that
he being strengthened with the Faith of Abraham, endued with the Mildness of
Moses, armed with the Fortitude of Joshua, exalted with the Humility of David,
beautified with the Wisdom of Solomon, he may please thee in all things, he may
always walk uprightly in the way of Righteousness, he may nourish and teach,
defend and instruct thy Church and people, and like a mighty King, minister
unto them the government of thy Virtue against all enemies visible and
invisible, and by thy help reform their minds to the concord of true Faith and
Peace, that being underpropped by the due Obedience, and honored by the
condign Love of these his people, he may, by thy Mercy royally ascend up to the
Throne of his forefather, and being defended with the Helmet of thy protection,
covered with thy invincible Shield, and all clad with Heavenly Armor, he may
gloriously triumph, and by his power both terrify Infidels, and bring joyful
peace to those that fight for thee, through our Lord, who by the power of his
Cross has destroyed Hell, and having overthrown the Kingdom of the Devil, is
with victory ascended into Heaven, in whom does consist all Power, Kingdom and
Victory, who is the glory of the humble, the life and salvation of his people,
who lives with thee and the holy Ghost.

O Lord, thou that governest all Kingdoms from everlasting, bless we beseech
thee this our King, that he may rule like David, and by thy Mercy obtain his
reward. Grant that by thy inspiration he may govern with the Mildness of
Solomon, and enjoy a peaceable Kingdom. Grant that he may serve thee with fear,
and fight for thee with constancy. Protect him and his Nobles with thy Shield,
and always give him victory by thy Grace, Honor him before all the Kings of
the Earth; Let him rule over Countries, and let Nations adore him. Let him be
singular in Judgment and Equity, and make him rich with thy rich right hand.
Give him a fruitful Country, and give to his Children all good things. Give him
a long life in this World, and in his days let Justice flourish. Strengthen
thou the Throne of his Government, and with gladness and righteousness, let him
glory in thy eternal Kingdom, through Jesus Christ.

GOd the unspeakable Author of the World, the Creator of Mankind, the Governor
of Empires, the Establisher of Kingdoms, who out of the loins of thy faithful
friend our Father Abraham, did choose a King that should save all Nations.
Bless we beseech thee this our present King, and his Army with a rich blessing.
Establish him in the Throne of this Kingdom. Visit him, as thou did visit
Moses in the Bush, Josua in the Battle, Gedeon in the Field, and Samuel in the
Temple; besprinkle him with the dew of thy Wisdom, and give unto him the
blessing of David and Solomon. Be thou unto him a Coat Armor against his
Enemies, and an Helmet in adversity. Give him patience in prosperity, and
protect him always with thy Shield. Grant that other Countries may keep Faith
unto him, and that his Nobles may live in Peace, embrace Charity, abstain from
Covetousness, speak Justice and maintain Truth: and so this people may grow up
together with the blessing of Eternity, that having overcome, they may rejoice
in everlasting peace, through Christ our Lord.

GOd which providest for thy people by thy Power, and rulest over them in Love,
grant unto this thy Servant James, the spirit of Wisdom and Government, that
being devoted unto thee with all his heart, he may so wisely govern this
Kingdom, that in his time the Church may be in safety, and Christian Devotion
may continue in Peace, that so persevering to the end in good works, he may by
thy Mercy come unto thine everlasting Kingdom, through thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with thee World without end. Amen.

The Litany being ended, the Archbishop begins to say aloud, Lift up your
Hearts. etc. Answ. We lift them up unto the Lord.


It is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places, give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and
everlasting God, the strength of thy Chosen, and the exalter of the Humble,
which in the beginning, by the pouring out of the Flood, did chasten the sins
of the World, and by a Dove conveying an Olive branch, did give a token of
reconcilement unto the Earth, and again did consecrate thy Servant Aaron a
Priest, by the anointing of Oil, and afterward by the effusion of this Oil,
did make Priests, and Kings, and Prophets, to govern thy people Israel, and
by the voice of the Prophet David, did foretell, that the Countenance of thy
Church should be made cheerful with Oil. We beseech thee Almighty Father, that
thou will vouchsafe to bless and sanctify this thy Servant James, that he may
minister Peace unto his people, and imitate Aaron in the Service of God. That
he may attain the perfection of Government in Counsel and Judgment, and a
countenance always cheerful, and amiable to the whole people, through Christ
our Lord.

This done, the King arises from his Devotion, and reposeth him a while in his
Chair of Estate.

After a while, he goes to the Altar, and there disrobeth himself of his upper
garments (his under apparel being made open with loops only closed) at the
places which are to be anointed.

The Archbishop undoeth the loops, and opens the places which he is to anoint.

The Archbishop first anoynteth his hands: saying,

Let these hands be anointed, as Kings and Prophets have been anointed, and as
Samuel did anoint David to be King, that thou may be blessed, and established
a King in this Kingdom over this people, whom the Lord thy God has given thee
to rule and govern, which he vouchsafe to grant, who with the Father and the
holy Ghost, etc.

The mean while the Quire sings the Anthem.

Sadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, anointed Solomon King, and all the
people rejoiced, and said, God save the King for ever.

The Archbishop says this prayer.

LOok down Almighty God with thy favorable countenance upon this glorious
King, and as thou did bless Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, so vouchsafe we beseech
thee by thy power, to water him plentifully with the blessings of thy grace.
Give unto him of the dew of Heaven, and of the fatness of the Earth, abundance
of Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and plenty of all fruits of thy goodness long to
continue, that in his time here may be health in our Country, and Peace in our
Kingdom, and that the glorious dignity of his Royal Court, may brightly shine
as a most clear lightning, far and wide in the eyes of all Men. Grant Almighty
God, that he may be a most mighty protector of his Country, a bountiful
comforter of Churches and holy Societies, the most valiant of Kings, that he
may triumph over his Enemies, and subdue Rebels and Infidels; that he may be
loving and amiable to the Lords and Nobles, and all the faithful Subjects of
his Kingdom, that he may be feared, and loved of all Men, that his Children may
be Kings to rule this Kingdom by succession of all ages, and that after the
glorious and happy days of this present life, he may obtain everlasting joy and
happiness through Christ our Lord.

The Prayer ended, the Archbishop proceeds with his anointing.

1. Of the Breast. 2. Between the Shoulders. 3. Of both the Shoulders. 4. Of
the boughs of both his arms. 5. Of his head in the Crown.
The anointing being done, the Dean of Westminster closes the Loops again
which were opened,

The Archbishop says these Prayers.

GOd the Son of God, Christ Jesus our Lord, which was anointed by his Father
with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, he by his holy anointing, pour down
upon thy head the blessing of the holy Ghost, and make it enter into the inward
part of thy heart, so that thou may receive invisible grace, and having
justly governed thy temporal Kingdom, thou may reign with him eternally, who
only being without sin, does live in glory with God, and the Father, and the
holy Ghost.

GOd which art the glory of the Righteous, and the mercy of Sinners, who has
sent thy Son to redeem Mankind with his precious blood, who bring Wars to an
end, and defendest, those that trust in thee, upon whose good will and pleasure
does depend the strength of all Kingdoms; we humbly pray in this Royal seat, to
bless this thy Servant, who puts his confidence in thy Mercy, vouchsafe in
thy favor to be present with him, that he which desires to be defended by thy
protection, may be stronger than his Enemies: Crown him with the Crown of
Justice and Piety, that with all his heart, and all his mind, he may trust in
thee, serve thee, defend and advance thy holy Church, and govern the people
committed to his charge in justice and equity. Kindle O Lord his heart with the
love of thy grace by the inward anointing wherewith thou have anointed Priests,
Kings and Prophets, that he loving Justice, and leading his people by the ways
of righteousness, after the glorious course of this life which thou have
appointed, he may come to eternal joy, through Christ.

The Prayers being ended. First a shallow Quoif is put on the Kings head
(because of the anointing)

If His Majesty's hair be not smooth after it; there is King Edwards Ivory Comb
for that end.

Then the Colobium or Dalmatica is put on him.

After the putting on whereof, the Archbishop says the Prayer.

O God the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords by whom Kings do reign, and
Lawgivers do make good Laws, vouchsafe in thy favor to bless this Kingly
ornament, and grant that thy Servant our King, who shall wear it, may shine in
the spirit, with the ornament of good life, and holy actions, and after this
life ended, he may for ever enjoy that life, and glory which has no end,
through Christ our Lord.

The King puts on the Linen Gloves (part of the Regalia.)

Then he takes off his Sword, wherewith he was girt before.

He goes to the Altar, and there offers it.

The chief Peer then present offers, and redeemeth the Sword.

Which having done, he draws the Sword out, and carries it naked before the
King, from that time all the Solemnity.

The Archbishop takes the Scepter with the Cross, and delivers it into the
Kings right hand, with these words.

Receive the Scepter, the sign of Kingly power, the Rod of the Kingdom, the Rod
of Virtue, that thou may govern thy self aright, and defend the holy Church
and Christian people committed by God unto thy charge. Punish the wicked, and
protect the just, and lead them in the way of righteousness, that from this
Temporal Kingdom, thou may be advanced to an Eternal Kingdom, by his goodness
whose Kingdom is everlasting.

After the Archbishop says this Prayer.

O Lord the Fountain of all good things, and the Author of all good
proceedings, grant we beseech thee to this thy Servant James, that he may order
aright the dignity he has obtained. Vouchsafe to confirm the honor which thou
have given him, honor him before all Kings, and enrich him with a rich
benediction; establish him in the Throne of this Realm; visit him with increase
of Children, let justice spring up in his days, and with joy of gladness, let
him Reign in thine everlasting Kingdom.

Then the Archbishop delivers the Rod with the Dove into the Kings left hand,
saying,

Receive the Rod of Virtue and equity, Learn to make much of the godly, and to
terrify the wicked. Show the way to those that go astray. Offer thy hand to
those that fall. Repress the proud. Lift up the Lowly, that our Lord Jesus
Christ may open to thee the door, who says of himself, I am the door, by me if
any Man enter in he shall be safe; and let him be thy helper, who is the key of
David and the Scepter of the house of Israel, who opens and no man shuts,
who shuts and no man opens, who brings forth the captive out of Prison,
where he sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, that in all things thou
may follow him of whom the Prophet David says, Thy seat O God endures for
ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter; thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity: Wherefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the Oil of gladness above thy Fellows, even Jesus Christ our Lord.

After this he blesses the King, saying,

THe Lord bless and keep thee, and as he has made thee King over his people,
so he still prosper thee in this World, and make thee partaker of his eternal
felicity in the World to come. Amen.

GRant O Lord that the Clergy and People gathered together by thy Ordinance,
for this Service of the King may by the gracious assistance of thy goodness,
and the vigilant care of thy Servant and King, be continually governed and
preserved in all happiness. Amen.

GRant that they obeying thy holy will, may be freed from all adversities, and
enjoying the riches of thy grace, may with servent love walk in the ways of thy
Commandments, that in this life being made partakers of thy peace, they may be
Citizens of thy Kingdom in the life that is to come, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The King kisseth the Archbishop, and the Bishops then assistant.

After this the King goes up from the Altar to the Stage (all the Peers
solemnly attending His Majesty in their places.)

In the mean time the Quire sing; we praise thee O God.

Which being ended, the Archbishop inthronizeth the King into his Throne there,
saying,

Stand and hold fast from henceforth, that place whereof hitherto thou have
been Heir by the succession of thy Forefathers, being now delivered unto thee,
by the authority of Almighty God, and by the hands of us, and all the Bishops
and Servants of God; and as thou see the Clergy to come nearer unto the
Altar, so remember that in places convenient thou give them greater honor,
that the Mediator of God and Man may establish thee in this Kingly Throne, to
be the Mediator betwixt the Clergy and the Laity, and that thou may reign for
ever with Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns for ever. Amen.

Which done, all the Peers do their homage to the King, in these words.

I become your Leige-man of Life and Limb, and of Earthly Worship, and Faith
and Troth shall bear unto you, to live and dye with you against all manner of
folk. So God me help.

And after, put their hands and touch the Crown (by way of ceremony, as
promising to support it with all their power.)

Then the King to ease himself of the Scepter and Rod in his hands, gives them
to carry to such as it pleases His Majesty.

The Archbishop kneeled down, and made his homage as follows.

Out of the Coronation of Edward the sixth.
J. A. Shall be faithful and true, and Faith and Troth bear unto you our
Sovereign Lord, and to your Heirs Kings of England, and I shall do and truly
knowledge the service due of the Lands, I claim to hold of you, as in the right
of your Church, as God shall help me. And so kissed the Kings left cheek, etc.

Or these words taken out of another book.

I become your man Liege of life and Limb, and Troth and hearty Honor to you
shall bear, against all men that now live and dye. So help me God. etc. The
Archbishop goes down to the Altar, and begins the Communion.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, we beseech thee that this thy Servant James our King, who by
thy Mercy has received the government of this Realm, may also receive an
increase of all Virtues, whereby he may be acceptable to thee, and avoid the
gulf of vice, and overcome all his enemies, and finally come to thee in glory,
who art the Way the Truth, and the Life, through Christ our Lord.

The Epistle, 1 Pet. 2. By two Bishops. The Gospel, Matthew. 22. By two Bishops.
The Nicene Creed. The Offertory.
The King comes down from the Throne to offer.

He offers twice.

1. Bread and Wine. 2. A Mark of Gold.
Then the Prayer.
ALmighty God, give thee of the dew of Heaven, and of the fat of the Earth,
abundance of Corn and Wine. Let the Nations serve thee, and the Tribes adore
thee, and let him be blessed that blesses thee, and God shall be thy helper.
Almighty God, bless you with the blessing of Heaven above, in the Mountains and
Hills, and with the blessings of the Earth beneath, with the blessings of Corn
and Wine, and Fruit, and let the blessings of the old Fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, be established upon thee through Christ our Lord.

BLess O Lord, the virtuous courage of this King, and accept the work of his
hands, replenish his Realm with the increase of thy Blessings, with the Fruit
of the Heavens, and the dew of the Water, and the depths. Let the influence of
the Sun and the Moon, drop down fatness upon the high Mountains, and the Clouds
rain plenty upon the low Valleys, that the Earth may abound with store of all
things. Let the blessings of him that appeared in the Bush, descend upon his
head, and the fullness of his Blessings fall upon his Children and Posterity.
Let his Feet be dipped in Oil, and his Horn be exalted, as the Horn of an
Unicorn, by which he may scatter his Enemies from on the face of the Earth; the
Lord that sits in Heaven be his defender for ever and ever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

BLess, we beseech thee, O Lord, these thy gifts, and sanctify them unto this
Holy use, that by them we may be made partakers of the Body and Blood of thy
only begotten Son Jesus Christ. And thy Servant our King James may be fed unto
everlasting Life of Soul and Body, and enabled to the discharge of his great
Place and Office, whereunto thou have called him of thy great goodness: grant
this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

O GOD, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings do Reign, and
Lawgivers do make good Laws, vouchsafe in thy favor to bless this Kingly
Ornament, and grant that thy Servant our King, who shall wear it, may shine in
the spirit, with the Ornament of Good Life, and Holy Actions, and after this
Life ended, he may for ever enjoy that Life and Glory which has no end,
through Christ our Lord.

The Prayer done, the Dean of Westminster arrayeth the King, 1. With the
Supertunica, or close Pall. 2. Then with the Tynsin Hose. 3. Then with his
Sandals.


The Spurs are put on by a Nobleman, thereto by the King appointed.

Then the Archbishop takes the Sword, and lays it before him on the Altar,
and says this Prayer.

HEar our Prayers, we beseech thee, and vouchsafe by thy Right Hand of Majesty,
to Bless and Sanctify this Sword, wherewith this thy Servant James desires to
be girt, that it may be a Defense and Protection of Churches, Widows, Orphans,
and all the Servants of God, against the savage cruelty of Pagans and Infidels;
and that it may be a fear and terror to all those that lie in wait to do
mischief, through Christ our Lord.

Then the Archbishop delivers the Sword into the Kings Hands, (which Sword
is girt about him by a Peer thereto appointed) saying,

REceive this Kingly Sword (which is hallowed) for the Defense of the Faith of
Christ's Holy Church, and delivered unto thee by the hands of Bishops, though
unworthy, yet Consecrated in the place of the Holy Apostles; and remember of
whom the Psalmist did Prophecy, saying, Gird thy self with thy Sword upon thy
Thigh, O thou most Mighty; and with this Sword exercise thou the force of
Equity, and mightily destroy the growth of Iniquity; Protect the Holy Church of
God, and his Faithful People, and pursue Heretics no less than Infidels,
defend and help Widows and Orphans. Restore the things that are gone to decay,
and maintain those things that are restored, be revenged of Injustice, and
confirm things that are in good Order, that doing these things, thou may be
glorious in the triumph of Virtue, and excellent in the ornament of Justice,
and Reign for ever with the Savior of the World, whose Image you bear, who
with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

Then the Armil is put about his Neck (in the manner of a Stole) and tied to
the boughs of his two Arms:

The Archbishop saying,

REceive the Armil, as a token of Gods embracing, whereby all thy works may be
defended against thy Enemies, both bodily and ghostly, through Christ our Lord.

Then the Mantle or open Pall is put on by the Dean of Westminster:

The Archbishop saying,

REceive this Pall, which is formed with four Corners, to let thee understand,
that the four Quarters of the World are subject to the power of God, and that
no Man can happily Reign upon Earth, who has not received his Authority from
Heaven.

Then the Archbishop takes the Crown into his hands, and says this Prayer.
O GOD of Eternity, the commander of all Powers, the vanquisher of all Enemies,
Bless this thy Servant, who boweth his Head unto thy Majesty, preserve him in
long Health and prosperous Felicity, be present with him, protect and defend
him, whenever he calls upon thee. Give him, we beseech thee, the Riches of
thy Grace, fill his Soul with Goodness, and Crown him with thy Mercy, and let
him always in godly Devotion wait upon thee, through thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Archbishop Crowns the King, saying,
GOD Crown thee with a Crown of Glory and Righteousness, with the Honor and
Work of Fortitude, that thou by our Ministry, having a right Faith, and
manifold Fruit of good Works, may obtain the Crown of an Everlasting Kingdom,
by the gift of him whose Kingdom endures for ever.

In the mean time the Quire sings the Anthem.
BE strong and of a good courage, and observe the Commandments of the Lord, to
walk in his ways and keep his Ceremonies, Precepts, Testimonies, and Jugments,
and Almighty God prosper and strengthen thee whithersoever thou go. The Lord
is my Ruler, therefore I shall want nothing.

THE King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord; exceeding glad shall he be of
thy Salvation, for thou have granted him his Hearts desire, and have not denied
him the request of his Lips: for thou have prevented him with Blessings of
goodness, and have set a Crown of pure Gold upon his Head.

Then he puts the Ring on his Wedding-finger; saying,
REceive the Ring of Kingly Dignity, and by it the Seal of Christian Faith,
that as this day thou art adorned the Head and Prince of this Kingdom and
People, so thou may persevere as the Author and Establisher of Christianity,
and the Christian Faith, that being rich in Faith, and happy in Works, thou
may Reign with him who is King of Kings, to whom be Glory and Honor, for
ever and ever.

After this, the Archbishop says this Prayer.
O GOD, to whom belongs all Power and Dignity, give unto thy Servant the
Fruit of his Dignity, wherein grant he may long continue and fear thee always,
and always labor to please thee, through Christ our Lord.

The King comes to the step of the Altar, to receive the Sacrament.

The Archbishop ministers the Bread.

The Dean of Westminster the Cup.

The King returns to his Throne, and there stays the end of Service.

The Communion being done, the King comes down in Estate to the Altar.

Thence into King Edward's Chapel.

The King takes off his Crown, and delivers it to the Archbishop, who
lays it on the Altar there.

The King withdraws himself into the Traverse.

There the Great Chamberlain of England disrobeth him of the Robes of King
Edward the Confessor.

These Robes he immediately delivers to the Dean of Westminster.

The King is arrayed with his own Royal Robes provided for His Majesty to wear
that day.

The King being newly arrayed, comes forth of the Traverse, and goes to King
Edward's Altar.

There the Archbishop puts on him the Crown which is provided for His
Majesty to wear that day.

The King takes again his Scepter with the Cross into his Hand, and the Rod
with the Dove.

The King with his whole Train in most Solemn manner goes back to his Palace
by the same way he came.

Dinner being done, and the King withdrawing himself, the Scepter which the
King carried in his Hand, with the Rod (being the Regalia) are to be
re-delivered to the Dean of Westminster again, to be kept as they have been.

THE CORONATION OF THE QUEEN.
THE Queen must be supported by two Bishops, from the West Door of the Church
of Westminster, etc.

The Queen must be Anointed, etc. after the Homage done by the Lords, and the
Kings Coronation finished.

The Queen following the King down to the Altar, going before the Lords,
bearing her Crown, Scepter, and Rod, two Bishops sustaining her; and for her
there shall be made on the left side of the Altar a Folding-stool.

She shall sit while the King be required for the keeping of the Customs, etc.
and that done, while Veni Creator is singing, and all the while the King is
Anointing.

The Archbishop entering the West Door of the Abbey, says this Prayer.
O Almighty and everlasting God, the Fountain and Wellspring of all goodness,
which do not reject the frailty of the Woman, but rather do vouchsafe to
allow and choose it, and by choosing the weak things of the World, do
confound those things that are strong; which did sometime cause thy People to
Triumph over a most cruel Enemy, by the Hand of Judith a Woman; give ear, we
beseech thee, to our most Humble Prayers, and multiply thy Blessings upon this
thy Servant, whom in all Humble Devotion we do Consecrate our Queen. Defend her
always with thy Mighty Right Hand, and with the Buckler of thy favor, protect
her on every side, that she may be able to overcome, and triumph over all her
Enemies, both bodily and ghostly, and that with Sarah and Rebecca, Leah and
Rachel, and other Blessed and Honorable Women, she may multiply and rejoice in
the Fruit of her Womb, to the Honor of the whole Kingdom, and the good
Government of the Holy Church of God, through Christ our Lord, who vouchsafed
to be born of a most pure Virgin, that he might visit and Redeem the World, who
lives and reigns with thee, in unity of the Holy Ghost, through all Ages,
World without end.

Another Blessing of the Queen before the Nobles, to be said at the Altar
before she be Anointed.
GOD which only have Immortality, and dwell in Light which cannot be
approached, whose Providence is never deceived, which have made all things that
are to come, and call those things that are not, as the things that are;
which castest down the Proud from their Seat, and do exalt the Humble and
Meek, we humbly beseech thy unspeakable Mercy, that as for the good of the
People of the Jews, thou did deliver Queen Esther from Captivity, and did
bring her to the Bed of King Ahasuerus, and the Society of his Kingdom; so for
the good of thy Christian Flock, thou will of thy Mercy by our Ministry,
advance this thy Servant to the most High and Royal company of our King, that
she continuing always in the chastity of Princely Wedlock, she may obtain the
Crown that is next unto Virginity, and may in all things, and above all things,
study always to please thee the living God, and by thy Holy Inspiration to
perform those things that are acceptable unto thee, through Christ our Lord,
Amen.

Here the holy Oil shall be poured upon the Crown of her Head in the manner of
a Cross.

The Queen is to be Anointed two times; first, in the forepart of her Head,
the Bishop saying these words;

In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, let the anointing of
this Oil increase thy Honor, and establish thee for ever and ever.

Secondly, on her Breast, saying the same words;

In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, let the anointing of
this Oil increase thy Honor, and establish thee for ever and ever.

After the Anointing, this Prayer is to be said:
O Almighty and everlasting God, we beseech thee of thy Goodness, pour out the
spirit of thine abundant Blessing upon this thy Servant, that as by the
Imposition of our Hands, she is this day Crowned Queen, so she may by thy
sanctification, continue always thy chosen and worthy Servant (...) she may
never hereafter fall from thy Grace, through Christ our Lord.

Here the Ring must be given her, and put on the Forefinger of her Right Hand,
the Bishop saying,

Receive this Ring, the Seal of a sincere Faith, that you may avoid all
infection of Heresy, and by the power of God compel Barbarous Nations, and
bring them to the knowledge of the Truth.

This Prayer must follow.
GOD, to whom belongs all Power and Dignity, grant, we beseech thee, to this
thy Servant, by the sign of Christian Faith, prosperous success in this her
Honor, and that she may continue firm in the same, and endeavor always to
please thee, through Christ our Lord.

Then the Blessing of the Crown.
O God, the Crown of the Faithful, which do Crown their Heads with precious
Stones, Bless and Sanctify this Crown, that as the same is adorned with many
precious Stones, so thy Servant that wears the same, may of thy Grace be
replenished with the manifold gifts of all precious Virtues, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Then the Crown is set upon her Head, the Bishop saying,
Receive the Crown of Glory, and the Honor of Joy, that you may shine in
Righteousness, and be Crowned with everlasting gladness.

This also,

Seeing you are by our Ministry solemnly Consecrated for our Queen, receive the
Crown of Royal Excellency, which is placed upon your Head by the Episcopal
hands of us, though unworthy; and as you are Crowned without, with Gold and
Pearl, so labor to be beautified within, with the Gold of Wisdom, and the
Pearl of Virtue; that after this Life ended, you may with the just Virgins,
decently meet the everlasting Bridegroom, our Lord Jesus Christ, and enter the
Kingly Gate of the Heavenly Court, by his help, who with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

Then the Archbishop puts the Scepter in her Right Hand, and a Rod of Gold
in her Left Hand, saying,
O Lord, the Fountain of all good things, and the giver of all perfection,
grant unto thy Servant, that she may order aright the high Dignity she has
obtained, and with good works establish the glory thou have given her, through
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then is the Queen carried back into the Throne by the two Bishops.

As she passes by the King, she boweth to him.

She is placed in her Throne, and thus continues, until she come down with the
King, to Offer, and receive the Communion.

The Queen goes with the King into St. Edward's Chapel, puts off her Crown
there at the Altar, before which Altar she stays until the King has made
himself ready in the Traverse.

After they both put on their Crowns Imperial, and so go to the Palace.

The FORM of King CHARLES the I. his CORONATION in Scotland, June 11th. 1633.
Written with Mr. Dell's own Hand, Secretary to the Late Archbishop of
Canterbury Dr. LAUD.
The Form of Coronation, and Rites to be used therein; collected from other the
like Solemnities used in this Kingdom.
LEaving the choice of the Place and Church to His Majesty's own appointment,
wheresoever the Coronation shall be done,

A Stage must be set up made square and fastened to four Pillars of the Church,
railed about, and the Rails and Stage overspread and covered with Carpets and
Tapestry.

The Stage being made of some convenient height and breadth, must have some
Steps for ascent on the West part, about the midst thereof, and as many for
descent to the Altar or Table, which is to be placed on the East.

Upon the Stage another little Scaffold must be erected of two foot high, with
two steps to ascend; on which the Throne of State must be placed, and adorned
as is meet.

A Chair of State must also be set on the Stage, on the right hand of the
little Scaffold, with a Fald-stool and Cushions, for His Majesty to do his
Devotion.

A little Traverse is to be made on the South side of the Altar or Table, for
the King to repose and disrobe himself.

Round about on the right and left hand of the Stage, there must be Scaffolds
for Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen of the Chamber, and others to rest and
behold.

Within the compass of the Altar or Table a Pulpit must be set for Sermon.

Over against it a Chair of State for his Majesty, with a Fald-stool to kneel
at.

On the West side of the Pulpit a Foarm covered with Tapestry, for the
Archbishop, and Bishops serving at the Coronation.

The Evening before, the King would be at service in Chapel, besides his
private Devotion, whereof the Bishop of Dunblane, now Dean of the Chapel, must
have care to remember His Majesty.

The Regal, Crown, Scepter, and Sword, with the Great Seal of the Kingdom, and
Spurs are to be delivered to such Persons as His Majesty will appoint for
carrying the same.

There is likewise to be provided a Red Silken Coat, having the Places for the
Anointing opened and looped, which His Majesty is to wear next to his Shirt.

The Sacred Oil is to be provided also, and put in some Silver Vessel.

Cloth of some color, red or blew, must be prepared and spread on the Ground
from the Palace Hall door, to the Stage in the Church, for His Majesty to walk
upon all the way, which Way must be railed on every side. This must be done in
the Morning of the Coronation by some Nobleman that His Majesty will make
Almoner for that day. And this concerning the preparation.

The Morning of the Coronation.
The Bishops, Noblemen, and Commissioners of Buroughs to the number of six,
are at that Morning to come unto the Presence. The Constable and Marshal (who
are to carry their Battons in their hands all that day) having brought the King
from his Bed Chamber to the Presence, and after he is placed in his Chair, they
all making the Reverence that becomes; Some one of the Church, or Noblemen
speaks to this purpose.

Sir, the Estates of this your native and ancient Kingdom, calling to mind the
great happiness they enjoyed under the Government of your Majesty's Father of
blessed memory, and acknowledging your Highness to be the rightful Heir of this
Crown by a long and lawful descent, do beseech your Majesty to receive them
into your Highness protection, to govern them by the Laws of the Kingdom, and
defend them, their Rights and Liberties by your Royal Power: Offering their
Service in most humble manner to your Majesty, with their Vows to bestow Land,
Life, and what else is in their power, for the safety of your Majesty's Sacred
Person, and maintenance of your Crown, which they entreat your Majesty to
accept, and pray Almighty God that you may happily, and for many years enjoy
the same.

The King Answers.
I do esteem your affections more than the Crowns of many Kingdoms, and will by
Gods assistance bestow my life for your defense, wishing to live no longer than
I may see this Kingdom flourish in all happiness.

Then kissing his Majesty's hands, they prepare all to go in their ranks as
they are appointed, toward the Church.

The Lion King of Arms having an open Crown upon his Head, carries in his hand
the Vessel containing the sacred Oil. Two of his Brethren walk on either of his
hands one. The Trumpets sound, and so they march.

The Receiving of the King into the Church.
THe Archbishop and Bishops, with the Musicians of the Chapel are to meet the
King at the Entry in Procession-wise.

The King is received under a Canopy, supported by four Barons. Two Bishops
walk, one on His Majesty's one hand, and another upon the other. The Dean of
the Chapel is always by to inform the King of the Rites of the Solemnity, as
need shall be.

The King is received with an Anthem into the Church, Behold oh Lord our
Protector, and look upon the face of thine Anointed, because one day in thy
Court, is better than a thousand etc. Quam dilecta, etc.

The King passing up the Church, goes to the Stage, and reposeth himself a
little.

The Regal, Crown, Scepter, Sword, Great Seal, and Spurs are laid down on a
Taffel besides the Altar or Table. The sacred Oil is delivered by Lion King of
Arms to the Dean of the Chapel, who brings it to the Archbishop, and he sets
the same on the Table.

Then the King comes down from the Stage, and the Sermon begins.

Which ended, the King ascends again to the Stage, and sits down in the Chair
of State.

Then the Archbishop (the Marshal of Scotland going before him) goes to all
the Quarters of the Stage, and speaks to the People in these words;

Sirs, I do present unto you King Charles, the rightful and undoubted Inheritor
of the Crown and Dignity of this Realm. This day is by the Peers of the
Kingdom, appointed for his Coronation. And are you not willing to have him for
your King, and become subject unto him and his Commandments?

The King stands up in this time, and as the Archbishop goes from one part of
the Stage to another, turns himself that he may be seen of the People.

The People declare their willingness by their Acclamations and shouts, crying,
God save King Charles; or let the King live.

Then is sung this Anthem. Let thine Hands be strengthened, and thy right Hand
be exalted, let Judgment be the preparation of thy Seat, Mercy and Truth go
before thy face, Psalm. 89. Glory be to the Father, etc.

Whilst the Anthem is singing the Archbishop goes down to the Altar or Table,
and rests there.

Then is the King, supported by two Bishops, brought to the Altar, and makes
his Oblation; After which he kneels at his Fald-stool, and the Archbishop says
this Prayer.

O God who do visit those that are humble, and do comfort them by thine
Holy Spirit, send down thy Grace upon this thy Servant King Charles, that by
him we may feel thy presence amongst us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Prayer ended the King sits down in his Chair, and the Archbishop goes
unto him, and asks, if he be willing to take the Oath appointed to be given
at the Coronation of Kings? His Majesty declaring his willingness, the
Archbishop ministers the Questions following.

Archbishop. Sir, will you promise to serve Almighty God, and as every good
King in his Kingdom ought to do, maintain the Gespel of Jesus Christ in this
your Dingdom, against all Atheism, Profaneness, Heresy, Schism, or
Superstition whatsoever?

Rex. I promise faithfully so to do.

Archbishop. Sir, will you promise to rule this People subject to you, and
committed to your Charge, according to the Laws, Constitutions and Customs of
this your Kingdom, causing (as much as in you lies) Justice and Equity to be
ministered without partiality? And to endeavor the Peace of the Church of
Christ and all Christian People?

Rex. I grant, and promise so to do.

Archbishop. Sir, will you likewise promise to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Crown of Scotland?

Rex, I promise so to do.

Archbishop. Sir, We do also beseech you to grant and preserve unto us of the
Clergy, and to the Churches committed to our Charge all Canonical Privileges,
and that you will defend and protect us, as every good King ought in his
Kingdom to defend his Bishops, and the Churches that be under their Government?

The King answers,
With a willing heart I grant the same, and promise to maintain you, and every
one of you, with all the Churches committed to your charge, in your whole
Rights and Privileges, according to Law and Justice.

Then the King rising from his Chair, is led to the Altar, where, in sight of
all the People, laying his hands upon the Bible, he takes his Oath, and says,
All the things which before I have promised, I shall observe and keep. So God
me help, and by the Contents of this Book.

After the Oath, the King returns to his Chair of State, and then is sung the
Hymn, Veni Creator, etc.

The Hymn finished, the King kneeleth at his Fald-stool, and the Archbishop
says this Prayer.

WE beseech thee O Lord, holy Father, almighty and everlasting God, for this
thy Servant King Charles, that as at first thou broughtest him into the World
by thy Divine Providence, and in the flower of his Youth have preserved him
until this present time; so thou will evermore enrich him with the Gift of
Piety, fill him with the Grace of Truth, and daily increase in him all
Goodness, that he may happily enjoy the Seat of Supreme Government, by the Gift
of thy supernal Grace. And being defended from all his Enemies, by the Wall of
thy Mercy, may prosperously govern the People committed to his Charge.

After the Prayer, the Letany is sung, and at the close thereof this is to be
added.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true Worshipping of thee,
in Righteousness and Holiness of Life, this thy Servant Charles our King and
Governor, and so to the end.

Then is said this Prayer by one of the Bishops that sings the Letany.

O Almighty and everlasting God, Creator of all things, Ruler of Angels, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who made thy servant Abraham Triumph over his
Enemies; did give many Victories to Moses and Joshuah, the Governors of the
People; did raise and exalt David thy Servant to be a King over them; did
enrich Solomon his Son with the Gift of Wisdom and Understanding, and blessedst
him with Peace and great Prosperity. Give ear we beseech thee unto our humble
Prayers, and multiply thy Blessings upon this thy Servant, who is now to be
consecrated our King, that he being strengthened with the Faith of Abraham,
endued with the mildness of Moses, armed with the Fortitude of Joshuah, exalted
with the Humility of David, and beautified with the Wisdom of Solomon, may
please thee in all things, and ever walk uprightly in thy ways. Defend him by
thy mighty Arm, compass him with thy Protection, and give him to overcome all
his and thine Enemies. Honor him before all the Kings of the Earth. Let him
rule over Countries, and let Nations adore him. Establish his Throne with
Judgment and Equity, let Justice flourish in his days, and grant that He,
underpropped by the due Obedience and hearty love of his People, may sit on the
Throne of his Forefathers for many years, and after this Life, may reign with
thee in thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior.
Amen.

The Letany thus ended, the Archbishop begins to say aloud, Lift up your
Hearts, and give thanks unto the Lord.

Answer. By the Bishops that sing the Letany.

We lift them up unto the Lord, and to give thanks unto him it is meet and
right.

Then the Archbishop says,
It is very meet and right, and our bounden Duty so to do, and at all times,
and in all places to give thanks to thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty and
everlasting God, the strength of thy Chosen, and the exalter of the Humble, who
in the beginning, by sending the Flood of Waters, did punish the sins of the
World; and by a Dove bringing an Olive Branch in her mouth, did give a token
of Reconcilement to the Earth; who afterward did Consecrate thy Servant
Aaron a Priest, by the Anointing of Oil, as also by the pouring out of the
same, did make Kings, Priests, and Prophets to Govern thy People Israel, and
by the voice of the Prophet David did foretell, that the Countenance of thy
Church should be made joyful with Oil: We beseech thee to bless and sanctify
this thy Servant King Charles, that he may minister Peace unto this People,
that he may attain to the perfection of Government in Counsel and Judgment, and
that his Countenance may be always cheerful and amiable to all his People,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

This Prayer said, the King rises from his Devotion, and reposeth himself a
while in the Chair of State, in which he is Crowned.

Afterward he goes to the Altar, and stands with his Back close unto it,
disrobes himself of his upper Garment, his under Coat having the loops opened
in the places where he is to be Anointed.

Then he comes to the Pulpit-side, and sitting in a Chair, a Canopy is held
over his Head all the time of his Anointing.

The Archbishop first Anoints his Hands in the Palms, saying, In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (which words he repeats in
all the several Anointings) let these Hands be Anointed with Oil, as Kings and
Prophets have been Anointed: And as Samuel did Anoint David to be King, that
thou may be blessed and established a King in this Kingdom over the People,
whom the Lord thy God has given thee to Rule and Govern: Which he vouchsafe to
grant, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost is one, and reigns in Glory
everlasting. Amen.

In this time the Singers do sing the Anthem, Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the
Prophet Anointed Solomon King, and all the People rejoiced, and said, God save
the King for ever.

Then the Archbishop says this Prayer.
LOok down, Almighty God, upon this thy Servant, our dread Sovereign, King
Charles, with thy favorable countenance, and as thou did Bless Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, so vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to water him plentifully with
the Blessing of thy Grace; give unto him of the dew of Heaven, and of the
fatness of the Earth, abundance of Corn, Wine, and Oil, with all plenty of
Fruits, and other good things. Grant him long to continue, and that in his time
there may be Health and Peace in this Kingdom. Grant, O Almighty God, that he
may be a mighty Protecton of this Country, a bountiful Comforter of Churches,
and Holy Societies, the most Valiant of Kings, terrible to Rebels and Infidels,
amiable to his Nobles, and to all his Faithful Subjects. Make his Royal Court
to shine in Princely Dignity as a most clear Lightning, far and wide in the
Eyes of all Men. Finally, let him be Blessed with happy Children, that may
Reign as Kings after him, and Rule this Kingdom by Succession of all Ages, and
after the glorious and happy days of present Life, give him of thy Mercy an
everlasting Kingdom with thee in the Heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Prayer ended, the Archbishop proceeds in the Anointing. 1. His Breast. 2.
Betwixt the Shoulders. 3. Both the points of the Shoulders. 5. Boughs of his
Arms. 6. The Crown of His Majesty's Head.

The Anointing done, the Dean of the Chapel closes the loops again, which
were opened.

Then the Archbishop reads this Benediction. God the Son of God, Christ Jesus
our Lord, who was Anointed of his Father with Oil of gladness above his
fellows, pour down upon thy Head the Blessing of the Holy Ghost, and make it
enter into the inward parts of thy Heart, so that thou may Reign with him in
the Heavens eternally. Amen.

This pronounced, a shallow Quoif is put upon the Kings Head, because of the
Anointing.

Then the King goes to the Altar, and the Robe is put upon him, at which the
Archbishop says this Prayer.

O God the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whom Kings do reign, and
Lawgivers make good Laws, vouchsafe in thy Favor to bless this thy Servant
Charles, in all his Government, that living godly and leading his People by the
way of righteousness, after a glorious course in this Life, he may attain that
joy which has no end, through our Lord. Amen.

Then the Sword is brought to the Archbishop, who laying it on the Altar,
prays in this manner.

HEar our Prayers, we beseech thee O Lord, and vouchsafe by thy right hand of
Majesty, to bless and sanctify this Sword, wherewith thy Servant Charles
desires to be girt, by the same he may defend Churches, Widows, Orphans, and
all the People of God, against the savage Cruelty of Pagans and Infidels; and
that it may be a terror and fear to all those that lie in wait to do mischief,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Archbishop takes up the Sword, and puts it in the Kings hand, saying.

Receive this Kingly Sword for the Defense of the Faith of Christ, and
Protection of his Holy Church; and remember him of whom the Psalmist did
prophecy, saying. Gird thy self with thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O thou most
mighty; and with thy Sword execute thou Equity and Justice. Pursue all
Heretics and Infidels, defend Widows and Orphans, restore the things that are
gone to decay, maintain and confirm the things that are restored, and in good
order, destroy the growth of Iniquity, and take Punishment of all Injustice,
that you may be glorious in the Triumph of Virtue, and reign with him whose
Image you bear for ever and ever. Amen.

The Sword is girt to the Kings side by one of the Peers thereto appointed.

Then the King returns to the Chair wherein he was anointed, and has the Spurs
put on by the Lord Marshal.

After which the Archbishop taking the Crown in his hand, says this Prayer.

O God the Crown of all the Faithful, who do crown their Heads with precious
Stones that trust in thee, bless and sanctify this Crown, that as the same is
adorned with many precious Stones, so this thy Servant, that wears the same,
may be replenished of thy Grace with the manifold Gifts of all precious
Virtues, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Archbishop Crowns the King, saying. God crown thee with a Crown of
Glory and Righteousness, with the Honor and Virtue of Fortitude, that by a
right Faith, and manifold fruits of good works, you may obtain the Crown of an
everlasting Kingdom, by the Gift of him whose Kingdom endures for ever. Amen.

Then the King goes to the Stage, and sits in the Chair of State, which is
placed by the Throne.

Then the Lion, by direction of the Marshal calls the Nobles, who set their
hands to the Crown, and say every man these words. So God not help me, as I
shall support thee. And when they have done, they all hold up there hands, and
swear to be loyal and true Subjects.

The Marshal having in his hand the obligatory Oath of the People, goes to the
four corners of the Stage, and reads the same to the Lion, who cries it down to
the People, and they all hold up their hands and say. Amen.

The Oath of the People is this. We swear, and by the holding up of our hands
do promise all Subjection and Loyalty to King Charles, our Dread Sovereign, and
as we wish God to be merciful unto us, shall be to His Majesty true and
faithful, and be ever ready to bestow our Lives, Lands, and what else God has
given us, for the Defense of His sacred Person and Crown.

When the King is crowned the Earls and Viscounts put on their Crowns, and the
Lion his. The other Barons and Lords continue bare and uncovered.

Then is this Anthem sung.
BE strong and of good Courage, and observe the Commandments of the Lord, to
walk in his ways, and keep his Ceremonies, Precepts, Testimonies and Judgments.
And Almighty God strengthen and prosper thee wheresoever thou go. The Lord
is my Ruler, and therefore I shall want nothing. The King shall rejoice in thy
strength O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be of thy Salvation. For thou have
granted him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the Request of his Lips,
for thou have prevented him with Blessings of goodness, and have set a Crown of
pure Gold upon his Head.

After this, the King goes down again, looses his Sword wherewith he was girt,
and offers it, laying the same upon the Altar, which one of the Chief Nobles
redeems with an Offering, and then draws it forth, and carries the same naked
before the King.

Then the Archbishop takes the Scepter, and delivers it into the Kings right
hand, with these words.

Receive the Scepter, the Sign of Royal Power, the Rod of the Kingdom, the Rod
of Virtue, that thou may govern thy self aright, defend the holy Church, and
all the Christian People committed by God to thy Charge, punishing the Wicked,
and protecting the Just.

And then he says this Prayer.
O Lord, the fountain of all good things, and the Author of all good
proceedings, grant we beseech thee, to this thy Servant, that he may rightly
use the Dignity which he has by Inheritance; vouchsafe to confirm the Honor
which thou have given him before all Kings, and enrich him with all
Benedictions. Establish his Throne, visit him with increase of Children, let
Justice spring up in his days, and his Soul be filled with Joy and gladness,
till he be translated to thine everlasting Kingdom. Amen.

After this, the Archbishop blesses the King, saying. The Lord bless thee and
keep thee, and as he has made thee King over his People, so he still may
prosper thee in this world, and in the world to come make Thee partaker of his
eternal Felicity. Amen.

The King then kisseth the Archbishop and Bishops assistant. After that, the
King ascends the Stage attended by the Nobles, and the Singers sing Te Deum
laudamus, etc.

Which ended, the Archbishop enthrones the King, saying. Stand and hold fast
from henceforth the Place whereof you are the righteous and lawful Heir, by a
long and lineal Succession of your Forefathers, which is now delivered unto
you, by the Authority of Almighty God, and by the hands of us, the Bishops and
Servants of God; and as you see the Clergy come more near to the Altar than
others, so where it is convenient, you will remember to give them that Honor
and Respect which is due to their Places, that the Mediator of God and Man, may
establish you in this Kingly Throne, and that with him you may reign and live
for ever.

Then goes the Chancellor to the four Corners of the Stage, and proclaims his
Majesty's Pardon, with offer of the same under the Great Seal of Scotland, to
all who shall require it. Upon which the People make their Acclamations,
crying, God save the King.

This done, the Archbishop and Bishops kneel down and make their Homage, their
hands being betwixt the Kings hands, and these words are read unto them.

J. A. B. shall be faithful and true, and Faith and Truth bear unto you our
Sovereign Lord, and your Heirs, Kings of Scotland, and I shall do, and truly
acknowledge the Service of the Lands, which I shall claim to hold of you in the
right of the Church, as God help me.

And they shall kiss the Kings left Cheek. After them, the Temporal Lords in
like manner kneeling and holding their hands betwixt the Kings hands, have
these words read unto them.

J. A. B. become your Liege Man, and Truth and Faith I shall bear unto you,
live and die against all manner of Folks whomsoever, in your Service. So God me
help.

They kiss likewise the Kings left Cheek. The King gives the Scepter to such
as it shall please his Majesty for carrying the same, and goes down to the
Chair of Estate over against the Pulpit.

And the Archbishop going to the Altar or Table, begins the Communion.

The Communion ended, and Blessing given, the King with the Crown on his head,
and Scepter in his hand, returns with the whole Train in most solemn manner to
his Palace.

The Trumpets sound, the Cannons shoot, and other small Shot are discharged.
Silver and Gold Pieces coined for that purpose are cast among the People.

And then the King goes to his Feast, which is ordered as his Majesty shall
give direction.

God save the KING.

FINIS.

