THE CERTAINTY OF SALVATION To Them who Dye in the LORD.

A SERMON, PREACHED At the FUNERAL of the Right Honorable, GEORGE Lord
DELAMER; AT BODEN, In the County-Palatine of CHESTER: September the 9th. 1684.

By ZACHARY CAWDREY; Rector of BARTHOMLY, in the said County-Palatine of
CHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Gillworth, Bookseller in New Castle, in
Staffordshire; and James Thursion, Bookseller in Nantwich. 1684.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND PIOUS LADY, ELIZABETH Lady DELAMER.
Madam,
THough the time, allowed me to prepare for the bearing that part I sustained
at the Funeral of your Honored Lord, was but short (that worthy Person, to
whom that Province was first committed, falling sick some days before the
solemnizing of it) yet the Deference I bare to the Memory of that Great Good
Man, and the hopes of being serviceable to the Glory of God, and the Good of
some who might be present in so numerous an Auditory, prevailed with me to
attempt the Discharge of it as well as I could.

And it seems, some favorable Auditors of that plain Sermon, then preached
(which your own Retirement through Sorrow, did not permit your Honor to hear)
have given you that account of it, that your Honor judges it may be of use and
benefit to others to read, to excite them to live in the Lord, that they also
may dye in the Lord, and be eternally happy.

If therefore, when your Honor shall have read this Discourse your self, it
shall appear to your pious Judgment, likely to be further useful to that good
end, for which I preached it, and your Honor now desires the publishing of it,
I humbly submit it to your Honors pleasure and disposal. And as I shall follow
it with my Prayers to God, that it may prosper to the encouragement of humble
and pious persons who shall read it; so also shall I beg of him, in whose sight
the death of his Servants is precious, that he will build up a lasting Monument
to the Memory of your Pious Lord, by causing his Lordship that now is, and the
rest of his Generous Offspring, always to imitate this their great Domestic
Exemplar; that so your Honor may still be a Naomi, Ruth 1.20. and that the
Remainder of your Days may be blessed in them, as your many Years have been,
wherein you lived with your most excellent and pious Consort.

MADAM, I am Your Honors Most humble Servant, ZACHARY CAWDREY.

THE CERTAINTY OF SALVATION To them who dye in the Lord.
REV. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the Dead that dye in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors; and their Works do follow them.


IT is an Article of the common Creed of all Mankind, that it shall be far
better with pious and virtuous Persons, and far worse with the vicious and
ungodly, after this Life, than it can possibly be whilst they are in the Body.
For it is generally believed, that this present Life is appointed by God, the
Supreme Judge, to be the time of Trial and Probation, wherein Men work out for
themselves either Eternal Salvation or Damnation. It was such even to Adam in
Paradise.

Now, if we enquire into the Rise of this common Persuasion (at least, as to
the first part of it; about the future happiness of those who are esteemed good
Men) we shall find that it is not Natural Reason which, in its Consequences,
draws Men into this Belief: For Reason will easily convince a considerate
person (who shall set himself to weigh things seriously and wisely) that Humane
Nature is sunk into a state below the degree which was due to it according to
the scale and distances of the Creatures from one another, and is fallen from
its primitive temper, to affect and do things very Brutish, and unbecoming a
Rational Being. And seeing this proneness to unseemly Actions and Affections is
found to be common to all Men of all Ages and Climates or Places, it cannot be
reasonably conjectured how this Degeneracy of Humane Nature could have come
into the World, but by the Miscarriage of the first common Parents of all
Mankind.

Besides, it is plain to every Man who reflects upon his own Life, that he
himself has actually sinned, both frequently and heinously, against the
In-written Law of his own Conscience.

So that no Man's Reason can secure to himself, that God, the Righteous Judge,
will advance him to Bliss hereafter, seeing he has come short of the Glory of
God, his Maker ( Romans 3.23.) which ought to be the great end and design of
every Man.

So that though Reason can evince the Immortality of the Soul, and that God
will judge the World in Righteousness, according to their Works, and
consequently, can prove that an Hell and state of Torments does abide the
notoriously debauched and wicked persons, yet cannot Reason prove that there
remains an Heaven, or state of Bliss for any, seeing all Men are Sinners.

From whence then comes it to pass, that men of all Religions; Heathens,
Mahumetans, Jews and Christians, have imbibed a Belief, that certainly there is
a Reward for the Righteous; and that after this Life, the Pious, the Just, the
Loyal, the Temperate, the universally Kind and Obliging, and who delight in all
other holy and humble persons, shall enter into Peace and Bliss? If I be able
to judge, there can be no other Rise of this common Belief and Hope, but the
Tradition universally carried down, from the first Fathers of Nations, to their
Posterity; whom their Parents instructed, that though Mankind, by the
Miscarriage of their first Parents, was fallen from their primitive Innocence,
and had forfeited all Right to Happiness, as well as the fallen Angels had
done, according to the Law, and first Covenant of their Creator; yet God
condescended to make a New Covenant with Man in his lapsed State, through the
Mediation of that promised Seed of the Woman, who, by having his Heel bruised
(by suffering the Curse due to our Sin) should break the Serpent's head, and
defeat the design of the fallen Angels, who aimed at the universal destruction
of all Mankind. And in that Covenant God promised also, through the
Intercession of the promised Seed, to accept graciously of the sincere, though
imperfect Services of Men, and to reward them with an eternal Happiness. So
that in every Nation, they that feared God, and worked Righteousness should be
accepted with him, Act. 10.35.

And this Patriarchal Creed, about the efficacy of the Propitiation of the
promised Seed (the Christ) to abolish the guilt of Sin; and the prevalency of
his Intercession, as Mediator of the New Covenant, to make accepted the
Services of sincere and humble Penitents, was not only carried down by
Catechetical Instruction to all the Families of the Earth, but they were taught
also to make a Confession of that Faith, and to protest that Hope by the
offering of Sacrifices, till the promised Seed should come to be actually
offered as a Propitiation for Sin, and to establish that New Covenant, and the
gracious Promises of it, in and through his Blood. Which Covenant was indeed,
as to the Acceptance of God's infinite Mercy, established from the first moment
that the Promise was made to Adam. And so Christ was a Lamb slain from the
beginning of the World; not only in the Type of Sacrifices, but in Divine
Acceptance, and in the acting of Faith by the Saints of all Ages.

But this primary intention of Sacrifices, as representing the Atonement to be
made by the promised Seed, and the Acceptance of our Services through his
Intercession, was soon lost, and the Tradition about their Significancy was
soon corrupted, and they became universally abused to Superstitious and
Idolatrous Services.

Yet still God, in his infinite Mercy to Men, and for their encouragement in
Virtue and Piety, secured that part of the Tradition incorrupt, That to them
who by patient continuance in well doing sought for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, God would give Eternal Life, Romans 2.7.

But because Virtue was always envied, and many times persecuted (and
especially it was so, after that Religion came again to be exercised upon the
Genuine Patriarchal Principles revived in the Evangelical Doctrine) God, for
our encouragement, was pleased to confirm that Article of our Faith [about the
happiness of holy Men after death] by several Revelations from Heaven, which
were after recorded in the Writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles. And of
that sort is the Theme assigned me for my present Discourse: I heard a Voice,
etc. For this Text was therefore commended to my Meditation, because it was the
last Scripture which this Noble Berean, this learned and pious Lord had set
down under that Head, [The Certainty of Salvation.] It being his pious custom,
not only daily to search the Scriptures, and meditate on them; but also to
refer the Scriptures to their proper Subjects; that they might be of ready use
to him on all Occurrences.

The Position, or Doctrine of this Text is the more to be observed, I have seen
three Books in Quarto, writ by his Lordships own hand, wherein the Scriptures
are thus disposed methodically under their proper Heads, very judiciously;
being especially, Collections of such as tended to the confirming of his
Judgment in the Doctrine of the Gospel, or encouragement of his heart in the
practice of Repentance, Faith, Charity, Heavenly-mindedness, etc. And some
also, as they did occur, for to justify the Vsages of the Church of England,
against both Popish and Phanatical Criminations.
First, because it is the foundation of all Religious Actings and Sufferings
(for every one that comes to God, or is a Proselyte to his holy Fear and Love)
must believe that he is, and is a Rewarder of those that diligently seek him,
Heb. 11.6. And Secondly, Because it is not only the Dictate of the Holy Ghost
to the inspired Penman, but commanded by a Voice from Heaven to be recorded:
An Angel speaking articulately in and with a Clap of Thunder to St. John, to
write it. Instances of the like Voice we have in several places of Scripture;
particularly, Mat. 3. at our Savior's Baptism; and Act. 9. at St. Paul's
miraculous Conversion.

The Doctrine it self to be recorded is not barely propounded, but confirmed by
all the Methods that Reason or Discourse does admit; namely, by Testimony (Thus
says the Spirit) and by Arguments artificial, drawn from the most clear (to
pick that of the Causes;) They may, or do rest from their Labors, and their
Works follow them to be rewarded; a tranquillity or undisturbedness of state,
and an enioyment both of reflex and direct pleasure being necessary to make up
complete Blessedness.

Position. So now then our Theme or Position to be discoursed on is this, That
it is evident both from the Testimony of the Spirit, and the most cogent
Reasons, that they who dye in the Lord are from thenceforth blessed.

But before I pursue the Proof of it from the Arguments in the Text, I must
explain the meaning of the Terms denominating the Subject of all the three
Propositions in the Text; namely, They that dye in the Lord: for in every one
of the Propositions, that is the Subject: They who dye in the Lord are blessed;
They who dye in the Lord rest from their Labors; and They who dye in the Lord
have their Works to follow them.

Qu. What is it therefore to dye in the Lord?

Answ. He dies in the Lord, who at the time of his death is found under that
temper of Spirit, and the exercise of those Graces, which do evidence his
Implanting into Christ by Grace, and his Acceptance with God in Christ, through
his Mercy, in the New Covenant.

But to make this more clear, we must explain who it is that lives in the Lord:
and that I may do so, I must set down what Respects and Relations Christ stands
in toward us, according to God's Appointment in the New Covenant.

1. Christ therefore is appointed by God in the New Covenant, to be a
Propitiation and Atonement for Sin, through his Blood and Meritorious
Sufferings; that on the account of them, God might pardon the returning
Penitent, without any dishonor to his Sovereign Government of Men and Angels.

2. He was appointed also to be the Mediator of a New Covenant, in whose hand
all the Promises thereof are established: All the Promises of Pardon, Peace,
Grace and Glory are Yea and Amen in him, or through his Blood or Death;
confirming that New Testament, or Covenant.

3. Christ is also appointed by God to be the Head and Fountain of new
spiritual Life and Power to Mankind, who by the Fall of Adam, had lost all
power to do good, and promote their own Happiness, as well as the Devils and
damned Spirits had lost the same; but, It pleased the Father that in Christ
should all fullness of spiritual power dwell, Col. 1.19. And He is that true
Light which lights every man that comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. And, Of
his Fullness we are to receive Grace, and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16.

4. Christ is appointed also to be the High Priest, in and through whose
Intercession, our sincere, though imperfect Services are accepted.

5. And he is appointed also to be the First born among many Brethren, in and
through whose Purchase and Title we are to be adopted to the Inheritance of
Eternal Glory.

6. Christ is also appointed to be the First Fruits of them that sleep, to
consecrate our Bodies to a Resurrection, by his rising again.

Thus is Christ to us a Propitiation, a Mediator, an Intercessor, an Head and
Root both of Grace, and Adoption of Bodies and Souls to Glory.

But to whom is he effectually all this?

The Gospel tells us, he is so to them, who exercise Repentance toward God,
and Faith toward him, our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 20.21. Who are constant in
mortifying of their Lusts, Romans 8.13. Who have devoted themselves sincerely to
God's Glory, 2 Cor. 5.15. (that is) who have resolved to do or suffer any thing
which may promote the Knowledge, Fear, and Faith and Love of God, and of our
Lord Jesus Christ: And who exercise universal Charity toward all Men (even
Enemies) with special delight in all holy and good Men, 1 Cor. 13.1. And
lastly, Those who make God's Favor in Christ Jesus here, and Communion with
him in a Vision of Peace hereafter, the Inheritance and Happiness which they
choose and desire before all things, both in this World, and in the World to
come, Psalm. 73.25. and Gal. 6.8. These, I say, these penitent, believing,
mortified, devoted, charitable, and heavenly-minded persons are (according to
the Conditions of the New Covenant) in Christ, so as to receive from him the
Benefits of Justification, Peace, Increase of Grace, Acceptance in their
Duties, and Adoption, and Resurrection unto Glory.

So then they who persevere in the Exercise of those Graces of Repentance,
Faith, Devotedness to God's Service, etc. to the end of their days, these dye
in the Lord: they dye with a Right and Title (according to the terms of the New
Covenant) to that Crown of Glory which Christ has purchased; and as a
Righteous Judge, will give unto them at that day, the day of death.

A second Term to be explained is this (From henceforth) (...) which is an
Epoch, or Date; and to me seems best sixed at the death of the Saints.

So that the sense is, They who dye in the Lord are blessed from the very
Instant of their death, without any suspension of their Happiness through the
sleep of their Souls, or on account of their passage through, or stay in
Purgatory, or any other middle state intervening betwixt the bodily Life and
the Happiness of departed holy Souls.

This plain sense is both agreeable to the Scriptures, and seems to be the
sense of the Church of England about this Text, in that she appoints it to be
read at the Interment of the Dead. So that I shall cleave to this plain sense,
waving all critical Enquiries after any other; though I am not ignorant that
some Expositors begin this Date from the ceasing of Persecution for some time
under the Emperors Trajan, Antoninus, or some other mild Heathen Emperors.
Other Expositors fix it from the renewing of Persecutions under Decius or
Dioclesian, or other bitter Persecutors. Others again fix it from the time of
ceasing Persecution under the Emperors, or Rome-Heathen, till the Renewal of
Persecution again under Rome-Papal. But though Expositors thus differ about
some critical Notes of time, yet they all agree that at their death the Saints
are happy. I shall therefore stick to that sense.

Thirdly, I must explain what are the Labors, from which they who dye in the
Lord are said to rest.

I answer, All Conditions which are burdensome to the inward or outward Man,
to Body or Soul, are Labors. Such therefore are Sickness, Pain, Loss,
Reproach, Disappointment, Banishments, Imprisonments, Tormenting Deaths: Such
also are those passions of Fear, Anger, Sorrow, Envy, Inordinate Desire,
Suspiciousness and Anxiety of Mind: Such also are all Compassions and
Sufferings in Soul for the Miseries of others, whether our private Friends and
Relations, or our Country, or the Church of God. Add to these, Christians being
subject to Temptations, either to sin, or to doubt of God's Mercy to their
Souls, are Labors also. I say, all these, both Sufferings, Passions,
Compassions and Temptations are Labors.

Here therefore I shall, before I come to handle the main Proposition, speak a
little to two other Truths here supposed; and they are these:

First, That even good Men, who live in the Lord, do not, till they dye in the
Lord, rest from all their Labors.

Secondly, That bad Men, who do not live in the Lord, and consequently, cannot
dye in the Lord, such do not rest from their Labors when they dye; but the
bitterest of their Labors follow them, even beyond the Grave.

First, That good Men have not a Rest from their Labors on this side the
Grave. It is true that Faith and Patience do much correct the malignity and
bitterness of their Sufferings: but even the best of God's Children have their
Labors here. For, Who can doubt but it is a labor and burden, even to a good
Man, to be under pining sickness and pain, to be subjected to the persecutions
of slanderous Tongues and Pens, to be deprived of their Estates, Liberty or
Country? Who doubts but that Anger, Sorrow, Fear, and Anxiety of Mind are yet a
greater burden and labor, if a good Man, in his weakness, falls under the
impression of any of them? So also it is no small burden, when Friends are
miserable or disobliging. What a great part of a good Man's heart and bowels
are carried away by the loss of a dear Joseph, the Imprisonment of a Simeon,
the Ravishment of a Dinah or Tamar, the Incest of an Amnon, or the Rebellion of
an Absalom? What a burden of heart to good Men are their sorrows and fears for
the Church of God, through the divisions of Brethren, and the Contentions of a
Paul and Barnabas, or through the Apostacies of some, eminent for Profession of
Godliness, to either damnable Errors, or rending Schisms, or downright
Profaneness and Debaucheries? Such labors and sufferings also to a good Man are
their fears and sorrows for the Land of their Nativity suffering, or like to
suffer through Wars, Famine, or Pestilence. And lastly, What a labor and
burden is it to a good Man to be assaulted with inward Corruptions, or outward
Temptations; and to wrestle and combat with his spiritual Adversaries, and his
own Doubts?

Now there are few or none of these, but may be put into the Inventory of most,
or all good Men. So that they may well, say to their own Souls in the Language
of the Prophet; Micah 2.10. Arise ye, and depart; this is not your Rest, for it
is defiled. So that no pious persons ought to reckon it a mark of God's
displeasure or rejection, if they suffer here, and have not an Heaven upon
Earth; seeing all holy Men, who have gone before them to Heaven, were made
perfect by Sufferings: and so also their Sufferings may be instrumental in the
hand of God's Spirit, to prepare them, and make them meet for the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light.

The second Proposition here supposed is, That bad Men, even when they dye, do
not rest from their Labors. They are no more free from Sufferings on this side
the Grave, than good Men are: their Sicknesses and Pains be as sharp and
vehement, their Bones being full of the Iniquities of their Youth, Job 12.11.
their Children may be rebellious; as Sennacherib had Adramelech and Sharezer;
or they may dye soon, if they be hopeful, like Jeroboam's Abijah: Their Names
and Reputations may be torn in pieces by their black-mouthed Fellow-sinners;
and they usually are highly tormented with fears and anxiety of Mind, and with
rage and envy at other Men. But one of the chiefest torments of wicked Men on
this side Hell is, their indignation against the Servants of God; against whom
they being exceedingly mad and outrageous, their Breasts are made thereby Nests
of Hornets or Serpents, which continually sting and torment themselves, though
they are the Tormenters; they raging, because they cannot break the faith and
patience of the Saints. Add to all these, that their very sinful pleasures
carry so much of pain of Body, and impairment of Health, and of torment of
Mind, through disappointment in them, as out-weighs all the supposed pleasure
of the Sin. Add to this, the horror of their Consciences, and a fearful
expectation of fiery Vengeance to come upon them. This is the portion of those
that hate God; and well were it with them, if all this misery of theirs might
expire with their last breath: but woe, and alas; the bitterest sort of these
labors follow them to Hell, and constitute a great part of it: There God lets
loose upon them those furious passions, which are at once, both their sin and
torment: They are given over to the most outrageous and implacable hatred
against God; and though they know they are miserable because they hate him,
yet, through the impotency, and violence of their rage, they cannot so much as
desire to be reconciled to him. We find, even upon Earth, weak and passionate
persons to be subject to the like impressions, when they are peevish, and angry
with their Betters, though they find that their very anger is exceedingly
fretting and galling, and that also it is contrary to their interest to
maintain that unequal Contest with their Superiors; yet they cannot bring down
their stomachs, to desire Reconciliation: such is the rage of the Reprobates
against God; but their's is far more vexatious and tormenting, than ever the
passions of any peevish Child, or Woman, or other weak person was to themselves
on Earth. And though upon Earth, the Wicked have the helps of common
discretion, natural patience and toleration, and the interposal of diversions,
to abate the sharpness of their passion; yet in Hell they shall have none of
these assistances and restraints; but the torrent of their rage against God
shall run with that impetuous violence, as to fill their Souls with
unexpressible spiritual pains and torment. Add also, that then shall be let
loose in them a most furious and implacable anger and rage against the Devils
and their fellow-damned in general, who shall hate and rage against them
reciprocally: but especially, their indignation shall be against their
Fellow-sinners; those whom they either seduced, or by whom themselves were
seduced into those courses of Sin, that led them into destruction; and all
their endearments of drunken Cups, and wanton Embraces, and other mutual
Caresses in their Sins, are then turned into the bitterest hatred, and spitting
(as it were) Fire and Brimstone in one another's faces, because they did
mutually seduce, and were seduced into those sins which brought them into that
place of torments. Oh, that Brethren in Iniquity would consider this, that Hell
will turn their sinful kindnesses into mutual detestation and rage against one
another! But though Anger and Rage are a torment, that no Tyrant on Earth ever
found out the like; yet there are other passions then let loose upon them, no
less tormenting: Such is their envy against God, and his Essential Glory and
Bliss; their envy also at the blessed state of the Angels, and all the
glorified Saints of God; but especially, See the fifth Chapter of the Book of
the Wisdom of Solomon, excellently describing this part of the misery of the
Damned.
at those whom they themselves personally hated, despised, slandered and
persecuted on Earth; whom they shall then know to be exalted to Glory and
Happiness: (As the rich Man, Luke 16.23. who would scarce vouchsafe half a Look
on Earth toward poor Lazarus, save that of contempt and scorn, lifting up his
eyes in torments, saw Abraham, and Lazarus in his bosom, enlarged in the
pleasures of unconceivable love and delight.) Add yet further, the remorse and
gnawing of wicked Men's own Consciences; those Worms that never dye. Add also
their vexatious sorrow, together with their anguish, and sense of their pains,
with the utmost tenderness and resentment, without any assistance of natural
Courage, or philosophical Considerations to abate it. And to all these may be
added also, their fears of new torments, of new effects of Divine Displeasure;
together with the despair of ever coming out of that Prison, or shaking off
those Chains which hold them in the utter Darkness; there is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

So that we see that those vexatious passions of Anger, Envy, Sorrow, Fear,
etc. which make the lives of wicked Men miserable upon Earth, shall follow them
to Hell in the highest Paroxisms, and most vexatious bitterness; besides what
other ways of tormenting them, God shall then think sit to draw forth against
them. Oh, that Men would ponder and consider these things, and, knowing the
terrors of the Lord, be admonished to flee from the Wrath that is certainly to
come! The consideration of which may well make our thoughts run into that
Meditation of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. v. 118, 119, 120. Thou have trodden down
all them that err from thy statutes; for their deceit is falsehood: Thou put
away all the wicked of the earth like dross, therefore I love thy testimonies.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Having thus made my way clear to my main Position, by a brief Consideration of
these two other supposed in the Text; That the Godly, on this side the Grave,
do not rest from their Labors: and That the Wicked, neither in this World, nor
that to come, have Rest, (There is no peace, says God, to the wicked,) I
proceed to handle that great Article, which a Voice from Heaven commanded to be
recorded; namely, That it is witnessed by Divine Testimonies, and confirmed by
the most cogent Arguments, That those who dye in the Lord are from thenceforth
blessed. The Divine Testimony is dispersed all over the holy Scriptures, this
being the very end of penning them: Romans 15.4. That we, through patience and
comfort of the scriptures, might have hope, a lively hope of this glorious
inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven
for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. I shall therefore cite only two or three Scriptures
confirming this Doctrine, That those who dye in the Lord are thenceforth
blessed. By the inspired Prophet Isaias, the Spirit says this, Isa. 57.1, 2.
The righteous perishes [dyeth] (so is the Caldee Paraphrase) and no man lays
it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the
righteous is taken away from the evil to come: He shall enter into peace, they
shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. The same Spirit
speaks so also by the inspired Apostle, St. Paul, Romans 2.6, 7. God will
render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance
in well doing, seek for honor, and glory, and immortality, eternal life. So
again, in that remarkable place, Gal. 6. v. 7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked; ((...), in the middle Voice) God does not mock or delude the
Expectancies of his Servants) whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap:
For he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit, reap life everlasting. And our
Savior told the Saint-Thief, he should that day be with him in Paradise, Luke
23.43. But the Spirit not only witnesses this in the Records of Scripture; but
in the hearts, and by the mouths of his dying Servants. Attend at the Stakes of
the Martyrs, ready to ascend in their fiery Chariots, and crying out, Come,
Lord Jesus; come quickly: I desire to be dissolved, and be with the Lord. Or
hearken at the Deathbeds of other Saints, who, with old Simeon, cry with their
last breath, Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart, according to
thy word, in peace. Or as it is, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought the fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at
that day (the day of his departure which, Ver. 6. he says, was at hand.) All
these give abundant testimony to this truth. In short, All the triumphal
expressions of dying Saints (whether Martyrs, or others) declaring their
assured hope of Bliss, amongst the Spirits of other just Men made perfect, upon
their Dissolution, are but the Echoes of the Testimony of the Spirit in them,
sealing to them the Assurance of their immediate Entrance into Life everlasting.

But this Truth is yet further evidenced from the Arguments of the Text; They
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. The first Argument runs
thus; They that rest from their Labors are blessed: but those who dye in the
Lord, rest from their Labors; therefore they are blessed. That resting from
Labors, and things burdensome to Body and Soul, but especially, those
burdensome to the Soul, makes Blessedness, is the Sense of all wise Heathens,
as well as Christians.

Seneca writ a Book about Tranquillity of Mind, Seneca de Tranquillitate.
Plutarch, (...).
and Plutarch another of the same Subject, to show that Happiness consisted in
undisturbedness of the Soul or Spirit: and they both give directions how a wise
Man might attain that state of a quiet Spirit, in the midst of the confusions
of his outward condition. Their directions are, some of them, very good and
rational, but not of virtue enough to work the Cure they pretend to. There is
one Christian Direction surmounts them all; namely, this; Trust God's Goodness
in all things, and submit to God's Wisdom and Faithfulness in all things, to
cause all to work together for good, according to his Promise in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.28. But however, hence it is evident, these Heathen judged that a
resting from Labors, at least, those of the Soul would make a blessed state.
And Epicurus thought, that much of the Happiness of the Gods consisted in their
Rest, and quiet Recess from the bussles and confusions of the World below. And
indeed, it must needs be the common sense of all Mankind, that rest from
labors makes a blessed state: For who can think but that it is a blessed
condition to be free from Pain, Sickness, Tortures, Reproaches, tormenting
Passions and Compassions; and the rest of those Labors which I showed, that
even good Men are subject to in this Life. And now, then, that the departed
Saints do rest from these Labors, is sufficiently proved, in that the
All-knowing Spirit of Truth here affirms it: For the Spirit not only says,
They are blessed, but says also, They are therefore blessed, because they rest
from their Labors. But that they do rest from their Labors may also be made
out by Discourse and Reasoning: For first, They that are departed in the Lord,
having laid by their Bodies, are secured from all impressions that were made
upon their Souls, by the means of their Senses, and Members of their Body, they
cannot be sick, or pained, or weary, or hungry, or feel Cold or Heat, or be
wrought upon by any Engine of Torture: From all these sorts of Labors
therefore, the separate Souls of the Saints must needs rest. Next, as to
Reproaches and Slanders; they affect us not in the Body, further than we hear
and know them; and if we do hear them, yet the testimony of our Consciences
disarms false Reproaches and Slanders of their Stings: Nay, even just
Reproaches falling upon a good Man, through some scandalous act of Sin, does
not sharply afflict him when he does repent; for the shame for his sin will sit
light, where the sorrow for his sin sits heavy. And further, where a Sinner's
Repentance is evident, none will reproach him for his sin, but Fools and
Villains. And if a good Man, even in this Life, is thus secure, in a great
measure, against Reproach, much more safe is he in the other World, in his
separated state: for, as all the flatteries of surviving Friends and Admirers
arrive not at the knowledge of the Damned, nor abate or alter their misery, no
more do all the Libels and Satyrs, or other lying Invectives, thrown after good
Men departed, ever reach to their knowledge, much less can they impair their
joys, or disturb their blessed tranquillity.

Nay, the very memory of good Men's sins (of David's Adultery and Murder, of
St. Peter's Denial of his Master, and the like) which were repented of upon
Earth, are not recorded in Heaven: God removes their transgressions from before
his own face; and other Saints, if they knew them upon Earth, cannot possibly
upbraid them, they all being possessed with the Contemplation of God's infinite
Mercies in Christ Jesus, who had pardoned and saved themselves, and other
penitent Sinners.

The next sort of a good Man's Labors, are those which arise from Temptations
to sin, or to doubting of God's Mercy. But first, the Saints cannot possibly
sin in Heaven, not only because there will be nothing to tempt them to it, but
also, because, knowing God perfectly (according to their capacity) they must
needs love him perfectly; and consequently, they cannot sin against him: And,
they loving God perfectly, cannot possibly doubt of his love to them; seeing
the highest effect of the Divine Love to us is this, to give us to love him,
and delight in him.

Now then, there remains nothing but tormenting Passions and Compassions, which
we before put into the Inventary of good Men upon Earth: but none of these can
follow them to Heaven.

For first, Anger cannot enter into that Kingdom of Love, because, they who
love him that begets, must needs love them that are begotten of him, 1 John
5.1. When therefore two Saints meet in Heaven, who, on account of different
Opinions or Practices (consistent with true Faith in both the Litigants) were
highly angry with one another upon Earth, they will each rejoice in the
Salvation of the other, and each love other as himself, and will bless God,
that he was to each of them a more just and merciful Judge, than they were to
one another upon Earth.

Next, No fear can enter there, where God's Truth, Power, Wisdom and Goodness
are all engaged for the Security of our being eternally blessed.

It is no less impossible, that Envy should follow a Saint to Heaven, to
torture him there, who was, in a great measure, a stranger to it here; seeing
even here, God is the Portion of Believers; and they who have God for their
Inheritance, find no reason to envy the Lot of others, being assured, their own
is the best Portion. But besides, consider that every one of the Saints in
Heaven has the full Inheritance: the Church there, is a Church of the
Firstborn of God: Every one is an Heir to the whole Kingdom, and filled with
all the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. according to the Capacity of every one.
For such is the nature of the Enjoyments of spiritual Objects, that every Man
may have all: So that one Saint's knowing and loving God perfectly, hinders
not, but that another, yea, ten thousand times ten thousand may know and love
him perfectly, without any Defalcation from the Portion of one another. And
further, consider that all the Saints having entirely resigned their Wills to
the Will of God, and being perfectly well pleased with all his Appointments and
Assignments; and withal, loving other Saints even as themselves, it is
impossible that Envy should enter amongst them; for the only Roots, on which
Envy can grow, are a quarrelling with the Will of God, and not loving our
Neighbor.

Lastly, No sorrow, either for themselves or others, can disturb the
Inhabitants of the Jerusalem which is above: For, How can they sorrow, who have
all they can desire, and delight eternally in the state they do enjoy? Nor can
the Saints grieve on the account of others, seeing all pleases them, which it
pleases God to order for his own Glory: So that for what the state of their
Friends on Earth is, they are not sollicitous; knowing, that that infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, which it is their delight to contemplate above, rules all
things, both in Heaven and Earth.

Nay, the very Reprobation of wicked Friends and Relations will not affect the
Saints, who do delight that God's Justice and Holiness are glorified as well as
his Mercy.

And withal, the Love of God so entirely possesses the Saints, that it
extinguisheth the Love of wicked Friends, as the powerful shining of the Sun
puts out a Lamp or Candle.

Hence then it appears, they must needs be blessed who dye in the Lord, seeing
they rest from all their Labors; both from outward Sufferings, and inward
Temptations, and from all tormenting Passions and Compassions. There remains
therefore a Rest for the People of God.

But there is another Argument also, in the Text, to prove the blessed state of
departed Saints; Their works do follow them.

But that the Argument may show its force, we must enquire what sort of Works
do follow them?

I answer, First, Their sinful Works do not follow them who dye in the Lord;
they being absolved from the Guilt of them, by the Propitiation of the death of
our Savior Christ. So that there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1.

How far the remembrance of our own sins and sinfulness may abide with us in
Heaven, I cannot say; only, I do confidently believe, that no more of that
Remembrance shall remain with us there, than shall cause us to admire and adore
the infinite Patience and Long-suffering of God to us on Earth, and to delight
our selves in that sweet reflection upon the Divine Goodness.

The Works, therefore, of the Saints, that follow them, are their good Deeds,
done according to God's Law, as the Rule; and by his Grace, as the Power; and
in Obedience and Love to him, as the Motive; and for his Glory, as the End. And
of this sort are all Acts of Piety, Faith, Repentance, Mortification, Loyalty,
Charity, Justice, Temperance, and other Christian Graces.

These follow the Christians, to be judged and rewarded.

But by what Law are they to be judged? Not by the Law of Works, given at our
Creation; not according to the Estimate, which God's Rectoral Justice passes
of the Actions of Men and Angels, as he is the Maker and Ruler of them; (for
the best Works of the best Men, being thus judged, would be reprobated and
condemned.)

The Works therefore, of the Saints follow them, to be judged by the Law of
Faith, by the New Covenant, by the Book of Life mentioned, Rev. 20.12. Out of
which, together with the Books of their Consciences, the Dead are judged
according to their Works; that is, according as their Consciences do bear
Testimony, of their Evangelical Obedience, or of their Neglect of it, they
stand or fall at the Bar of Divine Justice. The Law of which Book of Life is
this, That if the heart be sincere, as to the aim and end, with a single eye
designing God's Service and Glory in our Undertaking; and if the matter of the
Act be according to God's Command, then, though there be a failure in that full
intenseness of the Affections that should have accompanied the work, or in the
exactness and regularity of some circumstances of it: which failure is caused
through an unaffected or unallowed inconsiderateness, or through some other
weakness; yet being done, I say, with a sincere heart, it is (being weighed in
the Balance of the Gospel) a good work; it is accepted by God in Christ Jesus,
and accounted to the Saints for Righteousness, and shall be rewarded. This is
plainly proved from that Promise, Mat. 10.42. He that gives a cup of cold water
to a disciple, in the name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward, shall have
a disciple's reward. And so, Matthew. 25.21. The Servant that was faithful in the
use of his Talents, was called to enter into the Joy of his Lord. And so again,
Mat. 25.41. Those who clothed, fed and visited Christ in his poor Members, are
by Christ invited, as the Blessed of his Father (as those approved by his
Father) to inherit the Kingdom prepared for them from the beginning of the
World.

We may observe the different manner of dating the setting out the Reward of
the Righteous, and the Reward of of the Wicked. The Wicked (those on the left
hand) are bid, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; into the Hell which was appointed by God, immediately upon the sin
of the Angels, which was committed before the sin of Man; probably, before
Man's Creation, or the Creation of any part of the visible World: But the
Saints (those on the right hand) are called to enter into the Kingdom prepared
for them from the beginning of the World; that is, from that very instant
wherein God condescended to make a new Covenant with fallen Man, in the
promised Seed, the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.15. For that phrase (From the
beginning of the World) points directly to the time of making that new Covenant
in Paradise; and on that account, Christ is called, A Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. That new Covenant is in that Verse called,
The book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World; it
containing the conditions of life and Happiness, settled in the Mediation of the
Lamb, the Lord Jesus; and confirmed in his Blood, from the beginning of the
World.

So then, when God made that new Covenant; promising in Christ Acceptance of
Men's sincere, though imperfect Obedience; then, I say, he appointed and
prepared for them, not a Return into an earthly Paradise, but an entrance into
an everlasting Kingdom, into an Eternal Life, even for all those, who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for honor, and glory, and Immortality,
Romans 2.7.

We may observe further, that the New Covenant was ratified and established by
God's Mercy, in the promised Seed, Genesis 3.15. in his sentencing the Serpent,
and before he passed Sentence on Adam and Eve: And therefore, in the sentencing
of them, we hear of nothing of either spiritual or eternal Punishments
pronounced against them; but there is denounced only such temporal miseries,
and a temporal death, as do indeed declare God's Anger against Sin; but
withal, may, by the Grace of God in the New Covenant, redound to our spiritual
and eternal Good: On which account, St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.15. says, that The
childbearing woman, notwithstanding her pains in childbearing, shall be
saved, (...), through that promised birth of the Savior of the world, if she
continue in faith: For the (...) relates not to every Woman's Childbearing,
but to the famous Birth of the promised Seed (as I, with submission to the
Godly Learned, do judge.)

So then, when Christians, through Grace, perform the Obedience of the new
Covenant in Repentance, Faith, Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness, Charity, and
the rest of Christian Duties, God accepts of them in Christ Jesus, and will
reward them: therefore their Works following departed Saints to be rewarded,
they who die in the Lord are blessed.

And yet the Argument concluded not strongly, unless that Reward be, and make
up complete Blessedness. But that it does so, is evident from Romans 2.7. God
will give to them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for honor,
and glory, and immortality, eternal life: And Gal. 6.8. it is affirmed, that
They who sow to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Now, this Life everlasting, which is the portion of the Saints, that it may be
a complete and perfect Happiness, must be, at least, thus qualified.: In it,
the Saints must not want any thing that they stand in need of, or desire any
thing, but what they have, nor ever come to distaste or loath any thing they do
enjoy, nor fear the loss of what they are possessed of, nor envy the portion of
any other who partake that state with them, nor yet despise any that are their
Associates in that blessed Inheritance: I say, the meanest Saint cannot envy
the highest Angel, nor can the highest Angel despise the meanest Saint. For
Reason it self will evince, that it cannot be a perfect Life and Happiness,
where there is want of something we do need, or longing for something we have
not, or a loathing of what we once savoured, or a fear of losing of what we
enjoy, or a scorning, or an envying of those who are our Companions in the same
state: But those Evils of Want, Longing, Loathing, Fear, Envy and Scorn being
removed, it cannot be, but the Reward of the Saints must amount to Fullness of
Joy, and Pleasures for evermore. Oh, the infinite Mercies of God in Christ
Jesus, who accepts of the sincere, though imperfect Services of holy and humble
persons; and thus highly rewards them!

But if we yet further enquire what Object it is, that being thus enjoyed, sets
us above Want, Longing, Loathing, Fear, Scorn and Envy?

I answer, It is God himself, communicating his own glorious Perfections to the
Knowledge and Contemplation of the Saints and Angels, in that excellent Light
of Glory, wherein they see him face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. and see him as he
is, 1 John 3.3. By which Knowledge, so clear, and so glorious, the Saints and
Angels are wrapped up into the most intense and fervent love of him, and delight
in him, that it is possible for Creatures of their degrees to receive.

And seeing the Essential Happiness of God himself appears to be his
Comprehensive Knowledge of his own Glorious Essence and Perfection, and the
Essential Love of, and Eternal Complacency in himself (for there is not a more
excellent Being than himself for him to contemplate, nor a more lovely Being
than himself for him to delight himself in.) Hence, I say, our coming to that
blessed Enjoyment of him, is called, Matthew. 25.21. the Entering into the Joy of
our Lord, we coming to enjoy God, whom himself enjoys, and to enjoy him by
Contemplation and Love, which is the way of God's own Essential Enjoyment of
himself, as far as we can apprehend.

Thus God is the Portion of his People, and the Inheritance of his Saints. The
Works, therefore, of those who dye in the Lord, following them, to receive so
high a Reward, through God's Mercy in the New Covenant, confirmed in the Blood
of his blessed Son; it must needs be, that they are eternally blessed.

And that this honorable and pious Person, whose Funeral Rites have called
this great Assembly together, is now arrived at that Reward, and Crown of
Evangelical Righteousness, is, I suppose, the persuasion of all persons present
who knew him, and who believe that there is a Reward for the Righteous.

But, considering that when a great and good Man dies, something of the
Panegyric is required, to make up the Justa, and complete his Funeral-Rites (
David himself made a Funeral-Oration at the Interment of Abner, 2 Samuel 3.33.) I
shall say something of that kind, as well as I am able; but still being careful
of this, that I may not, by Commendation of the Dead, give any just Offense to
the Living; nor by false Praises of the Deceased, lay a Snare for the Feet of
Survivors, as is too often done. I will therefore say nothing, but what I knew,
or have unquestionable Testimony for it.

Concerning the Family, of which, this Noble Lord was lately the Head, you all
know, it has sent forth its Boughs unto the Seas, and its Branches to the
Rivers, Psalm. 80.11. most Families of Quality in this County, and many also in
other Shires, having mingled their Blood, by Marriage, with that of Dunham.

Himself joined in Affinity, with two great and ancient Families of the
Nobility; first that of Lincoln, then that of Stamford; who justly esteemed a
person of such accomplished Endowments, of such eminent Moralities and
Intellectuals, a Son in Law worthy their desire and choice.

From his Youth upward, he professed and practiced serious Godliness, mixed
with Humility and Charity, and devoid of Affectation, Censoriousness, or
Partiality.

He visited his Closet frequently every day for his private Devotions, and
withdrew for that good work, even in the greatest throng of Business; and in
his very Journeys, sought out such Privacies as befitted those sacred
Brea^hings: which showed, that it was Affection, not Custom, which carried him
to that pious Retirement.

His Family was daily called, at due Periods, to Religious Worship; himself and
his pious Lady joining therein, when Health permitted.

He constantly, when he was in health, attended the Public Service of God,
according to the Order of the Church of England, by Law established; of which
Church he lived and died a pious Member.

He usually came to public Worship with the first, and staid till all Offices
of the same were celebrated, if any, besides the common and stated parts of it,
were to be transacted, as Baptism, or the Eucharist, joining devoutly in them.
In London, he received the Communion Monthly, at Covent Garden-Church, if he
was able to go thither; humbly kneeling at the Rails before the Altar, or
Communion Table.

It was his misfortune, when he was young, to be seduced with the plausible
pretensions of the Artificers of our late Troubles: But he soon showed the
integrity of his heart, by his early withdrawing from them, when he discovered
the mischievous designs of those who had drawn upon their Sovereign.

But, as if that Secession from them had been a small Expiation of his Error,
he, upon the first hopeful opportunity, adventured his Life, Fortunes and
Family, in the Service of our Royal Sovereign, whom God long preserve.

And this he did not only upon truly Loyal and Monarchical Principles, without
admixture of any By-designs with the Service of his Prince; but also by the
Warrant of an express Commission from his Sacred Majesty, constituting him
Commander in Chief of all the Forces raised, and to be raised for His Majesty's
Service, in Cheshire, Lancashire and North Wales. Which Commission I have seen
and read; it being exemplified under his Majesty's Royal Signet, and Sign
Manual: Dated at His Majesty's Court at Bruxels, Aug. 9. 1659. in the eleventh
Year of his Reign.

With him then joined many primitive Loyal Cavaliers, and many Loyal Converts:
some of both sorts, I believe, are here present.

And the Rising of him, and of you (Noble and Loyal Sirs) with him in this
County, gave the first warm and invigorating Spring beam to the Frost-nipt
Loyalty of the Nation. For, the Tyrannical Usurpers cunningly exciting many of
the Loyal Party, by the Artifices of false Brethren, to make ineffectual
Attempts against their too well fortified Usurpation, did, upon the discovery
of them by their Decoys, cut them off, by bloody and merciless Executions.
Which, though it abated not the Zeal of the Royal Party, yet it rendered many of
them so mutually jealous, that they durst scarce in secret communicate their
loyal thoughts and desires to one another.

But the Rising of this Noble Lord, and of you (Generous Sirs) in Cheshire,
unlocked the bosom, and opened the mouth of every Loyal Subject to his
Neighbor, to own the Royal Cause again with Courage and Confidence, and gave
the whole Nation boldness to declare their longing for David's Return.

Insomuch, that one of the bloody Regicides said with Indignation, That Sir
George Booth 's Rising in Cheshire had again conjured up that old Monarchical
Spirit in the Nation, which he feared would never again be suppressed; and for
that, he must dye without mercy.

And undoubtedly, he had done so, as the gallant Montross did in the like
Circumstances before, if God had not wonderfully prevented. So that this Noble
Lord, and his Loyal Fellow Soldiers (even the Regicides themselves being
Judges) triumphed over the very Heart and Principles of Rebellion.

And that His Sacred Majesty had this gracious sense of this Attempt, is
evident, by the Honors, and other Favors he accumulated on this Loyal Convert.

And that it may appear that I speak not without Warrant, I have transcribed
out of his Lordship's Patent for his Barony, His Majesty's gracious and ample
Testimony of that honorable Engagement. The words are these; Idem Georgius,
summis Majoribus nequaquam virtute Minor, crudelissimo Patris nostri Augustae
Memoriae Parricidio, nec non nostro miserrimo longoque exilio, soevisque
Regnorum Calamitatibus barbara and inhumana Regicidarum crudelitate
mancipatorum gravissime affectus; singulari in Nos amore in ruentem Patriam
memorabili pietate impulsus, incredibili virtute, Rei Familiaris Vitaeque,
summo cum periculo, coacta fida and Nobili Fortium Virorum Manu e Comitatibus
Cestriae and Lancastriae Arma sumpsit, Nos Regnis, Nobis Regna redditurus.
Quibus Ausis ingentibus licet tunc temporis ceciderit, restanrationis tamen
Nostrae tam foelicis, tamdiu exoptatae, Ansam praebuit.

The same George, no way inferior in Virtue to the chiefest of his Ancestors,
being deeply affected with the cruel Murder of Our Father of blessed Memory,
and with Our own most deplorable and long Banishment, and with the heavy
Calamities of Our Kingdoms, enslaved by the inhumane Cruelty of the Regicides;
and being drawn by singular love to Us, and by memorable piety toward his
sinking Country, having with wonderful Courage, and the greatest hazard of his
Life and Fortunes, gathered a Loyal and Generous Band of valiant Men, out of
the Counties of Cheshire and Lancashire, took up Arms, designing to restore Us
to Our Kingdoms, and Our Kingdoms to Us. In which Heroic Attempts, though he
then failed, yet gave he occasion for our so happy, and so desired Return.



Having been thus large in this part of his Character, I will be the briefer in
the rest.

I shall not need to mention his Domestic Virtues.

It is known to all about him, that in the faithful and affectionate Conjugal
Love betwixt him and his pious Lady, God set forth a worthy Example to this
profligate Age, how sacred the Matrimonial Bands are to those who fear God.

As God blessed him with a numerous Issue (for all whom he made an honorable
Provision before his death) so he educated them all with that pious Care, as if
the Fate and Honor of his Family was imbarqued in every one of them single.

Toward his Servants he was so just, that he not only gave them all their due
Expectances, and more, as to Temporals; but caused them to be constantly
instructed in the things belonging to a better Life.

Toward his Tenants (according to the Hereditary Virtue of his Family) he was
one of the best of Landlords; under whose Benevolent shadow, many hundred
Families did rest, and enjoyed comfortable and plenteous Subsistencies

The freedom also of his generous Hospitality, and of his Alms to the
Necessitous, have rendered his Memory blessed: And so also has his Charity
toward all Men; with his special delight in all the pious, humble, loyal and
peaceable persons known to him. And no less eminent was he in his Mercy
toward, Enemies; not only forgiving those who attempted his Life and Fortunes,
and putting them into his Prayers, but doing them signal and ample Kindnesses,
overcoming their Evil with Good.

In the long and sharp Pains and Sickness, which cut short his Pilgrimage, he
showed such composed Patience, as no bare Philosophical Principles (though he
was well verst in the choicest of them) could possibly have produced; but it
evidenced it self to be the Genuine Issue of the Grace of God, in a Will wholly
submissive, and resigned to the pleasure of his Sovereign Lord and Maker; and
still trusting his Wisdom, Mercy and Faithfulness in Christ Jesus, to cause all
to work together for good to his immortal Soul.

So that we have, upon all accounts, good ground to hope that he is entered into
that Kingdom of Peace and Purity, where every Saint and Angel loves God more
than they love themselves, and God loves every Angel and Saint more than they
can love themselves; and every Saint and Angel loves others, even as
themselves: and so they have as many Joys as they have Companions.

It must needs therefore follow, that all Labors are then removed, all Tears
are wiped away, all Desires satisfied, all Wants supplied, all Temptations
excluded, and all Graces perfected; and the Glorified Saints have the
perfection of Holiness, and the fullness of Happiness, through the Excellency of
the Knowledge and Love of God, their Maker and Savior, and in mutual
Complacency in one another, and rejoicing over one another in the Lord.

This is the Portion of those who live and dye in the Lord.

Therefore (my beloved Brethren) be ye steadfast, unmovable always abounding in
the work of the Lord; for as much (...) ye know, that your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord.

Rev. 1.5, 6. To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests to God, ever his Father; to him be
Glory and Dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

