

Behold our sad Saint in the Forest left
With her Benoni, of all joys bereft,
Save what she took from her pure innocence;
This Portrait shows it lively to the sense.
THE Innocent Lady, OR THE Illustrious Innocence.

Being an Excellent true History, and of Modern times, carried with handsome
Conceptions all along.

Written Originally in French, by the Learned Father de Ceriziers, of the
Company of Jesus.

And now Rendered into English by Sir William Lower Knight.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for William Lee and are to be sold at the
Turks-head in Fleet Street, 1654.

The Translators Apology for some passages in the Book.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
YOu may think it strange, that I should Apologize any thing for this Piece,
the Author being one of the most exquisite Pens of Christendom; but it is to
satisfy the nicer scruples of some persons, who perhaps, may be offended with
a passage or two in the History, relating a little to the Romish superstition.
I shall onesay this in Vindication of my Self, and my particular judgment, That
I look upon it in the original, as one of the neatest contrived things that
ever passed the press; and I am confident will generally be so received: it
may stick only with those of the weaker judgments, whose approbation or
dislike, will be very indifferent, either to the Author or Translator. This
little work has lately been transmitted into the stateliest and sweetest
languages of Europe, I mean, the Spanish and Italian, nations that scorn to
borow from any other but their own unless they meet with so choice a master
piece as this. The Author has said enough in his Epistle to the Reader, for
the truth of the story, and really for the body thereof, I believe there are
none, who have read the German Chronicle, will make the lest doubt of it; but
for the interlarding it with miracles (which we may pass over if we please)
that must be taken for the Jesuits own way of cookery: If you are not pleased
with the plot or frame of the work, I am strangly mistaken; and for you of the
tenderer sex, If ever heretofore any passionate Scene in a Play drew pearled
tears from your eyes, you will much more liberally bestow them here, where you
shall find no Romance to abuse you, or the issue only of a Poets brain to
entertain your fancy, but a true and Authentic relation of modern times. To
say more, would but take off from the luster of the discourse; what is spoken
already, is only to clear my self of giving an over easy belief to the
miracles of this Book, muchlesse of recommending those passages of the Cross
and Crucifix, to the faith of any one otherwise than by way of admiration of
the rare description thereof. I had need only to crave pardon for sullying so
precious a Gem taken out of its native Cabinet with my rude and unhandsome
handling; but your eyes, Ladies, have such an influence, as will remove all
clouds it may receive from me, and only by the virtue it derives from thence,
make the Copy to equal the Original. If I have rendered this any way to your
satisfaction, I have the end I aimed at, (being all the ambition I aspired
unto) which will give me the boldness to publish shortly another neat Tract of
the same Authors, entitled, Joseph, or the Divine Providence, and a handsome
discourse of Monsier de Grenail, called The Pleasures of the Ladies, both
which, are ready for the Press; till they come forth, look favorably on the
Innocent Lady, and for her sake and the learned de Ciriziers, entertain kindly
the weak endeavors of

Your most humble Servant, Will. Lower.

Why God permits the good to be Calumniated. Preface.
THe Christian Religion has such evident proofs of her truths, that it is to
be gross, even to stupidity, to be ignorant of them, and wicked even unto
madness, to contradict them: nevertherlesse, all the ages have seen enough of
these reasonable monsters, who have rather harkned to their sense, upon the
subject of its doctrine, then obeyed her maxims against their inclination. Who
knows not that the troubles of this life should make up all our desires,
seeing they make all our crowns? We see clearly that it is in the thorns, that
we must gather virtue, that the gall is her best nourishment, though it be not
the most pleasant: and yet the fear of the pricks hinders us from bringing
thither our hands, and the horror which we have of its bitterness, takes from
us the desire which we should have to taste its delights: they say that the
evil which God does us is a sign of the good which he intends us; but how many
persons do we see, who love better to be his declared enemies, than to receive
such like proofs of his love? there are of those choice and eminent souls, who
leave not themselves to be holy vanquished in the displeasure of affliction,
but find a virtue masculine and courageous enough to despise altogether the
sense and feeling thereof: It is that which all the wisdom of the Philosophers
has not yet seen. The five ages which nature imployeth to produce a Phoenix,
would not suffice her to commence a patient, it is a work which cannot be
conceived, but by grace, and which perfecteth not it self, but by that which
can destroy it. To suffer and not to complain, to endure and witness
contentment, to weep and laugh altogether, are the things which a common virtue
cannot unite. In like manner, there are found some persons, who have much ado
to comprehend that God should afflict those whom he loves, believing, that
suffering should be the punishment of sin, and not the recompense of virtue:
But if they have seen some one whose Innocence was too clear to be unknown, and
the evils too apparent to be ignorant of them, their spirit is troubled, their
thoughts are wandering, their faith has stumbled, and humane reason has
almost made them to sin against the Divine. He who had strength enough to
fight with the Bears, to tear the Lions, to destroy Giants and overthrow
himself, whole armies, has not had enough thereof to vanquish altogether this
thought; And yet no body doubts that David was not courageous, seeing the
monsters under his feet, and that he was not holy, being according to the heart
of God. I know not whether Solomon was wiser than his father, yet
notwithstanding I am not ignorant that of ^our evil things he confesses not to
be able to support one of them; it is the sense that springs from calumny; the
malice whereof is the great rock of Innocence, the shipwreck of virtue, the
poison of good actions, and the venom of that prodigious serpent which carries
the name thereof. And to speak truth, we should not find it strange, if
ordinary patience cannot attain to its contempt, seeing that nature has
nothing so sensible to suffer, nor grace so grievous to overcome. How comes it
then that God takes pleasure to see us assaulted with his rage? Must Susanna be
thought unchaste for being fair? or the perfection of her body do injury to
that of her soul? could she not be seen without desire, nor slandered without
being convicted of a crime, whereof her very thought was not culpable? Should
an apple render the wife of Theodosius criminal? was that an inevitable
misfortune to Queen Elisabeth, loving the virtue of a Page, to love an object
that was not chaste? deserved Cunegonda to handle fire, for proving that her
heart burned not with any evil flame? the daughter of the great Anthemius,
could not she do good to her sister, without losing her reputation, nor drive
the Devil from her body without putting him into her soul? who can conceive why
God permitted that Marina should be punished for a sin, whereof she was not
capable, and which was as far from her will, as from her sex? Soft, humane
reason, take heed how thou think that an essence all good and all perfect
should produce any evil: if there flow sharpness from that inexhaustible
spring of sweetness, it is either to wean our affection from the vanity of
pleasures, or to make our virtue merit in the martyrdom of sufferings. Our
griefs are not more sensible unto us, than unto God, if we are assaulted, he
resents it; if we are wounded he complains: he does indeed seem sometimes not
to know us, but it is to the end to render us known to all posterity: he
permits detraction to spot our honor, but to the end to dravv the rays of our
glory from our own obscurity: you know it, fair souls, who glitter now like
so many Suns in that great day of eternity. Is it not true that God loves not
our abasement, but to raise us up again? our contempt, but because it may be
glorious to us? Our losses, but because we may derive advantage from them? our
evils but because they do us good? The Bees suck honey as well upon the Thyme,
and Wormvvood, as upon the Roses and the Lillies: and holy souls make their
infirmity prosper as well, as their good fortune: but the first being of a
nature more refined, God will not be niggardly unto us of a favor, which we
can so well improve. Who knows not that a great virtue has sometimes thrust
those who possessed it into presumption, and that innocence mistaken, and
calumniated has found its conservation in that which seemed to destroy it. The
life of the Nightingale which nourishes not it self but with melody: is very
delightful, and that of the Swan is not to be despised, though he lives not
but with melancholy. God takes pleasure that we should lead a life like unto
this sorrowful Bird; provided that we be so white in Innocence, as he is in his
plume, he cares not to see us swime in the waters of our grief. Nothing
pleases him like our sighs, and he loves perfectly that music, of which
himself gives the measure: and indeed there are those visages who weep with so
good a grace, that they should never be without this ornament; our eyes ravish
not those of God but by tears, which he seeks with a great care; and which he
gathers with an incredible joy. The tears fall to the ground, and mingle
themselves with the dust, but their restuction gos unto the firmament, and
mounteth above the stars; so as they are the pearls of heaven, which form
themselves in the salt waters of our bitternesses, as a great Wit has said. It
is the delicate wine of the Angels, the delights of Paradise, and the voice
that goes even to the ear of God: For this reason, he commanded one of his
Prophets that the apple of his eyes should appear unto him continually, for as
much as he takes an inexpressable content at the sweet violence with which they
constrain him: if we knew well to weep, we should know to vanquish our enemies,
to drown our sins, to ruin the devils, to extinguish hell, and sweetly to force
heaven to the sense of our requests. The sinner has no stronger arms than in
his eyes, seeing that God himself may be wounded with them. The Athenians
offered plaints in one of their sacrifices; for my part, I believe that it was
to that unknown divinity, which the Apostle instructs them to be the true God:
for as much as they cannot present him an offering more acceptable then tears,
which are no sooner dropped from our eyes, but they enter into his heart: How
can he not love these liquid pearls, these melted diamonds; this subtle sweat
of the soul, that a^stils it self through the fires of love, to the end to
offer him an essence more precious a thousand times, than that of the Iasmin? I
do not say, that chastity plants it self in our hearts, as the lillies who have
no other seed but their tears, and that virtues appear there only, when this
dew of our eyes makes them to bud there: After all this, we should no more
wonder if God takes pleasure in the sighs of an afflicted Innocence, since we
find so remarkable an instruction in his example, and so advantageous a profit
in his merit: and then if God will that we suffer, is it not great reason to
consent thereunto? If our displeasures delight him, ought we to seek out the
cause thereof? Alas, we shut up the Birds in the Cages, to the end to draw joy
from their plaints: Can it be that they are more ours, than we are his? and
that their liberty is more subject unto our tyrany, than ours is to his Empire?
O how happy should a creature be, if God taking pleasure in his tears, he might
weep eternally! the History which we have to set forth, can give rare examples
of this truth, and advance most profitable instructions from this practice*

To the Reader.
MY dear Reader, in expecting a Work, whereof I give you here but one of the
least parts: I conjure you to suspend your judgment upon this History, and not
to take the effects of an all adoreable Providence, for the Fictions of a
Romance. Raderus in his Baviere, Ericius Puteanus, and many other Authors, can
warrant the principal circumstances thereof, and I assure my self, in time, to
make you understand, that there is nothing in the whole piece, which is not as
true as divertising.

ERRATA, or faults escaped in the printing.
Page 3. line 6. those her sex, read those of her sex, page 5. l. 24. the great
perfections 1. the perfections, p. 7. l. 16. exposed r. proposed, p. 13. l. 18.
part r. depart, p. 23. l. 2. soldiers r. folds, p. 26. l. 14. Narbonana, r.
Narbona, p. 31. l. 28. as of a Come^, r. as that of a Comet.

The Innocent Lady, OR, The Illustrious Innocence.
IN one of the Provinces of the The Netherlands.
Gaul Belgic, which was sometime the country of the Tongrians, about the
time that the glory of the great Lodowick began to be obscured, and that the
children of this Lion degenerated into beasts much less generous, was born a
daughter in the most illustrious family of the Princes of Brabant. Scarce had
this little creature seen the first rays of the light, but her parents gave her
a second birth, which rendered her a daughter of heaven, from whence she
received the fair name of Genevieva: It is not my design to describe the great
virtues of this little Princess nor to make appear the graces which she
possessed, even when her mouth was fastened to the sweetness of the breast, no
one can see the height of her perfection and be ignorant of the foundations of
her piety. The father and mother called her ordinarily their Angel, in which
certainly they were not deceived, for she had the purity and innocence of them,
one sole thing rendered her unlike unto those divine spirits, which is, that
they thrust men forward unto good by secret and invisible motions, and she
carries them thereunto by examples, which have no less of force than of
sweetness. The Angels have attractions, against which one has much pain to
conserve his liberty, and Genevieva possessed graces too charming, not to be
inevitable. One could not hate her devotion at less rate than being
insensible. We must not imagine that the ordinariy amusements of infancy
should possess her thoughts; nothing partaked in the care of her devotion, but
the diverse means to entertain it, and to increase it. The sweetest pleasure
that she relished, was the love of retirement and of solitude: this inclination
built her a little hermitage in the corner of a garden, where nature seemed to
have favored her design, making to grow there store of trees, whose
delightful shades permitted not the sun himself, to see the mysteries of her
devotion. It was there that she erected little Altars of Moss, and boughs; it
was there that she spent the greatest part of the day, from which so sweet
entertainment, the pastimes of those her sex and age could not divert her:
When her mother remonstrated to her that it was time to have more serious
thoughts, she answered modestly, that hers had the fairest and greatest of all
the objects, notwithstanding that all her designs were within obedience, and
that she should not so soon command her any thing, as she would conform her
self wholly thereunto; but if she would permit her inclinations to make the
choice of her condition, she could not find any kind of life more desirable,
than that which had drawn so many great and illustrious persons into solitude,
and which of the half of the world had made a desert.

It is the place (said she) where Kings, and Princes, and Empresses are gone to
seek the traces, and steps of their Savior: It is the place where Saint John
conserved the Innocence of his manners: it is the place where poor virtue
retires it self, finding more safety amongst the wild beasts, than in the
towns, where it meets with the cruelty of salvage creatures. It Is in a word,
the place where I imagine a perfect repose, and where I could find my
contentment, if you would permit me there to seek it. It is not Madame, that I
am not disposed to follow all the motions of your will; but surely since you
leave me the liberty of my thoughts, I should think to displease you as much in
dissembling my sense, as in having one contrary to yours, which cannot be but
reasonable.

Oh Genevieva! you know not from whence this inclination comes to you, and
wherefore heaven has given it you; a day will come that you shall follow the
example of that incomparable penitent, to whom Egypt has given name, though
you may not imitate her debauchees, it will be then that you shall acknowledge
the Providence of God, which disposes of us by those means secret and unknown
to all other but unto himself, and which leads men to the point of felicity
by those ways, which would seem to cast them headlong into the pit or depth of
misfortune. God has a custom to give us from the birth certain qualities,
which make our good fortunes, and the order of our life. Those children amongst
the Lacedaemonians, that came forth from the womb of their mothers with a Lance
in hand, and those others to whom nature had imprinted a sword in the arm,
carried on them the presages of the event, and the signs of their Horoscopes.
The great Archbishop of Millain, when he was a little infant, acted the
Prelate, blessing his companions, and imposing hands on them, as if he had
already been that, which after he was to be. All those that observed the
devotions of our little Virgin, penetrated not into the designs of God, and
saw not that which appeared not long time after. Let us leave those slight
Devotions to the knowledge of him, who knows the value thereof, and who
recompenses the merit: come we to those noble actions, which carry more day and
light, and which marketh more visibly the care, with which heaven watches upon
the salvation of men. If I enterprise to describe the great perfections of this
great Saint, I think not my self more obliged to touch them all, than those who
will put themselves upon the water, to take the river at his source.

Behold me then in the seventeenth year of our Genevieva: but who can mark all
the virtues of her soul, and all the fair qualities of her body? another pen,
but mine, would say, that nature had made the strokes of essay in all the other
beauties of her Age, to give in her an accomplished work of her power and
industry: and not to lie, she seemed to be obliged thereto, since it is not
more unseemly to see a fair soul in an ill favored body, than to see a Diamond
in the dirt; or a Prince full of Majesty under the ruins of a Cottage, and in
the obscurities of a Prison: That which I will say upon this subject, is, that
she heeded not to increase it, nor to add unto it these artifices by which
deformity seems fair, she had no other vermilion, but that which an honest
modesty set upon her cheeks; no white but that of Innocence; no scents, but
those of a good life: she had also no ruins in her visage to repair with
plaster, no blackness to color with white, no stinks to cover with Musk and
powder of Iris. All her graces were her own, and not borrowed; contrary to
those maids, who having not charms enough to make them loved, have recourse
unto the Shops of Merchants, as unto natural Magic to buy there what nature
would not give them, and to make themselves liked in spite of all her
disfavours: but surely, as the clothes, which are used here, last not always,
so this beauty loses it self, and they observe with the swine the same
difference which they see between the painted flowers and the natural.
Although our Genevieva took so little care to conserve her graces, and her
perfections, yet had she enough of them to make her self a great number of
Idolaters, if she would have contributed any thing to the misfortune of souls,
and discover that which Modesty should hide: knowing well that the pearl is not
so precious without, as within her shell, and that the gold is exposed as a
prey unto men, as soon as it is exposed to their sight; she appeared not out of
her chamber, but as the lightnings out of the clouds, when necessity or
civility commanded her. Maids believe that they shall never be sought, if they
go not to seek men, in exposing all the beauty they have even to the eyes of
the blind: but this false opinion betrays ordinarily their good fortune, for
not being rare enough, one esteems them too common, and notwithstanding any
moderation men use in judging, the liberty, which they give themselves to take
all kind of recreations, makes them pass for Ladies of pleasure. The Sun
makes himself adored, where he is not seen but once a year; certainly, if women
were more restrict in showing themselves, I know not if the age of the profane
Divinities would return, and if the god of the shepherd Paris should not find
as much adoration amongst us, as he had formerly with the Idolaters.

Behold all the artifice which our Innocent maid used to draw those, who had
good opinion enough of themselves to hope for some part in her good will.
Amongst those that made suit unto her, Sigifridus (whom we call Sifroy) was not
the last nor the least fortunate, since he carried alone that, which the others
had desired: without telling you that he was one of the most puisant Palatines
of Treves, it is sufficient to understand his quality, to know that he had a
heart good enough, to aim at the alliance of a sovereign house. This young Lord
having understood by fame a part of the perfections of this fair Princess,
would rather believe his eyes, than the common report thereof, behold him on
his way, with an equipage so magnificent, that he leaves not to any one of his
Rivalls the vanity to make comparisons; being arrived, he went presently to do
reverence to the Prince, and to the Princess his wife, who permitted him to
salute Genevieva, unto whom he made all the Offers of service that could be
expected from a Love without fiction. It was after having seen her, that he
confessed that the Poets had not given mouths enough unto fame, and that to
publish all the perfection of Genevieva, there should have been more than one
trumpet. What will he do after being returned from the ravishments, which this
amiable object had caused him? his fidelity and his discretion makes him to
hope a happy success of his love; he fears notwithstanding to merit little,
and desire too much, and that his Mistress should be as disdainful as she is
fair.

This error possessed not very long time his spirit, for he had not
entertained her twice, but he found her replenished with so much sweetness and
modesty, that his passion from free became necessary. He endeavored to
express himself by his sighs, not daring to declare it by his discourse, for
fear to make his true resentments pass for sottish and fading fooleries.
Besides he observed that the motion of marriage never escaped from his mouth,
but an honest shame appeared on the visage of Genevieva, and augmented her
beauty. He so feared some evil word, that he dared not utter to her the good.
Being in this apprehension, he went to find the Prince and the Princess, unto
whom he declared the design of his Voyage in these few words.

Sir, if you are as favorable to my designs, as your sweetness makes me
hope, in the ignorance of my good or evil fortune, I hold my self almost
assured, not to be altogether miserable. I am not God be thanked, come from a
house, whose name should serve me for reproach; and though the glory of my
Ancestors should add nothing to my merit, I am not so unfurnished thereof,
that it should not be easy for me, if it were seemly to advance those things
from which may be another would derive vanity. My Nobility is not equal unto
yours: I know notwithstanding that it can be no shame unto you, if you do me
the honor to accept my alliance: fortune has not given me so little means,
that I should not sustain the dignity of your house; but though it should be
much less, I could not without betraying my good fortune conceal you the
ardent affection, which I have not, so much for the beauty of your daughter,
which is incomparable, as for her virtues, which are without example; her merit
is so powerful upon my will, that if fortune had made me Emperor, I would
come without regreet to lay at her feet all the world, to acquire the honor of
her respects; it is then in you to work my joys, or my displeasures, seeing
that I know her so submisse to obey you; that if you command her to love me, I
cannot fear to be hated of her.

The Prince might have reprehended a little vanity in this complement, and
taken it ill that he should demand his daughter with those reasons;
notwithstanding being not ignorant how advantageous this party was, he thanked
Sifroy for having fixed his eyes upon her, whereas he might employ them more
worthily elsewhere, and witnessed to him he held his suit as an honor;
nevertheless he would not be unjust to constrain his daughter in an affair,
wherein there is nothing free but the choice only: he promised him though to
dispose, as much as he could, her will to the consent of an Alliance, which
made him to hope for as much of satisfaction, as he saw therein of advantage.
At the same time the mother had charge to manage this affair, and to order the
affections of her daughter. I will not stay to describe what she met with in
vanquishing her spirit, before she could make her meet her desire; it was not
for that she held any refractoriness in her thoughts, but surely she had much
pain to resolve her self, being wholly her own, to become the half of
another, and to deprive her self of a thing, which she could conserve always,
not being able to loose it but once in her life. In the mean time she must
obey, but with how much repugnance? The veil that shame laid upon her front,
her tears, and her sighs, speak it much better than I. There are few wise
maids that trouble not themselves, when one speaks unto them of a Husband, and
who find not difficulty to cease to be Angels, to begin to be of the number of
wives. Behold notwithstanding our Genevieva, where all desires, excepting her
own, carried her. Behold her married to a great Palatine; it would be a
superfluous thing to say that nothing was omitted of all the rejoycings that
could honor a marriage; the Dances, the Bals, the Turneys, and all the other
exercises of gallantry were the least pastimes of the Feast.

All those that saw the good fortune of this marriage, believed it eternal,
but alas! how few Roses are there amongst many thorns, and how humane wisdom
penetrates but a little into the event! Genevieva, I give you two years to
live, if not content, at least in pleasures; your marriage has begun like that
of Eve in a Paradise, it shall end like hers in a solitude; enjoy hastily those
contentments, which must last so little: why trouble we so many delights? Let
us expect the evils without going to seek them: After that our new married had
passed some months in the Court of Brabant, they must part to go to Treves,
the parents of Sifroy received her with all the respects that her quality and
merit ought to expect from their affection. Saint Hidulph, who was then Pastor
of that great Town, was very glad to see his flock increased with so innocent a
sheep, and to witness his joy, as she was upon the point to depart, for to go
unto a house in the Country, he gave her his Benediction.

This place of pleasure was seated in a Campania, which was not bounded but
with the Horison; the Castle was encompassed with a park, where it seemed that
the Spring would retire her self with her Zephires, when the Aquilo's reigned
in the Plains of Germany, how rigorous soever the winter was, it touched not
the oranges, and respected no less the laurels than the thunder. At the foot
of the wall, there ran a river, which nourished always a great number of
Swans; it was in this place full of delights, and like unto the enchanted
Palaces of Romance, that Sifroy, and Genevieva led the sweetest and most
innocent life of the world; nothing troubled their contentment, and all things
contributed to their pleasures, not one of the domestics was deprived of this
happiness, peace, and good correspondence governed all those that were of
their train: They talked not of other cunning, but of that which might deceive
the birds; and to speak the truth, they must change master to do otherwise,
since one could no more suffer tempest in his house, than on the top of
Olympus, or in that part of the air, which is above the winds and the storms:
if any one would have his leave to be gone, he must do an ill action, to the
end to obtain it; to merit their affection, they must have the love of God: All
this repose proceeded from the example of the masters; so true it is, that the
Lords make the vices or the virtues of their Subjects.

What could one desire more to the happiness of this house, unless that it
might be constant? but scarce were two years slid away in this so Innocent
life, but the brazen drum of the Sarazens troubled the contentments thereof.
Abderame King of those Moors, which were passed out of Africa into Spain,
promised nothing less to his ambition, than the conquest of Europe. The
perfidiousnesse of traitors, rather than his courage, had already put him into
possession of all these Provinces which are beyond the Pyrenees.

France was a dainty morsel for him, but he feared to find there other people
than the Goths. He was not ignorant that there was yet of those ancient Gauls,
whose Ancestors, to the number of thirty Cavaliers, chased sometimes two
thousand Moorish Horse, and constrained them to retire themselves into
Adrumetta, considering then that in every Province he had whole Nations to
conquer, and in one Frenchman many men to combat, he raised the most fearful
Army, that the West had ever seen. That deluge of Soldiers stretched it self
from the Pyrenees even unto Tourain, where the invincible Charles Martel
attended him, with twelve thousand Horse, and threescore thousand French Foot.
The renown of so famous a battle, joined to the interest of all the North, led
a great troop of Nobles to Martel; insomuch that the bravest Warriors found as
much glory to fight under this great Captain, as to gain victories by the
conduct of another.

Sifroy, who was one of the most puisant Lords of Germany, was ashamed to sleep
in the bosom of his wife, whilst that all the others thought of the public
safety, but he found much resistance in the resolution of Genevieva, and more
than one difficulty to overcome, since there accompanied it somewhat of love
and of fear. On one side honor pricked him forward, on the other part he could
not resolve himself to quit a good, which he began only to know; and for my
part I believe, that if God had not sent a strong inspiration to Genevieva, to
dispose her to the consent of this voyage, that the desire to conserve his
reputation would have been in danger to yield to the violence of his love:
notwithstanding when they were to part, it was then that these two lovers had
need of their virtue. Let us pass quickly this grievous encounter, for fear to
drown us in the tears which they shed.

The apparel of War being prepared, and the day of departure come, the Count
called all his Domestics, and after having recommended unto them the
obedience, and the right due to his dear wife, he takes his favorite by the
hand, and then addressing his speech to Genevieva, he says unto her: My Girl,
behold Golo, to whom I leave the care of your contentment; the experience which
I have of his fidelity makes me hope that the grief of my absence shall be in
some manner moderated by the confidence you may take of his service, I say no
other thing unto you, as unto his recommendation, but that after me you may
expect more comfort from him, than from any person of the world, and therefore
I desire you to cherish him in my consideration. At these words the poor
Genevieva sownds, they raised her, she falls again three times: all the
servants sought out remedies to call again her soul, which seemed to fly for
fear, to see the departure of Sifroy, or perhaps to remain under the conduct of
Golo. The Count who had observed a notable change in the countenance of his
wife, when he recommended to her the fidelity of his Favorite, lifts up his
eyes, and says these words: It is to you only Queen of heaven, glorious
mother of my Savior, that I leave the care of my dear Genevieva. Go Sifroy, go
boldly where honor calls thee; fear not that there will arrive any disgrace to
that of thy wife; Thou can not put her into surer and faithfuller hands than
those where thou leavest her.

O My God, how little reflection has the heart of man, and his spirit,
prudence, to discover the malice thereof! is there any thing more important,
than the choice of friends, and of good servants; and yet there is nothing in
the world wherein we are more easily and dangerously deceived. O how our
Palatine failed grossly in the opinion which he had of Golo: Genevieva is not
a wife of Potiphar, but Golo is not also a Joseph; his shameful and abominable
practices will soon make appear the treachery of his soul.

Let us accompany our Warrior to the Army, where he was very well received of
the great Martell. I think it not from our purpose to describe the combat that
Sifroy encountered, to the end to trace a light Image of that which our
courageous Princess sustained at the same time. We have said that Charles Martel
attended Abderame near unto Tours, where a fair Campania seemed to offer him
the field of his victories. Having understood that the enemy had put his men in
order, he dispos^d of his in such sort as they had the river of Loire, and that
of Cher at their back, and four hundred thousand Moors in front of them. To
oblige them to conquer, he ordered the inhabitants of Tours to open the Ports
only to the Conqueror; and to take away all hope of flight, he placed on the
wings of his Army five or six hundred of his bravest Cavaliers, with express
commandment to cut the throats of the first that forsook his rank, or that put
the assurance of his safety otherwise than in his arms; after his Battlia was
ordered, he spoke thus to his Soldiers:

Companions, I see well that the ardent desire which presses you to fight,
will hinder me to make you a long Discourse, besides I think it unnecessary,
seeing that you are better disposed to do good actions, than I to utter fair
words. Expect not that I go to seek in the Records of the passed ages examples
of reason, I have always known, that you love better to give it to your
Nephews, than to take it of your Ancestors. And then though we should be
resolved to be insensible of our Interests, and that the ruin of our houses,
the Sack of Towns, the Desolations of Provinces, the plaints of our children,
and the honor of our wives should not carry us to the desire of revenge; the
injury that they do unto God, and to our Religion should be a sufficient motive
to induce us to punish the fury of these Barbarians, who come from so far to
bring you Palms. I will never have so ill opinion of your Piety, as to believe
you would come to despise that God, which you have adored; that Religion which
you have conserved, those Saints which you have honored, those Churches which
you have built, and those Altars which you have erected. It cannot be, that you
who are ready to carry your faith into the midst of Barbary should permit the
impiety of these Moors to tread under foot what she possesses most sacred in
the bosom of your country, and as it were before your eyes. But I consider not
that my discourse has already saved the life of twenty thousand of those
cowards, and hindered that half of the victory is not on our side. Go then,
combat before the eyes of Saint Martin, whose quarrel you sustain this day,
and remember, that you are French, whose glory should have no other limits, but
those of the world.

The impatience of the French permitted him not to speak longer; Besides would
he not overwarm this ardour capable to conquer all when it is well ordered, and
which nothing can hurt but its excess. Behold then our Lions, who pierced into
the great Multitude of the Sarazines. Hudes with his Gascons assaulted the
baggage by the command of Martell, who judged that the cry of women and
children would cause trouble in the Army of Abderame. The Event deceived not
his expectation, for as soon as the terror fell amongst these people, there was
nothing heard but sighs, nor seen but blood and slaughter.

Our French massacred all what the flight drew not from under their victorious
Arms, and to say in a word they carried away the most glorious Victory that
ever any one heard speak of, the Sarazines leaving upon the place, three
hundred sixty and five thousand dead, with their Chief, which cost but the
loss of five hundred men. The rest of the Moors rallied themselves under
Aucupa, one of their Kings, who secured, himself at Avignon. Our great Charles
willing to leave the marks of his Piety and of the homage he did unto heaven
for this Victory, built a Chapel, which they named De bello, and since by
corruption, the Chapel of Saint Martin the fair. It was very reasonable to
honor the valor of the Princes, and of the Lords with some mark of glory, as
the courage of the Soldiers had found its recompense in the booty.

After this happy journey, they presented unto Martel a great number of
Gennets, which are little black animals, covered with red spots. Willing to
make them serve for Monument and Trophie of his victory, he instituted the
order of the Gennet, which was three links or rings of gold distinguished from
so many Roses, which our ancient Gauls put in the buckler of the God Mars. At
the chain hung a Gennet in the collar of France sowed with Lillies, which
reposed it self upon a green flowery turf. The number of the Knights were
sixteen, amongst which Sifroy held one of the principal ranks, as he who had
not given place to any in this occasion. The head of this prodigious serpent,
which had drawn his Soldiers throuh France, was broken by our Martell, but the
tail moves yet a little. Therefore he designs to follow Aucupa into Avignon.
Our Palatine, who would not go away with the half of his glory, and who saw
himself obliged by so honest acknowledgements to pursue the perfection thereof,
designed to accompany the Army at this enterprise; not promising himself so
soon the end thereof, he sent to visit Genevieva by one of his Gentlemen, who
carried her the collar of his order, with this Letter.

Madame, since the time that I parted from you, if I would believe my
impatience, I should complain not to have lived since the consideration of
hnour brought so hard a constraint to the liberty of my contentments. And to
say true, passed felicities being but present miseries, I cannot think of the
happiness which I have possessed, without confessing my self the most
miserable of all those that live upon the earth. What? thtnk you that my spirit
labors amongst the hazzards of War, so much for a thousand dangers which may
environ me, as for the apprehension that I have to enjoy no more your dear
company. If the assurance which I have of living in your memory, and in the
tenderest part of your heart, flattered not my grief, it would long since hove
been mistress of my senses, and have found no more remedy in all my reason. It
is this confidence which has conducted me unto the places where death seems to
be as certain, as life is there little assured. For I would fain have you know
my Girl, that the strongest motive that cast me into the hazzards was this,
Thou live in the bosom of thy Genevieva, who should be so cruel, as to
offend that fair and innocent breast, to procure thee evil? no, there is no
barbarity has so much cruelty to commit so heinous a sin: and death it self,
as blind as she is, has too much knowledge to have so little discretion, She
has made appear, in giving me no wound, that she apprehended to procure grief
unto you. Banish then on your part, those vain apprehensions which love puts
ordinarily into the spirit of those that love. Lanfroy will tell you the good
fortune of our Arms, and the just reason that hinders me from seeing you: above
all, my dear girl, I conjure you to wipe off your tears, and to stop your
sighs, which come from so far to seek me; otherwise I shall not believe that
you would take any part in my good fortune, if you divide not the contentments
sthereof with me. To the end you may have some cause to be pacified, I offer
you the present, with which it has pleased our invincible General to honor
my courage, and the emulation I had to do well. I knew not to present it to any
body, so dear unto me as your self, if you receive it with the good will which
I promise me, I shall draw from thence as much satisfaction, as if they should
erect statues to my valor, and as if all the mouths of fame were employed, but
to speak of my merit, this is the esteem that I desire you to have of my
affection, adieu my Girl, and conserve me the fairest life of this age.

Leave we Sifroy to depart for Provence, and come we to find the Countess with
Landfroy, who was not long on his way before he was with her. When one came to
tell her, that there was a Gentleman arrived from her husband, she was walking
in the windings of a Labyrinth to loose there her sorrows, or at least wise to
charm the troubles thereof. Lanfroy was by misfortune habited in black that
day, which made Genevieva to sownd as soon as he appeared: but having observed
by his countenance and gesture the testimonies of joy, rather than the marks of
sadness, she demanded of him with a trembling voice how Sifroy did. After that
the Gentleman had made an humble reveence, he presented his packet: Madame,
behold the Letters that will speak it with a better grace than I. Having opened
them, she withdrew her self a little into an Alley, and read them two or three
times, stopping very long on every word; notwithstanding her joy was not
entire, considering that her Palatine was absent. The curiosity of a thousand
demands presented it self to her spirit, she called Lanfroy, who by her
commandment told her that his Master was at Tours, upon the point to go unto
Avignon, to besiege the rest of the Sarazines, who were retired thtiher, and
from thence to Narbona, against Anthime, who held that strong pla^e. All this
discourse pleased not much the Countess, who judged well that these sieges of
Towns would detain her husband long time: lastly, having understood that they
feared yet the coming of another King named Amorus, who brought succors to his
Nation, she saw well that the return of Sifroy was not to be hoped till the
following year, which made her resolve to dispatch unto him his Gentleman some
days after with this answer.

Sir if the Letter which you writ unto me, gave consolation to my evils, I will
have no other witness thereof but he who rendered it me; but if it has caused me
new apprehensions, there is nothing but my love that can tell it you. Surely,
as I desire your return beyond all things so the assurance which I have of your
retardment, causes me as true griefs, as your return gives me vain joys, was
it not enough to conceal me the time that might make me hope, without telling
me that I must be miserable a full whole year and that I shall see you only,
when you have vanquished an Hydra that springs up again every day? alas, it may
be that my miseries shall not go on so far, and that this time shall be longer
than my life. When the first news of that great defeat was brought unto us,
and that the blood thereof was come almost to flow at the foot of our house, I
could not express unto you how many fears assailed my spirit, and with how
many distresses my heart was seized. I heard continually my thoughts that said
unto me, Genevieva, believe thou that death has spared thy Palatine amongst
so many thousand men as her fury has devoured? if her blindness takes from her
all knowledge, and leaves her not any discretion, thou have no cause to hope
that she has conserved a life which was unknown unto her. That tempest is
passed, that storm is dissipated, and you cast me into new despairs! Oh that
you would apprehend a little that which exposes me an hundred times a day, to
the hazard of being a widow! consider my dear Sifroy, that fortune has no
means more ordinary to make her favors appear, than their little continuance:
her constancy not able to be assured, she should be suspected of you. What
know you, if the glory of these honors which she presents you, is not of the
nature of those fires, that shine not, but to lead into precipices? Oh how much
better it had been that it had left your courage without recompense, than to
offer it new motives to destroy it self. I am not ignorant of the justice of
your Arms, and that heaven is obliged to make them prosper, if it will maintain
its own quarrel, but who knows not also, that very often it makes us encounter
our enemies, to the end to break us, seeking in our losses, either the revenge
of our sins, or the merit of our patience. I do not oppose my self
obstinately against that which the will of God seeks from our obedience;
notwithstanding whilst that it shall not be known unto me, reason will that I
have care of your safety, not willing to forget mine own. Not to lie, if your
absence were more profitable to the service of God than it is dammageable to my
repose, I would make all my Inteests give place unto his, and would not desire
only to be happy at the least disadvantage, of his glory, but now that France
is propped with an Arm, upon which all the Crowns of the earth might repose the
care of their conservation, can I permit you to increase its assurance without
being Accomplice of the evil which you do me? If I should consent thus to mine
own misfortune, you have too much knowledge of your merit, not to esteem me
unworthy of your amity; and without doubt you would accuse my judgment, if I
had so little wisdom. Esteem me not ignorant, as to this point, for I know
that whole Rivers of the enemies blood are not worth one drop of yours and that
it should not be desirable, although it might be profitable, to finish the
death of all these Barbarians by the least hazard of your person. This thought
makes me to hope, that you will guard your self from your own courage, which is
the most redoubtable of your enemies, for fear to expose may be three persons
to the same death. But if you have resolved to seek all the occasions to dye,
attend at least, till this little creature, which I believe to carry in my
womb, be out of the danger to make thereof its sepulcher.

Grief had begun this Letter, grief finisheth it. Our Palatine was already at
the siege of Avignon, when he received it. To tell you the trouble, that the
last words of his wife cast into his soul, would be the occupation of some one
that seeks out such matters; I would do it notwithstanding, if it were not time
to discourse unto you the most wicked, and most infamous treason that could
fall into the spirit of a servant.

Golo, unto whom Sifroy had given more authority than the saver of Egypt
received from his Master, had always looked upon Genevieva with the respect
which he owed to her virtue, whilst that the Count remained with her. They say
that the Diamond hinders the action of the Loadstone upon the Iron, if it be
put between both; it is true, perhaps, that Golo had never a thought against
his duty in the presence of his master, were it that he apprehended the
punishment of his infidelity, or that he believed his wife would never divide
her heart, having before her eyes him that wholly possessed it. This Lady had
beauty enough to be beloved, but she had too much honesty to permit it. This
was the cause, that the Traitor Golo concealed his fire for some time; but at
last he could not burn with more discretion then the Laurel does; he ^ighed, he
complained, he would fain declare the evil that he suffered; yet not daring to
hope the remedy thereof, he believed his words would be lost, and his fortune
hazarded, should he say that which he ought to conceal: His thoughts combatted
long time with his passion, and perhaps it had been vanquished, if it had not
been aided with the presence of its object. Little Fly, you will burn your
self, if you keep not from this light, whose luster will be as fatal to you,
as that of a Comet.

What will our intendent do, become slave to the filthiest of all the
passions? He takes courage, and resolves himself to discover his flames to her,
who was the innocent cause thereof. He goes into the Countess chamber; but as
soon as he perceived her modesty, his temerity expects a refuse and reproaches.
This first essay not seeming seasonable, he remits the design thereof to
another encounter. At last, behold the occasion that he takes to discover his
desires. The Countess had entertained a Painter, to work in the Galleries of
her Palace: amongst the works that he made, the Tablet of Genevieva was not
the least; and it could not be deformed, being the portrait of so fair a thing;
as one day the Countess beheld it, she called Golo, and asked him his
judgment of that piece, he who looked for an opportunity to declare his
passion, was very glad to meet with this, and seeing that the servants, and
gentlewomen were too far distant to hear him, He says unto her, Truly Madame,
If e're the pencill has hit right, it is in this subject; there is no beauty
how excellent soever it be, that comes near this Image, and for my part, I
think to have eyes is sufficient to a heart. In speaking thus, he had always
his sight fixed upon Genevieva, witnessing by his sighs and lascivious looks,
that he had passion for something else, than for the colors. Our chaste
Countess perceived it well, notwithstanding the fear to appear too subtle,
made her dissemble to comprehend that which she could not be ignorant of. This
modesty served as fire to a man all molded of bitumen; believing then that his
discourse was too clear not to be understood, and the modesty of his mistress
too great, not to be affected, he thus continued what he had so ill begun. But
Madame, if your bare picture gives love to those that ow unto you respect,
would you not pardon a person that would adore the Prototype thereof? without
doubt your beauty is too perfect to be so cruel, and so unjust as to desire to
command a passion, which the Gods have obeyed. This is to speak like an
Idolater (replied the Countess) these Divinities being feigned, their love is
nothing else but a fable. At least it cannot be denied (replied the Intendant)
that these fictions may not express my true affections. You love then Golo?
Yes Madame, and the most beautiful person of the world. Truly I would fain
know her that has given you this innocent affection, I would advance with all
my power your co^tentment, and if your design be fixed upon any one of those
whom I may command, I would endevor to render your suit as acceptable to her as
it is advantageous. Genevieva, your sweetness has too much co^placence, if you
would be a little more severe, you would be less unfortunate. I leave you to
think, if our Intendant had his head in the stars, taking the wise
dissimulation of his mistress for a secret consent. It was then that he showed
his visage more openly, and that his sighs made the half of this evil
discourse. Madame I see nothing amiable but you, they are your attractions
which have vanquished the constancy that I opposed to my felicity; but since
that I know your answers favor my designs, I cannot be unforunate, if I be
not foolish. A clap of thunder had stricken Genevieva with less astonishment
then these words, notwithstanding being come again to the liberty of speech,
her choler and indignation, represented to him the shame of his infidelity,
with such sharp reproaches, that if he had not had much passion, without doubt
he had never had impudence.

How, miserable wretched servant, says she, do you acquit your self thus of
the fidelity which you promised to your Master? dare you look upon a person,
who has as much horror of your crime, as desire to punish it, if repentance
do not make you wise? the dissimulation which I used, was it not an
advertisement to your rashness, that I would not hear it? take heed you never
more offer me any such discourse, if you be but as much careful of your good,
as little of your duty. I have the means to make you repent your folly.
Indignation and despite hindered the rest of her discourse.

What will Golo say? it is no time to speak, and then he sees that the servants
perceive the Countess was moved, persuading himself that another occasion would
render her more favorable to his pursuits, he remits them with an answer that
draws him out of the suspicion of the servants, and which excuses him to his
Mistress.

Madame (replied this fox) if there be any fault in that which you reproach me
of, it is pardonable, being not voluntary: I hope to make such satisfaction to
the person that I have offended, that if she be reasonable she will be angry no
more. Those who heard these words, having not conceived what the had said,
believed that the Intendant, a man chollerick and brutish, had wronged some one
of the house, and that he promised to satisfy the complaints that had been
made against him: this encounter passed in this manner; but Golo, who had not
valued his conquest, is it had been easy redoubles his passion, and esteems the
good fortune to enjoy her by the difficulty to acquire her. He thinks, he
meditates the means to attain to the end on it. At last behold the most unjust,
the most shameful, and most criminal thought that could fall into the mind of
a wicked servant. There was a Cook in the house, who had gained the good
opinion of the Countess by his virtue, (that was the only artifice and magic
they must use to possess her heart and her affection) the Intendant having
known it sufficiently with the other domestics, resolves to make once more his
shameful demands; and in case that he should be refused, to render the
chastity of Genevieva suspected unto him, who oughted not doubt thereof. Her
being with child served for a pretense to his malice, and the envy, which the
other servants bare to this poor Cook, promised an easy belief to his
calumny. One evening after Supper, that the coolness of the time invited the
Princess to come forth, as she walked in an arbor separate from her maids,
Golo seigning to have some affair to communicate to her, approached her, and
after many words darted out a discourse, to sound the bottom, and to be the
spies of the Combat, that he prepared against her chastity; after having put
himself into a thousand postures, and taken an infimity of countenances, after
having alleged all the ill reasons of his passion, he ended thus.

This discourse, Madame, is not to constrain you to love me against your
inclination, but only to persuade you to one last request, which I make unto
you, to advance my death with this weapon, since your rigor permits not my
constancy to hope what my love meriteth; this shall be to oblige me by a signal
favor, to make me die in another fashion than slowly. When he held this
discourse, he presented her a Poniard: If the Princess interrupted not the
importunities of this perfidious man, it was anger that hindered her; for
as soon as she could do it, commanding her just passion not to break out, she
replies unto him: Golo, I believed, that my mildness would have corrected your
presumption, and that it was enough to have shown you, that your pursuit was
too shameful, not to be vain; but seeing my goodness is unprofitable unto
you, I declare unto you, that if ever you be so bold to open your mouth to the
like purpose, my husband shall be advertised thereof. Oh Genevieva what have
you said? this word will cost you but your life, if the credulities of Sifroy
second the artifices of Golo, why would you not do it without telling him it?
you show well that your freeness has more of candor than your prudence has
of conduct. My dear Reader, it is now that you come to see Innocence suffer,
learn from hence how to suffer with a good grace. The History that I come to
describe is capable to give both the example and the motives thereof. Our
Intendant provoked with this refusal, retires himself full of rage and fury;
this thunder will soon break out into a furious tempest. Some few days after
Golo called two or three of those that he could best trust in the house, and
then having made three or four tears to slide from his traiterous eyes, he said
unto them sighing.

My friends, I cannot express unto you with how much displeasure I am
constrained to discover unto you a thing, which I have hidden from you as long
time as I have hoped amendment in the deplorable subject of this discourse. And
truly, if the particular sin of our unfortunate mistress, passed not into a
public scandal, and that her shame darkened not the glory of her husband, I
should permit my silence to conceal the crime of Genevieva, for fear to publish
the dishonor of Sifroy. I am ashamed to tell you that which I think, but what
means are there to hide a thing from you, of which your eyes are witnesses.
Those who have not seen the caresses of Genevieva in the behalf of that
miserable varlet, may be ignorant of their cunning: those, who have not heard
their discourse, may doubt of their evil practice; those, who have not
perceived their filthy actions, may esteem them innocent; but alas! who can do
it? the subtilty of their words, the gentleness of their glances, the liberty
of their actions, and her pregnancy, are the voices that tell us too loud our
misfortune. For me, on the fidelity of whom my Master has reposed the care of
his wife, as I had more obligation to watch over her deportments, so have I
seen the things which I would fain have to be false, to unbelieve them.
Traiterous and perfidious. Slave! is it thus, that thou coverest thy deceit
with pretense of devotion? is it thus that thou hidest thy Magic under the
fair semblance of a studied piety? I speak this (my friends) because it is
miserable for me to think, that my Lady should abase her eyes upon this beggar,
if they were not blinded with the force of some charm. I thought it fit to take
your advise upon so ill an affair, to the end to conceal the infamy of this
house as much as it may be possible for us. For my part I believe that it is
fit to put this miserable Cook into a prison till the return of our Master, and
because that my Lady may enlarge him being free, it will not be unseasonable to
make her keep her chamber, with the sweetest usage that an offender may hope
for, in the mean time I will give advertisement to my Lord of the diligence
that you shall have contributed to his affairs.

All this fair Oration was not to persuade those who were already prepossessed
of the Innocence of the Countess, but only to keep some appearance of form in
a manifest injustice. Behold the resolution then taken against these two
innocent victimes. One morning that Genevieva was yet in bed, Golo called the
Cook, and with these words which had this in common with the thunder, that they
grumbled not but to dart lightning, reproached him that he had put an amorous
poison into the Princesses meat, by means whereof he had disposed both of her
will and of her person. It was in vain for the poor Drogan to protest that he
was innocent, to call heaven and earth to witness of his deportments, and of
the honesty of his mistress; he must pass the Wicket, and do a long penitence
for the sin of Golo, having no other consolation in his griefs, but the tears
that he shed day and night in his prison. It was a thing worthy of compassion,
when this mischievous Impostor went into the chamber of Genevieva to make her
the evil discourse, which had rendered Drogan culpable. Truly the holy Lady had
need of all her virtue in this encounter, yet her patience escaped her a
little, but as there was not any creature that was not Golo's, so was there not
one that hearkened to her plaints, or was moved with her misery. They took her
and led her into a Tower, from whence she might hear enough the pitiful cries
of Drogan, but not comfort his evils. To express the regrets of Genevieva, one
must be touched with the same resentments, and for my part I love better that
you should meditate them, than to express them ill. So many regrets might kill
a woman eight months great with child, if God had not taken a particular care
of her; all the consolation she had amongst so many distresses was that heaven
could not leave this injury unpunished, without declaring it self Accomplice
thereof. Endeavoring sometimes to make her sighs break prison, she complained
amorously in this manner.

Alas my God! is it possible thou should permit the evils that I suffer,
having a perfect knowledge of their extremity; what have I done unto thee to
make me the sad subject of so many dolors? the petty services that I
endeavored to render to thee, made me hope a better fortune, and I see now,
that either thou punishest rigorously their defects, or that thou disdainest to
acknowledge their merit. But my most pitiful Father, have thou no punishment
more sweet and less shameful? the loss of my riches, was it not capable to
make the proof of my patience; and to punish the revolts of my heart? could not
sickness expiate my offenses? the death of my kindred and friends, and my own,
would this be too little a thing to try my fidelity? Oh how thou would have
obliged me if thy justice could have been contented with that: but alas! that
which I have said, are blessings which I may desire, if I compare them to the
evils that I suffer. I should not lose enough, if I might not lose what is
impossible for me to recover without miracle. This favor would be very
necessary unto me, I crave it not for all that, provided that this innocent
that I carry be not oppressed under my ruin. I consent that thou should
permit it. Let them hide me in the darkness of a prison, but let him see the
light of the day, and that of thy grace, let them beat me, but let not the
blows light upon him, let them slander me, but let not the blame stick on him.
Let them kill me, but let him live. I may hope of thy mercy that one day they
shall acknowledge, his mother was miserable, but innocent, afflicted but
without sin, calumniated but without cause, condemned but without crime. My
ashes shall receive this satisfaction from my enemies, and my soul shall be
content therewith. If thou permit me to expect this from thy goodness, I will
not languish without some kind of pleasure, and shall rest content to drown in
my tears, rather than burn with a fire which had been displeasing unto thee.

It was thus that the poor Innocent sighed night and day, without hoping any
comfort but from heaven; for to expect it from men, had been but to help to
deceive her self, and to seek for illusions. No body put foot into this Tower,
Golo was the Dragon that kept this treasure, where he had always his heart: he
went often to see Genevieva, who received more pain and displeasure from his
importunities, than from the evils which he made her to endure. But if he had
before found resistance in his designs, he met here now with impossibility.
The Countess dissembles no more, her sweetness is turned into a just
indignation. If Golo thinks to flatter her, she reviles him; if he makes her
promises she despises them; if he will approach her she flies, if he touches
her, she cries out. One time he said unto her, that the means to cover her
shame, was to permit him that, which a wretched Cook had obtained at his
pleasure. At these words the Countess could no more command her choler, than
satisfy the revenge that it inspired into her. Perfidious traitor (said she)
art thou not content to have rendered me miserable, without desiring to make me
an adulteress? hitherto I have not beheld thee but as a wicked man, but now I
take thee for a cruel tyrant. Finish perfidious man, finish thy cruelties,
chastity has her martyrs; I refuse not to be of them, for to expect that I
permit thee other thing than to kill me, is to loose thy time and thy pains.

This wretch considering that his Mistress had too much virtue to sin,
endeavors to cover his crime, under the pretext of marriage: He made therefore
a report fly abroad, that the Palatine having embarked himself at Sea for his
return, had there made shipwreck, and so perished. Upon this news, he forged
letters, which he made to slide into the hands of Genevieva, to the end to
dispose her to his suit by the assurance of her husbands death. But the holy
mother of God discovers this artifice, which animated the Countess with such a
despite, that the Intendant no sooner made unto her the overture of his
marriage, but she sent him away with a box, this artifice succeeding not to him,
he had recourse to his nurse, who never did a worse action, than in giving him
the breast; the fidelity of this woman, Golo made use of to carry necessaries to
Genevieva; He conjures her to gain him the heart of the Princess, and to
sweeten her spirit by all the artifices that she could devise; he hopes easily
to be able to beguile a woman, by the same means that the devil used against a
man. But surely he deceives himself, for he finds that Genevieva is a rock; if
the winds beat it, it is to fasten it; if the waves strike it, it is to polish
it; nor threatening, nor flatery, nor sweetness, nor cruelty, nor violence, nor
subtilty could prevail any thing against a soul so full of virtue.

During all these devises, the term of Genevieva's lying in arrived: alas! may
I say that a Princess was constrained to be her own Midwife? should I say that
in this necessity, where the beasts have need of assistance, the wife of a
powerful Palatine was abandoned of all succor? verily he must be of some
other matter then marble, to deny tears to so extreme a misery. Behold then our
holy Countess in the transes of childbearing, behold her son in her own
hands; who could hear this, which she says unto it without pity? certainly it
would not be more easy to see her without tears, then without eyes.

Alas, my poor infant, how many sorrows has thy innocence caused me! oh how
many evils will my miseries make thee suffer! fearing that the necessity of
all things, and the incommodities of the place, might make him die out of the
grace of God, she baptized it. Boldly, Genevieva, call your son Benoni, or
Tristan, he must carry the name of his Godmother, since God, who is his
Godfather, has none at all: After that this little infant was brought forth,
his mother wrapped it in the old napkins, which they had left there by neglect.

When the Nurse told the Intendant that there was then two prisoners in the
Tower, and that the Princess was extremely cast down with sorrow and grief,
pity, which had found no entrance into the soul of this barbarian, made then
her last attempt to touch him with some sense of compassion: At last he
relented even so far as to give her a little more bread than ordinary, rather
to keep her to her passion, or to make her dolor live, than to bring her
relief. A complexion strong, and robustious would be ruined amongst so many
distresses and anguishes; it was not then a little miracle to see Genevieva
more fair and fresh after the pains of her Childbed, and in the resentments of
so much bitterness, then she appeared amongst the pleasures and the delights of
her prosperity. One would have believed after having seen her, that she was of
the nature of that flower, who is never more gay and lively, than when they
tread her under foot. Our Intendant being gone into her prison, found there new
lights, with which his senses were so dazzled, that he thought to dye with love:
but finding this holy woman firm in the resolution to live miserable, and to
dye chaste, rather than to purchase felicities by the loss of her honor, he
resolves himself to give the last stroke to his evil fortune.

All this proceeding was yet unknown to Sifroy, he thinks it fit then to
anticipate the spirit of his Master, and to let him know the misfortune of his
house. Two months were stolen away since the lying in of Genevieva, when he
instructs one of his servants, to carry him the news thereof: yet would he
make prudence appear in his malice, and to this effect he writes only these
few words to the Palatine.

Sir, if I feared not to publish an infamy which I would hide, I should trust a
great secret to this paper: but all your domestics, and particularly this
bearer having seen the diligence that I used, and the artifices which have
deceived my prudence, I have no need but of their testimony to put my fidelity
out of suspicion, and my service in estimation; believe all that which he shall
tell you, and give me soon advertisement of your will.

We have said that the Count was at the siege of Avignon when he received the
first news of his wife. Since the taking of this fair Town, Charles Martel had
likewise reduced Narbone, where Anthime was shut up. The courage and prudence
of this great Captain, made it self remarkable in the bloody journey of Tours,
and at the sieges of these two towns. Notwithstanding his great Genius never
appeared better than in the defeat of Amorus King of the Sarazines, who having
understood the ill success of his Nation in France, would needs come there
never to depart thence, for he was slain there with all his people, without the
escape of one from the slaughter, to certify his loss. This last combat was
as advantageous to the glory of Martel as the first, but it cost him dearer
than the others, for besides a great number of dead, there were store of Lords
wounded, amongst whom our Sifroy received a blow, which held him long time in a
Town of Languedock, where the ill news which the artifice of Golo had framed,
was brought him. The change of Acteon never gave so much astonishment to that
miserable person, as the discourse of this messenger put into the spirit of the
Palatine. He meditated naught but high and cruel vengeances; from admiration
he fell into choler, from choler into fury, and from that into rage.

Oh! cursed woman, must thou sully so shamefully the glory which I have
endeavored to acquire in combats, ought thou to bring so much cunning to
cover thy treachery, and to make piety serve as a vail to thy filthiness?
well, thou have made no account of mine honor, I will not spare thy blood, nor
that of thy infant which thou have not brought into the world, but to serve as
executioner to thy crime. And then setting before his eyes the modesty and
honesty of his wife, as if he had been delivered from some evil spirit, he said
with a sober sense: no, it is not possible that Genevieva has so wickedly
betrayed me, I have always known her actions full of virtue, her love being so
ardent, it could not be so long dissembled: tell me my great friend, how long
is it since this miserable woman was brought a bed? Monsieur, replied the
messenger, it is but a month. It was herein that the malice of Golo had
traveled, for to put the Countess under a violent suspicion of her chastity,
he made him say to the Palatine that she was brought a bed the tenth month
after his departure.

This might well be true, and Genevieva innocent, since Philosophy and
experience teach that women may carry their fruit ten months, yea that some
have been found who have gone great even to the fifteenth and sixteenth.
Notwithstanding because it is not ordinary, Sifroy believed easily she was
dishonest. Jealousy aided somewhat his belief, for although the virtue of
Genevieva might deliver his spirit from this disease, her beauty cast him into
some shadows, even when he enjoyed her in the repose of his house. It is a
thing worthy of admiration, to see that prudence aids sometimes to deceive it
self. All that which the Palatine could lay hold of for proofs of his wives
Innocence, he made conjectures to her confusion; her honesty was no more but
subtilty, her wisdom but cunning, her devotion but hypocrisy, her virtues but
vices disguised. It is then no marvel if he consented to his own misfortune.

After having well thought on the revenge of this crime which his sole
credulity had made, he dispatched the same servant toward Golo with commandment
to keep his wife so close shut up, that no body might make address unto her;
and for that wretched slave who was in prison, that he should find out in the
horror and extremity of his sin, some punishment proportionable to his
attempt. The Intendant received this commandment with pleasure, to execute it
with prudence he made a morsel to be prepared for this poor miserable, which
soon took from him the taste of all others. Behold the first Act of our bloody
Tragedy, the blood of this innocent victime satisfied not the rage of Golo; on
the contrary, mounting to his excess through the horrible visions of Drogan,
whom he believed to have always before his eyes, and through the apprehension
that Sifroy might come to discover the Innocence of Genevieva, he supposed that
it was time to think upon the means of her entire ruin.

Having understood that the Count was on his journey, and would soon arrive, he
went before hand as far as Strasbourg to meet him. There was near the Town an
old sorceresse, sister to Golo's nurse, of whom he believed he might serve
himself in his design; he went unto her house, and gilded her hands, that she
might make Sifroy to see what never had been. His plot thus laid, he went
further to meet the Count, who received him with thousand testimonies of good
will. When he had drawn him aside, he demanded him the deplorable condition of
his house. It was here that the tears and sobbes of Golo rendered themselves
Accomplices of his treason; scarce pronounced he a word without a sigh: at last
after a long and tedious discourse, he declared unto him all that which we have
said, and that he had sent Drogan with little noise to the other world, that
his perfidiousnesse might not break forth by his punishment. The Count praised
infinitely the conduct of his Intendant: lastly having questioned him very
often upon the particularities of his misfortune, Golo fearing to be surprised
in his answers, said unto him: Sir, I do not believe that you doubt of a
fidelity which I would witness to you at the cost of my life, but if you will
take other proofs of this ill affair than from my mouth, I have the means to
make you see how the whole passed. There is not far from this place a very
knowing woman, who will make you to see all those evil practices. Sifroy was
surprised with a curiosity which will cost him much sorrow; he prayed him to be
his conduct to her house, which he promised him. In the Evening the Count, with
his Confident, dismissed his train, and slid himself into the sorceresse house,
The Palatine put a good quantity of Crowns into her hand, and conjured her to
let him see all what had passed during his absence. The false old Witch, who
would increase his desire by her refuse, feigned to find difficulty therein,
and even to divert him from thence by many reasons, representing to him that he
might perhaps see those things, the ignorance whereof might be more profitable
to him, than the knowledge could be desirable, and that a misfortune is never
full when it is hidden. All this tended but to give more desire to Sifroy to be
deceived* Seeing him then resolved, she took him by the hand with Golo, and led
him into a little vault, which was under her cave, where nothing gave light but
two gross candles of green tallow. After having marked out two circles with a
rod, and put Sifroy into the one, and Golo into the other, she put a mirror
into a vessel full of water, upon which the Sorceresse murmured certain words,
whose horror made the hair stand on end: this done, she made three turns
backwards near a bucket, and blowed as many times upon it. The moving of the
water being stopped, the Count approached by her command, and as he bowed
himself three times, he cast his eyes upon the Glass. The first time he
perceived his wife speaking to the Cook with a smiling countenance, and an eye
full of sweetness: the second time he saw Genevieva, who passed her fingers
into his hair, flattering him with much dalliance; but the third, he saw those
privacies which could no ways accord with modesty. Imagine you with what fury
he came forth from this little hell. Oh what words said he not? what fatal
cruelties called he not to the revenge of his grief?

When an Elephant is in fury, it is enough to show him a sheep to appease him:
the Intendant who feared that the same might arrive to his Master, endeavors
in keeping of Genevieva, to take away an object of sweetness from before his
eyes. He represented to the Count that it was to be feared his just anger,
willing to punish the crime of his wife, might publish it, that he judged it
more fit to give the commission thereof to some other, who would dispatch it
softly, whilst he rendered himself by little journeys at his house. This
counsel was received of the Palatine with much praise, and because he thought
no person so trusty as he who was the author thereof, he gave him charge to
execute it, though Golo witnessed some displeasure in this obedience.

The Intendant at his return into the house, failed not to reveal the whole
mystery to his nurse, forbidding her to communicate it to any body. But the
providence of God would not that this woman should be more secret than others,
who know nothing of that which they conceal, and have no silence but for the
things they are ignorant of; scarce had she understood this from the mouth of
Golo, but she poured it into the ear of her daughter, who though she had a
wicked mother, was not without some laudable qualities, and above all, not
without a tender compassion of Genevieva's miseries. The Countess perceiving
that she wept, asked the cause of her tears? Oh! Madame (answered this Maid) it
is concerning your life, Golo has received command from my Lord to put you to
death. Well my Girl (said the Countess) you and I have occasion to rejoice, it
is long since I petitioned this favor of God: but what shall become of my
poor infant? Madame he must dye with you. At these words Genevieva remained
without motion, the first word that grief permitted her to utter was this: Oh
my God, will thou suffer that this little creature, who knows not yet to sin,
be afflicted and that an Infant be culpable, because he is unfortunate?

In saying this she washed his little cheeks with her tears, and then having
given unto love all the kisses that he demanded, she addressed her self to that
good maid. Sweet heart I know not if I may beseech thee to render a last
service to the most miserable of all women; thou can oblige me with little
pain, and without hazard, since all I shall request of thy courtesy is, that
thou bring me a little ink and paper; thou shall find some in that cabinet or
closet which is near my chamber, hold, there is the key; take there what thou will of my jewels, provided thou do me this pleasure. The maid failed not to
do what she had prayed her, sliding afterward a writing into the same Cabinet
from whence she had taken the paper.

So soon as the next day began to break, Golo called two servants, whom he
thought the most trusty, and commanded them to conduct the mother and the child
into a Wood, which was half a mile from the Castle, to kill them there out of
noise, and then to cast their bodies into the river. To have some mark of their
cruel obedience, he willed that they should bring him the tongue of that wicked
woman (so he called our Innocent Princess.) What probability of denying any
thing to a barbarian who has the power to make himself obeyed? they went into
the prison where they bereaved the poor Lady of her Habits, they clad her with
old garments, and in this pitiful condition, they drew her along to
punishment. I hear thee demand Reader, if there be a providence that watches
over the designs of men? To this I answer, that there are not more stars in
the Firmament, (...) eyes op^n upon all their actions; but (...) God seems
sometimes to sleep in the midst of our miseries, it is to the end to save us
with more wonder, and more evident testimonies of his love. Let us return to
the poor Genevieva, whom I see go guarded between two, carrying in her arms
her little Innocent. It is here where all the eloquence of Orators would be
mute, if it should enterprise to express the horror of this sad spectacle.
Our Princess whom grief had hindered to speak until then, turning her self
toward the house, where she had suffered so many cruelties, said sighing.

Adieu then, sad residence of my sorrows, adieu, since heaven will that I die, I
quit willingly a place where I have endured so many cruel deaths. But since men
fail in the testimony of my Innocence, I desire that all the insensible
creatures that are within the compass of these walls, accuse my wickedness,
if I have been wanting to my duty, and praise my virtue if I be Innocent; adieu
for ever. Whilst Genevieva wept thus, a torrent of tears washed her cheeks and
her bosom, not that she had regret to leave so miserable a life as hers, but
because she esteemed the means of losing it too unjust, not to be lamented. And
to speak truly, there must be a virtue beyond-humane to remain insensible of
such rude strokes. When we lose life, we lose a thing which we cannot always
keep; but honor being as the spirit of our soul, if it come once to dye, we
cannot but with much difficulty hope the resurrection thereof.

Our two Innocent victimes being arrived to the place where their sacrifice was
to be made: one of the ministers of this barbarous execution lifted up already
the sword, to cut the throat of the little Infant, when the mother demanded to
die first, to the end not to dye twice. O how a miserable beauty has power upon
a heart that is not altogether of marble! could you believe that those whom
Golo had chosen to take away the Countesses life should be those that conserved
it to her? the last words that proceeded from her mouth, changed so their will
through compassion, that the one of them said to the other: Comrade, why should
we stain our hands in so fair a blood as that of our Mystris? let us leave her
to live, whom we have not seen to do any thing worthy of so cruel a death: her
modesty and sweetness are the infallible proofs of her Innocence; may be a day
will come that will put her virtue into evidence, and our condition into a
better fortune. It would be hard to say, who had the most pain to consent to
this design, either those who were to take her life from her, or she that
should lose it. Notwithstanding the regret to see an Innocent of five years old
murdered made Genevieva consent to be unhappy sometimes, persuading her self
that necessity would make her dye with less horror than the sword.

This so resolved, the two servants commanded their Mistress to get her self so
far into the Forest, that Sifroy might never have news of her. It was easy
to hide her self in a wood which seemed not to have been made but for a retreat
to the bears, and savage beasts, its extent gave horror to the most hardy,
when they were to traverse it, and its obscurity was the abode of silence: but
if any thing interrupted it sometimes, it could be but the howlings of the
wolves, the cry of owls, and the sighings of the Orfray. The grief of the
Countess bare well its part there when it was permitted her to live amongst
the beasts. Go boldly then Genevieva, go into a place which you sometimes
ardently desired, and know that God had not given you an inclination unto
solitude, but to sweeten unto you the inco^modities thereof. As the Servants
returned toward the Castle, it happened by accident, that they repented them
of their pity, remembering that Golo had commanded them to bring the tongue of
Genevieva for assurance of their fidelity. Whereupon they returned back again
to execute that which their compassion had hindered them to do, But God who
conducted this affair, ordained that they should meet a little dog, who
received the favor to lose his tongue for his Mistress. Being arrived at the
house, the Intendant received the news of that which they should have done by
his commandment, for which he resented a very sensible joy: presently he gave
advertisement thereof to the Palatine, in whose house he acted the Count.
Sifroy being arrived, they talked not but of the Chase, of debauchees and of
recreation, to the end to divert all the thoughts that might call back the
memory of Genevieva. One day the Count being fallen upon the discourse of his
miseries, against the intention of our Intendant, he related to him that the
last night he had dreamed that a great dragon had ravished from him his wife.

Truly (replied Golo) who made all things serve to his artifices) Behold a
dream that tells you too clearly your misfortune: this dragon, is the traitor
Drogan, who has so wickedly sinned against his duty. You can doubt no more
thereof, seeing the dream has only reversed one letter of his abominable
name, to give you assurance whence your disaster proceeds. And truly besides
what I have spoken, we understand from History that many persons have dreamed
the same, when the unchastity of their wives made them adulteresses, or the
violence of some one constrained them to that wickedness. But Sir, you should
remove all these black thoughts from your spirit, since they cannot serve but
to trouble the peace thereof. Forget the ashes of her, who would burn with so
filthy a fire, that it is impossible to remember it without shame; must there
be so much force and virtue to raze out of your spirit an ingrate who has so
wickedly removed you from her heart? believe a person that makes his repose and
his troubles of your interests, and settle your spirits upon better thoughts,
than those that hinder the tranquillity thereof.

Let us leave the Count to seek divertisements for his evil humor, come we to
see Genevieva in the thicket of the wood where we left her. As Soon as the two
servants had abandoned her, her first steps carried her upon the bank of the
river, that passed by the Castle. It was there that she took the ring which
Sifroy had put on her finger, when he departed for France, and then cast it
into the current of the floods, protesting she would not carry the mark of a
virtue that had caused her so many misfortunes, and then entering again into the
Forest, she sought some retrait, to defend her self from the rage of the
beasts, and to die in covert. As she was in this search, and that the very
insensible creatures were afraid to succor her, she heard this voice which
came out of the midst of the wood: Genevieva, fear not, I will have care of
thee, and of thy son. Upon the assurance of this promise, she penetrated
further into the Forest, without perceiving any thing that might promise her
consolation.

Two days passed away in these extremities without the least comfortto her
grief, but the liberty to lament it. If her own sufferings were sensible unto
her, those of her child were insupportable: and certainly I know no patience
that could undergo so many evils, and be silent. The day seemed not to shine,
but to show her the horror of the place where she was; the night filled her
spirit with shadows, as well as her eyes with darkness. Nothing represented it
self to her imagination, that was not full of affright and terror: the puff
of a Zephire, the motion of a leaf, formed to her monsters more terrible than
those of Lybia. The care of her Benoni augmented much her fears, considering
that he had already lain two nights at the foot of an oak having but the grass
for bed, and a few boughs for defense: All the accidents that might arrive
unto her, presented themselves to her thought, to produce the same effects,
that grief could make there. That which touched most sensibly her soul, was to
hear the third day this little creature, whose sighings demanded the succor of
her breasts; but alas! they were dry, all what he could draw from thence was
nothing but a little corrupted blood. It was but then that she permitted thus
her grief to speak.

My God, my Savior, can thou suffer that this Innocent dye for want of
having one drop of water, whilst the authors of his misery surfeit with
blessings? where is that providence which makes thee to take care of the ravens
and the worms? If thy word deceive us not, thou owe the same favor unto him,
that thou do to those animals, seeing his birth is no less considerable, nor
his condition worse than theirs. Look upon pitiful Lord, look upon this
Infant, his father has acknowledged him no more, than the raven his young:
behold him creeping upon the dust, and take compassion of his evils, either to
finish them, or to allay them; will thou permit it to be said, that the
general care of thy providence has excepted this miserable from the
infallible rule of thy mercies? permittest thou that the Innocents perish with
hunger, whilst thy enemies abuse thy benefits, and provoke thy Justice? it is
in a manner the doing of evil, to do good to the wicked, and to hate virtue, to
see it persecuted without pity. Where is it that my grief carries me? pardon my
Savior, pardon this blasphemy to my impatience: it is sufficient that thou will a thing to render it just; since it pleases thee that he dye, I will it
also. In saying this, she reposed her son on the earth, retiring her eyes from
that subject of so many miseries; but as she had marched some paces into the
wood, the sweet murmr of a brook assured her, that there was a spring near
enough that place, which obliged her to take again her son to seek it out:
having found it, she refreshed the mouth of the Infant, and retained his soul
ready to quit his body for want of nourishment. Behold one of the effects of
Gods providence; there must be also a retrait to these poor banished
creatures; Genevievieva found one near enough to the fountain, it was a den
whose entrance was covered with a thick bush, where the mother and her son
marked out their lodging for seven years. Yet it was necessary to have some
nourishment; O goodness of heaven! how sweet art thou, and how amorous are thy
cares! whilst our poor Princess wearied her spirit with this thought, she
heard a noise, as if some horseman had brushed behind the bushes, which made
her afraid, until she saw appear a hind, who without affright approached to
her: her astonishment increased much more when she saw that this beast looked
upon the Infant with compassion, and coming near to the mother, fawned upon
her, as if she would have said that God had sent her there to be her nurse.
Whereupon perceiving that her udder was full of milk, she took her son, and
cherishing the beast with her hand, put him to suck.

Oh! how necessary it is to have a good heart; you may believe that Genevieva
received this benefit with resentments of joy, which wiped away all her passed
sorrows. The contentment of this first favor increased much, when she knew by
experience, that the hind came twice a day, without receiving any other salary
for her good offices but some handfulls of grass, and the caresses of the
Countess. I could say that sometimes she spoke unto her, as if she had been
endued with reason, and that she gave her testimonies of amity, as if she had
been capable thereof.

Some one will be very glad to know why God ordinarily uses the service of
hindes to nourish his servants in the desert: this curiosity is commendable,
and it pleases me well to satisfy it; a mean Lecture migh have made this
observation; and though we should have no other example, but that of Saint
Giles, our question would have foundation enough. It is certain that God can
derive our nourishment from whatsoever thing it shall please him, and that he
who has created four elements to this effect, can serve himself with the least
of their pieces to furnish us with delicates. It is he that has made honey to
be sucked out of the stones, it is he that nourished all the people of Israel
with dew, it is he that made three children to live in flames. as so many
Salamanders; it is he that sent every day a raven to the great father of the
desert Saint Paul; it is he that can draw our life out of death it self and our
nourishment from poison, which is the most certain ruin thereof.

Notwithstanding his conduct is sweet, and takes nothing of violence; it is
therefore he accommodates himself to the power of second causes, and follows
the inclinations thereof. Those who have written the secrets of nature, report
that the hind never brings forth, if the heaven serve not for Midwife to the
birth of her fruit by a puisant clap of thunder: from whence we derive two or
three fair knowledges: the first that it is no wonder the Hearts and Hinds are
fearful beyond all other Animals, since it is fear only that puts them into
the world: the second serves to the question which we propose, as a great
personage has observed. The difficulty which the Hind has to produce her
fruit, proceeds not but from its greatness, whence it happens, that the Fawn
having followed his dam very little time, forsakes her to go to pasture,
leaving the sweetness of the dugge for that of liberty. The Hind having
abundance of milk, seeks to discharge her self thereof, even so far that they
say, she oftentimes suffers her self to be sucked by the animals of another
kind, to the end to ease her: God who has given her this inclination for her
interest, makes use thereof sometimes for our necessity, thrusting her forward
by a secret instinct to be prodigal to us of a good which would be dammageable
unto her.

This was the only assistance which our little Innocent drew from the
creatures, during the space of seven years: for the Countess, the earth
furnished her with herbs and roots. He that will consider that Genevieva was a
Princess brought up among the delights of a Court, shall have no pain to
imagine her troubles. Was it not a spectacle worthy of compassion, to see the
wife of a Palatine in the want even of those things of which the most extreme
necessities have no need? to see her Palace changed into a frightfull solitude,
her chamber into a fearful den, her Courtiers into wild beasts, her music
into the howling of wolves, her delicate meats into most bitter roots, her
repose into inquietude, and her joys into tears; surely he must not be of
flesh that can be insensible of so many misfortunes; and if her virtue could
have changed a man even to this degree, her countenance would yet have found
tears amongst so many evils, seeing the rocks themselves seemed not to sweat,
but with her sufferings. Oh, who ever could have heard all the regrets which
she made to the echoes of this wood, would have said, that all the trees
complained thereof, that the winds murmured thereat with despite, and that all
the birds had forgotten their Genius, to learn to sigh her misery.

If the evils of the poor Countess touched sensibly her heart, it cannot be
spoke what torments those of her son caused her, particularly when his Tongue
came to be untied in the first plaintes of his grief, and that this little
innocent began to feel he was unfortunate. This pitiful mother locked him
sometimes in her bosom to warm his little members all cold as Ice, and then as
she perceived the tremblings of Benoni, pity pressed her heart so strongly
with grief, that she drew from thence a thousand sobs and from her eyes
infinite tears. Oh my dear son, (said this lamenting mother) oh my poor son,
my dear child, how soon beginnest thou to be miserable! to see the child, one
would have said that it had the use of reason, for at her sorrowful words, he
put forth a cry so piercing, that the heart of Genevieva remained sensibly
wounded therewith; one cannot say how many times grief and cold made her to
sound.

My Reader, I conjure thee before we pursue further the miseries of our
deplorable Princess, to cast a little thy eyes through the world, to observe
the diversity thereof: Thou shall see there an infinite number of women much
meaner in innocence and quality, who shine in gold and silk, whilst Genevieva
is pierced with cold, covered only with the shame of her nakedness: Thou
shall see there vice honored, virtue despised, impurity in credit, subtlety
praised* vanity esteemed, whilst a poor Lady suffers in the nook of a Wood,
for desiring to be innocent, and to keep her faith to a person to whom heaven
had engaged her. O God, how true is it that thy providence walks in the
depth, which it behooves not our spirit to sound, and that thy counsels are
precipices to all those who will search the profundity thereof: Let us go no
further to observe this truth then into the house of Sifroy, though it be two
years since we came thence. Whilst Genevieva weeps, let us withdraw us a
little from her misery, and enter into her husbands Castle: We shall see that
there is not a servant, who is not con^ent, not a lacquey that is not at his
ease, not a dog that has not bread. The Summer has its pleasures, the Winter
has its pass times. The chase Viscites, play and feasts, bannish sorrow from
this house. Golo added all the artifices that he could to the medicine of time,
to cure the spirit of his Master. It is true, that he could not wholly take away
the image of Genevieva's virtues, from the soul of Sifroy; her modesty, her
honesty, her pity, her constancy, her address, her prudence, her love, were
so many pleasing phantesmes, which reproached him night and day for his
credulity: This poor man believed to have continually her shadow by his side;
and though his evil Intendant knew to remove subtlely those thoughts full of
disquiets, notwithstanding they made always some impression in his spirit.

Behold an accident that ruined almost the whole fortune of Golo, and
discovered the reflection of his malice; three years after the return of the
Count, and three ages of his wives misery; As one day Sifroy looked over some
papers in his Cabinet, he lighted upon the note which the Countess had
conveyed therein: Who can describe the regrets, and sorrows that this bit of
paper caused unto him? his mouth uttered a thousand curses against Golo, his
tears watered the writing, he beat his breast, he tore his beard and hair; all
that which grief could command a man, the Palatine did; and surely he should
have had a Tigers heart, to read this Letter without regret: Innocence
conceived it, and grief dictated it.

Adieu Sifroy, I am going to die, since you command it. I never found any thing
impossible in my obedience, though I find some injustice in your commandment.
I will, notwithstanding, believe that you contribute nothing to my ruin, but
the consent that you give thereunto. I can also protest to you that all the
cause I have given thereof is only the resistance that I have made to remain
wholly unto him, who ought not to divide me with any other. I pass willingly
from a miserable life, to a condition that may be worse, upon the confidence I
have that my innocence shall be one day out of suspicion into which calumny
has cast it. All the regret that I carry with me, is to have brought an Infant
into the world, which must be the victime of cruelty, and the innocent cause of
my misfortune. Notwithstanding I will not let this resentment hinder me to wish
you a perfect felicity, and to him who is the author of my disaster, a better
fortune than that which he procures me. Adieu, it is your unfortunate, but
innocent Genevieva.

The Intendant who was upon the watch, judged that it was fit to let this storm
break away, and that prudence ought to withdraw him for a time from Sifroy,
when he believed that his choler was moderated, he saw the Count again, who
failed not to give him sharp reproaches, upon the evil judgment into which his
malice had precipitated him. But Golo wanted no cunning to deceive his master,
and to draw the thorn out of his heart.

Whatt Sir, (said this perfidious man to him) do you repent to have taken away
life from her, who has taken away your honor? or do you doubt not to have
done it justly? if that be it, your displeasure is reasonable, but what cause
have you to believe it? were not your eyes witnesses of your misfortune? your
domestics knew too well how equitable your action is, to find it evil^ all
humane policy allows you that which you have done. Will you be wiser than the
Laws, and condemn that which reason approves, perhaps this Letter has
persuaded you of her innocence; truly behold a pleasant justification: and
where shall we find crimes, if one be quitted thereof for denying them? who
shall be culpable, if it be sufficient to say that one is innocent? how wicked
soever a woman be, if one will hear her, she is always without sin. Had it
pleased God, Sir, that she who had the honor to belong unto you, had had less
malice or more prudence in dissembling, whereby to give us some cause to
interpret well of her fidelity, I had been the first to believe the proofs of
her Innocence, as I have been the last to receive the suspicions of her infamy.
But since to the loss of her honor she has added the contempt not to fear any
body, you should remain content in having revenged the public interests of
virtue, in punishing a particular offense.

These discourses accompanied with a feigned affection, conveyed softly an
insensibility into the spirit of the Palatine, insomuch that all these remorses
were not but as birds of passage, who gave a blow with the beak privily, and
then retired, were it through the reasons of Golo, or by the charms, and
sorceries of which he was master enough. Whilst I amuse me in the Palace of
Sifroy, we leave our innocent malefactresse, in the company of the hind, and of
her Benoni. Let us return if you please unto her grott. I advertise you
notwithstanding that you should no more consider this desert as the retrait of
serpents, or the repair of bears, but as a school of virtue, a race of
penitence, and a temple of sanctity.

After that our Countess had suffered in this sharp solitude three whole years
of Winter (for the Sun here nevr made a Summer) the evils rendered themselves
so familiar, that she was no more afraid of them, and her patience perfected it
self, even to this point, to look upon sufferings as upon delights. Custom
renders all things easy, that which seems in the beginning full of affright,
becomes gentle in the end. Poison kills, and yet there has been known a great
King that nourished himself therewith. Seems it not likely to you that our
Genevieva should dye with impatience amongst her regrets, and drown her self in
her tears? and yet see that every day gathering them up in her hands, she
offers them to God in a sacrifice, so acceptable to his divine goodness, that
he recompenses her as much for those Icie sighs, as if she had burned him all
the incense of Arabia.

The first favor that she received from heaven, after three years of
noviciate, was one a day as she was on her knees in the midst of her little
Cottage, her eyes turned unto heaven, the admiration whereof served as the
ordinary subject to her thoughts; while her spirit lost it self happily in the
immensity of these fair works, she perceived a young man glittering with light,
who cleft the air to render himself at her den. If Genevieva had been an
Idolatresse, she might have believed that it was the Moon that descended into
this wood, to be the Diana thereof, or rather the Sun who had taken himself
from heaven to visit a place which had never been enlightened. Her spirit had
too much light to fall into so gross an error: she took this beauty rather for
one of the intelligences of heaven, than for one of its stars, though he were
encompassed with rays: in which certainly her belief deceived her not, for it
was her Guardian Angel, who came, as sent from God into this den. It is no
easy thing to depaint a spirit, seeing it has nothing whereupon our senses
can fix themselves; notwitstanding as we may mark out the Sun with a coal, so
may we paint the Angels under the exterior forms which render them visible
unto us. He of whom we speak, had a visage where beauty and modesty mingled
themselves together with a Majesty so divine, that he might have made himself
to be adored of a person that had not known him a servant of God. Besides the
rays that spread themselves round about him, his body was covered with a blew
vail, a color which denoted the place from whence he came. He held in his
right hand a precious cross, in which the Savior of the world was so
naturally represented in a shining Ivorie, as it was easy to see that men had
not labored this work. His hair hung negligently upon his shoulders, which
certain drops marked as it were with blood; his eyes seemed to swim in death,
and his mouth complained with the excess of his martyrdom. His members were
so delicately polished, that one might see all the veins and nerves of this
body raise themselves up to the top of the skin.

When our Countess was come again from the admiration of so many wonders, the
Angel presenting her this Cross said unto her; Genevieva, I am here on the
behalf of God to bring you this Cross, which must serve for object to all your
thoughts, and for remedy to all your evils. If the bitterness of sufferings
seems insupportable unto you, mingle this blood among it, and you shall find
sweetness in your afflictions. If any thought of despair assault your spirit,
retire into these wounds, where all the doves of heaven have their refuge, and
I promise you repose. In a word, Genevieva, this here is the buckler which will
make all the blows of adversity fall at your feet: it is the key that will open
heaven to your patience, receive this favor with the acknowledgement that it
merits. As Genevieva bowed her self, she received the Cross to grave therein
all her victories, after the example of that great Captain, whose signal
victories were not otherwise recompensed by Justinian, than with blindness:
behold a prodigy most miraculous, this Crucifix followed our penetent every
where: If any necessity called her forth, it accompanied her, if she sought for
roots to sustain her, it was in her company, being in her poor retrait, it
never departed from her side: This miracle dured some months, until it fixed
it self in a corner of the grot, where there was a little Altar cut in the
Rock, and which our Saint adorned with flowers and boughs: as soon as
displeasure assailed her poor heart, the Savior stretched forth his arms unto
her, and opened her his bosom to pour thereinto her resentments: It was easy
to discover her thoughts unto him, who could not be ignorant of them, and to
lay all her sorrows at the feet of him, who could be the Physician thereof.

It is an error to seek for an indoleance in virtue; those that would teach it
with words, have destroyed it by their actions; the patience of the Stoics,
was not only unable to support evils without regret, but it came not so far as
to this point, to look upon them without changing color: The virtue of
Christians goes further then all the Theology of the Pagans; it is sweetness
notwithstanding imposes not such Barbarious law as insensibility: that great
man, whose spirit was nothing but patience, as his body was naught but grief,
retained always his affections in an equal resignation; he permitted
notwithstanding his tongue to complain of his miseries, and to say that his
members were not of brass: God himself in the cruelties of death, would that
his plaints should be a proof of that which he was, for fear the opinion of his
insensibility might take away the belief of the least of his natures. Let us
imitate his example in his submission, as well as in his complaints, our tears
and our sighs shall not hinder our patience to be a virtue. O how Genevieva
conformed her self perfectly to this example; her constancy was a marble
inflexible, but this marble yielded tears, and witnessed by her sighs, that it
was not a statue that suffered; she accorded all just plaints to her grief, but
her grief never gave any thing to impatience; in a word, she accused no less
sweetly her evils then a Lute, which men touch only, because her sighs are
agreeable unto them: One day as the Image of all her miseries represented it
self to her fancy, making of her eyes two fountains of tears, she cast her self
at the feet of her Cross, and said amourously unto it.

How long, my God, how long will thou suffer that virtue be so cruelly treated?
Is not five years of miseries sufficient, to be content with my patience?
though I should have overthrown thy altars, and burned thy temples, my tears
would have quenched thy choler, if it were not that my sighs would kindle it
the more. I made my self believe that my sorrows should last no longer than my
joys, and that the end of afflicting me should be that of not being able to
suffer more. I know well now that thou gave me formerly delights, but to make
me taste my bitternesses with more displeasure, and to render them more sharp
by the remembrance of my prosperity: Is it not time to make appear, that thou
art the protector of innocence, as well as the revenger of crimes? It is five
years that I have endured a martyrdom, which ceases not to be extremely
cruel, for being extremely slow; nothing in the world has comforted my grief,
all the creatures seem to be my engaged enemies, to the end to encreas my
afflictions: A good discourse can charm a grief, but behold I have almost
forgoten the use of speech in being separate from al other conversation then
that of the beasts: the night hides with her shadows the half of our evils, and
sleep dares not approach mine eyes, fearing to drown it self there, or at least
to meet there inquietudes: It seems that my misery is contagious, so much every
thing fears to approach it; hunger, cold, nakedness, make the least part of my
evils; the misfortune of this little innocent is more insupportable unto me
than all that: Oh, Lord! if thou would afflict the mother for some fault,
which to her is unknown, why would thou not take unto thee the protection of
the child, since thou know that he is as little culpable of my sin, as
capable to bear the punishment thereof? Pardon me my God, if grief snatches
these plaints from my mouth, I have believed, since I know not the cause of so
many evils, that I might find the ease thereof from that mercy, which
rejects no body.

In pronouncing these sorrowful words, she bathed her Crucifix with the
torrent of her tears, which spoke much more than her tongue. The little Bononi
mingling his tears with his mother, they brake forth into groans so pitiful,
that the rocks were not hard enough not to be touched therewith: At last the
poor Genevieva continuing her regreets, and embracing amourously her cross,
said unto it, My God, alas my God, what have I done unto thee, that thou
treatest me with so much rigor? Miracle! Whilst the Countess spoke, she
heard the image of our good Savior, which replied to her.

And what, my daughter, what cause have you to complain? You demand, what crime
has brought you hither: and tell me, what sin has nailed me to the cross?
Are you more innocent than I, or your evils, are they greater than mine have
been? You are without crime, and am I culpable? You never thought of the infamy
with which they have sullied your reputation, am I perhaps a seducer, and
Magician, as they reproached me? You receive no censolation from the creatures;
is it not enough from that of the Creator? No body has compassion of your
evils, who has had any of mine? The very insensible things have horror of your
affliction, and the Sun, refused he not so much as to look upon mine? Thy son
increases thy sorrows, believe thou that my mother lessoned my torments?
Comfort thee, my daughter, and leave me the care of thy affairs; think
sometimes that he who has made all the good things of the world, has suffered
all the evil; if thou comparest thy cup to mine, thou will drink it with
pleasure, and wilt thank me for the favor that I do thee to make thee live in
dolours, to die in the joys of a life laden with the merits of patience.

It would be a superfluous thing to tell you the confusion that this little
reproach put into the spirit of our St, but I think it will be profitable to
tell you, that this discourse gave her so much courage, and resolution, that
all the thorns seemed unto her but roses; her bitterness but sweetness; her
torments but pleasing delights: this also was the design of God to animate her
unto patience, and not to thrust her into despair by this reproach. From this
time forward Genevieva asked not but griefs from God, and God gave not but
sweets to Genevieva. To witness to her that her virtue was not unknown unto
him, and that her Innocence was very near unto that which the first man
possessed in the delights of Paradise, God wholly submitted unto her the rage
of the savage beasts, and the liberty of the birds. It was an ordinary thing
from her first entrance into the Forest, that the Hind came to give suck to
the child, and to ly every night in the Cave, with the mother and the Son, to
the end to warm their leie members: but since this last favor, the Foxes, the
Hares, and the Wolves came to play with the little Benoni. The birds strived
together which should leave himself to be taken first. The Cave of Genevieva
was a place, where the Bears had no rage, nor the Stagges fear: on the contrary
one would have said that our holy Princess had changed their nature, through
the compassion of her evils, and given some sense of reason to the beasts to
understand her necessities.

One day putting on an old garment on her son in the presence of a Wolf, this
beast departed presently from the den, and went to choke a sheep, whose skin
he brought to Genevieva, as if he had had the judgment to discern what was
proper to warm the body of her child. The Saint received this present, but yet
after having sharply rebuked him for doing evil to another, to do good to her.
Would you not say, my dear Reader, that the Court of Sifroy was full of Wolves,
and furious beasts, and the Grot of Genevieva of well mannered Courtiers: all
the difference was, that in his, the men had the cruelty of ravenous Wolves,
and in hers the beasts had the courtesies and civilities of men, compare the
felicity of the one to the other, and you shall find therein the same
difference that is between the pleasure of angels and that of devils. It is
true, that the earth produced not there any of her contentments; but the
Heavens had regard enough of it making a thousand blessings to slide into this
holy Cave. Nature contributed nothing to the good fortune of this desert, but
Grace rendered even the Animals ministers thereof. I have so many things to say
upon this subject, that the fear to offend any one hinders the will I have to
speak of them all. I pass in silence those felicities, the image whereof I
cannot produce more perfectly, than in that of the Garden where he lost his
innocence, whom God had made a little less than the angels. Only I can say
that Genevieva found in the obedience of the beasts all the service which she
could have expected in her husbands house. Behold a passage which I cannot
omit, being full of instruction. There was near unto this retrait a very fair
fountain, which furnished to our two solitary creatures more than half of their
life: I know not whether the Countess had ever beheld her self in the
crystal of her floods, as she one time cast down her eyes there, either of
purpose, or by accident, and perceived the wrincles of her front, she could
scarce know her self, the remembrance of what she had been taking away the
belief of being what she appeared.

Is this Genevieva (said she) no without doubt, it is some other? Alas could it
be possible that these languishing and dejected eyes, should sometime have
caused so many flames? this front cut with a thousand wrinckles, and which
resembles a rude bark, tells me that it is not that which made the Ivory
ashamed: these decayed cheeks are nothing like unto those, that were made of
roses, and of Lillies. Where does my error carry me? alas I feel too well that
the evils which I suffer have no other subject but the deplorable Genevieva. O
cruel dolours! truly it may well be said that you are barbarous, seeing you
have made so strange a Metamorphosis. Answer me unpitifull evils, where have
you laid the snow of my complexion? perhaps you have melted it, to distill it
into tears: but having already wept so much, must I have more evils yet to
lament? Genevieva, poor Genevieva, thou art no more but the Image of that
which thou have been, and a vain shadow of thy self: Oh poor Genevieva, poor
Genevieva!

Whilst the Countess complained thus, and endeavored to know her self in the
Fountain, she saw there a divinity resembling those Nimphs, which according to
the discourse of Poets, inhabit the waters. Her spirit was presently ravished
with admiration of so much Majesty: her desire carried her to cast her self at
the feet of this Goddess, as at the Altar of mercy, where her afflictions
might be changed into felicities. Respect restrained her desire. Floating thus
between fear and confidence, she heard a voice aside her, though she believed
it to proceed from that mouth which appeared in the water: she turned her self
and saw the Queen of the Angels, her good Advocate, who said unto her.

Truly, my daughter, you have much reason to complain you of a loss which is
extremely desirable, as being extremely advantageous. You are no more fair, ha
Genevieva! if you had never been so, you would be happy: it is the only
quality that has rendered you criminal; and though that should not be, ought
you to lament the loss of a good which you ought not to desire? you have lost
a thing which has lost the half of the world, planting Idolatry, and thrusting
men into the liberty of all vioes. Oh if you knew how acceptable your
blackness renders you to my son, you would abhor to have been formerly of
another color: come again to your self my daughter, and complain no more of
your miseries, since it is of those thorns that you may compose the Crown of
your glory, and of your tears, that you may make the torrent of your eternal
felicities.

Scarce had the Queen of heaven ended her Remonstrance, but a cloud more pure,
and more shining than silver took her away from the eyes of the Saint, who
remained full of joy and of confusion: of joy, for having seen her, who shall
make a part of our senses beatitude in heaven: of confusion, for having made
reckoning of her passed beauty. Notwithstanding this visit filled her spirit
with courage, and with a new resolution unto patience saying very often unto
God.

And well, my amiable Spouse, thou will that Genevieva suffer even to the end,
I am content therewith: I pretend to remain as faithful to thy divine will in
the anguishes of my grief, as in the prosperities of my good fortune: Thou
would teach me that there is nothing to be loved in the world but thy
goodness; I cherish nothing then but thee, my God, rendering infinite thanks to
thy conduct, for having steeped me all the creatures in gall, to wean me from
their love, and to reduce me into thine, Alas! where should thou be, my
poor heart, if God had not hindered thee to obey thine own inclinations?
without doubt vanity would possess thee now. O what just cause have I to thank
thee, for doing me so much good, by the loss of so small a matter: what can I
hope for in my husbands house, but a voluntary slavery, an honest servitude,
chains, which though of gold, cease not to be grievous and insupportable; and
then what contentment should I expect, to see in a palace things in picture,
which nature presents me here in their native and natural beauty? Do I not see
heaven discovered with all its Stars, which are so many eyes opened to lighten
my patience? does not every creature serve me for a mirror, wherein I perceive
some image of my God, there being not one that speaks not to me of him? These
little silver floods that precipitate themselves even into the bosom of the
Sea, say they not unto me with their murmr: Genevieva, see how thou should
fly into the bosom of God. These Birds, do they not teach me to praise him
from the morning even to the evening? Well, what can I hope more? honors which
are vain, greatness which is dangerous, acquaintance which is prejudicial,
amities which are feigned, pleasures which are filthy, delights which are
fatal. Ha my God! how much I acknowledge now the sweetness of thy providence,
thy holy name be blessed for saving a poor creature, who had never followed
thy attractions, if they had not been charming; thy admonitions, if they had
not been necessary; nor thy motions, if they had not been violent. I am
infinitely indebted unto thee, for doing me this favor: notwithstanding my
obligation appears unto me yet greater, if I consider that thou have
constrained me to be happy against my will, framing to me in my solitude an
image of Paradise, where all felicities are necessary.

Whilst our Saint lost her self in the pure and innocent joys of virtue,
Sifroy had neither repose, nor contentment amongst the joys of his house: the
night presented him nothing but black shaddows, and sad phanotsmes* The day
cleared not but to make him observe the absence of Genevievia; his spirit
rouled continually sullen and melancholy thoughts often times he was seen to
wander upon the brink of the river, observing in the inconstancy of the floods
the agitation of his spirit; and then as if this humor had rendered him
savage, he rid himself of his servants to give more liberty to his sighs in
the horror of a wood, being angry with his own shadow, if the obscurity
obliged it to follow him: Who can figure to himself the despair and fury,
whereinto he entered, when his memory said unto him: Thou have killed
Genevieva, Thou have massacred thy son, thou have taken away thy poor
servants life, whose pale shadows pursue thee incessantly. Genevieva, where are
you, where are you, my dear girl, where are you? It was to be believed, that
if he had had Golo in this humor, he had brought back the custom of
sacrificing to ghosts: but this perfidious man feigned very fitly a journey,
when he perceived the temper of his master changed; if his misfortune had staid
him in the Palatines house, there had been an end of his life, principally
after the horrible, and fearful vision of Drogan. I will not say, that it was
an illusion of his sick spirit, for I know that God permits sometimes souls to
come again for the good of some persons: Examples make sufficient proofs of
this truth, which is passed even unto hell; since that the rich man in the
Gospel, who was always clothed with the color of fire, demanded of the
father of the faithful, to return unto the world, to avert his brother from
the punishments of the other life.

One night as the Palatine was laid to sleep, he heard about midnight some one
that walked with great paces into his chamber: forthwith he drew the curtains
of his bed, and having perceived nothing at the glimmering of a little light
that remained in the chimney, he endeavored to sleep; but a quarter of an
hour after, the same noise began again, insomuch that he perceived in the
mid^st of his chamber a great man, pale and gashly, who trained after him a
great bundle of chains, with which he seemed to be tied: this horrible vision,
appearing in the obscurities of the night, was capable to overthrow the spirits
of a man, less^ hardy than Sifroy; but being courageous and assured, he asked
him what he would have, without witnessing much fear, thinking it unworthy of
him to tremble for shaddows, who had not apprehended death it self: Yet could
he not forbid a cold sweat, which diffused it self through all his body;
especially, when he saw that this spirit made him signs to come to him; which
he did notwithstanding, following him a thwart a low Court, and from thence
into a little garden, where he no sooner was, but it vanished away, leaving the
Count more astonished with his flight, than if he had continued him yet a
company so little delightful. The Moon aided much his fear, for having showed
him until then where he was, she withdrew all her light, leaving him to seek
amidst the darkness the door of his chamber. Being laid again in his bed, he
began to imagine that he had this great man all of Ice at his sides, who
pressed him between his arms, this made him call his servants, who found him
more pale than a dead man, he dissembled notwithstanding his fear until the
morning. Scarce began the day to break, but he commanded his servants to open
the Earth at the place where the spirit vanished: they had not dug above two
foot deep, but they met with the bones of a dead man laden with irons, and
chains. There was a servant who told the Count, that Monsieur the Intendant had
caused the body of the unfortunate Drogan to be cast into this very place where
they had found this carcass. Sifroy ordained that they should cause him to be
interred, and that Messes should be said for his repose. Since this time there
was no more noise heard in the Castle; but the spirit of the Palatine served
him for vision, giving him all the horrible imaginations that men provoked with
fury can figure to themselves.

It was then that he acknowledged his frights and his fears were the effects of
his crime. Nothing could divert him from his black and deep imaginations: he
had continually before his eyes the images of those three Innocents whom he
believed to have destroyed. These words were often heard to proceed from his
mouth: O Genevieva thou tormentest me! his friends endeavored to draw him from
this melancholy, but the hand of God pursued him in every place, and the image
of his crime never abandoned him. The devils carry their hell wheresoever they
go: and a wicked person trains always his executioner with him. Sifroy had
sinned through a sudden precipitation, and God clean contrary in his
proceedings would punish him with a slow and lingering pain, to the end to make
him feel how dangerous it was not to take counsel of reason, upon the accidents
that arrive unto us.

Whilst we amuse us in the horrors of the Count, we lose the good discourse of
Genevieva. It was well forward in the seventh year of her solitude, that the
little Benoni, began to have with the sense of his miseries, the full and
perfect use of reason. His mother forgot nothing of all that which might serve
to his instruction, having not the means no more than the desire to leave him
the goods of fortune, she would not leave him unprovided of those with which
poverty can make it self rich: all her care was to teach him to know God, the
love and reverence which we ow unto him, and that he was not like unto those
beasts that played with him, for as much as he had a soul which should never
dye, and that these animalls lived not but for a time. Morning and evening
before he reposed himself, she made him kneel down before the Cross, and she
never permitted him to suck his hind before he had prayed to God. This little
Infant showed so much inclination unto good, that his mother was transported
with joy thereof. He made her thousand petty questions, which showed enough the
sweetness of his nature, and the goodness of his wit. This made sometimes the
poor mother to weep, considering that her son deserved well to be brought up
in another School than amongst the beasts. She never granted Benoni to tell him
the cause of her tears; but dissembling with prudence, she believed that she
ought not to increase his evils in discovering the author thereof.

I cannot forget a discourse which added almost to the plaints of Genevieva,
the loss of her life. One day as this child played in his mothers bosom, and
flattered her amorously with his little hand, he demanded her: my mother, you
command me often to say Our father which art in heaven, tell me who is my
father? Oh little Innocent, what do you? this demand is capable to kill your
poor mother: indeed Genevieva was upon the point to sownd at these words,
notwithstanding, hugging this dear child in her bosom, and casting her arms
about his neck, she said unto him: My child, your father, is God, have I not
told it you already? look upon that fair Palace, behold his house, the heaven
is the place where he dwells: but my mother does he know me well? Oh my son
replied Genevieva he can do no otherwise, he knows you, and he loves you: how
comes it then (answered Benoni) that he does me no good, and that he permits
all the evils that we suffer? My son, it is to deceive our selves to believe
that goods are the proof of his love, far be it from us to have such a thought;
the necessities which we endure denote a fathers heart on our behalf, seeing
that riches are no other thing, but the means to destroy us, with which God
punishes sometimes the wicked, reserving his blessing for his friends in the
other world. The little Benoni heard all this discourse with much attention, but
when he heard her make the difference of the good and the bad, and of another
world; he could not choose but thus interrupt Genevieva. And what has my father
other children besides me? and where is that other world? my son answered the
holy Countess, God is a great and rich father, who has many children, yet is
he not less powerful for all that, for as much as he has infinite treasures
to give them. Although you never were out of this wood, you must know that
there are Towns and Provinces, which are full of men and women, whereof some
fellow virtue, and others leave themselves to go after vice. Those who respect
him as true children, shall go one day to heaven, to enjoy there with him a
thousand contentment: on the contrary those that offend him shall be punished
in hell, which is a great place under earth full of fire and of torments. Choose
now which you will be; we have reason to be of the first, for those who are
miserable as we, provided they be so, willingly, and because that God will have
it so are assured to go into Paradise, which is that I called the other world,
Benoni could not hold from asking her when they should go into this Paradise.
It shall be after our death replied the mother.

This poor Innocent was very far from comprehending all that which his mother
had said unto him, if the goodness of God had not served him for Master,
enlightening inwardly his little soul, and laying naked to him these fair
knowledges, which we learn not but with a long study, and much labor. He had
never seen any, and yet he comprehended presently what these Towns and
Provinces were, as perfectly as if he had traveled all the world: if he had
heard some phylosophie upon the immortality of the soul, he could not better
have comprehended its essence, and its qualities; he had even some knowledges
of which his age was not capable. Experience had never taught him what death
was, but it wanted not much, that he had not a sorrowful example thereof in
the person of his mother some few days after: the long troubles, the ordinary
griefs, and the want of all things had consumed a body, which could not be but
delicate, as having been nourished in the delights of a Court. She had
sustained six whole Winters, and as many Summers, insomuch, as scarce could she
know her self. To see Genevieva and a sceleton, was as the same thing; the
roots whereon she fed, had composed her body all of earth. Judge if a little
sickness accompanied with all these in commodities could not ruin a body,
which having been worn out by extreme dolours, extenuated by insupportable
austerities, and gnawn with thousand boiling cares, had need of more than a
puff to overthrow it. And yet behold a violent fever, which laid hold on that
little blood which rested in her veins, and enflamed it with so burning a heat,
that the poor Genevieva expected nothing but death. Benoni seeing the
languishing eyes of his mother, her color extremely defaced, betook himself so
strongly to his cries that he might well be heard of that soul which was fled
already, and besides he shed so many tears, that it was to be feared that so
much might well extinguish that little heat which remained to him. At last
Genevieva, returned from a long sownd fixed for some time her eyes upon the
amiable subject of her griefs, and after having told him that he was the son of
a great Lord, and all that she had concealed from him until then, she added.

My son, behold the happy day that comes to put end to my pains, I have no
cause to complain of death, having no reason to desire life. I am going to
leave the world without regret, as I have lived therein without desire. If I
were capable of any displeasure, it would be to leave you without remedy, and
without support in the sufferance of those evils which you have not meerited.
Not to lie for the matter, this consideration would touch sensibly my heart, if
I had not one more high, which constrains me to put my interests and yours into
the hand of him, who is the good father of orphans, and the powerful support
of the innocent. It is to him that I leave the care of your Infancy, it is from
him that you ought to expect your assistance; cast your self amorously into his
arms, and put all your confidence in his goodness. I will not have you retain
any thoughts of a poor mother, who has not brought you into the world, but to
suffer all the evils thereof; yet if you desire to render something to my
cares, behold what I demand of you for an acknowledgement: I conjure you, my
dear son, to bury with my body the resentments of my injuries, since there is
none but God alone that knows their greatness, there is none but he that can
ordain them their punishments. The punition of an injustice is never just, when
we our selves are the authors of the revenge, and the subject of the offense.
And then my dear Benoni, the injury that they have done me is of a strange
nature, seeing you cannot be pious without offending piety, nor revenge your
mother, but by the outrage of your own father. In this case it would be to wash
your hands with blood, to make them clean, and to make your self wounds to heal
your self. I know that it is hard to suffer evil without complaining of it,
this also is not that I desire of you; be sensible of your evils, nature wills
it, but resent them not seeing that virtue forbids it; have more regard to the
good will of God, which permits our afflictions, than to their evil will who
procure them us. If nature invite you to the desire of revenge, grace will
remove you from it; if humane reason commands it, divine forbids it; if
impatience persuades it, sweetness abhorres it: if the example of men carries
you thereunto, that of God should draw you from thence. We ought rather to obey
the judgment in this than the will, and to hear reason than to hearken to our
senses. I hope that the mercy of God will do us justice, and that it will give
all the world to understand that you are son of a mother very little guilty to
be in so ill esteem, and too innocent to be so unjustly afflicted. Moreover my
son, after having laid this body in earth, do that which God shall inspire you,
if he will that you return to your father, make no difficulty thereat; you have
those qualities which will make you acknowledged; the resemblance of your
visage to his will not permit him to disclaim you, if he remembers yet what he
is: as for me, from whom you cannot expect other good but my desires and
benedictions, I give them you as abundantly as heaven can distribute them unto
you.

In saying this, she put her Benoni on his knees, moystening his little visage
with the rest of her tears. Represent to your selves, the pity of this
spectacle: the poor Genevieva attended the end of her miseries, and Benoni the
beginning of his dolours. Death seeing them in this posture advanced himself to
give the last stroke of his rage. Stay cruel, it is not time yet to cut off so
precious a life, attend to give her her death, till the justice of God has
rendered her her honor. What spoils can thou hope from so miserable a
creature? her body has no more flesh to nourish thy worms, thou will gnaw her
bones, grief has done that already: thou pretend'st perhaps to increase the
number of thy phantosmes and of thy shadows, let her live it is no more any
other thing. Whilst that our Countess expected death, two angels more fair
than the sun entered into her Grott, who filled it with odor and light. Being
approached to her little bed of boughs, he who was tutelar of the sick, said
unto her in touching her; Live Genevieva, God will have it so: then opening her
dying liddes, she perceived these Angels, who gave her not time to be
considered, leaving her with health, the astonishment of this miraculous cure.
God does nothing which has not its last perfection, contrary unto men, who
travel by little and little, and who drive away a disease by remedies, which
are sometime violent evils. The great Physician of heaven gives a full and
perfect health by the sole command which he gives the sickness to retire, his
medicines are without disgust, and his cures without weaknesses: so soon as the
Angels departed from the cave of Genevieva, she departed from her poor bed as
strong as she was before this last sickness. To see her rise, one would have
said it was a resurrection that was made, and not a cure. The child wept for
joy to see his mother revive, and Genevieva sighed with sadness, to see her
self driven back again from the port into the tempest.

Afflict you no more, Genevieva, God contents himself with your sufferings, he
doubts no more of a fidelity, which he has known by so long a patience. Your
evils are finished, your crown is achieved, the fire of your glory has been
long enough buried in the bottom of the pit of calumny, it is time that it
break forth, and make appear the fair and innocent rays of its light. It was
near upon seven years that Sifroy and Genevieva suffered, the one in the
horrors of a crime which he had not committed but through ignorance, and the
other in the miseries which she endured not but by injustice. God willing to
make appear the innocence of the one, and the error of the other permitted that
that wicked Sorceresse, with whom he had seen the imaginary sin of his wife,
was taken, accused and convicted of heinous crimes, which she could not deny,
though they were false for the most part. Being upon the point to expiate her
offenses by the flames, and already tied to the infamous stake of punishment,
she d^manded permission of the Justice to say some last words, which was
granted her. After the confession of some crimes, she declared that of all the
evils which she had ever committed, that of rendering an innocent person guilty,
pressed her most. The Ministers of Justice laid hold of these words, and
commanded her to express her self on this last point, which she did, avouching
that the Palatine Sifroy had put his wife to death upon a suspicion which the
illusions of her Magic had given him. The Sorceresse dyed upon this
protestation, which was presently reported to the Count, who was no less
sorrowful for this news, than comforted to see that though he had lost his
wife without recovery, she was at last dead without reproach.

Who con describe the rage that seized his spirit, the menaces of his choler
against Golo, and the sweet plaints that he made unto his wife and his son: oh
cruel Hangman! was it not enough to ruin my House without hazarding the Honor
thereof? If thou had malice to massacre the Innocent; why found'st thou not
mean^ more honest to thy cruelty? if thou had not been as impudent as unjust
in thy calumny, would thou not think to have done sufficient? Oh that thou
have not a hundred lives to expiate the horror of this crime, perfidious
traitor thou shoudst lose one of them in the flames, another under the sword, a
third between the teeth of my dogs, and all in as many kind of deaths, as thy
malice has had diverse artifices in her calumnies: but you are still dead,
deplorable victimes, thou art dead, my dear Genevieva, thou art dead innocent
Lamb, which I have as soon made to die as to live: Your blood cries vengeance
unto heaven against me, and marks upon my front the shame of villainy. O shall I
beg your pardon of a fault, which my credulity only has committed? And why
should I not hope this favor from your mercy, seeing that you are as good as
innocent? if an extreme sin can revenge it self by an extreme punishment; Oh I
promise you to expiate mine, and to wash my hands in the barbarous blood of
him, who i^ the cause thereof.

It would be an infinite thing to tell you all those maledictions which his
choler made him pronounce against Golo: yet considering that we should not cry
after the Birds which we would take, he made his passion to be governed by his
judgment, and dissembled his discontent for fear to vent his design. Golo had
retired himself to his house these two years, and came to see the Palatine
only when civility constrained him to this duty. What does Sifroy? he takes
good order, that he escape him not, he prays him by letter to come to aid him
at a solemn hunting: The design thereof was true, but he declared not to him
that he was the beast which he would there take. Behold him then in the
Palatines, house, and from thence in the same Tower, where he had held so long
time his innocent mistress: Say now that God is not just, say that he sleeps,
and that his providence leaves virtue to suffer, and vice to triumph. Golo
sighed with fear, and Genevieva sighed with love, he lost himself in the
horrors of his punishment, whilst she lost her self in the sweet ecstasies of
her solitude. This is nothing yet, you shall see presently that God serves
himself with the malice of the wicked, as we use Serpents and Vipers, from whom
we seek their venom, and after crush their heads. The Palatine having thus
given the conduct of the punishment which he meditated, to his discretion, took
up a design to invite his allies at the kings festival, and after the feast to
put Golo into their hands: to this purpose, he made all the provision that
could be for a sumptuous and magnifick banquet: All the elements furnished there
their delicates: the Count willing to contribute thereunto something of his
labor, resolved to go a hunting: the day which he had chosen, had no sooner
dissipated the darkness, and waked the birds, but Sifroy departed, to the end to
surprise the beasts in their lodges. It would be to engage one's self in a
labyrinth to describe all the turns and returns of the Hares, the cunning of
the yellow beasts, the flight of the Stags, and the retreat of the Boars:
Although this discourse might be pleasing, it would be unprofitable, being from
the matter, and then I have so many necessary things, that I leave willingly
the superfluous.

Whilst they heated themselves in the Chasse, the providence of God prepared
its stroke, but in a fashion all amourous, and full of sweetness. Scarce was
our Palatine separated from his people, but he perceived a Hind at the mouth
of the wood, (it was the Nurse of his poor son) he presently set spurs to his
horse, but she gained the Forest, brushing a thwart the bushes, so slowly
though, that she seemed to desire her taking, or at least to be chased: Sifroy
pursued her even to a Cave. Alas it was that of our Innocent Countess. As he
made himself ready to dart a Javeline at this poor beast, he beheld something
in the bottom of that den, which resembled much a woman, but that it appeared
naked, having no other clothing but a long and thick dress of hair, which
covered in some fashion all her body. This spectacle made him approach it, till
he might discern that it was a woman, in whose bosom the Hind sought
Sanctuary. The Count and the Countess were then seized with two different
admirations: Sifroy wondered at the familiarity of this beast, and at the
extreme necessity of the woman, whom he had taken for a Bear: Genevieva, who
had not been visited, but of the Angels these seven years, could not
sufficiently admire to see her husband, whom she presently knew, though unknown
her self. After that the astonishment had made place to other thoughts, the
Palatine prayed her to approach him; but Genevieva, who was too modest to
appear so naked, requested him something to cover her, which he did letting
fall his Cassock, with which she clothed her self. When she was wrapped with
this cloak, Sifroy came toward her, and questioned her of many things.

O wisdom of God, how admirable art thou! during their discourse, the
goodness of heaven awaked the remembrance of Genevieva in the soul of Sifroy,
who demanded of her her name, her country, and how it came she was retired
into so fearful a desert.

Sir, (replied Genevieva) I am a poor woman of Brabant, whom necessity has
constrained to retire into this little corner of the world, having not any
support elsewhere. It is true, I was married to a man, who could do me good, if
he had had so much will thereunto as power. The suspicion which he too lightly
took of my fidelity, made him consent to my ruin, and to that of a child,
which was not conceived with the sin that was imposed upon me: and if the
servants, who received the command to make me die, had had so much
precipitation to execute my Sentence, as he had imprudence to condemn me, I had
not lived the space of seven years in a solitude, where I have not had any did,
but of the air, of the water, and of some roots, which have no less served to
prolong my miseseries than my life. During this sad Discourse, love spoke in
the heart of Sifroy, and his eyes sought upon this extenuated visage the marks
of his dear wife: his sighs said unto him, without doubt, behold Genevieva, but
the extreme misery of our penitent permitted him not to settle himself in this
opinion. The malice of Golo seemed unto him too prudent, and too full of
artifices to let her live, who had been the subject of his hate. Yet she said,
that a suspicion was the cause of her misfortune, that she was of Brabant, that
her husband was of quality, that he had a design against her life. O what force
has love! this visage which so many austerities had defaced, gave him certain
assurances of that which he sought. But my friend, tell me your name: Sir, I am
called Genevieva: at these words, the Count let himself drop from his horse,
and skipping unto her neck, he cried out: Is it thee then, my dear Genevieva,
alas is it thee, whom I have so long lamented as dead? and from whence comes
this good fortune to me, to embrace her whom I deserve not to see? but what
though, may I remain in the presence of her whom I have killed at least with
desire? O my dear Girl, pardon an offender, who confessing his sin avoucheth
your Innocence. If one life may serve, after having made you die so many times,
I put mine into your hands, dispose thereof according to your will; I will live
no longer than it shall please you, since that my life and my death depend of
your Justice Geneviev!

It is true, that great griefs can neither weep nor complain, and it is no
less true, that immoderate joys cannot speak. After this first sally, the
Count and the Countess remained immovable like marble Statues, without power
to speak a word in a long time. Genevieva thought of the amiable providence of
God, which rendered her Honor by those ways, which were rather miracles, than
miraculous; and Sifroy could not satisfy himself with seeing a visage, which
he had sometimes so much loved, and which he respected then, as the most sacred
part of a Saint. The miseries and languishments had not so consumed her body,
that there was not yet some remains of that former beauty, which had made him
to adore it; this pierced the heart of the Palatine for having persecuted
virtue in so fair a body. So soon as the ecstasy and ravishment gave him the
liberty to breath, the first word he uttered was this: Where is then my poor
Infant Genevieva? where is the miserable son of a father, who has been more
unfortunate than wicked? Then the Princess who knew the true regret of her
Husband, and saw in his tears the image of his soul, willing to render peace to
his spirit, used some of these sweet words, with which she was wont to caresse
him formerly.

My Lord, blot out of your mind the remembrance of my miseries, and of your
error: seeing we have no other power upon things passed but oblivion; let us
add nothing to our evils through our disability to cure them. God has not
reserved us hitherto, but to enjoy the fruits of his mercy, let us not refuse
that which he presents unto us. For me, who seem to have the greatest interest
in this, I pardon with all my heart those who procured me evil, and much more
willingly those, who have not done it me but by surprise. Think not that I
retain any resentment against you; if you have hated a malefactresse, I have
never been the subject of your hate. You have failed, your fault is so much the
more pardonable unto you, as it has been profitable unto me: live satisfied
then, Genevieva lives, and your son also. Surely Sifroy had need of a great
force to moderate so great a joy: but this virtue was yet more necessary when
he saw his little Benoni, who brought his two hands full of roots to his
mother. I am no more able to represent the contentment of this father, than a
great painter who veiled the grief of of him who could not see a sacrifice to
be made of his daughter. Fancy to your self all the contentments that a father
could have, and say assuredly that Sifroy enjoyed them all; how many sweet
tears shed he in his bosom? how many kisses imprinted he upon his mouth, and
upon his checks? how many embraces, and accolades think you that he gave him?
Love loses nothing; we need not doubt but he rendered him then, all that which
he owed him these seven years. But what is become of all our Hunters? Sifroy
blew his Horn, and called them, all the wood resounded with his voice: at last
three or four of those that knew it, betook themselves instantly to the place,
from whence it came.

O God, what astonishment seized not their spirits to find their Master in this
conjuncture, to see a little child hanging on his neck, a woman by his side,
and a hind amongst his dogs without any quarrel. What admiration when they
knew it was that Lady which they had so much lamented.

The Palm separated from her male withers and languishes, insomuch that one
would take it for a dry tree, but so soon as she can embrace with her boughs
him whom she seems to love, her branches take a vigor, which visibly makes
them grow young again. Genevieva, who amongst the troubles of her sorrow, and
the necessities of her poverty, had had time enough to lose her beauty, took
again so much grace at the sight of her dear Sifroy, that resembling something
that which she had been, the servants had not much labor to know her. They
could not choose but give tears to this first joy: some were readily sent to the
Castle to seek a Litter, and cloths, others giving all what they could of
theirs to cloth the Countess followed softly. It was not without displeasure,
that Genevieva quitted so pleasing an abode, at least he^ words witnessed some
regret.

Adieu (said this good Princess) adieu sacred Grott, who have hid so long time
my sorrows: adieu trees who have defended me from the Sun, adieu amiable
Brook, which have served me often with Nectar: adieu little Birds, who have
kept me so good company; adieu sweet animals, who have been unto me so many
servants; may thou never serve for a retreat to thieves, my dear grot; Let
not the heat of the Sun scorch these boughs; let the venom of the serpents
never empoison these waters; let not birdlime nor gins deceive these birds, nor
the hunters ever hurt these innocent beasts.

One might say without much fixion, that all the creatures witnessed the
displeasure of this departure. The den became more dark: the water seemed to
murmr more loud, and run more swiftly then ordinary: The Zephires sighed
thereat, and the Birds accompanied her, even at the going forth of the wood,
denoting by the beating of their wings, and the tone of their languishing
songs, the displeasure of this separation: there was none but the Hind, which
was without regret, because she followed the Countess, without ever moving from
her.

Having gone a mile, those who were sent to the Castle returned, accompanied
withal the Domestics, who could not say one sole word to their good
Mistress, so absolutely had joy possessed them: As they approached the house,
two fishermen advanced toward the Palatine, and presented him a fish of a
prodigious greatness: but the marvel was, that after having opened him, they
found in his garbage a ring which Sifroy knew to be that which Genevieva had
cast into the river: This new miracle caused a new admiration in all the
assistance, and chiefly in the spirit of the Count, who could not praise enough
the goodness of God, that made the dumb to speak, to declare the innocence of
his wife. This was not the first time that such like prodigies have happened. A
King of the Samians having cast an Emerauld into the sea, six days after one
brought him a fish, which had it under his tongue; no body can be ignorant of
that which arrived to St. Morillus after seven years travel: And to come near
unto the age of our Countess; it is certain that St. Arnoult grandfather to
the great Charlemain, recovered in a fish the ring, which he had cast into the
Moselle, insomuch that this same river having rendered that of our Genevieva,
seems to have some sense and feeling of justice.

Admire you not the sweet goodness of heaven, which discovers in the end an
innocence, which hate had laid hold on, calumny sullied, credulity convicted,
miseries afflicted, and solitude obscured the space of seven years. Observe if
you please the changes of fortune, or rather the effects of Gods providence:
Behold Genevieva in the delights of a Palace, alas! who is happy there? stay,
behold her in the obscurity of a prison, in the horror of a desert, and worse
than all this, in the necessity of all things, and in the pain of a crime, the
only conceit whereof is a cruel martyrdom to a Lady of honor: all is lost, a
little patience; I see her coming out of these vapors of calumny, as the Sun
out of the cloud, I see her cherished like a wife, served like a Queen, adored
like a Saint: what say you now? Is God good? behold if he be just.

All the kindred and friends of Sifroy failed not to visit him in his palace,
where they met with a far greater subject of joy than they hoped, when they
knew their good kinswoman, and understood the means which God used to declare
her innocence: there was no body that rendered not thanks unto God, for so
great a benefit: some saluted the mother, others were always glued on the
cheeks of the child: nothing was forgotten of all that could increase this
rejoicing: The feast dured a whole week entire, the joy whereof was not
troubled, but with the displeasure only to see that the Countess could not
taste, either flesh, or fish: All that which her strength and stomach could
endure, was herbs and roots, a little better accommodated then those she eat
in her solitude.

Some days being thus passed away in pleasures and delights, the Count
commanded that they should draw Golo out of prison, who had not been then
entire, if he had not reserved him to a punishment more rigorous; they brought
him into the chamber, where the Countess was withal this Nobility, which was
come to visit Sifroy: It was there where all the terrors of an evil
conscience seized this wicked man; his artifices served him no more, he could
not deny a crime which had men, the beasts, and the fishes for witnesses. The
hope of a pardon seemed unto him a new sin, the fear of torments tortured him
already, the image of death put him into transies; the goodness of Genevieva
gave him a thought of his safety, but the horror of his offense crossed it, and
represented to him, that it was as little reasonable to expect mercy, as he was
worthy of pardon. Her piety made him to hope it, but his own cruelty took from
him all his confidence: The amity of the Count endeavored to give boldness,
but his just indignation filled him with fear; he would fain find in his heart
the assurances of pardon, but his eyes, his voice, and all his visage spoke not
to him, but of Gibbets, and of punishments; at last daring not so much as to
fix his sight upon her, whom he had so unworthily treated, he fell down with
fear and faintness. Sifroy kindling all his countenance with choler, and
thundering forth fearful threatenings, after having reproached him for his
infidelity, condemned him to die. It was here, that goodness came to combat
with malice, prudence with artifice, compassion with cruelty, sweetness with
all the resentments of nature, and clemency with equity it self. Genevieva not
able to see a wretch without pity, endeavored to revoake the Sentence of
death, speaking unto Sifroy in these terms.

Sir, (said this good mistress) although good successes justify not evil
intentions, I have notwithstanding some cause to beg of you the life of Golo,
for the great good which he has procured me. I confess that all his
proceedings being unjust, I cannot find his pardon but in your goodness; but
if you look upon the favors that I have derived from thence, I believe that he
may have recourse to another virtue than mercy: I disguise not his fault to
give it a fair visage, Golo has offended Genevieva; he would have ravished
from her her honor, with her life: to whom belongs it to pursue the revenge of
this crime but to her self? if you say that her injuries are yours, and that
you enter into all her interests, I answer, that you should not take a less
part in her desires, and as there is nothing in the world that I desire with
more passion than the life of Golo, I must expect this contentment from your
goodness, as he hopes this favor from my benefits. Permit that I add to that
little virtue which I have, the glory to vanquish my self in the thing which is
most sensible to me, that is to give life unto him, who used all the means he
could to take mine from me: but if you are fixed to the design of punishing
him, I know no means more proportionable to his crime, then to leave him under
the hands of his own Conscience, which will furnish him with a thousand
executioners, and a thousand punishments: In a word, my dear Sifroy, I desire
that he live, and that he owe his life to these tears, which I give to his
misery.

Who would not have yielded himself to the prayers of so fair a mouth? Golo
began to hope, all the company expected the pardon of his crime: This discourse
could not contradict the expectation of the company without giving it
admiration: the poor malefactor was so touched therewith, that he cried out,
falling at the feet of Genevieva.

Madame, it is now that I penetrate better than ever into the goodness of your
heart, and the malice of mine, alas! who would have dared to hope that she whom
so many just reasons oblige to my ruin, would desire my preservation?
miserable Golo, it is at this instant that thou art unworthy of thy life, since
thou would have ravished that of this holy Princess. No, no, my good
Mistress, suffer me to dye: ordinary regrets and displeasures cannot expiate my
offense; it is fit that the rigor of a shameful death revenge its cruelty.
Blood is necessary where tears are unprofitable: since I cannot merit my
pardon, permit that I suffer my punishment. I have attempted your honor, the
violence of passion might serve me for excuse. Your courage having resisted my
pursuits, I have slandered your innocence; this sin is very black, yet it may
be forgotten. I was not content to make your virtue to be doubted, but I
endeavored to take away your life: truly this crime ought not to find pardon,
having no pretense at all. It is not that your goodness is not great enough to
grant me this favor, nevertheless, seeing that I am altogether unworthy
thereof, I have not the desire. So my dear mistress all that I beg of you in
dying is, that my crime live no longer in your memory, and that my blood wash
away the resentment thereof in your heart.

As he had ended these words, or to speak more properly, the sobbes having
interrupted them, his eyes powered forth so many tears, that it was to be
believed he would have melted at the feet of the Princess.

Golo took Genevieva for that which she was, extremely sensible, but if she had
much pity, Sifroy had no less zeal. God who is as just as merciful, would
give by this stroke an example unto men, and harden the heart of the Count, who
believed to have need of all the goodness of his wife, for his own pardon.
Behold then his condemnation confirmed, they led him unto prison, to attend
there the execution of the Sentence. Sifroy who would punish the extraordinary
crimes by torments which were not common, found himself troubled about the
manner of his death: sometimes he would revenge himself of his infidelity, in
exposing him to the rage of his dogs, which are the simbole of its contrary,
and then considering that his sin had beginning from the infamous fires of
love, it seemed reasonable unto him to cover them with the ashes of his proper
body, or to quench them in the waters of the River. All these punishments were
great, but his crime was no less. Sifroy thought not to be sufficiently
revenged, if the effects of his vengeance had not had something of
extraordinary. At last having long wavered thereupon, he concluded to make him
dye in this manner.

There was in the Palatines Herd four of those salvage oxen, which the black
Forest nourished, which were brought by his Command, and being coupled tail to
tail, the miserable Golo was tied by the arms, and legs, which were presently
separated from his body, whose infamous relics found their Tomb in the
stomach of the Crows by a just judgment of God, to the end that the body of so
wicked a man might be so ill lodged after his death, as his soul had been
during his life.

Behold the punishment of a man, who was not unfortunate, but by too much good
fortune. See the ordinary fruits that falsehood produces: behold the precipices
whereunto a wicked Passion carries us: behold the shipwracks whereinto the
winds of prosperity drive us: behold the sports of fortune, which flatters not
our hopes, but to seduce them. Deceive not your selves herein, if she show you
a a fair visage, remember that the Sirens do the same: is she allures by her
caresses, the Panther does it also; if her amorous plaints invite you, the
sighs of the Crocodile should serve for your instruction: if she shines, her
brightness is no more aamible then that of the false meteors; miserable Golo, I
see thee added to the example of those whom this traitresse has deceived! O
how happy had thy condition been, if it had been less eminent, and how thy
life had been assured, if favor had not exposed it! let us seek, I pray you,
the first step of his misfortune, and we shall find that it was the authority
which he had acquired in his Masters house; the second, too great a liberty to
behold that which he should not desire; and the last, a love without respect,
whence proceeded a demand without honor, a pursuit without success, a hate
without cause, a calumny without judgment, and a punishment without mercy: on
the other side, if we look upon the innocent Countess, we shall see virtue
smutted, but for its glory; constancy shaken, but for its setlement; sanctity
despised, but for her security: and moreover we shall acknowledge that the
triumphs of vice are short, and its confusion very long; and that it is not
once only that God has withdrawn the innocent heads from the sword of the
Executioner, to the end to crown them.

Those who were found accomplices to Golo, received punishments proportionable
to their faults, and those who had showed themselves favorable to the
affliction of Genevieva, met with no less gratitude in her, then the others of
severity in the spirit of the Palatine: that poor maid who had pity of the
Countess, and had brought her ink, found her benefit written otherwise than
upon paper. Death hindered Genevieva to recompense those who had given her
life, in not taking it away; for as much as the one of them was deceased, the
other received all the acknowledgement of that good action: These recompenses
and pains were followed with the contentments of all those that loved virtue.
The little Benoni was he that found more fortune in this change: the very
pleasures of a Solitude, made him to taste the delights of his house with more
sweetness. Never had he been so happy, if he had not been miserable,
notwithstanding his spirit stayed not so much on his contentments, that he took
not the tincture of all the good qualities with which Nobility might advance
his merit. Nothing of low was observed in this little courage, for having been
brought up in poverty: nothing of wildness for having been bred with the
bears. The father and mother took a singular pleasure in the good inclinations
of this son, aiding him with their wholesome instructions. From the accord and
correspondence, which was in this house, was bred a general peace, every one
of the servants had no less than a golden age. I would say, that they were
fully satisfied and content*

There was not any person who thought not himself well recompensed for his
passed sorrows; Genevieva had only more of merit than of recompense: the World
having made her suffer all her evils, had not goods enough to render her* that
which was due unto her; heaven therefore took care to think on the price of her
patience. You comprehend well, that I would speak of the death of our Countess.

God who would not honor the World longer with so great a virtue, resolved to
retire her to her original, but it was after having advertised her thereof.

One day as she was in prayer, it seemed unto her, that she saw a Troop of
virgins, and of holy women, amongst which her good Mistress held the chief rank,
having all the others for Ladies of honor: their Majesty ravished presently
our Saint, but their sweetness charmed her much more sensibly: there was not
one of them that gave her not Palms and Flowers, and the Virgin holding in her
hand a crown embroidered with precious stones, seemed thus to speak unto her.

My daughter, it is time to begin an eternity of pleasures; behold the crown of
Gold which I have prepared you, after that of thorns, which you have worn,
receive it from my hand. Genevieva understood very well what this visit
signified, which caused in her an incredible satisfaction; the subject whereof
notwithstanding she would not declare to Sifroy, for fear to cast a cloud on
his joy. Her prudence concealed from him the causes thereof, but the disease
which had less discretion, told it him within a few days. It was a little
fever which seized our incomparable Countess, and gave him a more clear
expression of her revelation. To describe unto you the contentment of
Genevieva, it would be a thing no less superfluous, than it would be
impossible to express the displeasures of Sifroy. Must I lose (said he) a
treasure which I have so little possessed? It is true that I am unworthy
thereof* my God, and that I cannot complain of injustice, since you take not
from me but what I hold of your pure mercy, and not of my merit. But alas! had
it not been more desirable not to have it all, than to have it for a moment?
soft and fair, Sifroy, soft and fair, it is no time to deplore, keep your tears
for anon, if you will give them to the justest grief of nature. I deceive my
self; boldly, empty all the humor of your eyes, you should be ashamed to give
so little of it to the loss you are to make. Small griefs may be lamented, but
great evils have no tongue. When one knows well to speak his evil, the sense
thereof is not extreme, nor the regret unfeigned.

Alas! Genevieva is already dead; I see her stretched out upon her poor bed,
without vigor, and without motion; her eyes are no more but two stars
eclipsed, her mouth has no more Roses, her cheeks have lost their lillies. Oh
that it is not possible for me to call all the beauties of the world about this
bed, I would say unto them; behold the remains of that which you cherish with
so much passion! behold the ashes of that fire which burns the world! behold an
example of that which you shall be! behold an image of which you shall soon be
the resemblance: make ye, make ye now, Divinities of that which death shall
change one day into worms and putrefaction. But I deceive my self, Genevieva is
not dead, a violent trance had only withdrawn her soul for a time, she comes
to her self again; this gives belief, that nature is yet strong enough to drive
away the evil, provided that it be assisted with some remedies. Think not that
any thing was spared. She must depart, God will have it so, and her stomach,
which could not suffer but Herbs and Roots, nourished her Fever, and advanced
her death. The good Princess knew it, and desired it, she called her dear son
Benoni, whom she blessed, and her Husband, to whom she said this adieu able to
make Tigers and Panthers weep.

My dear Sifroy, behold your dear Genevieva, ready to die, all the displeasure
that I have (...) leave this life, comes unto me from your tears, weep no more,
and I shall go away content. If death would give me leisure, I would make appear
unto you by the contempt of that you lose, the little cause you have to lament
your loss. But sin^^ the time presses me, and that there rests unto me, but
three sighs, I have but this word to s^^ unto you. Weep Sifroy, as much as I
merit it, and you shall not weep much: notwithstanding I conjure you yet, that
having forgotten that little dust which I leave, you would remembe^ that
Genevieva goes to heaven to keep yo^^ place there, and that the Husband and
Wife making but one, it may be that God calls ^^ to draw thither the other
part. Adieu ha^^ care of Benoni.

After these languishing words, (...) that her weakness permitted her, was
(...) receive the sacred body of her good Master, which was no sooner entered
into her mouth, but she fixed her eyes on heaven, where her heart was already,
thrusting her fair soul forth of her fair body, by a last sigh of love. It was
the second of April in the very year of her restoration, that she knew
perfectly the merit of her patience. Benoni had no sooner seen the dead members
of his Mother, but he cast himself upon the bed, breaking forth into such sharp
cries, that he pierced the heart of all the assistants. It was impossible to
withdraw him from thence, what endeavor soever they used thereunto. On the
other side Sifroy was on his knees, holding fast the hands of his dear Wife,
which he watered with his tears.

All the domestics were round about her like so many Statues of Marble, whom
grief had transformed; yet must they give to the earth what the soul of
Genevieva had left it; they made themselves ready to bury this holy body, which
was found clad in a rude haircloth, capable alone to consume members so
delicate as hers. When they carried the Hearse out of the House, it was then
that the Palatine made his grief break forth more visibly than the torches
which lighted the Funeral pomp; nothing was heard but sighs every where,
nothing was seen but tears. In the end after that Sifroy and his son had laid
their hearts into the same Tomb with Genevieva, the followers endeavored to
withdraw them from the Church, where this holy body remained in depository, the
regret of this loss was not so peculiar to men, that it was not common to the
beasts: the birds seemed to languish with grief; and if they singed sometimes
about the Castle, it was no more now but plaints.

I cannot omit one thing, which seems unto me worthy of admiration, the poor
Hind, who had served the Countess so faithfully in her life, expressed no
less love unto her at her death. They hold that this kind of beast casts forth
but one gross tear at death, it must be granted then, that this Hind dyed more
than once at the decease of her dear Mistress. It was a pitiful thing to see
this poor beast follow the Bier of Genevieva, more deplorable to hear how
woefully she brayed, but most strange that they could never bring her back to
the house, remaining day and night at the doors of the Church where her Mistress
was. The Servants carried her Hay and Grass, which she would not so much as
touch, suffering her self thus to die with hunger. They brought the news thereof
to the Palatine, who betook himself to weep so tenderly as if his Wife were
dead once again: for recompense of her fidelity, he made her to be cut in white
marble, and laid at the feet of Genevieva. All that notwithstanding comforted
not the affliction of Sifroy: it was in vain to tell him that nature being
satisfied it was time to hearken unto reason. The remedies of his griefs caused
him new griefs: if they represented unto him that it was no more a love of
Genevieva, to lament in this manner, but a hate of himself: he answered that
the regret to have lost so holy a woman could not be commendable, if it were
not extreme. This was not enough, he sought all the means to entertain his
passion, having never more pleasing Idea's than those which represented him his
Genevieva. If he went unto the Church, it was to make unto her a sacrifice of
his eyes, if he returned to his house, he retired himself into his chamber,
speaking to every thing that had been hers.

Behold the bed of my Genevieva, (said he) behold her cabinet, behold her
mirror: then looking into her glass, he sought there the visage of his dear
wife, calling continually Genevieva, Genevieva, but Genevieva answered not:
from the chamber he passed into the garden, which was sometime all her pastime,
but it was in the greens of eternity that he must seek her to find her. If the
soul of the Saint had been capable of any other passion than of joy, it had
been of a tender compassion to see the deep Melancholy of Sifroy: without
doubt her love would have been the remedy thereof, as she was the cause
thereof: One afternoon as he was in his ordinary indispositions, a page came to
tell him, that there was a Hermit, who requested covert. The Count who had not
been accustomed to shut the door unto works of mercy, nor to drive away good
actions from his house, was very glad to meet the occasion thereof: He
commanded then, that they should cause him to come up. O how happy were thou,
Sifroy! at the same time, that thou op'nedst thy gate unto charity, thou
openedst thee that of glory: may be that this encounter makes the knot of your
predestination.

Whilst that supper were making ready, the Count kept company with this holy
man, who entertained him upon no other subject, but the miseries of the world,
and the bitternesses which are mingled amongst it is greatest delights: Though
these discourses were sharp, yet they seemed unto him full of sweetness:
Supper being ready, the Count made the Hermit fit at the higher end of the
table, although his modesty had chosen the lowest place; he believed that his
virtue required the chief; so do all those, who despise not virtue for being
ill clothed: Every one having taken place according to his quality, and eaten
according to his appetite; our Religious man took notice, that Sifroy did
nothing but mourn, and complain, without tasting one morsel of meat: He
believed that he nourished not himself but with sighs, or at least, he made
show to believe it. That notwithstanding hindered him not to ask him the cause
of his tears, which obliged much the Count, who took no pleasure but in the
remembrance of his dear Genevieva: After, having made the recital of his
lamentable History, he concluded thus;

Now my Father, have not I cause to shed everlasting tears? can any one find
it strange, that so precious a loss should afflict me?

Sir, replied the Religious man) It would be to overthrow the first law of
nature, to deny tears unto those to whom we ow something more: Patience hinders
not to complain, but only to murmur: you have reason to resent your
affliction, but how long is it since my Lady deceased? It is six months
(answered the Palatine* Pardon me then, if I say, that your grief is too long,
or that your courage is too weak, there is somewhat of excess when tears reach
so far: Oh father, that would be true, if I had made a common loss, but having
lost in Genevieva a wife and a Saint, and even by my fault, I cannot
sufficiently complain my misfortune. That very thing said the Hermit) should
comfort you, and wipe away entirely your tears: Permit me (if you please) to
discourse with your grief, and to examine its justice: you have lost a wife,
ought you always to possess her? They have ravished from you a Saint, what
right gives you the enjoyment thereof? have you so little profited in the
consideration of the worlds changes, to be ignorant that man, being not made to
last always, must end once: your judgment is too good, to exact from death a
privilege, which is impossible: on every side, where we cast our eyes, we see
nothing but tombs and ashes: Sovereign Princes have indeed some power upon
life, but none at all upon death, yea her greatest pleasure is to overthrow a
Thron, to break a scepter, and to pull down a crown, to the end to render her
puissance remarkable by the greatness of those whom she has ruined: Be we born
in the purple, or in the spiders webs, inhabit we palaces, or dwell we in
cottages, death will find us out every where: the great may be distinguished
in the condition of living, but they shall never have a difference in the
obligation of dying. I say not, but that there are many things which may make
us look upon death as a good to be desired, and life as the subject of all our
fears; I stop at the reasons which are particular to you, for fear that my
considerations may be too general. What cause have you to take it ill, that a
mortal thing should dye? you find nothing here to object, but that it is too
soon, as if you would that death should have the discretion not to displease
you, but when you pleased. And know you not that death being born to the ruin
of nature, we should not expect favor from her cruelty, if not to make us dye
quickly for fear of languishing. If this knowledge be passed unto your spirit,
whence comes it that you take it ill that a woman has not lived beyond what
she should live, and that she has lived but a little, to the end not to dye
longer? it is not the death of a woman that afflicts you, but a Saint who might
acquire her self a greater crown in heaven, and do many good actions in the
world. Are you assured that what had been well begun, should finish well. My
Lady, was laden with merit, might she not fall under the burden? her
treasures of virtue were great, might she not fear thieves? she was firm in
grace, but feeble in her nature: her piety was well supported, but not
immovable: her will was constant, but it was capable of inconstancy: what know
you, if God who has no other thoughts, but for the good of his creatures, has
not taken from her the leisure to sully the glory of her former actions.
Believe me Sir, vice and virtue follow one another like the day and the night:
the night may precede the day, but this terminates again in the darkness. I will
believe that the merit of her whom you lament could not be changed but by a
great prodigy, but it could not also be conserved, but by a great miracle; I
see no cause at all to murmr against God, if he takes pain to keep for you a
thing which you might lose. Consider now the weakness of your tears, and I
assure my self that you will resolve rather to follow her, than to hope that
she should come again where you are. Her example in conforming it self to the
will of God, leaves you a straight obligation to imitate it, her constancy will
not that you should weep longer; it is that which she her self would say unto
you, if you could hear her, it is that which a person counsels you, who has
no other interest in your repose, but that which charity gives him. Seek it in
the honest divertisements of hunting, of visits and of recreations, which
cannot hurt you, if you take them with moderation, which is to be expected from
a person, to whom virtue ought to be as natural as it is necessary.

The Palatine left not escape one sole word of this Discourse, which gave him a
medicine that time it self had denied him. The Table being taken away, after
some communication every one retired himself. The next day Sifroy having
demanded where the Father was, the servants answered that he walked in the
garden, but being come thither, he found him not. The Count would not believe
that he was gone, thinking him too honest to commit an incivility, and
acknowledging enough not to be ungrateful. When the day was passed and no news
of him, he knew not where to fix his belief; that which filled his spirit with
admiration was to find his habit in the chamber. The profit which he drew from
his good words, sweetened much the sowernesse of his resentments. All the
contentments which were full of gall before, seemed unto him afterward more
sweet, and less in supportable: the flight and the Chase furnished him a good
half of his divertisements, thinking that if he laid traps for the beasts, he
might take there his grief. O admirable goodness of heaven, who so wisely
makes use of our inclinations, that he turns them all to our profit.

One day the Count having resolved to run a great Stag, which they had known by
his head, assembled a good number of his neighbors, to have the pleasure of him
This design being undertaken, behold all the Gentry in Campania, who had no
sooner sought that which they desired, but they found it. The Palatine was the
first that perceived the Stagge, who by his flight drew him so far into the
wood, that he conducted him into the Grott where Genevieva had lived seven
years. But he was much astonished to see the Stagge in the midst of of the den,
and the dogs about him without power to approach him, as if they had been of
stone, or that the beast had been in an enchanted circle. He endeavored to
encourage them with his cry, but when they raised themselves upon it; one would
say that some invisible hand kept them back. The Palatine lighted from his
horse, and entered freely into this sacred place; he considered it, and knew
there yet the traces of his holy wife, which drew presently the tears from his
eyes: Oh, said he, behold where my poor Genevieva did penance so long for a
sin which she never committed! behold, the place where innocence sighed so
much! behold the corner where her poor members reposed! Alas! am I yet to
deliberate upon a counsel which I should have executed long since?

As the Count was in this admiration, the greatest part of the Gentery arrived,
who were no less seized with this spectacle then he, avouching that this
accident was not without miracle: Sifroy would not that this sanctuary should
be damageable to the poor beast that was retired thither, having then caused
the dogs to be put into lease, he drove out the Stag into the wood, where he
found presently his safety in his flight. Although our hunters brought nothing
home unto the Castle, they never made notwithstanding a better prise. The Count
who had a design in his mind, of which no body had any knowledge, departed some
few days after for Treves, where he met with St. Hidulph, much inclined to the
design which he meditated; it being to build a Chapel where the much blessed
Genevieva had so long lived, to serve for a monument of the mercies with which
the goodness of God had rendered this place recommendable: The whole was done
with a magnificence, which witnessed enough the affection of a husband, who was
passionate, and the liberality of a Prince, who was not coveteous: The Church
bare the name of our Lady of Mersen, by the imposition which the Archbishop
made thereof in his Consecration: And the reason of this name (which signifies
in the language of the Country, mercy) seems to be received from the graces
which the Virgin Protectresse of Genevieva caused to flow into this holy grot.
The Palatine who judged that this solitude might serve for a pleasing abode to
those who would quit the creatures, to find God, caused to be erected about the
Chapel two or three little Hermitages, which received likewise the benediction
of St. Hidulphus, who parted not from our Lady of Mersen, before he had placed
upon the great Altar the miraculous Cross, which Genevieva received from the
hand of Angels: A while after the relics of the Countess were transported to
the place which had made them holy: this action received approbation from
heaven, which permitted that the service of five or six pair of Oxen, necessary
to this convoy, should be supplied without pain by a couple of Horses. That
which rendered this transport miraculous, was the veneration that it received
from the creatures, which one would esteem incapable thereof: the highest trees
bowed their branches to honor this body, which came to consecrate them with
its presence: the birds endeavored themselves to sing, clapping their wings
with so visible a testimony of joy, that one could not be ignorant of it.

As this sacred pledge was laid in the place, which had been marked out for it,
and that every body had left the Palatine alone in the Chapel, our Savior
loosing his right hand from the Cross, blessed him; Who sees not now unto what
prosperities afflictions conduct a man? the ceremonies of the dedication being
accomplished, every one returned unto his house: but the Count having his
treasure in this holy retrait, we should not find it strange, if he had there
his heart also. All his thoughts were fixed there, and his desires had no other
object: if he could escape at any time all his visits terminated themselves at
this holy Chapel. At last knowing by the experience of some months, that a
man can have no repose where there is no pleasure, nor a body live separated
from his heart, he called his brother into his Cabinet with the little Benoni,
and spoke unto him thus.

My dear brother, it is some months since, that you might have known in the
change of my employments that of my affection: notwithstanding, since I must
open it more clearly unto some one, I have no body to whom I may do it better
than to you, both by devoir and by inclination. You should not be now to know
my design, if I had not judged it more fit to have you execute my last will,
than to be author of this counsel. You have seen and sighed a part of my evils
with all the affection that I could expect from a brother; I imagne that you
will not take a less part in my joys than in my sorrows, and that I may
expect your utmost power in whatsoever shall tend to my honest contentment.
This has made me resolve to leave unto you the Tutourage of my son, who ought
to hope no less from your affection, than from that of a good father, he ought
also henceforth to acknowledge and respect you in that quality, since my
resolution is to give what remains of my life to the service of my God in this
very place, where all our house has received so many favors; represent not to
me that my complexion is delicate, because my answer is ready in the example of
my dear Genevieva: tell me not that Benoni has need of my assistance, seeing
he has an Uncle from whom he may expect all kind of support. Besides, this
will is so fixed, that I will not have one sole day retard the execution
thereof: behold my dear brother, the papers which will give you the knowledge
of my affairs.

It was here that nature gave tears, yet without daring to contradict so holy a
resolution. There was only present Benoni, who spoke to his father in these
terms.

Sir I am too young to blame your counsels, but I am old enough to follow your
example. You leave me a little earth, to possess heaven: should I not be
ignorant, if I should accept that which you offer me, being able to make the
same choice that you do? No, no, Sir, I will never live any where but with you;
the Noviciate which I have made in the solitude which you desire has given me
too sweet an experience of its pleasures to withdraw me from your imitation: if
your design be to live here, mine is never to dye elsewhere. Uncle, enjoy
freely the fortunes of our house, I leave you them with as good a will, as I
cordially thank you for the care which you were ready to take for me.

This resolution of Benoni was contrary to the expectation of his father, but
not contrary to his desire. Behold then, the Palatine, who caused a little
Hermits habit to be prepared for him, as he had one already himself, leaving
all that which he had in the world to imitate his dear wife, accompanied with
his dear son. They came into the holy Grott, where all the Animals, which were
formerly acquainted with Benoni came to acknowledge him.

Glorious Soul, holy and incomparable Genevieva! if you can yet remember the
things of the earth, cast your eyes into this sacred Cave, where you have
sometime tasted so many delights, you shall see there your Sifroy, and the dear
child of your griefs; without doubt, the change of their Habits shall not have
changed your affection; on the contray, having more of your likeness in this
estate, I believe they shall have more of your love; but what? they have
already felt the effects thereof, and you have not permitted that so much as
one of those thunders, which rattle beneath you, nor one of those tempests, which
you tread under foot, should offend their heads; it is our part now, to make up
our confidence of your protection, seeing you are full of goodness; and our
example of your virtues, seeing you are full of merit.

Behold us (my dear Reader) at the end of a History which puts the providence
of God into its fairest day, Innocence out of the fear to be oppressed, and
perhaps into the desire to be exercised with calumny, since her persecutions
are followed with so much merit, and her merit acknowledged with so much glory:
If there be any thing good in this Discourse, I pretend no other recompense
thereof, than the favor of our great Saint: if there be nothing commendable, I
will receive contentedly for punishment of my faults, the censure of all those
that shall do me the honor to read this little work.

FINIS.

