THE CASE OF Founders Kinsmen.

THE CASE OF Founders Kinsmen: WITH Relation to the STATUTES of -- College, IN
The University of --

Humbly proposed and submitted to Better Judgments.

LONDON, Printed for J. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall.

THE CASE OF Founders Kinsmen, etc.
A. Founds a College 250 Years ago, dies unmarried; by the Statutes of his
College, he gives preference in Election of Fellows, to those, Qui sunt vel
erunt de consanguinitate nostra, and genere.

Q. Whether there are any such persons now who can claim the Preference as
Kinsmen? and who can claim?

IT is not unlikely, but that I shall be charged with Ingratitude, upon account
of these Papers, which scruple at the pretensions of Kindred, having my self
eaten a Founders Bread: A Charge indeed, which of all things I abominate; and
though the Argument may be popular, yet I hope it will not appear conclusive.
Suppose this A. had been my Founder; yet, since Gratitude is but one part of
duty to a Founder, if this which is called Gratitude, shall interfere with the
observance of his Statutes, I conceive he Acts most consistently, who keeps to
them, which are the Rule of his Obedience, as to every particular. Besides, I
thought my self obliged in common justice to propose somewhat of this nature;
for though in Acts of mere favor and grace, the respect had to any (though never
so remote) Relation to a Founder, or Benefactor, be truly commendable, yet when
they pretend to a strict right, and many additional advantages, to the
prejudice of others it may be more deserving, nay sometimes of their Seniors in
the College; I thought I say in Common Justice, such a pretension ought to be
scrupled and examined, and, if groundless, utterly discountenanced. I shall
therefore propose these Queries, Collections, and Observations, entirely
submitting them to better Judgments how far they are conclusive against such
pretensions, for to be peremptory and positive; besides, that it is a disgrace
to fail in such undertakings, I shall not take the Confidence, or pretend to
that Authority magisterially to assert. I come now to the thing in hand, which
is to be satisfied in these three Points.

First, What this Consanguinity is. Secondly, Who are these Consanguinei.
Thirdly, How far this Right of Consanguinity extends.
As to the first Point, I find, that by the Civil and Canon Law, this
Consanguinity must be defined C. 2. 35. quaest. 3.
and stated. Now by the Civil Law there is no proper Consanguinity strictly
taken, as I think, but between Brothers, and Sisters of the same Father. All
other Relation, being either Agnatio per lineam masculinam, or else Cognatio
per lineam foemininam. But the difference of these two being taken away Novell.
De Haered. ab intestato, 118.. Nullam vero.
, Kindred may be more largely called Cognatio generalis, or Jus eorum quos ab
eodem stipite descendentes sanguis conjunxit: And according to this definition
we find Consanguinitas, q. sanguinis unitas, to signify this Cognatio
generalis, by the Civil Law L. descriptionis C. de imponend. lucrat. descript.
and consanguinitate in gloss.
. Thus much for the strict, and for the more large acceptance of the word by
the Civil Law; consonant to which large use of the word the Canonists take the
same; the Laws therefore agreeing, Consanguinity is it not That Relation which
one person has to another as descended lineally from him, or that Relation
which two persons have to each other as coming from the same common stock,
whether by the male or female side? This Consanguinity I find also is
threefold: 1o. Ascendentium, The Relation of the Father, Grand father and their
Wives, to their Children, Grandchildren, and sic Ascendendo. 2o.
Descendentium, as of the Children, etc. to their Father, etc. and sic
descendendo. 3o. Transversalium, as between Brothers and Sisters and their
Children, Uncles and Aunts and their Children, and sic de Caeteris ex utroque
latere per dictam Novellam, 118. Thus much for the usual definition,
description, and division of Consanguinity allowed by all, as I conceive. I
come now to the second Point, who are these Consanguinei. Eos Consanguineos
dicimus, says the Canon Law C. 2. 35. quaest. 3.
, quos divinae, and Imperatorum ac Romanorum atque Graecorum leges,
Consanguineos appellant, ac in Haereditate suscipiunt, nec repellere possunt.
In some Books indeed I find, Affines, so termed; and Bartolus says, Quod
communis usus loquendi, Consanguineum appellat, etiam quocunque modo sanguine
conjunctum. But if we consider that in our Case, A. the Founder was never
Married; that cuts off all pretensions by Affinity, and of Children, and their
Descendants: Ascendants cannot be supposed by any means; and they being to be
de nostra Consanguinitate, and de nostro Sanguine; none sure can be his kin,
but by the Fathers, and Mothers side, and that will exclude all remoter
Alliance, or those quocunque modo; i. e. remotissimo sanguine Conjuncti. These
things being premised, Are not the Consanguinei to the Founder, those allied to
him ex linea Transversali, as Brothers and their Children, etc. Sisters
Children, etc. and sic de Caeteris in linea Transversali, of Statutable Age?
Now these, ex utroque latere, being equally privileged Novella, de Haered. ab
intestato, 118.. Nullam vero.
, they all claim to the very same degree. Which brings me to the third Point,
how far, or to what degree this Right of Consanguinity extends. Now because the
Civil and Canon Law differ in the Computation of their Degrees, this difference
must first be stated: It must therefore be observed, what is said, that the
chief design of the Canon Law, is to reckon the degrees, so as not to interfere
with prohibited blood, to prevent incestuous mixtures, and to promote relation
and public decency and honesty. And because Marriage cannot be, but between
two C. 2. 35. quaest. 4.
persons, therefore the Canons place two in one degree, who, according to the
Civil Law, are in two. For the Civil Law respecting only the Conveyance of
Estates, and the Right of Succession; and because that Right is conveyed down
from one to another, therefore generata persona gradum adjicit. The Rules of
each Law's Computation, see in the Decretum immediately preceding Ibid. c. 6.
. This being observed, the next thing is, to ascertain which Computation we
ought to follow: and, say our Books Garcias de beneficiis 7. par. c. 15. nu. 25.
, Certum est sequendum esse Computationem legalem pro gradibus, nam quoad
successiones and in earum materia servanda est in utroque foro, Computatio
legalis and non Canonica: And that this is a sort of Succession, may appear by
and by. Now Consanguinity extends it self more or less, according to the
different matters, it is referred to, as may be seen at large Bertachini
Repertorium Verb. Consanguinitas.
. But without doubt there cannot be a more substantial and favorable
Consideration, upon which account Kindred may claim the greatest privileges,
than in case of Succession; and if the greatest are there allowed, there can be
no reason to complain: And though in a Fellowship of a College, Non succeditur
Jure haereditario, and Successionis merae; yet where Kindred are called, it may
be said it is Successio aliquo modo, seu ad instar. Now A. the Founder having
made over his Estate to a certain number of Men, and having appointed them and
their Successors, his Heirs, he did Illorum fidei committere, to admit his
Kindred into some part of the Inheritance in Common with them, and to allow
them a Maintenance among them. And though fidei commissum may not take in, in all
respects the true notion of such a Fellowship; yet where we cannot be punctual,
I conceive the Law will justify a Reference to what is most likely. A
Fellowship therefore in Relation to Kindred, especially if we either consider
the Obligation the Law then laid upon the Clergy to provide for their
Consanguinei (and the Founder was of very high rank in that Order) or the
design of the Foundation, namely. a Maintenance for Students: I say, if we
consider this, a Fellowship is a provision, a livelihood, by way of a singular
fidei commissum, to be given them by the College; as the Haeredes fidei
Commissarii, or Fiduciarii in this respect. And Succession in fidei commissis,
being to be regulated according to the Order of Succession ab intestato Grassi
Recept. Sent. lib. 1.. Fidei commissum, quaest. 19. nu. 4.
, the Ascendants and Descendants succeed in infinitum; the Collaterals, who are
meant here, only to the tenth degree, as you treat of simple and particular
Succession, as this is. Now that the tenth degree is the very last, may it not
appear with submission?

First, From the Letter of the Law. Secondly, From Reason. Thirdly, From the
Universal Consent of the Doctors.
And first from the Letter of the Law, as by the Quotations. Fin. Instit. de
Success. Agnat. gloss. ibid. Auth. de Haered. ab intestato venientibus.. Si
vero neque fratres Verticulo Agnatorum. L. de legitimis Haeredibus and D. D.
Covarrav. lib. 1. tit. 13. De Success. ab intestato. Anton. Gomez. l. 8. nu. 5.
Ad L. Tauri. Cabed Decis. Lusitan. 51, 52. and 61. Surdis de aliment. tit. 1.
quaest. 11. Joan. Fab. Ang. Porc. Myns. Schneid. Wesembec. and Grot. lib.
. 2ly. From Reason. For why should the tenth degree be mentioned, if a longer
Succession was designed; and though some think decimus quasi numero rotundus and
certus pro incerto ponitur; yet when we find an allowance Introduct. cap. 30.
, etsi decimo: Etsi there, without any force, may signify thus much; namely,
that they might succeed, etsi, nay though, in the very utmost degree; namely, the
tenth. Again, why should the Law be less restrained in its Computation in one
Case than in another, barely as to the use of Words; for here all the
Commentators agree, that when it says Cognati shall claim usque ad sextum
gradum Instit. de Cognat. Success.. 5.
; there sextus est ultimus and non certus pro incerto: But when the same
Paragraph says, the Agnati shall succeed etsi decimo, then we must have an
Evasion, Sed ratio non pati videtur, ut dicamus uno numero successionem
terminari, altero non item. And although it may seem that there is some ground to
extend it to Longissimus Instit. de legitima Agnat. Success.. 3.
yet that longissimus must be de Jure longissimus, and that is explained by
Vinnius Vinnius ibidem.
upon the place to be Decimus. Once more in vain would be the Provision for the
Succession of the Fiscus L. variiae Causae, ss. Divus Pius, D. de jure Fisci.
or Ecclesia C. 5. and 7. 12. quaest. 5. etc. 21. 12. quaest. 1. c. sed hoc de
Success. ab intestato, and Abbas ibidem.
, or Unde Vir and Uxor L. maritus, C. unde Vir and Vxor.
, whose respective Rights in Cases of Failures are settled by Law, if all
relation was perpetually privileged to succeed, though never so remote, even in
infinitum. And therefore the Jus Agnationis and Cognationis being aequatum by
Novella 118, are not both admissable only in the tenth degree, and no farther?
I come now to the third Point the Authority of the D. D. who may be consulted
Vid. D. D. citatos in page 10. nempe Covarrav. Gomez. Cabed. s^rdum, etc.
; as also Sanchez Sanchez Consil. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 1. Dub. 24.
and Lynwood Lynwood Provinciale, c. Ita quorundam, de testamentis.
. But to instance more particularly in those who have with submission decided
the Case in terminis. And first for Sanchez, in the place afore-cited, he says
from Ancharanus, Propinqui (who are the same as Consanguinei by the Law) sunt
illi tantum qui vocantur de jure civili ad Successionem ab intestato. And again
from Tiraquellus, Leges concedentes Consanguineis retractum, sanguinis ratione,
intelligi debent de Consanguineis usque ad eum gradum in quo de jure civili
succedunt. And again, Ad legatum Consanguineis relictum, tantum habent jus
Collaterales qui succedunt ab intestato, caeteri omnes pro extraneis habendi;
and there quotes D. D. Again, Fidei commissum Consanguineis relictum iis tantum
relictum intelligitur, qui vocantur de jure civili ab intestato ad
successionem, scilicet usque ad decimum gradum. And this holds not only in
Temporalibus, but also in perpetuis; for though, as he goes on, Quidam J. Christi
in legatis perpetuis, Consanguineos Collaterales in quocunque gradu extraneis
praeferendos dicunt, and rationem ponunt ex praesumpta voluntate testatoris,
cum enim velit legatum esse perpetuum, and norit Consanguinitatem intra gradum
successibilem non durare in perpetuum, censendus est, velle in hoc Casu
Consanguinitatem durare in perpetuum. Sed idem tenent D. D. says Sanchez, in
perpetuis ac temporalibus, and quotes Mantica, who is my second Author. Now
Mantica says Mantica de Conject. ultim. volunt. lib. 8. tit. 12.
, Si relictum sit cuilibet ex Consanguineis, omnes admittuntur ad decimum
gradum, quia eo usque protenditur and defertur successio, and ideo qui vult
admitti tanquam ex progeny, debet probare se esse in aliquo gradu, qui non sit
ultra decimum. Quinetiam generaliter licet in legato, vel fidei commisso
familiae, vel Propinquis relicto, ex aequitate defendi possit, ut ultra decimum
gradum protendatur, inspecta testatoris voluntate and considerata communi horum
fidei commissorum (i. e. perpetuorum) interpretatione, quae sunt conservandae
Agnationis gratia; yet, says Sanchez Loco prius citato.
, this Consideration, namely, Conservandae Agnationis gratia, is instar
majoratus, and sic aperte vult successionem esse perpetuam. To reconcile this
difference, he goes on, that, Si perpetuitas cadit solum in eos: i. e.
Consanguineos ne reddatur caducum, tum succedunt in infinitum, sed cum
perpetuitas non cadit solum in Consanguineos, sed in aliis servatur, tum non
est clara testatoris voluntas, quod eos vocaverat in infinitum, and sic standum
est communi sententiae D. D. quod solum usque ad decimum gradum extenditur. And
this is also Mantica's Mantica lib. 8. tit. 12. Number. 46.
Opinion, That if the Will of their being so called in infinitum, non potest ex
verbis testamenti, sive ex legitimis conjecturis colligi, a communi D. D.
Opinione non est recedendum, nam mutanda non sunt quae certam interpretationem
semper habuerunt; and in dubio crebrior sententia accipienda est, nam integrum
est judicium quod plurimorum sententiis comprobatur. My third Author is Grassus
Grassus Recept. Sent. lib. 1.. Fidei commissum, q. 19.
, who agreeing, it is needless to transcribe him. Now if neither from the Letter
of the Statutes, or from any reasonable Conjectures it shall appear, that A.
the Founder designed this Right of Consanguinity to extend ad infinitum, then
will not this Point be cleared? The Statute then runs thus:

Insuper cum secundum Apostolum teneamur bonum facere ad omnes; maxim autem ad
domesticos fidei, statuimus, ordinamus and volumus, quod in omni Electione
Scholarium praedictorum futuris temporibus in dictum Collegium facienda,
Principaliter and ante omnes alios, illi, qui sunt vel erunt de Consanguinitate
nostra, and genere, (si qui tales sint) ubicunque oriundi, dum tamen sint
reperti habiles and idonei secundum conditiones superius and inferius
recitatas, sine aliquo probationis tempore in veros dicti Collegii socios, ab
initio eligantur, and etiam admittantur: Quibus deficientibus, tunc illi qui
sunt vel erunt de locis vel parochiis, in quibus possessiones and res
spirituales and temporales dicti Collegii consistunt, si juxta Ordinationes
praedictas habiles sint, prae caeteris eligantur. Quod si tales in dicta
Vniversitate, tempore Electionis hujusmodi celebratae, minime reperti sunt,
tunc pauperiores and indigentiores Scholares Clerici in dicta Vniversitate
students hoc ordine praeferantur; viz. Prae Caeteris oriundi de Diocaesi A.
and deinde seriatim de Comitatu, B. C. D. E. and sic de caeteris Comitatibus
infra Provinciam F. dummodo in Grammatica sufficienter, and in cantu ut
praedicitur competenter eruditi sint, and secundum qualitates and Conditiones
superius and inferius recitatas habiles and idonei reperti and probati fuerint,
ad dictum Collegium eligantur ac etiam assumantur, tot quot supplere poterint
deficientem numerum. Quos omnes sic electos seu assumptos (his qui de nostro
sanguine fuerint duntaxat exceptis) per unum Annum in eodem Collegio stare
volumus antequam in veros socios ejusdem Collegii admittantur.

This then being the Statute, let us see whether this Right in perpetuum
follows from the Letter of the Statute. A. the Founder begins, Quia secundam
Apostolum, etc. which also we find enforced by the Canon Law C. 14. and 16.
distinct. 86. c. 5. de poenitent. distinct. 2. c. inhibendum est. De Cohabit
Cleric. and mulierum, and subministrent, c. 1. 12. quaest. 3. etc. 4, 5, 6, and
7. 12. quaest. 5.
. And since he takes the hints from the Law, may we not reasonably suppose he
pursues the Law according to the Obligation of it. And this being the
Obligation, in case any one should happen to die intestate, and so the
Consanguinei to be unprovided for, by the Party whilst living: Here the Law did
enjoin the Bishops and other Ordinaries to distribute what the person died
possessed of in Pias Causas, Personis decedentium Consanguineis, Servitoribus,
and Propinquis, seu aliis: And this is Ordained also by a Provincial
Constitution Cap. Ita quorundam, de testamentis in Lynwood.
. Again, from the using the Words Consanguinitas nostra, Genus, and sanguis
noster; for without doubt, had it been designed that all manner of Relation,
how distant soever, should have been privileged, the Founder might have had
terms of a less strict Sense: And therefore, as we have good reason to suppose
that he was not ignorant of that Constitution in Lynwood, so may we not
suppose, that according to the same Law from which he took the hint, he would
intend also the Persons, he was obliged to take care for. And accordingly
Lynwood, on the Constitution aforementioned, says, Et Consanguinei, and qui
sunt Consanguinei, patet ex Hostiens, summa Hostiens. Sum. Tit. de Consanguin.
and Affin.. 1, etc.
; where they are explained to be communem sanguinem habentes: And again the
same Lynwood C. Ecclesiarum, de rebus Eccles. non alienand. and consanguineis.
says they are, Qui de nostro sanguine sunt: Consonant to which Acceptance,
the Founder says, Consanguinei, and qui de nostro sanguine. And if we should
allow Genus to be more large than either Consanguinitas, or Sanguis noster, yet
is it not restrained by those two? It being never once more mentioned, but the
Founder keeps to Consanguinei and Sanguis. And having thus far proceeded to
show the Founder had respect to the Law, both for the Obligation of providing
for his Kindred, and also for what Persons were truly so, come we now to see to
what degree he meant them. And here according to Lynwood C. ita quorundam, de
testamentis and decedentium.
, of whom I cannot suppose the Founder ignorant; and what say you, if Lynwood
made this Statute? We find the tenth degree to be the utmost, for which the
Church was to provide, in the Distribution of Intestate's Goods; and the Church
being only to supply the Testator's neglect, and supplying it only to the tenth
degree, can we suppose the Law to oblige farther? His Words are these Ita
quorundam and Decedentium. De testamentis.
, Unde breviter scias, quod in successione ab intestato, Prima Causa est,
Liberorum. Secunda, Ascendentium cum quibusdam Collateralibus, si extent.
Tertia, Transversalium. Primae duae in infinitum protenduntur, Tertia usque ad
decimum gradum. Et sic in bonis Laici, and sic in bonis Clerici intestati,
deficientibus praedictis, Ecclesia praefertur fisco. And the more to confirm
this, that the Founder had an eye to Lynwood in this Provincial; or if it was
Lynwood's Opinion and Draught, he meant it pursuant thereto, we find the
persons to be provided for, in the College, are ranked in the same Order.
Consanguineis Servitoribus, and Propinquis, seu aliis. The Statute says, Illi
qui sunt vel erunt de Consanguinitate nostra. The Provincial Consanguineis. The
Statute says, Illi qui sunt vel erunt de locis in quibus possessiones, etc. The
Provincial, Servitoribus and Propinquis, and the Gloss and Propinquis, tam
ratione loci quam sanguinis. Lastly, The Statute says, Tum pauperiores
scholares, etc. The Provincial, Aliisque, which the gloss upon Aliisque, calls
extraneis, dummodo sint pauperes.

Come we now to consider, whether he designed a Perpetuity to his Kindred. If
the Founder had intended they should claim in perpetuum, he might have used
more express words. And though he says, Qui sunt vel erunt, yet Erunt may be
understood, of those which should be in the tenth Degree; for it is likely there
were some then capable when the Statute was made. Again, Erunt must be kept to
de nostra Consanguinitate; and what that is, has been endeavored to be
explained. Nor is futuris temporibus only to be restrained to the Consanguinei,
but relates also to Elections in general, which were to be made in Cases of
Vacancy for ever. Besides, what ever these words may signify, yet may not,
Quibus deficientibus, well agree with what has been proposed? A word used in
all Books to express the extinction of Kindred, and as it were purposely put
here to prevent all ambiguity: And that Deficere does imply a total extinction,
a final period, may it not appear, from the constant use of the word, when
joined to terms, signifying Stock, Family, Kindred, and Lineage; being also
explained in that sense, from the Founders making after a new Degree of
Privileged persons, a new Substitution? Again, because when he provides for the
pauperiores Scholares, etc. in case of want of those in locis ubi possessiones,
etc. he is so far from using that word Deficere, as well conceiving, there
would not be a want of People in those places, a total extinction as I may say;
but he uses these words, Quod si tales tempore Electionis minime reperti
fuerint. And thus does it not appear from Statute, and fair Conjectures, That
here is a new Substitution, Et perpetuitas non cadit in Consanguineos, sed in
aliis servatur; which is the difference required by Sanchez, in the place
afore-cited, to fix it to a certain degree, and not to extend it in infinitum.
Since therefore neither according to Law, the General Opinion of the D. D.
Statute, or fair Conjectures it does appear (with submission still) that there
is any privilege beyond the tenth Degree, may we not conclude with Mantica,
aforecited, Ideo qui vult admitti tanquam ex progeny, debet probare se in
aliquo gradu, qui non sit ultra Decimum? And that too, ascending to the very
Founder; for although in other Cases, a Relation to the last immediate Possessor,
is a good claim for the next Heir, yet here the Law looks no farther than a
Possession continued from the immediate to the next Taker: But in our Case, no
one claims by Right of Succession, strictly so called; or as related to a
former Kinsman, but from his own next akin, as mediately related to the
Founder; so that a flaw in immediate or mediate Kindred spoils the Line.
Besides, suppose I am indisputably related to one who speed as a Founders
Kinsman, the proof he made of His relation is unknown to the Present College;
and since I found my Right upon a Special qualification, even to the prejudice
of others else Eligible, I ought to show my Pretensions, and the Society are to
judge of the clearness of my Title.

It may not be amiss perhaps to say, how improbable now it is to fix any
tolerable Descent; and where such Memoirs, which require all the punctilio's of
Niceness, which are so difficultly adjusted, and which are often so carelessly
neglected: I say, where such Memoirs have great Chasms and Discontinuances, and
cannot carry the Relation up to the first of the Branch.

Again, where the ancientest Memorandums are an hundred Years short of such a
Founder, there is, I say, just reason to suspect the exactness of such a
Descent. Besides, the Methods of such Registrings are very faulty, and so far
from being exact, and to be relied upon, that they deserve little credit, it
having been ingeniously confessed, that the very persons Words have (and that
usually too) been taken, for what Family they have been related to.

But however unlikely it may be, to bring an exact and nice Title; yet where
there is some specious show, especially since the Electors are sworn when
admitted Fellows, to prefer the Consanguinei, it is best to err on the safest
side. It Is true indeed, this may be so, where no one else is like to be wronged
by these Pretensions, who may be equally, nay more eligible; and here we ought
to judge rather nicely than favorably; especially too, where he claims other
advantages, besides those of a bare Election.

And as to the Oath, the Clause indeed is still administered; but it was then
made, when there were, or would be, in some time, Kindred.

However, the intent of the Founder, and the Law having determined this Right
of Consanguinity, according to what we have proposed, the Obligation must cease
on Course. And besides, that there are also other Clauses or Things deducible
from them, now sworn to likewise in that Oath, not now warrantable. And thus
much for these Queries, Collections, Observations, or what else you will call
them. But put the Case the most favorable for the Consanguineus:

Either he claims upon the Title of mere Consanguinity; or,

Of Consanguinity backed with the other necessary Statutable qualifications.

He cannot claim upon the first account, because that very Statute which gives
him a Right as Consanguineus, gives it not merely as such, but upon these
Terms, Dummodo sit habilis, etc.

If he claims upon the Second, there the College are Judges of his
Qualifications, both by Statute of the Founder, and Orders of their Visitor;
which Orders provide, That the Candidates shall approve themselves by a
three-days Examination, to every Fellow singly if he requires it, Tam quoad
quam ad doctrinam; by which Examen, the Fellows are to judge. Now this Right of
Judging and Choosing is not to be taken from the College; and if they Elect in
due time, the Election is good, nor can a Fellow be put upon them.

First, Because none are Elected, but by the Head and Majority of the Fellows;
and if the Choice be made in due time, there can be no Lapse or Devolution.

Secondly, The College are upon their Oaths; and when they have Judged and
Elected under that Obligation, which is the highest can be laid upon them, the
Election of a qualified person is irreversible. I have nothing more to add, but
that these Papers are entirely submitted, to the more knowing and experienced.

FINIS.

