THE GOSPEL Preached to the ROMANS, IN FOUR SERMONS.

Two on the 5th of November: AND Two on the 30th of January, 1680.

By JOHN CAVE, Rector of Cold-Orton in Leichestershire; and Chaplain to the
Lord Bishop of Durham.

Fruamur bono nostro, and recti sententiam temperemus, cohibeatur Superstitio,
impietas expietur, vera religio reservetur.

Min. Fael. p. 55. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Rich. Chiswell, at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

THE GOSPEL Preached to the ROMANS, IN TWO SERMONS, On November 5. 1680.
The First Sermon.
ROMANS 1.15. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
that are at Rome also.


THe great Doctor of the Gentiles St. Paul, directs this Epistle to all the
Professors of Christianity at Rome, tempering his Aposto^^^ Authority, with
much Charity, and ^rdor, insinuating his good Opinion of their Sincerity, tho
attended with the Weakness and Imperfection of Learners, who are usually too
retentive of their former Prejudices, and Prepossessions, and therefore stand
in need of clear Demonstrations, and frequent Impressions, to bring them off
from a Religion delivered and endeared to them by Tradition from their Fathers,
and to confirm and establish them in a new Doctrine.

After he had magnified his own Office, by intimating his extraordinary Call
and Separation unto the Gospel of God in the first verse of this Chapter; that
he might not any ways advance himself, to the discouragement of their
Infant-Graces, and hopeful Dispositions; he owns them also to be the Called of
Jesus Christ in another Capacity, Ver. 6.
and dignifies them with the Titles of the Beloved of God and Saints, Ver. 7.8.
such as he gave Thanks and prayed for, in regard of their Christian
Principles, which made Rome now more truly renowned, and honorably spoken of
throughout the World, than all he former Grandeur, Wisdom, and Lo^ning.

Oecumenius gives this Reason of (...) precedence of this Epistle, because
(...) was written to such, as had not only the advantage of a Civil and
Philosophical Education, but were also initiated in the Worship of the true
God, according to the Revelations of the Gospel; yet to keep them humble and
teachable, he suggests to them their want of many things, of some Spiritual
Gift, Ver. 11.
in order to the Settlement, and Growth of their Faith and Comfort; the
fructifying of their fair Blossoms, and the ripening of their tender Fruit:
Ver. 13.
I have oftentimes purposed to come unto you, that I might have some Fruit
among you also, even as among other Gentiles. For the Doctrines I teach, are
such, as will not only give Wisdom to the Simple, and Barbarous, but improve
the Knowledge of the Wise; and therefore in that respect, as fit to be preached
at Athens, or at Rome, as in the most obscure and ignorant parts of the World;
yea such are your defects in Knowledge and Faith, that I am obliged, by my
Commission, to instruct you; I am a Debtor both to the Greeks, and Barbarians;
to the Wise, and to the Unwise. So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach
the Gospel to you that are at Rome also.

From these Words, some have observed St. Paul's Cheerfulness, and Courage, his
Readiness and Resolution, in discharge of his Ministry; as a Pattern worthy to
be imitated by all of his Order, and Calling; for as much as neither the Power,
nor Prejudices of Rome, the Seat of the World's Empire, and Learning, did in
the least dishearten him from Preaching the Gospel there: Where the Articles of
pure Faith, and the inconceiveable, or at least, inexplicable Mysteries, of the
Christian Religion, were more likely to be rejected with scorn, than received
in Love; and where such a plain Preacher, as came not in the way of Human
Wisdom, or Excellencies of Speech, was like to persuade but little; yet he is
ready, and resolved as God shall enable him, as much as in him is, to preach
this Gospel at Rome; as he speaks Emphatically, at Rome also; a Place so
famous, for the general Concourse of the Wise and knowing Men of the World.

I cannot disallow of this Sense of the Words, which would afford us very
profitable matter of Discourse; yet I humbly conceive, they are very capable of
another Meaning, viz. That our Apostle, was the more desirous to preach the
Gospel at Rome, because there was still a great mixture of Judaisme, and
Gentilisme, even in the Christianity of that Place; and those that he calls
Saints, were but imperfectly such, right in Fundamentals, but in many respects
needing Reformation of their Errors, as well as Settlement, and firmer
grounding in the true Belief.

Though St. Peter were the Apostle of the Jews, as St. Paul of the Gentiles;
and each superintended their proper Diocese in all places where they met; as at
Antioch, and afterward at Rome, ordaining distinct Bishops to succeed in both
Cities; and making all the Jews in each under the Charge of one, and the
Gentiles of another; (as the Learned Dr. Hammond has abundantly proved, to the
utter overthrow of St Peter's Supremacy, and Universal Pastorship:) yet as St.
Peter, before any Agreement between themselves to the contrary, preaches the
Gospel to Cornelius a Gentile, and his Family. So St. Paul here writes to Jews
and Gentiles both, and desires to have an opportunity to preach the Gospel to
them in common.

He had upon several Occasions encountered the Jews in their Synagogues, and
disputed with the Greeks in their most famous Cities; at Athens, Corinth,
Ephesus, and elsewhere; erecting where ever he came, some honorable Trophies
of the Power and Prevalency of his Master's Gospel.

He desires now to carry his Spiritual Arms, and Forces, to the Imperial City,
not to make himself, but Christianity eminent, and victorious; to triumph not
only over the Vices, and Immoralities, but the very Religion, or rather, the
remainder of Superstition in that Place, by showing them how weak the Jewish
Dispensation, and how altogether ineffectual the Precepts of the Gentile
Philosophy were, to make Men truly happy; that neither Gentiles by their
Natural Works, nor Jews by their Legal Obedience, could be justified: but yet
both were equally capable of Salvation by the Gospel, which he is so ready to
preach to them. It has been observed, that in all the Churches of the
Apostle's own planting and cultivation, the Seeds of sound and wholesome
Doctrine did more easily take Root, than Heathenish and Jewish Customs could be
extirpated; and by his distinct Addresses, both to Jews and Gentiles, in this
Epistle, we may well conceive, this was one great inducement to him to preach
the Gospel, to them that were at Rome also, viz. To bring them off from those
Superstitions which Antiquity, Universality, and Oral Tradition, had made them
too fond of.

But if we will suppose those Christian Converts to be refined, and wholly
purged from all their former Errors, and Corruptions, and so not to need the
preaching of the Gospel, for those Purposes; It is most plain, that there were
a great many Jews, and Heathens, among them, to whom this Epistle was to be
communicated, and that many of them, who could by the Light of Nature easily
discover a God, and a Providence; yet were fallen into Idolatry, and such
vicious Practices, that they much wanted the preaching of the Gospel; a clearer
Manifestation of the Justice and Goodness of God to recover them.

It is not my Design at present, to make a Comparison of the Gospel of our
Savior, with the Ethnical, or Judaical Institutions, and to show the great
Advantages it has of them, both in respect of its Rules, its Aids, Motives and
Terms of Acceptance, its Power and Efficacy to save.

Nor shall I enquire further into the State of Rome at that time, nor what
mixtures of their former Sentiments and Practices they retained, who came from
the Synagogue, or from the Temples of Jupiter, and Apollo, into the Discipline
of Christ, and the Services of his Church.

But I shall regard only the Condition of our Modern Romans, and must apply
that Doctrine to you, for your Defense, and Security, in the Truth; which for
their Conviction and Recovery, I am ready, as much as in me is, to preach to
them that are at Rome also.

In my Discourse upon these Words, I shall confine my self to three general
Heads; showing first of all, I. That the Romans now stand in as much need, if
not more, of the Ministry of the Gospel, as they did in our Apostle's Days. II.
That the most Christian and effectual may of promoting the Gospel, is Preaching
and Persuasion. III. That those who are commissionated to that Office, ought to
be ready, and resolute in the discharge of it. Of these in their Order,
beginning with the first, viz.


I. That the Romans now stand in as much need, if not more, of the Ministry of
the Gospel, as they did in our Apostle's Days.

The most dark and depraved state of Gentilisme, did not more want the Sun of
Righteousness, the purifying Light of the Gospel, the preaching of Repentance
from dead Works, and Holiness of Life, than this pretended Catholic Church now
does; For not only the Romana, but the Germana Fides, the noted Honesty and
Fidelity of those Heathens, is in a manner quite lost among those Christians,
and their present Treachery, and Perfidiousness, are as much spoken of, and
experienced throughout the World, as their Primitive Faith then was.

Perhaps there were as many, if not more Saints, in Nero's Household, as are in
his Holiness's own Family, and the places nearest his Influence and Inspection;
Which gave the famous Van-Harmin occasion to declare; In Vita Arminii.
That, if he had not before been sufficiently averse to Popery, the sight of
Rome, and its lewd Practices, would have given him an invincible dislike.

I shall not here take notice of what has been said by their own Authors, of
the Epicurean and Atheistical Lives of so many Popes, scarce to be paralleled
in any heathenish History; nor of the Stews, and tolerated Debauches of Rome
her self. Neither should I have touched at all upon this Argument, wherein we
our selves have too great a Concern, if it were not most apparent, that their
vicious Manners, are the proper Fruit of their corrupt Doctrines: Those I mean,
of Equivocation, Mental Reservation, dispensing with Oaths, Durand. lib. 4.
did. 31.
breaking Faith with Heretics, etc. And those other of Indulgences, Vendible
Pardons, easy Absolutions, and Deathbed Repentance; particularly their making
Fornication less sinful in some, than chaste Wedlock, and not a deadly Sin in
any, according to the Natural Law.

The manifold Disorders of our Lives, the great Luxuriancy of Vice, and the
decay of Piety, Justice, and Sobriety among those of our own Communion, require
a pathetick and powerful Ministry, of all the Holy Precepts, Counsels,
Reproofs, Directions of our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, and it is
needful still to preach Gospel-Reformation to the most reformed part of
Christendom, where all the Principles of Virtue are already sufficiently
taught, and established.

But where it is a part of Men's Religion to be vicious, where it is their Duty
to Sin, and their wicked Practices derive from such Principles such impious
Doctrines as make a kind of Anti-Gospel to that of our Savior, their Spiritual
Estate is very necessitous and deplorable; they want Doctrine, as well as
Exhortation; the planting of Paul, no less than the waterings of Apollo: Which
minds me to proceed, to the principal thing I intend to insist upon, viz. to
show,

That the Church of Rome stands in much need of the preaching of our Savior's
pure Gospel, in regard of the Heathenism, (if I may not say) Anti-Christianism,
of several Religious Tenants, Opinions, Ceremonies retained, and observed among
them.

There is no Branch of implanted Superstition in any Son of Adam, which may not
sufficiently feed it self with some part or other of the Romish Liturgy, or
with some Customs by that Church allowed, concerning the Invocation of Saints,
Adoration of Relics, Worship of Images, or the like; as the learned Dr.
Jackson observes. And what was spoken more generally by him, I shall endeavor
to demonstrate particularly.

But before I come to speak of their Opinions and Customs, give me leave to
observe; That the very Characters and Marks of their Church, the Titles and
Prerogatives of their Popes, are such, if not the very same, that the Heathens
signalized themselves, and their High Priest by. I begin with Bellarmin's first
note of the Church, and that is,

1. Catholicism, or Universality, which (since the Gospel has been preached
throughout the World, and both Jew and Gentile are made one in Christ, are
baptized into one Body) is no improper Mark of the Church, but very falsely
applied by the Papists, to themselves; and with an Arrogance no where to be
equalled, but among the proud Pagans, who boasted of nothing more than the
Latitude of their Superstition, and that they only were true Catholics; that
all Faith, and Religion was theirs; that the Jews were ignorant of the Gods of
their Fathers; observed the Institutions of a private Spirit, a Lawgiver of a
singular and separating Humor; and therefore were no better than downright
Heretics, and Schismatics, a Sect distinct from, and contrary unto the
Religion of the whole World besides; which is no more in effect than what
Tacitus, one of their wisest and most sober Writers affirms; quo sibi in
posterum gentem firmaret, novos ritus contrariosque cateris mortalibus indidit;
Moses, says he, that he might have a People of his own, instructed that Nation
in Rites and Customs quite contrary to those which were generally received.

They profane those things which we esteem Holy, Profana illie omnia quae apud
nos sacra.
and they tolerate what we prohibit.

Hitherto you see, who thought themselves the Catholics, if not the
Roman Catholics in those days; for to note this by the way, it will be very
hard to make Sense of the composition, by any other Figure than that which they
used, when they denoted absolute Universality, by Romanus Orbis, and Romanum
Imperium; and made Romanitas to signify the whole World, only that which they
called Barbaria excepted; Romana Dominatio, i. e. Humani Generis, says Florus.

2. Another Mark of the Church is Antiquity, which they much glory in, as if
theirs were truly ancient, and ours a novel, upstart Religion. Notwithstanding
our learned Writers, have abundantly showed, not only, when the Errors we
protest against, were not in the Church, but the particular time, and occasion
of the commencement of many of them, tho not a few of those Tares, were sown in
the most ignorant and sleepy Ages, and brought forth by such gradual
Alterations, that they might not so easily be discerned in their Productions
and Progress, as in their Maturity; but this is besides our present
undertaking, which was only to show that this Pretense also, was a great
support of Gentilisme. Si longa aetas authoritatem Religionibus conciliat,
servanda est tot saeculis Fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents qui secuti
sunt saeliciter suos. Symmachi. Ep. ad Theod.
Its Orators and Advocates upon all occasions, set forth the Antiquity of their
Rites and Ceremonies, and the Innovations of Christianity. Where was your
Religion before Luther? say the Papists to us; and where was yours before Jesus
of Nazareth? said the Pagans to the first Christians. When Acts 17.19.
St. Paul preached the Gospel at Athens, the Philosophers there asked in Scorn,
What the new Doctrine was, whereof he spoke? and the Historian calls the
Christians, Christianos genus hominum novae and maleficae superstitionis.
Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Not. Ecclesiae. cap. 4.
Men of a new and mischievous Superstition.

3. A third Mark of the Church, which they think suits theirs very well, is a
Power of Working Miracles: we cannot yield, that this is a perpetual visible
Note of the true Church, as is pretended.

Miracles indeed are the clearest Evidences of Divine Truth and Authority, and
the most immediate Credentials of Heaven. Our blessed Savior attested his
Divinity, and the Truth of his Gospel thereby, and in the Churches Infancy,
gave his Apostles the same Power of confirming their Doctrine: but many good
Reasons have been given to show, that there is not the same need, and use of
them now, as then there was; and how far the Devil by the Agility, and Subtilty
of his Nature, may impose upon the Senses of Men, and puzzle them with strange
Appearances, I shall not now enquire; nor endeavor to refute the pretense of
the Romanists in this kind, by discovering the Vanity and Extravagancy of their
lying Legends, only to be named, in a place, and time fitter for Laughter and
Disport, than this wherein we are. Nor shall I stay to show, how little cause
they have to boast of this Faculty, if they were more expert in it, than indeed
they are; Seeing our Savior and his Apostles have prophesied of the latter
times, that in a general Apostasy from the Faith, Great Wonders should be
wrought, Mat. 24.24.
able to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; and that those
especially who would not receive the Love of the Truth, through an effectual
working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11.
in lying Wonders, and strong Delusions, should be brought to believe Lies.

But my Business here also is to show, that the Heathens talked as much, and
upon as good Grounds, of this Gift of Miracles, as they do; it is well known
how famous Pythagoras was for it, in the Writings of Porphyry, and Apollonius,
Tyaneus, in those of Philostratus, and Hierocles; Histor. lib. 4.
besides what is said of Vespasian by Tacitus, and those wonderful
Manifestations of the Divine Power, and Presence in the Roman Armies, which
Balbus boasted of: Lib. 2. de not. Deorum. p. 27.
yea the idle and rediculous Reports, of the frequent removals of the Chapel
of Loretto, from one Country, and from one Place to another, by invisible
Hands, in its most creditable Appearance, seems to be but the counter-part of a
Heathenish Wonder; That, I mean, of the Temple of Diana's removal out of the
Isle of Zazinthus, unto Saguntum in Spain, as it is related by Pliny.

4. Another Mark of the Church with them, is outward Splendour and Temporal
Prosperity; of which we read nothing in Scripture, and it agrees much better
with the Condition of Paganism, and Mahumetanism, than this of Christianity.
The Roman Orator, Cicer. Orat. de Haruspic.
from the flourishing Greatness, the many Victories and Triumphs of that
Empire, infers the Truth and Goodness of its Religion; and the Idolatrous Jews,
will not be put out of conceit with their abominable Superstitions, because
they prospered and fared well in them; Jer. 44.17.
We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our Mouth, to burn Incense
to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings to her, as we have
done, we and our Fathers, our Kings, and our Princes in the Cities of Judah,
and in the Streets of Jerusalem. But why so resolute and obstinate in your way?
Why? Because we have this Catholic Argument that we are in the right outward
Plenty, Health and Prosperity, as it follows; for then had we plenty of
Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil.

I might here add, That the Heathens have the same plea with them, for
uninterrupted Continuance, Number, and Variety of Professors: but I forbear
this, because it is no reproach to true Christians that they are a little
Flock, seeing we are assured by Scripture Testimony that the whole World in a
manner lies in Wickedness.

I proceed to examine the Popes pretended Titles of Supremacy and
Infallibility. It has been observed that old Babel, who was the Foundress of
Idols, and the Mother of all Heathenish Superstitions, was the first Pattern in
the World of ambitious Dominion. And,

1. For the Supremacy of our new and mystical Babel, it seems to derive from
that Lordship, Mark 10.42.
which was exercised by those that ruled over the Gentiles. And indeed that
Authority which the Historian attributes to the Pontifex Maximus, may suit new
Rome, Dionys. Halic. Ant. Romans l. 2.
as well as old. The High Priests have great power among the Romans, and are
the Lords and Controllers of their most important Affairs; they decide all
Religious Controversies between the Commonalty, the Magistracy, and the
Ministry; they call all Magistrates and Priests to account for the exercise of
their Authority. And what follows in the same Author, shows, in how great
repute they were.

2. For their Infallibility. (...), etc. They determine all Differences,
relating either to Traditional or Novel Customs in Religion. I know the Papists
would fain parallel the Infallibility of their Chair with that of Moses, and
endeavor to confirm it by a seeming Parity of Reason in their case with that
of the Jews, Thou shall come to the Priests, the Levites, Deuteronomy. 17.9, 11.
and the Judge that shall be in those days, etc. Thou shall not decline from the
Sentence that they shall show thee, to the right Hand, nor to the left. But it
is apparent, they were to judge according to Law; and therefore the Jewish Gloss
would fit these Men's Purpose, Glossa Hebraica.
better than the Text it self, If the Judge shall tell thee that the right Hand
is the left, and the left the right, thou must believe him. To which that known
Saying of Bellarmin's very well agrees, If the Pope shall desine Virtue to be
Vice, and Vice Virtue, we must take it to be so upon his Credit.

But I proceed to examine the Religious Practices, Opinions and Ceremonies, of
the Roman Church, and to compare them with those of the Heathens.

And here I must not enlarge upon Particulars, because I have so many to name,
but shall be most brief in those that are of an obvious and ordinary
Observation. I begin with;

1. The Canonization of Saints.

Here the Pope assumes the very same Authority which the Roman Senate
challenged in the Apotheosis of their Emperors. As will appear, by comparing
the Power and Rites of Canonization in Bellarmin, Bellarmin de Sanctorum
Beatitudine. l. 2. c. 7. Alexand. ab Alex. Genial. dies Herod. Hist. Romans l. 4.
Dr. Jackson 's Works, lib. 5. p. 937.
with those of the Gentile Consecrations: Yea to make the Parallel more
complete, as the Deification of Antinous was countenanced with feigned
Relations, and the appearance of a new Star; So are Revelations frequently
pretended, to credit the Popish Sanctifications; and surely where Reason does
not only desert, but oppose them, as in this case of making their Gods and
Mediators, they had need be well furnished with Revelations. The second thing I
shall instance in, is,

2. Their praying to Saints and Angels.

Which seems to be the very same thing condemned by the Apostle in the
Revolters of the latter times, under the title of (...), which we translate
Doctrine of Devils; 1 Timothy 4.1.
but the most learned Mr. Joseph Mede, The Apostasy of the latter times.
Doctrines of Demons. These Demons in the Heathens Divinity, were an inferior
fort of Deified Powers, Mediating Spirits betwixt the Supreme Deities and
mortal Men, according to that of Plato, Plato's Symposion.
(...), etc. God does not mix himself with Men by any immediate Communications,
but all Converse, and Conference between the Gods, i. e. the Dii superi, the
Superior Gods and us is managed by Demons. They receive and present our
Prayers, they return our Blessings, and confer our Rewards. And it is Celsus
his Doctrine, Origin. contra Celsum. lib. ^.
that they must be confided in, have Oblations and Prayers offered to
propitiate them as their Laws require; and he calls them, the Peers of the
Heavenly Kingdom, chief Ministers, and Officers of the High God. And these were
the Souls of Men, famous in their life time for some worthy Deeds, renowned and
honored after Death, as a middle and inferior sort of Gods; Multi Christiani
Divos, Divasque non aliter venerantur quam Deum; nec video in multis quid sit
discrimen inter eorum opinionem de Sanctis, and id quod Gentiles putabant de
suis Diis. Lud. Viv. com. in Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 8. c. ult.
and by (...), 1 Cor. 10.20. which we translate a Sacrificing to Devils, may as
well, if not more properly, be meant, a sacrificing to those Demons, to the
Souls of brave Men surviving after Death, and supposed to be in a Capacity of
doing good or evil to Men upon Earth.

Let us now consider whether the Papists praying to Angels and Saints departed,
their burning Lights and Perfumes to them, presenting them with Oblations and
Vows, do not exactly resemble this Pagan Daemonolatry, and equal, if not
exceed, the Idolatry and Superstition of their Devotion herein.

The Advocates for Popery indeed pretend that there are many great differences
in the Case; As, 1. That the Heathens adored wicked Men either altogether
unworthy of any, or worthy of disgraceful Memory; whereas their Church worships
none, but such as were of eminent Deserts. 2. That whereas the Heathens invoked
their Demigods, as the immediate Authors and Bestowers of particlar Blessings
and good Things; they pray to the Saints only as Intercessours, and more
prevalent Supplicants to Almighty God. 3. That they acknowledge one Supreme
Superexcellent Being, and reserve for him a Sovereign Honor as his peculiar;
whereas the Heathens either did not own one Supreme Being, or worshipped the
Devil as such, and gave that singular Honor which was due to God, to the
Creature.


By such distinctions as these they endeavor to clear themselves from any
Participation with Heathens in this their Idolatry.

But these Pretenses have been so well examined, and so fully confuted by
others in every particular, that a brief reply to each will be sufficient at
present. As to the first, it is plain, that, Bochart. Geogr. Sacr.


1. Many of those whom the Heathens worshipped were great and good Men, Theoph.
Gale, Court of the Gentiles.
and it has been noted by some learned Persons that the Gentiles worshipped
Adam and Eve, Noah, Shem and Japhet, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. under several
other Names. And if they worshipped evil Men, it was upon mistake, such as our
Romanists, with all their infallibilities, are not sure to escape, and perhaps
Thomas Becket and Father Garnet may be found at last not much better Saints
then some of their Vertuoso's. However, the Idolatry of the Service consists,
not in the qualification of the Creature to whom it is addressed; those that
worship good Angels, as well as those that sacrifice to Devils, are alike
guilty of it, because they give that homage to the Creature, which is due only
to the Creator, as it is remarked by our Apostle in the 25 verse of this 1
Chap. to the Romans, It is a worshipping or serving the Creature good or bad,
(...), besides the Creator, who is blessed for ever.

2ly. They pretend they only pray to Saints and Angels to pray with them, and
for them to God, the only giver of all things, and so are clear of that
Idolatry of the Heathens, in making Demons, or the Souls of dead Men the
Objects of their Adoration; and the Authors of their Blessings. But to this we
answer these things: And,

1. It plainly appears by such Practices of the Church of Rome, which the Popes
themselves have authorized, that their Invocation of a Saint does not consist
in a mere Ora pro nobis; but in imploring particular Blessings and Relief, and
some such as is proper for none but God or Christ to give. As in their Prayers
to St. Cosmas and St. Dominic, to keep them from all Diseases, as well of Soul
as of Body; that to St. Francis, to deliver them from the Bondage, Dr. More's
Antidote against Idolatry.
and Slavery of Sin; that to St. Andrew, for Grace to bear the Cross; and to
St. Nicholas against the Assaults of the Devil.

I need not instance in their Hyperdulias, their excessive Idolatries, Horae
Sanctae Mariae secundum usum Sarum.
in the Worship of the Blessed Virgin; praying upon all occasions in the same
Forms to Her, as to God the Father and Son; Psalterium beatae Mariae.
as appears in her Rosary, and elsewhere.

2. I answer, That if this Plea would acquit the Papists from Idolatry, the
Heathens have as good right to it, as they. For it is plain, They looked upon
their Demons or Dii Medioxumi, as Mediators, or Managers of their Affairs with
the Supreme God. Epist. ad Romans c. 1.
It was St. Ambrose's Observation, that those old Idolaters went to God by the
Creatures; as we procure access to an Earthly King, by some Court Favorite.

3. They plead they own one Supreme God, and make neither Saints nor Angels
equal unto him, and worship him with a peculiar Honor incommunicable to any
other: but the Heathens do not so, say they, as you have heard already.

For answer to this, I say;

1. That admit the Romanists make no Saints equal, to God the Father, or to any
Person in the Trinity, considered according to his Deity alone; yet it is a
high degree of Sacrilege, to mention their Merits, Blood and Sufferings, as
Motives for acceptance of their Prayers in our behalf; and to invest them with
Christ's Royal Titles and Prerogatives, as he is our High Priest and only Agent
in the holiest Tabernacle of Heaven; typified by the High Priest under the Law,
who was to officiate alone in the Holy of Holies.

3ly. Whereas they plead that they reserve a peculiar Honor for God, which
they call Latria, and give only Dulia, an inferior kind of Homage, a Service of
Love and Respect to Saints.

For answer hereunto, taking no notice of the presumption and dangerous
consequence of making distinctions, where the Lawgiver has made none: It is
plain by all Circumstances, that they give Religious Worship, however they call
it, to Saints in their Invocations, burning Incense, and the like. Yea their
own Word Dulia, notes Religious Worship, as well as the other (...), Duliam
exhibebatis, you served them, Gal. 4.8.
which by Nature are not Gods. And it is observed that there is the same Word
for them both, in the Hebrew. That, to be sure, is Divine Worship which we give
to any Person or Thing; as being endowed with those Divine Properties, of
Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, to know our Thoughts, to hear our Prayers at a
distance, and to give relief in extraordinary and unknown ways. This Worship
the Papists give to their Saints and Angels; and tho they call it Dulia, it is
more than a civil Homage, the very same which the Scripture appropriates to
God, Arnob. lib. 7. p. 232.
and forbids us to give it to any other.

And whereas they pretend further, that Sacrifice is the only external Act of
Latria. It is very apparent that Supplication and Incense which they offer to
their Saints, By Dr. Cudworth. Dr. Stillingfleet.
were looked on both by Jews and Gentiles as the more solemn and divine parts
of Worship.

3. It has been cleared from all color of rational Doubt and Dispute, that
the Heathens acknowledged one Supreme Being, the Father of God's and Men. Acts
17.23.
And that he to whom they erected the Altar at Athens, was not the Devil, but
the God that made the World, and all things in it.

Neither did they equalize all with Jupiter, and use the same Form to him, and
to their Demigods and Heroicks; to whom they gave not an absolute and
sovereign, but such a kind of relative and subordinate Worship, as the Papists
profess due to Saints. So that if one be justified, the other cannot be
condemned; and if one be condemned, the other cannot be justified. Yea what
ever was Idolatry in the Heathens, the same is so in us, with aggravation, if
we commit it; because they had not so express a Declaration from God against
all Idolatry, as the Jews and Christians have.

But to proceed; if I had time, to instance in all Particulars: The Idolatry of
the Papists might be further discovered, by showing you how they imitate the
Heathens, in praying to several Saints, in several Distempers and Exigencies.
For besides their Honor for Aesculapius; Orig. contra Cells. l. 8. p 416.
Celsus tells us, that dividing Man's Body into 36 parts, each had its peculiar
Demon, or Guardian-God, and he names diverse of them. Yea the Popish Tutelar
Saints, such as St. Patrick, St. George, St. David, derive from the Genius's
and Heavenly Powers, which the Heathens believed did preside over Persons,
Cities, and Countries, according to that of Symachus; The Spirit of God which
governs this great World, has distributed its Protectors to every City.

According to the number of thy Cities, Judges 2.12.
so are thy Gods.

So that now upon the whole matter what was said of the Idolatrous Israelites.
They forsook the God of their Fathers, which brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, and served Baalim and Ashtaroth, may justly be applied to these
Christians, They forsook the Lord that brought them out of the Spiritual Egypt,
and worshipped Saints and Angels, and that with the Pagan Circumstances of
consecrated Altars, Images, and Temples. I may add to these, that the Papists
Prayers to Saints as well as to God, consist of vain Repetitions, witness the
fifty Ave Mary's in our Ladies Psalter, witness the fifteen short Ejaculations,
in that which they call the Psalter of Jesus, and their repeating the name of
Jesus thirty times in every one of them, which way of Devotion you know is
reproved by our Savior in the Practice and Doctrines of the Heathens. The next
thing we shall consider i^^

3. Their worshipping of Images

Notwithstanding the Doctrine of the Second Commandment, and Saint Paul's
signalizing the Sottishness and Folly of the Practice; notwithstanding the
general outcry of the Fathers against it, for several Centuries, their
forbidding sometimes the very making of Images, and disallowing the Art of
Painting for fear of this abuse, and the Decrees of so many Councils against
it; yet this Church, which would seem to reject for heretical or impious
whatsoever is not handed to them by the Fathers or Councils, has thought good
in her own Infallible Wisdom and great Devotion, no doubt, to bow very low, and
use more religious Ceremonies toward her Images, than the Heathens themselves
did to their's.

For was it not expressly decreed in a Provincial Council, Archbishop Usher's
Answ. to the Jesuits Challenge.
held at Oxford 1408, by Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, That it
should be commonly taught and preached by all, that the Cross and Image of the
Crucifix, and the rest of the Images of the Saints, in memory and honor of
them whom they figure, as also their Places and Relics, ought to be worshipped
with Processions, bending of the Knee, bowings of the Body, Incensings,
Kissings, Offerings, Lighting of Candles, and Pilgrimages, etc.

Yea in the Roman Catechism, set out by the order of the Council of Trent, is
not the Parish Priest required to declare to his Parishioners, not only that it
is lawful to have Images in the Church, but to give Honor and Worship to them?
etc.

And for their Practice I need say little, because it has been so fully
demonstrated by our most learned Dean of St. Paul's, and others of our Church:
1. That they set up Images in Churches over Altars, purposely to worship them.
2. That they consecrate those Images with Solemn Prayers for that purpose. 3.
They use all the Rites of Worship to them, which the Heathen Idolaters used to
their Images. 4. They make solemn Processions in honor of Images, carrying
them with as much Pomp and Ceremony, as ever the Heathens did their Idols. 5.
That they cover their Altars and Images, and omit to burn Incense before them
in the time of Lent, as the Heathens were wont to do at certain times.


Dii quoque templorum foribus celentur apertis. Ovid. Fast. l. 2.

Thure vacent Arae, stentque sine igne foci.
6. Their attributing Motion and Speech, and several miraculous Operations to
the Images of Christ and the blessed Virgin, has even as much Truth and Reason
in it, Lib. 5. Hist. lib. 1. c. 12.
as that which Livy and Valerius Maximus report of the moving and talking of
the Images of Fortune, and of Juno Moneta. I shall add no more upon this Head;
not only because so much has been said by our Protestant Writers, but because
their Casander plainly confesses, Casan. consul.
that their Peoples Adoration paid to Images and Statues, was equal to the
worst of the ancient Heathens.

4. Their Doctrine of Purgatory,

Which has no ground at all to stand upon in the Holy Scriptures, or as they
have framed and modelled it in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers; (if that
will give it any Support or Credit) was taught of old in the Heathens
discourses of their Acherusia, and their Rivers of Fire, which give a painful
Purgation of all the Spots and Stains of lesser Sins, and thereby prepare the
Soul for Admission into the Elysian Fields, Plato Phood.
the Regions of blessed Spirits. The next thing I shall take notice of, is;

5. Their Prayers and Oblations for the Dead.

That the Church Triumphant prays for this Militant, though they know not
particular Men's Cases (without a particular Revelation) I make no doubt at all;
and that Commemorations of the Dead, Prayers for them, and particular
Intercessions at the Celebration of the holy Eucharist, practiced in the
Ancient Church, cannot be denied. Arch Bishop Usher's Answ. to the Jesuit. p.
204. Vossii These. Theolog. 125.
Yet it must be yielded withal, that these Prayers and Intercessions had not
any Relation to Purgatory, being offered in their behalf whom they supposed to
be in a state of Rest and Happiness; and they consisted partly of Praises, and
Thanksgivings for the blessed Estate, which, the Party deceased was entered
upon; and partly of Supplications for the completion of their Bliss at the day
of Judgment, and the preservation of their Memory upon Earth, for the good
Example of the Living. But there is no Warrant or Precedent at all in Church
Antiquity, before the fourth Century, for the popish way of praying for the
Dead; their Oblations and Sacrifices either for the mitigation of
Purgatory-Pains, or deliverance out of them. Till then this was only the way of
the Heathen; As Arnobius, Lib. 2. adv. Gent.
in his Book against them, has observed. It was their general Practice to pray
for their departed Friends, and to offer Gifts, such as Honey, Milk and Wine for
them; Ovid. Fast. l. 2.
and the forecited Father informs us, that they sacrificed the Blood of certain
living Creatures for the Purgation of the Souls of Men: And Plato in his 2 Book
de Republica, tells us, that the dead are purged by Sacrifices; whereas the
Gospel, which Saint Paul desired to preach to his Romans, promises no relief at
all to the Dead, from the Prayers, Sacrifices or Merits of the Living;
forewarns us of no Wrath to come but what is eternal, no Fire but what is
unquenchable, no Torments but those of Hell, which are as immutable and
unmixed, as the Joys of Heaven; and makes the time of this Life, the only
accepted time, the day of Salvation, exhorting us in this our day to consider
the things that belong to our Peace, to our future Happiness, or Misery; to
make our Calling and Election sure, and to work out our own Salvation, not
trusting to others to do it for us, when the Night of Death comes upon our
selves, wherein no Man can work.

The Second Sermon.
HItherto I have showed, how little there is of Gospel in the Romish
Canonization of, or praying to Saints and Angels, worshipping of Images, Their
Doctrine of Purgatory; and lastly their Prayers and Oblations for the dead: and
^o begin again where we left, tho we cannot take notice of all their Pleas and
Defenses, for their praying for the dead; yet we shall not conceal one which
they rely much upon, and that is, what Damascen, if the Book de Defunctis be
his, ^ells us of a dead Man's Skull, that spoke thus unto Macarius the Egyptian
Anchoret; When thou do offer thy Prayers for the dead, then do we feel some
little Consolation. But this is no evidence against Moses and the Prophets,
against the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles.

But this Brainless speaking Skull, minds me to consider in the next place;

6. Their great Devotion to Relics.

The Members, Blood, Bones; yea the Habits, or any of the Goods and
Appurtenances of their Saints departed, to which they ascribe as miraculous
Effects of several Natures, as the Speech of this Skull: only the rarity of
this is, It was not the Skull of a Saint, but of a Heathen Priest; as the Greek
Meneology will have it, and Thomas Aquinas takes it for granted.

But if we consider how idly and lavishly they Romance, in extolling the
wonder-working Power of some of their Relics, we must conclude that the
Confidence of the Reporters, and the Credulity of the Hearers, are the greatest
Miracles in the case, if their sottish Adoration of them, be not still more
prodigious. I will not present you with Heathen Precedents and Practices, to
aggravate, but rather a little to excuse the fondness of this Superstition;
which sure they would be more ashamed of, if it were not a little countenanced
by such Stories, as Plutarch reports concerning the Preservation and devout
Adoration of Theseus's Bones; In Vit. These.
and by what such a Sage-Philosopher as Plato says, concerning the Worship they
gave to the very Shrines of their Hero's, or deceased Worthies, and by that
general Practice of the old Romans, not only of preserving, but reverencing
their Bones and Ashes, Serve. in Virg.
as their Patrons and Defenders, tanquam Tutelares Patronos, Lares atque
Penates. But I proceed to take notice of,

7. The Worship they give to the consecrated Host.

And I choose the rather to speak of it just now, because it may be, and has
been accounted, one Species of the Idolatry of Relics; (The Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, being the Mystical Relics which he left us, as
Monuments of his Death till he come.) If it may not more properly be reduced to
Image Worship, as being the Adoration of a Sign, or Symbol; which soever it be,
I must confess, Mr. Med.
with the learned Mede, it has a strain above the abomination of the Gentiles,
who, tho they supposed some Presence of their Demons in their Images, and
Relics, yet were they never so blockish, as to think their Images and
Relics transubstantiated into Demons. Caster. Enchyrid. Fisher contra
Oecolampadium. l. 1.2.
Yea they themselves acknowledge of their own Accord, that if the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation be not true, (which it cannot be, unless all the Sense and
Reason of Mankind be false.) the Idolatry of the Heathens in worshipping some
Golden or Silver Statue, is more excusable than theirs, in worshipping a Bit of
Bread.

8. As for the Peoples receiving in one kind; (contrary to the continued
Practice of the Church for a thousand years together) tho it cannot be supposed
to be of an Original purely Heathen; Baron. lib. 4. c. 26. p. 633. Bellarm. de
Eucharistia. l. 4. c. 24.
yet for the Credit of its Antiquity, Baronius and Bellarmine, do derive it
from the Practice of the Manichees, their abominating of Wine, and their
willingness to come to the Communion, (at least to avoid the Law and Censures
of the Church) if they might receive the Bread without the Cup. Now from the
Characters the Fathers give us of these Manicheans, they were rather Infidels,
and Heathens, than Christians; Tertullian.
one of them calls them, alterius Divinitatis Haereti^i.

9. Their locking up the Scriptures in an unknown Tongue; if it was not taken
up in imitation of that Roman Law, which prohibited the common reading of the
Sybilline Prophecy's; yet it justifies it self by the same Reasons: Those were
not to be read, or published sine Authoritate, and Jussu Senatus, without the
Command and License of the Senate; As Tully, Vid. Isaac Casaub. Exercit. ad
apparat. Baron. Annal. p. 66.
Livy, Dio, inform us; and the Reason of their Concealment was, lest Private
and Factious Persons should under the countenance of their Authority, make any
innovations in their Religious Ceremonies, or in the Civil Government of their
Country.

I know, They are ready to defend this Practice, by a more worthy and
warrantable Example, Maimon. Praef. Par. 11. more Nevochim. Hill. Jes. in
Hottingeri, Thesau. Theol. p. 78.
viz. The great Caution which the Jews used, in explaining the more Difficult
and Metaphysical parts of their Religion; and particularly their prohibiting
all, but wise and knowing Persons, to study the Vision of Ezekiel's Wheels, or
any other abstruse, intricate part of Divinity; but their End in this, was
rather to prescribe a prudent Method to the People in reading the Scriptures,
than to take them wholly out of their Hands. Let us next see whether they can

10. Say any thing more to the Purpose for their Prayers in Latin.

The learned Isaac Casaubon, in his Answer to the Epistle of Cardinal Peron
(having noted, that King James read in a Book of a certain Popish English
Priest, that Prayers in an unknown Tongue were more effectual and prevalent
than those which were understood) tells them plainly; Quod insulsissimum
delirium ab Ethnicis primo excogitatum.
This most senseless dotage was of Heathen Extraction. In like manner, the
Valentinian Heretics used Hebrew, an unknown Language in their Worship, (...),
that they might thereby raise the Wonder, if not the Devotion of the simple
Vulgar; as Eusebius informs us. Eusebius. Hist.


11. Their placing such Virtue and Efficacy in the Sign of their Cross, their
Agnus Dei's, etc. which cannot rationally be attributed to them, seems parallel
to the Bacchus Laureus, to the (...), or Amulets among the Heathen; or to the
Precatiunculae, or little Prayers, that the Turk carries about with him, as a
Defensative against all Dangers, and Diabolical Assaults.

12. The Papists using Spittle in Baptism, seems to be derived from that
Heathenish Rite the Satyrist refers to.

Ecce Avia, Persius Satyr 2.
aut metuens Divum matertera, cunis
Exemit puerum, frontemque atque uda labella
Infami digito, and lustralibus ante salivis
Expiat, --
And Pliny tells us at large, Lib. 28. c. 4.
what wonderful Virtue they attributed to Spittle, with Allusion whereunto
Athanasius calls the superstitious Dotages of Priscilla, and Montanus, (...),
old Women's Spittle.

13. The Ceremony of sprinkling Holy Water was a Heathenish Rite, used in the
Sanctifications and Lustrations of the Capital.

But River-Waters were thought to be less purgative, therefore those only of
the Sea, were used for the Expiation of greater Crimes, Alexand. ab Alexan.
dies. Genesis
Propter vim igneam magnopere purgationibus consentaneam. For which Cause,
questionless the Papists in the Composition of their Holy Water, make use of
Salt, as one of the chief Ingredients, that it may come more near in nature to
the Water of the Sea.

I do not blame the Heathens much for their Washings and Cleansings Preparatory
to their holy Services, nor the Christians in St. Chrysostom's time, for
washing their Hands at the Church-door before entrance; but I blame them very
much for using them as expiatory to wash away the Guilt, not only of other
Crimes, but of Murder it self; as Orestes did in Pausanias after the killing of
his Mother; and we condemn the same end of using it, much more in the Papists:
For it is their's too; Haec Aqua benedicta deleat mihi delicta.
Let this holy Bowl, cleanse my Soul.


14. Burning Candles by dead Bodies, was innocent, and useful to them that
watched by them, the night before the Interment; but when they thought the
departed Souls benefitted thereby, the Ceremony was infected with Heathenish
Superstition, and was condemned by the Counsel of Eliberis.

Temperance and Mortification, are enjoined by our Christianity, and discreet
Abstinence and Fasting are very useful to call off our Minds from the
blandishments of the Sense, and serve many good ends of Religion: but this
change of Diet which the Papists account fasting, resembles a Superstition,
which the Jews were guilty of, Declar. Erasm. adversus censuras Theolog. Paris.
p. 41, 42.
in their way of eating; as Erasmus confesses.

Again, though the freedom of Man's Will, was the current Doctrine of the
Fathers, for all the first Ages until St. Augustine's time; and God in
Scripture with respect to his own Covenant, is said to be just, as well as
merciful in remembering our labors of Love; Smith's Select Discourses, p. 288.
Hottinger. Thesaur. Philo. p. 554.
yet the Popish Opinion of Free Will, and the Meritoriousness of their good
Works, is as inexcusable as the Notion of the corrupt Pharisees about them.

And both they, and the Talmudists, have the same Plea for their unwritten
Traditions.

But I have not time to insist upon more Particulars, either of Jewish or
Heathenish Corruptions in the Roman Church; and it will be the less needful,
because I have already given you some of the most considerable Instances of
their foul Relapses and Apostacies, parallel with the greatest Defections in
the Jewish Church, the Sin of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, their worshipping the
true God by Images, the Calves of Dan and Bethel, and the way of Ahab their
worshipping of other Gods, besides him, viz. Baalim-Demons, inferior Gods, and
Mediators, exactly accomplishing that Prophecy of St. John, Rev. 11.2. that the
second, or outmost Court of the Temple, which is the second state of the
Christian Church, Apostasy of the latter Times.
(as Mr. Mede has observed) together with the holy City, should be trodden
down by the Gentiles, (that is, overwhelmed by the Gentiles Idolatry) forty
two Months.

So that in the close of this Argument, we will allow the Antiquity of the
Romish Religion, that in many parts of it, it was elder than the Apostles, or
the Preachings of Christ himself; and to their fierce charge of Novelism we may
justly oppose that of the learned Scaliger, Scal. respons. ad Serrar. Min.
Nos novatores non sumus, sed vos estis veteratores, Our Religion is not new,
bearing the same Date with the Gospel of our Savior, but yours a little too
old, professed at Rome before ever St. Paul, or St. Peter preached there, in
many Parts symbolizing with that of your Unchristened Ancestors, the Gentile
Fathers.

But some will say, Why should we object that, as a matter of Reproach to the
Papists and to their Religion, which they glory in as a convincing Proof of its
Truth, and Goodness, its agreeableness to the Law of Nature, and the best
Reason of Mankind.

For answer hereunto,

1. We must acknowledge, that Christianity is the sum or perfection of
whatsoever Things were laudable, or passable in any Religion that has been in
the World.

2. That those Practices in the Heathens, which were not the Products of
Superstition, but Dictates of the Law of Nature we allow and embrace;
commending all things that were solemn, decent, and comely in their Religion.

3. That as our Savior was pleased to retain many of the received Practices
among the Jews, only with such necessary Alterations as made them suit with the
Doctrine, and nature of Christianity. So the Primitive Church, retained some
Ceremonies, which the Heathen used, relating to the outward Order, and Decency
of their Ministeries, and Worship; such as were the Habits of their Priests,
their Fasts, Vigils, Festivals, Processions, etc. And no doubt it was well done
at first to accommodate to Christianity, such customs of the Heathens as had
nothing of Idolatry or Superstition in them, Pertinaci P^ganismo m^tatione s^b
e^tum est quum rei i^ to um subla io potius irritasset. Beda.
nothing of peculiar Opposition to the Gospel, to procure thereby a more easy
Entertainment to its Doctrines, and in some measure to abate the usual
Prejudices, which all new and strange Institutions meet withal.

4. Some Compliances which were useful, and necessary in the Infant-state of
the Church, might, and did become hurtful afterward; and many great Men
complained betimes, of the retaining of Pagan Rites, even of such, as were in
their own nature indifferent; (...) p. 391.
particularly because the Gentiles used in the Services of their Idols, to sit
down immediately after they had prayed; Tertullian would not have the
Christians do so. De O^at. c. (...).


5. If there be any thing doctrinal in their Rites, the Observation of them
will be an owning of their Religion, a joining Christ with Belial, Light with
Darkness; a corrupting and deflouring of the Purity, and Chastity of our
Savior's Gospel.

6. We have instanced for the most part, in Ceremonies of this nature; and have
proved as fully, as well as we could in so little time and space; that if there
ever was any such thing as Superstition, and Idolatry, in the Heathen World;
there is now too much of them in the Roman Church, and the Christian Faith so
thoroughly infected with them, that in so general a Corruption, we cannot but
contemplate, and lament that Apostasy, or falling away of Christians, foretold
by our Apostle, 2 These. 2. And by these Spiritual Adulteries, conclude who is
the Whore of Babylon, the Mother of the Formcations, and Abominations of the
Earth; who in our days, go a whoring after the Heathen, Ezekiel 23.30.
and are polluted with their ldols.

Therefore to apply this.

1. What we have heard of the Church of Rome, justifies our Separation from
her; we depart no further from her, than she has done from Christianity; and
renounce only the Heathenism and other foreign Corruptions, which she has
mixed with the Gospel of our Savior.

We do not voluntarily make a Schism upon the account of a stinted Liturgy, a
few indifferent Ceremonies, or some little Defects, and Disorders in the lower
Forms of Ecclesiastical Polity; but are forced to separate from such Idolatries
and Superstitions, as are altogether inconsistent with the Doctrine, and
Worship of the Gospel.

2. It concerns those that would not partake of the Sins of Rome, the mystical
Babylon, and receive of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4.
to come out of her, according to our Apostle's Advice, to come out from among
them, to be separate, and not to touch the unclean Thing. 2 Cor 6.17.
For what Concord has Christ with Belial, or the Temple of God, with Idols?

3. Let us highly magnify the undeserved and distinguishing Goodness of God,
for delivering us from those Heathenish and Abominable Superstitions, wherewith
for some time the whole Church, in a manner, was, and still a great part of it
is, overspread, and restoring to us the clear, and pure Light of his Gospel;
and let us most humbly and heartily pray for the continuance of this Blessing.

Thou have brought up a Vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the Heathen and
planted it; let not the Wild Boar out of the Wood root it up, nor the Wild
Beast of the Field devour it.

Yea, it concerns us to bless God for delivering us from the Cruelties of the
'Papists, wherein they also Gentilize (as I should have showed if I had had
time) and particularly from the most merciless Design of this day; a Design
which at once outwitted the Malice of past, and the Imitation of future
Conspiracies, and which if it had taken effect, would not only have satisfied
the Antichristian Spirit of the worst of Men, but (if any thing would) the
Hatred, Enmity, and Revenge, of the Devil himself, who was a Murderer from the
beginning. Cursed be their Anger, for it was sierce; and their Wrath, for it
was cruel; But for ever blessed be God, who brings the Counsel of the Heathen
to naught. And blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and the People whom
he has chosen for his own Inheritance. We thy People, and Sheep of thy Pasture
will give thee Thanks for ever, we will show forth thy Praise to all
Generations.

4. Let us endeavor to consirm our selves by these Considerations in the true
Faith, which we profess, and in a steadfast Obedience to the pure Gospel of our
Savior. Not learning the way of the Heathen; Jer. 10.2.
not giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Demons; 1 Timothy 4 1.
To such as speak Lies in Hypocrisy. forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from Meats.

Whatever there is of Gospel and true Christianity in the Church of Rome, we
have it already; and what is more, either purely of their own Invention, or
borrowed from the Heathens, who have changed the Truth of God into a Lie, I
hope we shall be content to want. We hold the Foundation Jesus Christ, and
reject none of the Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, which they built upon it,
but the superadditions of Hay and Stubble; such Doctrines and Practices of
theirs, as are not to be found in Scripture, nor in the Creeds, Homilies, and
Canons of the Primitive Church.

Notwithstanding their great boasts of Antiquity (which prevail much where they
are believed) it is a plain case, that the Popery of their Religion if not new
in it self, is new in the Church, never professed by any Christians for the
first three hundred Years, and as to the grosser parts of it, not known in the
Church, until several Ages after.

We may patiently hear them upbraid us with Singularity, and Innovation, when
we are assured our Doctrines are as old, and as universal as our Savior's
Gospel; and we may allow them to glory in any thing older and more Catholic
than that. Their Religion will not appear to us more sacred and venerable,
because much of its Attire, many of its Rites and Ceremonies, are more antique
than ours; and because it is adorned in those Fashions of the World, those
Vanities of the Gentiles, which as they were before Christianity, so were to
pass away at its Appearance, and where they remain, or rather have been
reassumed, are the Blemish, and Disgrace, if not the Disease, and Leprosy, of
that most excellent Institution.

But on the contrary, I hope we shall be more fervent, more settled and
constant in our Affection to, and Zeal for our own Religion, when we consider
that it is sound and pure Christianity, the only Catholic Religion, which has
in it all that is truly good of all other Religions, without their
Adulterations and Debasements. It is a Religion which does not allow us to give
Gods Glory to another, Isa. 42.8.
nor his Praise to graven Images. It admits neither Saints nor Angels to share
in God's Worship, nor owns any other Mediators, but his Son Jesus Christ. It
is a Religion which enjoins none, but Reasonable Services, which allows us to
search the Scriptures, and prove all things; not exacting an Implicit Faith,
or Blind Obedience. It gives us to understand what God says to us, and what we
pray for to him, in the use of an English Bible and Liturgy. It is a Religion
which makes no more Sacraments, than our Savior did, but gives us them entire.
In a word, it is a Religion which is pure, and peaceable, which dispenses with
no Duties of Piety, Righteousness, or Charity; which teaches Obedience to
Governors, and abhors Rebellion and Treason, as one of the worst things in
Popery.

Methinks no worldly Considerations, no Hopes or Fears should cause us to waver
in, much less to depart from, a Religion, so purely Christian as this; So
Profitable unto all things in our Politic, and private Capacities, maintaining
Peace, and Property, the Power of Sovereigns, and Rights of Subjects; Giving to
God the things that are Gods, and to Caesar those that are his, no way
oppressing the meanest of the People in their civil Concerns, and most
effectually promoting the spiritual Welfare, and Happiness of all Men;
methinks, I say, we should not easily be persuaded out of such a Religion, at
least not to change it for that which we have heard described, one depraved
with the most fond Superstitions and Idolatrous Rites of Gentilism; nor indeed
for any other, which under the pretense of greater Purity, does really comply
with, and advance the Interests of this. What true Good can we propound to our
selves by such an Exchange? Let us therefore resolve to continue, and fix where
we are, Saying with those in another Case; Whither shall we go, thou have the
words of Eternal Life?

The End of the second Sermon.
THE GOSPEL Preached to them that are At ROME Also. IN TWO SERMONS, On the 30th
of January, 1680.
The Third Sermon.
ROMANS 1.15. So as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that
are at Rome also.


HItherto I have been discovering the Antichristian Errors of professed
Papists, in order to your Confirmation and Establishment, rather than (what I
yet most heartily desire) their Conviction and Recovery, because I know not
whether this Discourse may reach any of them.

There are another sort of Men who think themselves far enough from Rome, or at
least would have us think them so; who upon a true enquiry will be found to be
their Also. I mean these among our selves, who whilst they loudly protest
against the Heathenish Superstitions, and Idolatries of the Papists; do yet
combine with them, yea with the worst of them, the Jesuits, in many of their
Principles and Practices, no less unchristian; and strengthen the Hands and
Hearts of those our implacable Enemies, by dividing the Body, and consequently
wasting the Force of our Protestant Church.

I would not at this time especially, discourage the Zeal of any well meaning
Protestants, by aggravating the Errors and Irregularities of it; but sure they
must needs be very shallow Headed, if they are indeed true Hearted, and well
meaning Protestants, who think in these Days to serve their Cause, to bring
Honor and Security to their Religion, by breaking the Orders and Unity of our
Church, by mutinying against their Leaders, and drawing off into Parties, and
Factions, from the main of their Strength, if not turning their Weapons upon,
and making at those as their Enemies, who have been at least their Companions,
if not their Champions, in the common Quarrel. In order to the tempering and
directing of these Men's Zeal, I would in the Spirit of Meekness, the Spirit of
the Gospel, propound these things to their sober Thoughts.

1. That however they may value themselves upon their Courage and Forwardness,
yet they will never be crowned with due Praise, nor have any just cause to
triumph in their Victories, unless they strive lawfully, acting within the
compass of their own Calling, and Quality, not violently invading other Men's
Offices, but patiently waiting for God's Blessing upon the faithful discharge
of their own.

Those that are otherwise persuaded, are in that Particular, at Rome also.
Where we all know it is taught and practiced, as sound Doctrine; that a very
good End does Legitimate and Sanctify the worst Means that can be used for
attaining it.

2. If the Power, Policies, and Advantages of our Enemies be at this time very
dreadful, as indeed they are, I would advise them to consider; whether the
Protestant Cause is like to gain any thing, by their representing their Number
and Strength, to be more still, and more terrible than really it is: I mean, by
reducing every thing to Popery, which suits not their singular Models, and
Forms of Government and Worship.

Sure if the Fathers and Sons in this our National Church, are for the most
part Popishly affected, as too many of them, do most disingenuously, and indeed
dishonestly suggest, the very Heart of our Religion would fail for want of its
wonted and proper Succors and Support.

How formidable would the Interest of Rome then be, if there were none but
disagreeing, and scattered Forces to oppose it?

His Majesty in his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, 1660. was
pleased to signify, That in his Converse with the most Learned of the Reformed
Churches abroad; they did always with great Submission, and Reverence,
acknowledge and magnify the Established Government of the Church of England, and
the great Countenance and Shelter the Protestant Religion received by it,
before the late unhappy Times; and that, many of them have with great Ingenuity
and Sorrow confessed, that they were too easily misled by Misinformations and
Prejudice into some Disesteem of it; as if it had too much complied with the
Church of Rome, whereas they now acknowledge it to be the best Fence God has
raised against Popery in the World.

Those that go about to pull down this Bulwark, or fire this Castle, for fear
it should surrender to the Enemy; I would desire them to think in time, how
naked and defenseless they will leave the Protestant Religion; and whether they
do not really expose what they pretend to preserve, and strengthen the Building
of the Roman Church, with every Stone they take from Ours.

3. I would desire the Beginners of the Separation, to reflect seriously upon
the Issues of their former Practices. I mean, not only the shedding of so much
Blood, the Blood of their Equals, their Nobles, their King himself; in pursuit
of the Quarrel they began, but the great occasion they gave thereby (tho I hope
some of them unwittingly) of Triumph to our Popish Adversaries.

We know very well how ready they were to throw back upon our Religion, that
heavy Charge of Rebellion, which we had so justly laid upon theirs; and by
noting the irregular Practices of such Zealous Professors, how much they
endeavored to depretiate and beat down the esteem of the Protestant Religion,
where it was most valued, to raise some Men's Aversions, to an abhorrence of
it, and to confirm and heighten the dislike of others, into the utmost degree
of Contempt. The generality of weak, but honest Christians, who observed things
in their naked and proper Appearances, without the colorings of either side,
the Presbyterian Excuses, or the Popish Aggravations, were put into great
Doubts, and waverings of Mind, which part they should adhere to, the Idolatrous
Papist, or the Sacrilegious Protestant.

That Learned and truly Moderate Man Monsieur Amyrant, in the Epistle
Dedicatory of his Paraphrase upon the Psalms, to His Majesty that now is, gives
him to understand; how much the Proceedings of the Puritans here, were objected
to him by a great Peer of France, in way of Reproach to the Protestant
Religion, as if it moved to Sedition, and Rebellion; and were a perfect Enemy
to Monarchical Government.

And the blessed Martyr King Charles the Father; fearing lest the Scandal of
the late Troubles might be objected to his Son, against our established
Religion: He furnishes him with this Answer. That scarce any one that has
been a Beginner or Prosecutor of the late War against the Church, the Laws, and
Himself, either was, or is a true Lover, Embracer or Practicer of the
Protestant Religion established in England, which neither gives such Rules, or
ever before set such Examples.

I would desire those yet surviving, who did begin, or carry on that unhappy
War, after so fair a time of cooling, to consider calmly what it ended in, how
much our Religion lost, and how much Popery gained by it; and that they would
have a very jealous Eye upon every Discontent, and turbulent Motion which tends
the same way again, and not justify those Actions now, which sometimes since,
in their own Acknowledgment, could not be pardoned without a great Act of Mercy
and Oblivion.

Yea on this day of our sorrowful Reflection, upon the most execrable Treason
that ever the Sun saw; (for that against our Savior the Sun would not look
upon) How much does it concern us to bewail, not only that last, and most
daring Villainy; but all the causeless Complaints, the Factions, and the
Fightings, that made way for it: Endeavoring by all good Considerations to
increase our Abhorrence, and Detestation of so black a Crime; and by our
peaceable Behavior, and cheerful Submission to the Scepter we live under, to
secure our selves from the least touch, and stain of any such Guilt for the
time to come.

4. I would advise our dissenting Brethren to consider, how far a great part of
them have advanced toward Rome, and symbolized with the Papists, not only in
their own frequent Violations of solemn Oaths; those of Allegiance and
Supremacy, the Covenant of their own framing and imposing, but in their
specious offers of a Dispensation for our Royal Martyrs Goronation-Oath,
relating to the maintenance of Episcopacy, with the Legal Rites, Honors, and
Privileges of the Clergy; But also in their Imperious Solicitations of him to
give up that great Trust contrary to his declared Judgment and Conscience, and
that notwithstanding his signal readiness to comply with them in any thing
where he lawfully might.

God knows, I am very unwilling, even upon this day, to look back upon any
thing of this nature, which I might honestly overlook.

And indeed my own Circumstances in the Church, and the present temper of the
Nation is such, that I cannot be supposed in an equal Judgment, to be biassed
to any Partiality in defense of our present Constitution, either against
Papists or any other Aggressors or, Underminers of it; and however I may be
censured by any sort of Men for the seeming Imprudence or unseasonableness of
such plain dealing; I really design nothing else but the faithful discharge of
a necessary Duty, even in this Advice, and I pray God remove all prejudicate
Opinions.

But if they will not be persuaded to look back upon what is past, and think it
hard to be put upon doing so, after an Act of Pardon and Indemnity: I would
desire them to consider in the fifth place:

5. What good Effect they can rationally promise themselves, of their present
Separation; whether the breaking of Unity, and Order at this time, is not the
great Advantage which out Enemies desire, and by all means design, insomuch
that now, to be sure, whosoever is not with us, is against us; they that
separate from us, much more they that strive, and contend with us though about
lesser matters, are against us in the main.

It is observable, in what manner the Contention between Abraham's Herdsmen and
Lot's is related. Genesis 13.7.
And there was a Strife between Abraham 's Herdsmen, and the Herdsmen of Lot's
Cattle; and to intimate the unseasonableness of the Strife, it follows
immediately; And the Canaanite, and the Perizzite dwelt in the Land: It is set
down as an aggravation of their Sin and Folly, that they should fall out and
quarrel, while the Heathens were so near them, and thereby expose their
Religion to Contempt; and, to apply it to our own Case, doubtless it is no less
Unwise, than Unchristian, for us to divide and quarrel among our selves, now
the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwell in the Land, now the Papists, those
Gentilizing Christians, are among us not only as Lookers on, but as busy
Promoters of our Dissentions, and evil Designs thereupon.

Our Apostle, the Doctor of the Gentiles (the propriety of whose Vocation drew
him to have a special care of those without) says, if a Heathen come in and
hear you speak with several Tongues, will he not say that you are mad? you will
not only disgrace your selves, but by your Divisions harden him in his
Superstition.

One of the shrowdest Enemies of Christianity that ever appeared in the World,
was Julian the Apostate, and we read in Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 22. that he
could not invent any more effectual way, to ruin what he so much hated, than
by encouraging all the Professors of it in their distinct forms and ways of
Opinion and Worship. and we know the Papists have learned this Wisdom from that
Heathen Emperor to promote Division, and Toleration of several Sects; that
when they could do nothing against the whole, one part might destroy another.
And can we think of upholding the Protestant Religion, by the very same Arts
and Methods which the Papists have all along used to pull it down, and which
the Pagans have used to extirpate Christianity it self; Therefore surely, those
who have separated from us upon little Differences, if they are what they
pretend to be, 'Protestants indeed, cannot but see the greatest Reason
imaginable, to come in with speed, and to join cordially and closly, in helping
to repair those Breaches in the Chucrh, (which they themselves first made) at
which swarms of Sectaries have entered in among us, and too many others, have
gone out into the Church of Rome; surely it concerns them now, not only in
Duty, but in Policy and Interest, to go as far in Conformity, to come as near
us, as possibly they can, and to let their Followers know, what they are
convinced of themselves, that neither our Episcopacy, or Liturgy, are Popish,
but far more odious to those at Rome, than to any others, and that there is
nothing required of Laymen in the way of Declaration, or Subscription, which
they of the Clergy, could not freely submit to.

That such as Mr. Baxter, (whom I name for the Eminency and Influence of his
Example) now there is more need of a Cure of Church-Divisions, than when he
wrote his Book with that Title, would speak out again, and tell the World as he
does in the Preface of his Defense of that Book. That our Division gratifieth
the Papists, and greatly hazardeth the Protestant Religion, and that more than
most of the Dissenters seem to believe, or to regard. And as in another place,
that Popery will get so great an Advantage by the Separation, as may hazard us
all, and we may lose that which the several Parties do contend about.

I could wish they would reflect upon what was long since written by their own
Mr. Shepherd of new England. Parable of the Virgins, p. 8.
That it is the Jesuits Plot, to subdue by private Divisions, whom they cannot
conquer by open force. It was most pleasing to Satan to prevail with Christ, to
cast himself down headlong from the Temple, rather than to fling him down
himself. It Is the delight of Hell to set, and see Churches at variance among
themselves etc. -- It is a wonderful thing, to see what a a small occasion of
Offense will do, a Word, a Gesture, a Garment, a matter of Indifferency, etc.
--

That they would consider, and lay to heart, what that once great Man among
them, Mr. Philip Nigh, wrote a little before his Death, concerning the
Lawfulness of hearing the Conforming Ministers, particularly that place toward
the Conclusion, where he wonders, How the differing Parties came to be so
agreed in thinking it unlawful to hear us preach, and that he is persuaded that
it is one constant Design of Satan in the variety of ways of Religion, he has
set on Foot by Jesuits among us.

That they would consider the last, and dying Apprehensions, of their late
Champion Dr. Lewis Du Moulin, concerning what himself had formerly, and not
long since written and spoken with a great deal of Passion and Virulency, for
the widening of our Breaches, the defaming of our Church, and the vilifying of
some of the most eminent and worthy Persons therein.

Lastly, To save my self and others any further Trouble, or Travail in this
Argument; I would earnestly commend to their sober and impartial reading, our
great Dr. Stilling fleet's late and most excellent Book of the Unreasonableness
of Separation. And then I hope, we shall no longer by our imprudent and
unchristian Divisions, hold open a Door, as it were for Popery to enter in upon
us, nor by declaring against Rome, upon the distinct Interests of our singular
Persuasions, verify that of Tacitus in another Case; Dum singuli pugnabant, In
Vita Agric.
Vniversi vincebantur, when they broke their Ranks, and would fight single, all
were easily overcome.

But if none of these Considerations, or any other, will temper the obstinacy
of our Dissenters, and persuade them to Peace and Union; I must needs conclude,
notwithstanding all their Pretenses to the contrary, and their vehement
Outcries against Popery, that they are at Rome also. And I am the more
confirmed in this, because Mr. Baxter himself, was once persuaded that all the
Arguments else in Bellarmin, and all other Books that ever were written, have
not done so much to make Papists in England, as the multitude of Sects among
our selves.

But there are another sort of Men, who are at Rome also. I mean, the
Athiestical and Profane, the careless, and loose Livers among our selves; for
as my Lord Bacon has well observed. Controversies of the Church of England. p.
168.
There is a double Policy of the Spiritual Enemy, either by counterfeit
Holiness of Life, to establish and authorize Errors, or by corruption of
Manners, to discredit and draw into question, Truth and things lawful.

No Pagan Blasphemies, or Popish Usurpations, are so offensive to God, or
injurious to his Church, as the scandalous miscarriages of his pretended
Servants: Our greatest Fear and Danger, Beloved, is from our selves: Our Sins,
are our worst Enemies, and, if not overcome by us, will soon betray and ruin
us, and our Protestant Cause, without any other Plots, and Conspiracies. When
we consider what it was, that blasted those flourishing Churches of Ephesus,
Sardis, Laodicea; we cannot escape some fearful abodes, of the like effects, of
our decay of Love, our Hypocritical Profession, our Lukewarmness, and great
indifferency in the most material Parts and Acts of our Religion.

The Church of England (and God grant we may be truly sensible of it) has
suffered much, and is still like to suffer more by her own Children. And that
is verified in her, which was once said of Julius Caesar, Plures illum amici
confoderunt quam inimici. She has received more Wounds from her Friends, than
from her Enemies.

Victa est non aegre proditione sua. Ovid. de Carinna.
How many among us are there that profess little, or no regard at all to
Religion, or profess that regard for the temporal Conveniences that attend it?
And how many are false and hypocritical in their Profession, resting in mere
Shadows, and external Formalities? most unreasonably concluding that all is
well with them, because the Lines are fallen to them, in so pleasant a place as
a purged Church, and that themselves need Reformation the less, because that is
reformed? What is this, but as one speaks? To run round in a Circle, and meet
the Church of Rome where we left her? What is this, but to speak her very
Language, that to be in this Ark, this Church, is to be safe?

Behold, we are called Christians, and rest in the Gospel, and make our Boasts
of Christ, and the Purity of his Ordinances, and Worship among us!

But believe it, it is not the Name of Protestant or Reformed, no nor the Name
of Christ himself that will save us, or our Religion; if by our wicked
Conversation, we cause that Name, that worthy Name, (as St. James calls it)
to be evil spoken of among the Gentiles, our Popish or our Phanatical Enemies.

It is our walking in this Holy Name; our living up to the Principles of our
Savior's Gospel, and our improving the Means of Grace to a more perfect Degree
of Holiness, than any have attained unto in the Strength of Nature, or of their
own artificial Inventions, that will make Christianity truly glorious in the
Eyes of Jews, Turks and Heathens; Our Protestant Christianity to outshine the
Visibility of Rome, and our Church of England to flourish, and be honorably
esteemed, among all her Sisters of the Reformation. Our Skill in Controversies,
will not do us the Service, nor gain us the Reputation, that the Simplicity of
our Manners, the Piety of our Practices will; This is that (...), as St.
Chrysostom styles it, the most uncontrollable, or irresistible, if we may not
say infallible Proof, and Conviction of the Goodness of our Religion in the
Judgment of most Examiners.

I shall therefore conclude this Head of my Discourse, with an earnest
Exhortation to Holiness of Life: That our ways may be upright as among the
Gentiles, and our well-doing such, and so exemplary, as may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish and captious Men.

It is a shame to our Religion, that we should go to Rome for Examples of
Virtue, or seek Christ in the secret Chambers; that we should learn Piety from
Idolaters, or strictness of Life from the Enemies of Government; yet even among
them may be found some Instances of Mortification, and Zeal, which may serve at
least for our Reproach, if not for our Imitation. The voluntary Austerities of
the Papists, their Midnight Devotions, frequent Fastings, painful Pilgrimages,
and Pennances, may serve to put us in mind of our Savior's wholesome Precepts
of Self-denial, Heavenly-mindedness, devout Prayer, and discreet Abstinence;
and the Zeal of several Sectaries, in some parts of Religion, may condemn our
general Coldness, or Indifferency in the whole.

But if we can learn no good from them, let us be very careful, lest we harden
them in evil, and confirm them in their Erroneous Opinions, by our vicious
Practices.

When we have disarmed them of their defensive Weapons, and left them no
rational Plea, nor Excuse, for their Schism, and Sedition; Let us not put into
their Hands, a Sword of Offense, and expose our selves to the Mercy of their
Censures (which is cruel enough) by any Irregularities of another nature. And
because many among us at this time, appear more zealous for the Interest of
their Religion, than that of their Souls, less mindful of the great Duties of
Sobriety, Righteousness, and Piety in their own Conversations, than those of
discovering, opposing, and punishing, the heretical and traitorous Designers
against our Protestant Church, and seem more to fear the Popish Conspiracies,
than any of the Devil's Wiles and Stratagems; I would desire it might be well
considered that a holy, good Life is as necessary to uphold our Religion, as to
save our Souls. Nothing like this, as has been intimated already to break the
Courage, and baffle the Attempts of our Romish Adversaries, or to reclaim and
bring home other Dissenters into our Communion.

Nothing so like to fix and settle them in their Errors and Seditions, as our
loose and vain Conversations; and indeed at this time, we ought to be more then
ordinarily circumspect, now so many evil Eyes are upon us, watching for our
haltings, and so many Mouths ready opened to aggravate our least Miscarriages;
wherefore we could never more seasonably apply to our selves, that of good
Nehemiah, Ought we not to walk in the Fear of our God, Chap. 5.9.
because of the Reproach of the Heathen, our Enemies.

Among all the Motives and Persuasives to Holiness, methinks this should not
be the least powerful, that it is likely, if any thing, to gain those that
dissent from us, to convince the more sober and ingenuous, that we are in the
right way of Worship; and to remove all Stones of Offense out of the Path,
either of the tender, or peevish.

An eminent Example of, Mr. Edward Fowler in his design of Christianity. p. 304.
and a mighty Advocate for Holiness has well observed, That mere pretenses to
great Sanctity, do strangely make Proselites to several Forms, that have
nothing besides to set them off, and commend them: And as for obstinate
Persons, that will by no means be prevailed with to come over to us, they will
however be greatly disabled, from reproaching our Religion, when they are
convinced, that it has excellent Effects upon the Professors of it. Nor would
that idle and senceless Talk, whereby some hotheaded People endeavor to prove
us an Antichristian Church, be by many, if by any listened to, if they could
discern among us more Christian Lives; could they be once satisfied, that we
esteem it our principal Interest and Concernment to make our selves and others
really and substantially good, Ministers by preaching, and all by obeying the
Gospel.

This would be the most likely way to secure us from Popery and Tyranny, on the
one hand; from popular Tumults and Confusions, on the other; from all those
Evils and Calamities, that threaten us in these cloudy, lowering Times, these
times of general Trouble, and Distraction, and abodings of Evil; when Men's
Hearts are ready to fail for fear of what is coming upon the Earth, what is
likely to befall us of this Nation; because this is the sure way to have the
Sovereign overruling Power of Heaven and Earth on our side, his merciful
Providence to guard, and defend us in the greatest Extremities: and indeed, the
worse the times are, the greater the Dangers we are in, the more closly should
we walk with God, in the daily practice of Piety and Virtue, humbling our
selves for our Sins past, and watching against future Temptations, praying for,
and putting our Trust in the Divine Protection, according to that excellent
Example of the Prophet Micah; Chap. 7. ver. 7.
Because the Times were very wicked and perilous, (as God knows ours are)
Therefore, says he, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
Salvation; and then he encourages himself in Almighty Goodness, my God will
hear me.

Beloved, Our fervent Prayers, and our patient continuance in well-doing, will
avail more, for the removal or the preventing of public Calamities, than the
Policy of our Statesmen, the Zeal of our Preachers; and much more than the
heady and inconsiderate endeavors of our People: For when neither the Wisdom
of our Counselors, nor the Courage of our Magistrates can preserve us; God's
Mercy does deliver the Island of the Innocent, Job 22: 30.
and it is delivered by the pureness of their Hands; As it was spoken upon
another occasion. Wisdom 5.23.
But Iniquity shall lay waste the whole Earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow
the Thrones of the Mighty.

In this time of general Distress, Fear, and Danger, every Man almost, to be
sure, every Party of Men are projecting and fore-casting this and the other
way, to secure their own Interests; but alas, there is but one way to save our
selves, every part, and the whole; and that is the way of God, the way we have
been commending to you; the way of Righteousness, the way of Holiness, that is,
the way of Peace, and Happiness; Blessed are they that walk in it; Integrity
and Vprightness will preserve them, and keep them from the Paths of the
Destroyer. If (while we escape other Persecutions) the Calumnies and Reproaches
of those that reproach God, and his Religion, fall upon us; Let us consider
that in due time, the lying Lips shall be put to silence, Psalm 31.18.
which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the Righteous;
or else, God will hide them in the secret of his Presence, from the Pride of
Man: Psalm. 31.20.
and keep them secretly in a Pavilion from the Strife of-Tongues. If we walk in
God's Name, he will preserve ours, he will give Honor to our Persons, and
Defense to our Cause: When Aaron and Miriam in a Seditious Humor mutinied
against Moses, then God is pleased to own and vindicate Moses's Fidelity, and
to maintain his Cause; Numb. 12.7.
My Servant Moses is faithful in all my House, wherefore then were you not
afraid to speak against him?

If any thing will shame or confound the Malice of our Enemies, it must be an
exemplary Piety in our Lives, and Faithfulness in our Places.

We have heretofore, and of late, had many heavy Complaints of persecuting
Silencers; but there is one way of putting our Adversaries to Silence, which
sure will never be accounted Persecution; and that is merely by our well-doing.

For even those who will scarce suffer the Word of Exhortation, the greatest
Persuasions of our Ministry, will yield a little to the Integrity and Innocence
of our Lives. Therefore however they escape the Rod of the Civil Magistrate, or
the Churches Censures; let them not want such Christian Reproofs and
Convictions as these. Let the Peoples Practice, as well as our Doctrines, show
the Folly and Unreasonableness of those that separate from our Communion upon
the pretense of greater Purity. So that if we do not reclaim those that are at
Rome, we shall be no Accessories to their Guilt, and clear our selves from all
suspicion of being at Rome also, by lending any Hand to advance or uphold the
Antichristianism of that Religion.

I shall come next to the second Proposition.

The Fourth Sermon.
ROMANS 1.15. So as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to you that
are at Rome also.


THe second Proposition we are to speak to, was this, viz.

II. That the most Christian and effectual way of promoting the Gospel, is
Preaching and Persuasion.

It is one of the greatest Glories of the Christian Religion, that it came in,
and prevailed in the World upon its own Piety, and Wisdom, with no Force but a
Torrent of Arguments, and Demonstration of the Spirit; according to that
Prophecy concerning our Savior, Isa. 42.
That he should show Judgment to the Gentiles, and yet that he should not
strive nor ory, i.e. discover no sign of Anger or Discomposure in his Mind, nor
That any Man should hear his Voice in the Streets, i.e. he should raise no
Tumult or popular Hubbub.

Again it was prophesied of the Gospel Days, that our Savior's Institutions
should tend so much to the correcting and qualifying of the Ferity and
Roughness of Men's Manners; that they should need no other Weapons of
Hostility, than those of Argument and Persuasion; That their Swords should be
turned into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; and however in
this unhappy Declension of Times, Men's Worldly Interests, have much perverted
this most excellent Design of Christianity; yet our blessed Lord has expressly
forewarned, that whosoever shall presume to draw the Sword in his Cause, shall
be sure to perish by it. The Precepts which he gives, and most earnestly
recommends, in order to the general Benefit of Mankind, are those of Meekness,
Mercy, Forbearance, Long-Suffering, Brotherly Kindness, and Charity. He gave
Love for the Livery, and Badg of his Disciples. Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all Menknow that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

The Holy Spirit descended in the Form of a Dove, to signify, say some, the
Meekness and Gentleness of the Christian Temper. And St. Paul tells us, that
the Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23.
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance.

The Apostles of Christ, and their Followers, acted upon their Masters
Principles, and by the Motions of his Spirit; at his Command they preached the
Gospel throughout the World, but opposed nothing, besides their Patience and
Prayers, to the Countermands of Civil Authority, not allowing so much as the
Rebellion, either of the Tongue, or Pen, any open defaming, or any secret ways
of destroying the Powers they lived under; Nunquam Conjuratio crupit, Tertul.
ad Nar.
they were never found to be in any Plot, or treasonable Conspiracy; On the
contrary being reviled, they blessed, being persecuted, they suffered it. Yea,
Sozom. lib. 1. c. 20.
the Calmness and Gentlenss of their Spirit, appeared no less afterward when
they were in Power, than when under Persecution.

And herein, there Practice was very conformable to the Doctrine of the
Apostolical Men of the first Ages.

Non est Religionis, cogere Religionem, Religion is not to be propagated by
Force and Violence, Ad Scapulat.
says Tertullian,; And it was St. Gregory Nazianzen's Advice in his Oration
for Peace, (...), Christians must overcome their Enemies by lessening
themselves and lay the Grounds of their highest Triumphs in their lowest
Submissions: Our Religion, Lact. lib. 5.
says Lactantius, must be defended, non occidendo, sed moriendo, not by taking
away other Men's Lives, but by laying down our own, in the Testimony of the
Truth, and a good Conscience, whenever the Necessities of the Church shall
require it of us.

It was a great Honor to Proclus his Episcopacy, that he got the Hearts of his
People, and the Ends of his Government, by his admirable Condescensions, and
Clemency; In Vit. Procli. Archs. Epis. Constant. ante Opora. p. 34.
and this was the Wisdom of his Meekness, Ne Oves truci minacique vultu
absterrendo Lupis parare^ Praedam, lest by too much Sternness and Severity, he
should fright the Sheep from the Flock, and thereby make them a more easy Prey
for the Wolf.

Mansuetudine corpus Christi, quod est Ecclesia, vincit Inimicos; The Churches
Meekness breaks the Force of her Enemies Rage, and she conquers altogether by
Acts of Gentleness and Persuasion; and indeed other Methods are improper, nay
ineffectual; Men may be forced into Hypocrisy, but not into a true Belief;
they may be beaten out of their Trenches, and outworks of Wickedness, but the
Devils strongest hold, the Heart will not be taken by Violence; Nothing can
enter there, but the Light of Reason, and the Demonstration of the Spirit, the
voice of the Wise Charmer, and the powerful Preacher, the Instructions of Men,
and the Grace of God.

We must indeed contend earnestly for the Faith, yet above all things we must
put on Charity, and use such other Arms as are fit for the Christian Warfare,
not those that are carnal, but spiritual, Preaching and Disputation, Holiness
of Life, Assiduity of Exhortation, the word of God, and Prayer; and when we
come to reprove, rebuke, and to inflict spiritual Punishments, we must
distinguish as tenderly as we can, between the wilful and the weak, the
obstinate, and the ignorant: The first sort indeed must be more roundly dealt
withal; Isa. 58.1.
It was with such the Prophet Isa. had to do, when God bids him lift up his
Voice like a Trumpet; 2 Timothy 4.8.
with such Timothy must be instant in season, and out of season, exhort,
reprove, rebuke with all Authority. The obstinate we must endeavor to save
with fear, plucking them out of the Fire, with them we must be more sharp and
severe in our Admonitions and Threatenings; but on the Weak we must have
Compassion, those who may be supposed affectu piae Opinionis errare, as Salvian
thought charitably of some Arrians of his days; those who as Sheep going
astray, who may be supposed to err through simplicity, or the Fervours of
Devotion, ought to be treated with a fatherly Tenderness, and restored if
posssible with the Spirit of Meekness, conformable to the Doctrine of St. Paul
to Timothy, in Meekness instructing those who oppose; much more those who only
peaceably withdraw themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to
the acknowledging of the Truth.

The Council of Aix compares the Church to a Dove, which sometimes may strike
gently with her Wings, yet has neither Beak nor Talons, to tear and destroy.

And it was once the saying of a wise Statesman, Lord Verulam.
and one not disaffected to our Church; That there is no better way to stop the
risings of new Sects, and Schisms, than to reform Abuses, to compound the
smaller Differences, to proceed mildly and not with Sanguinary Persecutions.
And God be thankful, such is the present Moderation of Ecclesiastical
Constitution, that we have no Laws, like those of Braco, written in Blood; our
Penalties are not for Destruction, but for Correction and Amendment; we punish
none for bare Opinions, and readily embrace every returning Penitent: Yea such
of late has been the Tenderness and Indulgence of our Gracious King, and our
Bishops; that Mercy has triumphed over Justice, and our Dissenters have had
more Favor showed them than the Laws allow; yet too many of them are as
quernlous and discontented still as ever, like froward humorous Children that
cry, not because they are whipped, but because they may not scratch their
Nurse, and have their foolish Wills in every thing; or complain of their
Mother's Rigor, though her Commands are very reasonable, and her Corrections as
gentle: But this we are not to wonder at; Dr. Puller of the Moderation of the
Church of England.
for since, The very mildness and gentleness of our Lord Christ, by which St.
Paul affectionately entreats the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 10.1.
too ineffectually prevails on the Christian World, why should we think it
strange that the Moderation, which is the proper Glory of the Church of
England, cannot persuade either the Romanists or Enthnsinsts, to be sensible of
that Wisdom and Law of Kindness, which attempers all the Commands and
Constitutions of our Church, but the vehement Opposition of both Extremes
confesses, whether they will or no, that we are in the mean, and preserve that
Moderation in our Judgment of Doctrines, and our Exercise of Discipline, which
condemns the stifness of Opinion, and the violence Acting in each Party; and
shows that we cannot join with either of them, in destroying Men's Lives, and
Fortunes, overturning of Kingdoms and States, Laws and Governments; much less
in deposing or murdering of Sovereign Princes, under the pretense of
Conscience, and Religion. But this by the way, my Business at present being not
so much to justify the Practice of our Church, as the Doctrine of the Gospel;
and to show that the Religion of our Savior, made no forcible Entry, upon the
understandings of Men; it did not arrest their Judgments, with Motives drawn
from the civil Power, since it met with the greatest Opposition imaginable,
from the Heathen Emperors; but had the true Characters of the Divine Presence,
and came peaceably in aurd leni, without Noise and Perturbation, insinuating it
self into the Beliefs of Men by silent Influences, and convincing Arguments.

I may add here, That although our Lord Christ was not only King of the Jews,
but had the whole Host of Heaven at his command, yet he called not in the
Assistance of Force and Violence, to obtrude his Doctrines upon the World: And
it is a most remarkable Circumstance, That Constantine the Great did not appear
in the World to protect Christianity, until it had gained Footing in the most
considerable Parts thereof; Nor do we read any where, That when Christianity
became the Religion of the Empire, They ever used their Power, to revenge their
Sufferings, that they ever put either Jew or Heathen to Death, because they
would not renounce their Religion.

The Kingdom of Satan, and of Antichrist, have still been planted and watered
in Blood and Crueltv. As Nebrchadnezzar once dealt with those who would not
Worship his Golden Gods; so did the Heathen Emperors with the Primitive
Christians, Eusch. An. 403.
in a long Series of most merciless Persecutions. So did the King of Persia,
with Abdas the Bishop, who had overturned his Idol-Temples; So do the Turks at
this Day, with all the Opposers of their Superstition. And it is sad to relate
the Barbarous Cruelties of some professed Christians, toward others really and
truly such; how bloody the Rage of the Arrians was against the Catholics;
Athan. Ep. ad sol. vit. agentes.
as likewise that of the Donatists, and Circumcellians, in St. Angustine; that
of the Eutichians, in the second Council of Ephesus, called Ephesinum
Latrocinium, who murdered Flavianus, Archbishop of Constantinople. To come
nearer home; I shall name no more here, but that of our zealous Regicides,
which ought to be to us this day, and will be to succeeding Ages for a
Lamentation.

These were the bloody ways of Heathens and Heretics. But no Histories do tell
us, That true Catholics did ever practice, or approve of such Methods of
maintaining, or propagating Religion.

The Pseudo-Roman-Catholicks indeed, are upon infamous Record, for their
inhumane Cruelties in the defense of their Churches Errors and Usurpations:
which speaks the Pope, the Successor of Romulus, who made his way by Blood,
rather than of St. Peter, who drew his Sword but once in his Master's Quarrel,
and was severely checked by him for so doing.

When the War, begun by the Christians on the Turks and Saracens, was turned
upon the Albigenses by the Popes of Rome; Dr. Heylin's Parable of the Tares.
and that the Cruciata was proclaimed against those poor Souls only, because
they differed in some Points of Doctrine, from the Opinions of that Church; how
many hundred thousands, of well meaning Men, who made a Conscience of their
ways, and erred not (if they erred at all) out of Pride, but Ignorance, fell a
Sacrifice to the Roman Furies?

Thuanus their own Historian, reports that Pope Paul the third, Anno 1559.
among other Exhortations, which upon his Deathbed he delivered to his
Cardinals, did lastly wish them to uphold the Office of the Inquisition, quo
uno sacro-sactam authoritatem niti affirmabant, whereby the Authority of the Sea of Rome is chiefly supported.

Charles the ninth, with the French Papists, never acted any thing with more
Satisfaction to his Holiness, than that Tragedy in Paris, and other Cities,
where so many thousand Hugonots, were most treacherously and barbarously
slaughtered.

The Savage Irish, never thought their Hands and Weapons better employed, than
in butchering the Protestants; and this not more from the fierceness of their
Natures, than from the bloody Principles of their Religion.

And in our own Nation, how many suffered Death under King Henry the 8th, and
in Queen Mary's, his bloody Daughter's Days, for their most reasonable Unbelief
of Transubstantiation?

I have not now time to bring to your remembrance, the many Conspiracies of the
Jesuits against, and Attempts upon the Life of our blessed Queen Elizabeth, by
Parry, Babington, Stafford, Lopez, Squire, etc. Nor to present you with the
horrid Circumstances of their Powder Treason, against King James her peaceful
Successor, all the Royal Family, with the Flower of Church and State in a
Parliament Assembly.

But I wish we would take special notice, by reason of the seasonableness of
the reflection of their treasonable Designs, and Actings, against that
incomparable Prince, Charles the First, this Days Martyr; How they plotted
against his Life, and Archbishop Laud's, as has formerly, and of late, been
sufficiently discovered; how they blowed the Coals of the late unnatural and
destructive War; how in their Consults, they voted that King's Death as much
conducing to the Interest of the Catholic Cause, as they call theirs; and how
they assisted and directed Instruments, whereby that Hellish Enterprise (for
which we and the whole Nation mourn this day) was accomplished, and how they
triumphed thereupon; all this is notoriously known.

The first Rebellion began in Scotland, See the Apology in behalf of the
Papists answer, in behalf of the Royalists. p. 12. London, 1667.
where the Design of it was laid by Cardinal Richlieu, his Majesty's
irreconcilable Enemy; Then it brake out in Ireland, where it was blessed with
his Holiness's Letters, and assisted by his Nuncio, whom he sent purposely to
attend the Fire there; Lastly, in England, as has been intimated, it is
manifest their Agents did their parts there to unsettle the People, and gave
them needless occasions of Jealousy, which the vigilant Phanaticks made use
of, to involve us all in War and Confusion: Both in England and Scotland, the
special Tools they wrought with, were borrowed out of the Shops of the Romans.
It was our Royal Martyr's own Observation, Large Declaration concerning the
Tumults in Scotland. p. 3.
That their Maxims were the same with the Jesuits, their Preachers Sermons
were delievered in the very Phrase of Becanus, Sciopius, and Eudaemon Johannes,
their poor Arguments printed, or written in their seditious Pamphlets, were
taken almost verbatim out of Bellarmin, or Suarez; and afterward we have heard
how they carried on, and completed the bloody Tragedy, by Popish Influence and
Instigation.

Has the Clemency and Indulgence of his Majesty who now is, and whom God long
preserve, any ways assuaged their Malice and turned their Hearts to better
Purposes?

Their late deep and dreadful Conspiracy against the sacred Life of so good and
Gracious a Prince, and the whole body of his Protestant Subjects, returns a
loud Negative to the Question; and gives us too sad and sensible an Assurance
that their Feet are still swift to shed Blood, that Destruction and Misery are
in their ways; and the ways of Peace have they not known. And I would there was
no just cause of Fear, that they are working our Ruin again by the very
Instruments they used so successfully heretofore, and that some of those that
give us the loudest Alarms of the Romans coming to take away our Place and
Nation, are not themselves preparing their way. But are the Papists indeed
among all our modern Professors of Christianity the only Anti-Gospelers in this
particular of promoting Religion by Force? Truly I believe, the bloody and
rebellious Principles of all others, were originally theirs, and derived from
them.

But we can by no means excuse the Tyranny of the Independency, of which we
read so much in the History that bears its Name; And their frequent putting
Quakers to death in New England for their Opinions, Thorndike's Forbearance of
Penalttes. c. 29.
does show what a meek, merciful Spirit they are of, and what Liberties they
are like to allow others, wherever they obtain Rule; And I wish with all my
heart, I could honestly speak better, and more gentle things of all their elder
Brethren, the Presbyterians; and because many of that Persuasion, are not only
sound, and Orthodox in the main Articles of our reformed Religion, but learned,
and able Defenders of it, zealous Protestours against the horrid Wickedness of
this Day, and active Instruments in bringing home our banished King; I am not
willing to say the worst I know of the violence of some of their Spirits, and
the severity of their Discipline. Yet I hope none among us will justify the
Rage, Malice, and Cruelties of the Scotchfield-Meeters, ten of whom barbarously
murdered the Archbishop of St. Andrews; and it is the current Doctrine of
their Pulpits and Books, that killing of Bishops, and those ordained by them,
is no Murder, but a commendable, yea an Heroical Act of Justice; and that a
revolting Covenanter of any sort is as acceptable a Sacrifice.

Although I fear too many among us feel some glowings of this Hellish Zeal, some
kindlings and stirrings of this fiery fierce Spirit, yet (blessed be God) they
have hitherto, and I hope still will be restrained from such outrageous
Villainies.

But let me not I beseech you be thought your Enemy, If I tell you the Truth,
in telling you plainly; That thus far we must complain of the severity, their
want of a Gospel Spirit, as Optatus did of some separating, slandering
Malcontents of his time, Dei Episcopos linguae Gladio jugulastis, fundentes
Sanguinem non Corporis sed Honoris. Though your hands have spared the Lives,
yet your Tongues have murdered the Reputation of Gods Bishops, and Ministers;
though you have not shed their Blood, yet you have stained their Honor, and
which is worse vilified, their Function; yea notwithstanding the undeniable and
convincing Proofs they have given, both heretofore and of late, by their
Preachings, Writings, and Practices of their Sincerity in, and Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, yet as Tacitus speaks, Tacitus In Vita Agricol.
conflata magna invidia, seu been seu male gesta premunt, Where Envy and Spite
predominate, Men's good or bad Actions are alike distastful; and what was said
out of the same Author in Proclus's Case, Vi^. Procl. p. 28.
that famous Archbishop of Constantinople, may well be applied to theirs: Non
minus est periculum in magna quam in mala fama, cum fumma semper petat livor,
It is not the Evil of their Lives, nor the Error of their Doctrines, but the
eminency of their Place, if not of their Virtues, which has drawn upon them so
much vulgar hatred and Obloquy.

Faults they have had, Dr. Barrow's Ser. on Psalm. 132.16.
and will always have, for they are Men, and subject to the common
Imperfections of mortal Nature, but that perhaps less and fewer than any other
distinct sort of Men; But if their Faults were greater than ever they have
really been, or than ever Malice could misrepresent them; is it therefore
equal, that the Miscarriages of some should derogate from the Reputation, or
Prejudice the Welfare of the whole Order? yet so blind, as well as bitter is
some Men's Zeal, that they think they do God and their Country good Service, in
pursuing them all with the same cry, and running them down together with an
indiscriminating Rage; as if they were the greatest Enemies of our Peace and
Prosperity, and that there were a touch of the Bishop in all our Evils, and
Inconveniences. But without offering at any Vindication, (which indeed would
be besides my present Purpose) it may not be amiss perhaps, for the furthering
the Humiliation of this Day, to consider, that they who began with the Church
before, ended with the Crown; and tho at first they pretended a Quarrel only
with our Episcopacy, they soon proceeded to pour Contempt upon Princes and
Nobles, and to make havoc of Royalty it self; and that when it was most
happily seated in so Wise, so Holy, and so Gracious a King, and all under a
great show of Zeal for the Gospel, and the Purity of Religion.

But how far this was from the true and genuine Spirit of the Gospel, from the
Doctrine of our Savior, and the Acts of his Apostles, may be easily inferred
from what you have heard; and particularly from the Practice of our St. Paul,
who tho when a Pharisee, he thought he did God and Religion good Service, in
persecuting the Church; yet when once a Christian, he thinks only of preaching
the Gospel; He who before breathed out nothing but Threatenings and Slaughter;
after his Conversion, only exhorts, entreats with all Long-suffering, and
beseeches by the Mercies of God; Not that our Apostle was less concerned for
the Interests of Christianity, than for those of his former Religion, but
better instructed in the way of promoting them, viz. by the Ministry of
Reconciliation, preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ,
and by propounding the great Benefits and Blessings of the Gospel, as the most
powerful Advocates for its Entertainment, and if at any time he makes use of
the Terrors of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
it is not to persecute, but to persuade Men.

How far Civil Magistrates may by Threatenings and Punishments compel Men to
serve God, and keep his Commandments, is not the matter of our present Enquiry,
we see what is the proper Duty of those of St. Paul's Order, and what work is
like to prosper best in their hands, when they have to do either with those at
Rome, or any other Sects of Erroneous Christians, viz. Diligence and
Faithfulness in preaching of the Gospel; and so I come to the third and last
Particular.

III. That those who are commissionated to the Office of the Ministry, ought to
be ready, and resolute in the discharge of it.

The excellent Dr. Hammond, Answer to the 6 Queries. p. 365.
has well observed that the whole well-being of the Christian Church, which
consists in Unity, as the well-being of a Body, in the Health of it; nay, the
very Being it self, which consists in the Truth of the Doctrines, and Obedience
to the Institutions of the Gospel, depends in an eminent manner upon the due
Qualification of those who are entrusted with the Office of Teaching, in the
Church; and although the best of us are not sufficient for so worthy an
Employment, yet the worst of us are obliged to do our best, and to be ready as
much as in us lies, to preach the Gospel, to reason according to our Ability,
and Proportion, as our great Apostle did of Temperance and Righteousness and
Judgment to come, and showing out of a good Conversation, our Works with
meekness of Wisdom, taking heed unto our selves and to our Doctrine that in so
doing we may both save our selves, 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 2.15.
and them that hear us. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.
Studying to show our selves approved unto God, Workmen that need not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth; being gentle unto all Men, apt to
teach, patient in Meekness, instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken
Captive by his Will; as our Apostle exhorts Timothy.

We must not be wanting in declaring to our People the whole Counsel of God;
being ready to instruct the Ignorant, and to reduce the Erroneous by all good
Means, and to fortity them, what we can, against the Assaults and Artifices of
Seducers, who lie in wait to deceive, and make a Prey of them; and more
especially at this Time, to fore-warn them of the great Evils and Dangers of
Popery: That whilst the King and the Parliament take care to secure all the
Public Interests, by Instruments of their own; we also may, by the Word of our
proper Ministry, endeavor to stop the Progression of such Errors, which, as we
have heard, are so very destructive of Christian Religion, and hurtful to the
Souls of Men; persuading withal, what we can, to Unity and brotherly Agreement
among our selves, that we may thereby strengthen and double our Guards, against
so powerful and Subtle an Enemy.

If the Credit of Religion, the Glory of God, the Souls of our Brethren, be
dear unto us; what can we do less, than by a just and mild Defense of the
Truth, seek the Reclaiming of such as are gone astray, and the Establishment of
them who are weak in Judgment, but sincere in Affection, willing in all things
to live honestly and peaceably?

How much does it concern us, by constant Pain, full Catechizing, and
Preaching, first to ground and instruct simple People in the Religion of the
Gospel, the Principles of Christianity; and then to inform them of the Devices
of Satan, the wily Methods of Impostors, lest by fair Words, and enticing
Speeches, they beguile the Hearts of the Simple and Unwary? It concerns us, to
warn Men of the infectious and dangerous Nature of Heresy, the Mischief of
Schism, the vile and pernicious Designs of some plausible Pretenders to
Holiness, and the Spirit of Truth, (which every truly Christian Heart cannot
but passionately regret) who go about to turn Men to another Gospel, by
converting first the Scripture, the Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of our Lord Christ, into vain and fantastical Allegories; as it is
too notoriously known, the Familists sometimes did, and more than a Suspicion
that the Quakers do at present. These things would be plainly represented to
the less knowing Parts of our Congregations, and all together would be
discreetly and soberly told of the Danger of Popery, Socinianism, as well as
Enthusiastical Pretensions; there being a considerable Number of each Faction
driving on their distinct Interests among us, and have already turned many from
the Faith.

But because this way of public Teaching and Admonition, is more properly my
single Duty, than any others in this Place; and because I hope I have in a good
measure discharged it at this Time; and being ready also, with God's gracious
Assistance, as mnch as in me lies, to pursue it upon all fitting Occasions, I
shall conclude my Preaching with a twofold Prayer: 1. To You, my beloved
Hearers; and then, 2. To Almighty God: And to both in the Words of our Apostle.


1. First, to you who hear me this day; That you would mark them which cause
Divisions, or broach Errors, Romans 16.17.
contrary to the Doctrine which you have heard, and avoid them; And I beseech
you by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that there be no Divisions, 1 Cor.
1.10.
or Schisms amongst you but that you be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same Judgment. That instead of repining at little
Inconveniences, you would be much, and frequent in serious Thankfulness to our
most merciful Father, for the Liberty, Purity, and Peace of the Gospel, praying
to God (which is all you have to do) that those things which are amiss either
in Church or State may be better, and praising him that they are no worse; This
I beg of you, in the next place.

2. I shall pray to Almighty God, (and I hope that you will all join heartily
with me,) Romans 15.5.
that the God of Patience will grant you to be like minded one toward another
after the example of Jesus Christ, that you may with one mind and with one
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now the Lord in Mercy look down from Heaven upon his Church and faithful
People; bring his Truth to light more and more, dispel the Mists of Ignorance,
remove all Occasions of Offense, settle Peace and Truth, prosper the Means of
Grace, build us up in Faith and Holiness, and unite the Hearts of his People in
Love, that they may direct their Course by one Rule, walk in one Way, until we
all receive the End of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to Whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor,
Glory, and Praise, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 27. line 1. for Dominick, read Damian. P. 62. l. 32. read Amyraut. P.
67. l. 20. r. shrewdest. l. 9. r. Designers. P. 82. l. 6. f. greatest, r.
gentlest. P. 87. l. 5. f. Acts, r. Arts. P. 88. l. 16. after who, add are. P.
89. l. 11. f. thankful, r. thanked. l. 13. r. Draco. P. 90. l. 22. to
violence, add of. P. 92. l. 22. r. Circumcellions. P. 99. l. 13. f. the, r.
their. P. 104. l. 13. add to by, him at.


