Coenantibus eis accepit Jesus panem, et benedixit at fregit, deditque
discipulis suis, et ait, accipite et comedite: hoc ^ And as they did eat,
Jesus took the bread, and when he had blessed, he broke it and gave it to the
Disciples, and said eat: this is my body. Matthew. 26. Place this before the
(...) Page.



Antiquitates Apostolicae: OR THE HISTORY OF THE LIVES, ACTS and MARTYRDOMS OF
THE HOLY APOSTLES OF OUR SAVIOR, And the Two EVANGELISTS, SS. MARK and LVKE.

To which is added An Introductory Discourse concerning the Three great
Dispensations of the Church, Patriarchal, Mosaical, and Evangelical.

Being a Continuation of ANTIQUITATES CHRISTIANAE, OR, The Life and Death of
the Holy JESUS.

By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Orig. contr. Gelf. lib. 1. in Prooem. p. 2, (...).

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXVI.

TO THE Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God NATHANAEL, Lord
BISHOP of DURHAM, And Clerk of the Closet to His MAJESTY.
MY LORD,
NOTHING but a great experience of Your Lordships Candor could warrant the
laying what concernment I have in these Papers at Your Lordships feet. Not but
that the subject is in it self Great and Venerable, and a considerable part of
it built upon that Authority that needs no Patronage to defend it: But to
prefix Your Lordships Name to a subject so thinly and meanly managed, may
perhaps deserve a bigger Apology than I can make. I have only brought some few
scattered handfuls of Primitive Story, contenting my self to Glean, where I
could not Reap. And I am well assured, that Your Lordships wisdom and love to
Truth would neither allow me to make my Materials, nor to trade in Legends and
Fabulous reports. And yet alas! how little solid Foundation is left to Build
upon in these matters? So fatally mischievous was the carelessness of those who
ought to have been the Guardians of Books and Learning in their several Ages,
in suffering the Records of the Ancient Church to perish. Unfaithful Trustees,
to look no better after such Divine and inestimable Treasures committed to
them. Not to mention those infinite Devastations that in all Ages have been
made by Wars and Flames, which certainly have proved the most severe and
merciless Plagues and Enemies to Books.

By such unhappy accidents as these we have been robbed of the Treasures of the
wiser and better Ages of the World, and especially the Records of the first
times of Christianity, whereof scarce any footsteps do remain. So that in this
Enquiry I have been forced to traverse remote and desert paths, ways that
afford little fruit to the weary Passenger: but the consideration, that it was
Primitive and Apostolical, sweetened my journey, and rendered it pleasant and
delightful. Our inbred thirst after knowledge naturally obliges us to pursue
the notices of former times, which are recommended to us with this peculiar
advantage, that the Stream must needs be purer and clearer, In Phileb. page 16.
Tom. 2.
the nearer it comes to the Fountain; for the Ancients (as Plato speaks) were
(...), better than we, and dwelt nearer to the Gods. And though it is true the
state of those times is very obscure and dark, and truth often covered over with
heaps of idle and improbable Traditions; yet may it be worth our labor to seek
for a few Jewels, though under a whole heap of Rubbish. (...)
Is not the Gleaning of the Ancients (say the Jews) better than the Vintage of
later times? The very fragments of Antiquity are Venerable, and at once
instruct our minds, and gratify our curiosity. Besides, I was somewhat the
more inclinable to retire again into these studies, that I might get as far as
I could from the crowd and the noise of a quarrelsome and contentious Age.

MY LORD,
We live in times, wherein Religion is almost wholly disputed into talk and
clamor, men wrangle eternally about useless and insignificant Notions, and
which have no tendency to make a man either wiser or better. And in these
quarrels the Laws of Charity are violated, and men persecute one another with
hard names and characters of reproach, and after all consecrate their
fierceness with the honorable title of Zeal for Truth And what is yet a much
sorer evil, the Peace and Order of an excellent Church, incomparably the best
that ever was since the first Ages of the Gospel, is broken down, her holy
Offices derided, her solemn Assemblies deserted, her Laws and Constitutions
slighted, the Guides and Ministers of Religion despised, and reduced to their
Primitive Character, The Scum and Offscouring of the World. How much these
evils have contributed to the Atheism and Impiety of the present Age, I shall
not take upon me to determine. Sure I am, the thing it self is too sadly
visible, men are not content to be modest and retired Atheists, and with the
Fool to say only in their hearts, there is no God; but Impiety appears with an
open forehead, and disputes its place in every company, and without any regard
to the Voice of Nature, the Dictates of Conscience, and the common sense of
Mankind, men peremptorily determine against a Supreme Being, account it a
pleasant divertisement to Droll upon Religion, and a piece of Wit to plead for
Atheism. To avoid the Press and troublesome importunity of such uncomfortable
Reflections, I find no better way, than to retire into those Primitive and
better times, those first and purest Ages of the Gospel, when men really were,
what they pretended to be, when a solid Piety and Devotion, a strict Temperance
and Sobriety, a Catholic and unbounded Charity, an exemplary Honesty and
Integrity, a great reverence for every thing that was Divine and Sacred,
rendered Christianity Venerable to the World, and led not only the Rude and the
Barbarous, but the Learned and Politer part of Mankind in triumph after it.

But, My Lord, I must remember that the Minutes of great Men are Sacred, and
not to be invaded by every tedious impertinent address. I have done, when I
have begged leave to acquaint Your Lordship, that had it not been more through
other men's fault than my own, these Papers had many Months since waited upon
You in the number of those Public Congratulations, which gave You joy of that
great Place, which You worthily sustain in the Church. Which that You may long
and prosperously enjoy, happily adorn, and successfully discharge to the honor
of God, the benefit of the Church, and the endearing Your Lordships Memory to
Posterity, is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships faithfully devoted Servant, WILLIAM CAVE
.
TO THE READER.
THE design of the following APPARATUS is only to present the Reader with a
short Scheme of the state of things in the preceding periods of the Church, to
let him see by what degrees and measures the Evangelical state was introduced,
and what Methods God in all Ages made use of to conduct Mankind in the paths of
Piety and Virtue. In the Infancy of the World he taught men by the Dictates of
Nature, and the common Notices of Good and Evil ((...), as Philo calls them,
the most Ancient Law) by lively Oracles, Lib. de Abrah. page 350.
and great Examples of Piety. He set forth the Holy Patriarchs (as Chrysostom
observes) as Tutors to the rest of Mankind, Homil. XXVII in Genes. Tom. 2. p.
285.
who by their Religious lives might train up others to the practice of Virtue,
and as Physicians, be able to cure the minds of those, who were infected and
overrun with Vice. Afterward ( says he) having sufficiently testified his care
of their welfare and happiness by many instances of a wise and benign
Providence toward them both in the land of Canaan and in Egypt, he gave them
Prophets, and by them wrought Signs and Wonders, together with innumerable
other expressions of his bounty. At last finding that none of these Methods did
succeed, not Patriarchs, not Prophets, not Miracles, not daily Warnings and
Chastisements brought upon the World, he gave the last and highest instance of
his love and goodness to Mankind, he sent his only begotten Son out of his own
bosom, (...), the great Physician both of Soul and Body, who taking upon him
the form of a Servant, and being born of a Virgin, conversed in the World, and
bore our sorrows and infirmities, that by rescuing Humane Nature from under the
weight and burden of Sin, he might exalt it to Eternal Life. A brief account of
these things is the main intent of the following Discourse, wherein the Reader
will easily see, that I considered not what might, but what was fit to be said,
with respect to the end I designed it for. It was drawn up under some more
disadvantageous circumstances, than a matter of this nature did require; which
were it worth the while to represent to the Reader, might possibly plead for a
softer Censure. However such as it is, it is submitted to the Readers Ingenuity
and Candor.

W. C.

IMPRIMATUR.
THO. TOMKYNS.

Ex Aed. Lambeth.

Feb. 25. 1674.

AN APPARATUS, OR DISCOURSE INTRODUCTORY TO THE Whole WORK, concerning the
Three Great Dispensations OF THE CHURCH, PATRIARCHAL, MOSAICAL, and EVANGELICAL.
SECT I. Of the PATRIARCHAL Dispensation.
The Tradition of Elias. The three great Periods of the Church. The Patriarchal
Age. The Laws then in force natural or positive. Natural Laws what; evinced
from the testimony of natural conscience. The Seven Precepts of the Sons of
Noah. Their respect to the Law of Nature. Positive Laws under that
dispensation. Eating Blood why prohibited. The mystery and signification of it.
Circumcision when commanded and why. The Laws concerning Religion. Their
public Worship what. Sacrifices in what sense natural, and how far instituted.
The manner of God's testifying his acceptance. What the place of their public
Worship. Altars, and Groves whence. Abraham's Oak, its long continuance, and
destruction by Constantine. The Original of the Druids. The times of their
religious Assemblies. In process of time, Genes. 4. what meant by it. The
Seventh Day whether kept from the beginning. The Ministers of Religion, who.
The Priesthood of the firstborn. In what cases exercised by younger Sons. The
state of Religion successively under the several Patriarchs. The condition of
it in Adam 's Family. The Sacrifices of Cain and Abel, and their different
success, whence. Seth, his great Learning and Piety. The face of the Church in
the time of Enosh. What meant by, Then began Men to call upon the Name of the
Lord. No Idolatry before the Flood. The Sons of God, who. The great corruption
of Religion in the time of Jared. Enoch 's Piety, and walking with God. His
translation, what. The incomparable sanctity of Noah, and his strictness in an
evil Age. The character of the men of that time. His preservation from the
Deluge. God's Covenant with him. Sem or Japhet whether the Elder Brother. The
confusion of Languages when, and why. Abraham 's Idolatry and conversion. His
eminency for Religion noted in the several instances of it. God's Covenant with
him concerning the Messiah. The Piety of Isaac, and Jacob. Jacob 's blessing
the twelve Tribes, and foretelling the Messiah. Patriarchs extraordinary under
this dispensation. Melchisedeck who: wherein a type of Christ. Job, his Name,
Country, Kindred, Quality, Religion, Sufferings; when he lived. A reflection
upon the religion of the old World, and its agreement with Christianity.

GOD who at sundry times, Heb. 1.1, 2.
and in diverse manners spoke in time past to the Fathers by the Prophets, has
in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. For having created Man for the
noblest purposes, to love, serve, and enjoy his Maker; he was careful in all
Ages by various Revelations of his Will to acquaint him with the notices of his
duty; and to show him what was good, and what the Lord did require of him: till
all other Methods proving weak and ineffectual for the recovery and the
happiness of humane nature, God was pleased to crown all the former
dispensations with the Revelation of his Son. There is among the Talm. Tract.
Sauhedr. cap. Halec. and alibi. vid. Menass. Ben Isr. de Resurrect. lib. 3. c.
3. and Council. Quaest. 30. in Genes.
Jews an ancient Tradition of the House of Elias, that the World should last
Six Thousand Years, which they thus compute, (...) Two Thousand Years empty,
(little being recorded of those first Ages of the World) Two Thousand Years the
Law, and Two Thousand the Days of the Messiah. A Tradition, which if it
minister to no other purposes, does yet afford us a very convenient division of
the several Ages and Periods of the Church, which may be considered under a
threefold Economy, the Patriarchal, Mosaical, and Evangelical dispensation. A
short view of the two former will give us great advantage to survey the later,
that new and better dispensation which God has made to the World.

2. THE Patriarchal Age, (...) as the Jews call it, the days of emptiness,
commenced from the beginning of the World, and lasted till the delivery of the
Law upon Mount Sinai. And under this state the Laws which God gave for the
exercise of Religion, and the Government of his Church were either Natural, or
Positive. Natural Laws are those innate Notions and Principles, whether
speculative or practical, with which every Man is born into the World, those
common sentiments of Virtue and Religion, those Principia justi and decori,
Principles of fit and right, that naturally are upon the minds of Men, and are
obvious to their reason at first sight, commanding what is just and honest, and
forbidding what is evil and uncomely; and that not only in the general, that
what is good is to be embraced, and what is evil to be avoided, but in the
particular instances of duty according to their conformity or repugnancy to
natural light, being conversant about those things, that do not derive their
value and authority from any arbitrary constitutions, but from the moral and
intrinsic nature of the things themselves. These Laws, as being the results
and dictates of right reason, are, especially as to their first and more
immediate emanations, the same in all Men in the World, and in all Times and
Places, (...) as the Jews call them, Precepts that are evident among all
Nations, indeed they are interwoven into Men's nature, inserted into the texture
and constitution of their minds, and do discover themselves as soon as ever
they arrive to the free use and exercise of their reason. That there are such
Laws and Principles naturally planted in Men's breasts, is evident from the
consent of Mankind, and the common experience of the World. Whence else comes
it to pass, that all wicked Men even among the Heathens themselves, after the
commission of gross sins, such as do more sensibly rouse and awaken conscience,
are filled with horrors and fears of punishment? but because they are conscious
to themselves of having violated some Law and Rule of Duty. Now what Law can
this be? not the written and revealed Law, for this the Heathens never had: it
must be therefore the inbred Law of Nature, that is born with them, and fixed in
their minds, antecedently to any external revelation. Romans 2.14, 15:
For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature (by the light and
evidence, by the force and tendency of their natural notions and dictates) the
things contained in the Law, these having not a Law, are a Law unto themselves,
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts, (...), the reasonings of their minds, in
the mean while ((...), by turns) accusing or else excusing one another; that
is, although they had not a written Law, as the Jews had of old, and we
Christians have at this day, yet by the help of their natural Principles they
performed the same actions, and discharged the same Duties that are contained
in, and commanded by the written and external Law, showing by their practices
that they had a Law (some common notions of good and evil) written in their
hearts. And to this their very Consciences bear witness, for according as they
either observe or break these natural Laws, their Consciences do either acquit
or condemn them. Hence we find God in the very infancy of the World, appealing
to Cain for the truth of this, as a thing sufficiently plain and obvious, Why
art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance fallen? Genesis 4.6, 7.
if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, (...) be lift up? able to walk
with a pleased and a cheerful countenance, the great indication of a mind
satisfied in the conscience of its duty: but if thou do not well, sin lies
at the door; the punishments of sin will be ready to follow thee, and
conscience as a Minister of vengeance will perpetually pursue and haunt thee.
By these Laws Mankind was principally governed in the first Ages of the World,
there being for near Two Thousand Years no other fixed and standing Rule of
Duty, than the dictates of this Law of Nature; those Principles of Vice and
Virtue, of Justice and Honesty, that are written in the heart of every Man.

3. THE Jews very frequently tell us of some particular commands to the number
of Seven, Gem. Babyl. Tit. Sanhedr. cap. 7. fol. 56. Maimon. Tr. Melak* cap. 9.
and alibi passim ap. Judaeos. vid. Seldom. de Jur. N. and G. l. 1. c. 10. and
de Synedr. Vol. 1. c. 2. p. 8.
which they call (...) the Precepts of the Sons of Noah, Six whereof were given
to Adam and his Children, and the Seventh given to Noah, which they thus reckon
up. The first was (...) concerning strange worship, that they should not give
Divine honor to Idols, or the Gods of the Heathens, answerable to the two
first commands of the Decalogue, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; thou
shall not make unto thee any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, that
is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth;
thou shall not bow down thy self to them, or serve them: for, etc. From the
violation of this Law it was that Job, one of the Patriarchs that lived under
this dispensation, solemnly purges himself, when speaking concerning the
worship of the Celestial Lights, the great if not only Idolatry of those early
Ages, says he, Job 31.26, 27, 28.
If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in her brightness, and
my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, this also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God
that is above. The second (...) concerning blessing, or worshipping, that they
should not blaspheme the Name of God. This Law Job also had respect to, when he
was careful to sanctify his Children, and to propitiate the Divine Majesty for
them every Morning, Job 1.6.
for it may be (said he) that my Sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts. The third was (...) concerning the shedding of blood, forbidding
Manslaughter; a Law expressly renewed to Noah after the Flood, and which
possibly Job aimed at, when he vindicates himself, Job 31.29.
that he had not rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated him, or lift up
himself when evil found him. Nor was all effusion of humane blood forbidden by
this Law, capital punishments being in some cases necessary for the
preservation of humane Society, but only that no Man should shed the blood of
an innocent Person, or pursue a private revenge without the warrant of public
Authority. The fourth was (...) concerning the disclosing of uncleanness,
against filthiness and adultery, unlawful marriages, Job 31.9, 10, 11.
and incestuous mixtures: If mine heart (says Job in his Apology) has been
deceived by a Woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbor's door; then let my
Wife grind, etc. for this is an heinous crime, yea it is an iniquity to be
punished by the Judges. The fifth was (...) concerning theft and rapine, the
invading another Man's right and property, the violation of bargains and
compacts, the falsifying a Man's word or promise, the deceiving of another by
fraud, Verse. 5.7.
lying, or any evil arts. From all which Job justifies himself, that he had not
walked with vanity, nor had his foot hasted to deceit, that his step had not
turned out of the way, nor his heart walked after his eyes, nor any blot
cleaved to his hands. And elsewhere he bewails it as the great iniquity of the
Times, Chap. 24.2, 3, 4. and seqq.
that there were some that removed the Landmarks, that violently took away the
Flocks, and fed thereof, that drove away the Ass of the Fatherless, and took
the Widows Ox for a pledge, that turned the needy out of the way, and made the
poor of the Earth hide themselves together, etc. The sixth was (...) concerning
judgments, or the administration of Justice, that Judges and Magistrates should
be appointed in every Place for the Order and Government of Civil Societies,
the determination of Causes, and executing of Justice between Man and Man. And
that such there then were, seems evident from the (...) which Job twice speaks
of in one Chapter, Chap. 31.11-28.
the judged iniquity, which the Jews expound, and we truly render, an iniquity
to be punished by the Judges. The seventh (...) concerning the member of any
live-creature, that is, as God expresses it in the Precept to Noah, they might
not eat the blood, or the flesh with the life thereof. Whether these Precepts
were by any solemn and external promulgation particularly delivered to the
Ante-deluvian Patriarchs (as the Jews seem to contend) I will not say: for my
part I cannot but look upon them (the last only excepted) as a considerable
part of Nature's Statute Law, as comprizing the greater strokes and lineaments
of those natural dictates that are imprinted upon the souls of Men. For what
more comely and reasonable, and more agreeable to the first notions of our
minds, than that we should worship and adore God alone, as the Author of our
beings, and the Fountain of our happiness, and not derive the luster of his
incommunicable perfections upon any Creature; that we should entertain great
and honorable thoughts of God, and such as become the Grandeur and Majesty of
his being; that we should abstain from doing any wrong or injury to another,
from invading his right, violating his privileges, and much more from making
any attempt upon his life, the dearest blessing in this World; that we should
be just and fair in our transactions, and do to all men, as we would they
should do to us; that we should live chastely and temperately, and not by wild
and extravagant lusts and sensualities offend against the natural modesty of
our minds; that Order and Government should be maintained in the World, Justice
advanced, and every Man secured in his just possessions? And so suitable did
these Laws seem to the reason and understandings of Men, that the Jews though
the most zealous People under Heaven of their Legal Institutions, received
those Gentiles who observed them as Proselytes into their Church, though they
did not oblige themselves to Circumcision, and the rest of the Mosaic Rites.
Nay, in the first Age of Christianity, when the great controversy arose
between the Jewish and Gentile-Converts about the obligation of the Law of
Moses as necessary to salvation, the observation only of these Precepts, at
least a great part of them, was imposed upon the Gentile-Converts as the best
expedient to end the difference, by the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem.

4. BUT though the Law of Nature was the common Law by which God then
principally governed the World, yet was not he wanting by Methods extraordinary
to supply, as occasion was, the exigencies and necessities of his Church,
communicating his mind to them by Dreams and Visions, and other ways of
Revelation, which we shall more particularly remark, when we come to the
Mosaical Economy. Hence arose, those positive Laws which we meet with in this
period of the Church, some whereof are more expressly recorded, others more
obscurely intimated. Among those that are more plain and obvious two are
especially considerable, the prohibition for not eating blood, and the Precept
of Circumcision, the one given to Noah, the other to Abraham. The prohibition
concerning blood is thus recorded, every moving thing that lives shall be meat
for you: Genesis 9.3, 4.
but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not
eat. The blood is the vehiculum to carry the spirits, as the Veins are the
channels to convey the blood, now the animal spirits give vital heat and
activity to every part, and being let out, the blood presently cools, and the
Creature dies. Not flesh with the blood, which is the life thereof, that is,
not flesh while it is alive, while the blood and the spirits are yet in it. The
mystery and signification whereof was no other than this, that God would not
have Men trained up to arts of cruelty, or whatever did but carry the color
and aspect of a merciless and a savage temper, lest severity toward Beasts
should degenerate into fierceness toward Men. It Is good to defend the
out-guards, and to stop the remotest ways that lead toward sin, especially
considering the violent propensions of humane nature to passion and revenge.
Men commence bloody and inhumane by degrees, and little approaches in time
render a thing in it self abhorrent not only familiar, but delightful. The
Romans who at first entertained the People in the Amphitheatre only with wild
Beasts killing one another, came afterward wantonly to sport away the Lives of
the Gladiators, yea to cast Persons to be devoured by Bears and Lions, for no
other end than the divertisement and pleasure of the People. He who can please
himself in tearing and eating the Parts of a living Creature, (...). Porphyr.
de Abstin. lib. 1. Sect. 47. p. 39.
may in short time make no scruple to do violence to the Life of Man. Besides
eating blood naturally begets a savage temper, makes the spirits rank and
fiery, and apt to be easily inflamed and blown up into choler and fierceness.
And that hereby God did design to bar out ferity, and to secure mercy and
gentleness, is evident from what follows after: and surely your blood of your
lives will I require: Ib. V. 5, 6.
at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of Man, at the
hand of every Man's brother will I require the life of man; whosoever sheddeth
Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed. The life of a Beast might not be
wantonly sacrificed to Men's humors, therefore not Man's; the life of Man being
so sacred, and dear to God, that if killed by a Beast, the Beast it self was to
die for it; if by man, that man's life was to go for retaliation, by man shall
his blood be shed; where by man we must necessarily understand the ordinary
Judge and Magistrate, or (...) as the Jews call it, the lower Judicature, with
respect to that Divine and Superior Court, the immediate judgment of God
himself. By which means God admirably provided for the safety and security of
Man's life, and for the order and welfare of humane society: and it was no more
than necessary, the remembrance of the violence and oppression of the Nephilim
or Giants before the Flood being yet fresh in memory, and there was no doubt
but such mighty Hunters, men of robust bodies, of barbarous and inhumane
tempers would afterward arise. This Law against eating blood was afterward
renewed under the Mosaic Institution, Levit. 17.11.
but with this peculiar signification, for the life of the flesh is in the
blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make an atonement for your
souls; for it is the blood that makes an atonement for the soul: that is, the
blood might not be eaten, not only for the former reason, but because God had
designed it for particular purposes, to be the great Instrument of Expiation,
and an eminent type of the Blood of the Son of God, who was to die as the great
expiatory Sacrifice for the World: Nay it was re-established by the Apostles in
the infancy of Christianity, and observed by the Primitive Christians for
several Ages, as we have elsewhere observed.

5. THE other Precept was concerning Circumcision, given to Abraham at the time
of God's entering into Covenant with him. Genesis 17.9, 10, 11.
God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant, etc. This is my Covenant
which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee, every
Man-child among you shall be circumcised: and ye shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you. God
had now made a Covenant with Abraham to take his Posterity for his peculiar
People, and that out of them should arise the promised Messiah: and as all
federal compacts have some solemn and external rites of ratification, so God
was pleased to add Circumcision as the sign and seal of this Covenant, partly
as it had a peculiar fitness in it to denote the promised Seed, partly that it
might be a discriminating badge of Abraham's Children (that part whom God had
especially chosen out of the rest of Mankind) from all other People. On
Abraham's part it was a sufficient argument of his hearty compliance with the
terms of this Covenant, that he would so cheerfully submit to so unpleasing and
difficult a sign as was imposed upon him. For Circumcision could not but be
both painful and dangerous in one of his Years, as it was afterward to be to
all newborn Infants: whence Zipporah complained of Moses, commanding her to
circumcise her Son, that he was (...) an husband of bloods, a cruel and
inhumane Husband. And this the Talm. Tract. Jebam. cap. 8.
Jews tell us was the reason, why circumcision was omitted during their Forty
Years Journey in the Wilderness, it was (...) by reason of the trouble and
inconvenience of the way, God mercifully dispensing with the want of it, lest
it should hinder their traveling, the soreness and weakness of the circumcised
Person not comporting with hard and continual Journeys. It was to be
administered the eight day, Vid. Maimon. Mor. Nevoch. part. 3. c. 49. p. 506.
not sooner, the tenderness of the Infant not well till then complying with it,
besides that the Mother of a Male-child was reckoned legally impure till the
seventh Day; not later, probably because the longer it was deferred, the more
unwilling would Parents be to put their Children to pain, of which they would
every Day become more sensible, not to say the satisfaction it would be to
them, to see their Children solemnly entered into Covenant. Circumcision was
afterward incorporated into the Body of the Jewish Law, and entertained with a
mighty Veneration, as their great and standing Privilege, relied on as the
main Basis and Foundation of their confidence, and hopes of acceptance with
Heaven, and accounted in a manner equivalent to all the other Rites of the
Mosaic Law.

6. BUT besides these two, we find other positive Precepts, which though not so
clearly expressed, are yet sufficiently intimated to us. Thus there seems to
have been a Law that none of the Holy Line, none of the Posterity of Seth
should marry with Infidels, or those corrupt and idolatrous Nations which God
had rejected, as appears in that it is charged as a great part of the sin of the
old World, Genesis 6.2, 3.
that the Sons of God matched with the Daughters of Men, as also from the great
care which Abraham took that his Son Isaac should not take a Wife of the
Daughters of the Canaanites among whom he dwelt. There was also (...) Jus
Leviratus, whereby the next Brother to him who died without Issue was obliged
to marry the Widow of the deceased, and to raise up seed unto his Brother, the
contempt whereof cost Onan his Life: together with many more particular Laws
which the story of those Times might suggest to us. But what is of most use and
importance to us, is to observe what Laws God gave for the administration of
his Worship, which will be best known by considering what worship generally
prevailed in those early Times; wherein we shall especially remark the nature
of their public Worship, the Places where, the Times when, and the Persons by
whom it was administered.

7. IT cannot be doubted but that the Holy Patriarchs of those days were
careful to instruct their Children, and all that were under their charge (their
Families being then very vast and numerous) in the Duties of Religion, to
explain and improve the natural Laws written upon their minds, and acquaint
them with those Divine Traditions, and positive Revelations which they
themselves had received from God: this being part of that great character which
God gave of Abraham, I know him, Genesis 18.19.
that he will command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. To this they joined
Prayer and Invocation, than which no duty is more natural and necessary; more
natural, because it fitly expresses that great reverence and veneration which
we have for the Divine Majesty, and that propensity that is in Mankind to make
known their wants: none more necessary, because our whole dependence being upon
the continuance and constant returns of the Divine power and goodness, it is
most reasonable that we should make our Daily addresses to him, in whom we
live, move, and have our being. Nor were they wanting in returns of praise, and
solemn celebrations of the goodness of Heaven, both by entertaining high and
venerable thoughts of God, and by actions suitable to those honorable
sentiments which they had of him. In these acts of worship they were careful to
use gestures of the greatest reverence and submission, which commonly was
prostration. Abraham bowed himself toward the ground: Genesis 18.2.
and when God sent the Israelites the happy news of their deliverance out of
Egypt, Exodus 4.31.
they bowed their Heads and worshipped. A posture which has ever been the
usual mode of adoration in those Eastern Countries unto this day. But the
greatest instance of the Public Worship of those times was Sacrifices; a very
early piece of Devotion, in all probability taking its rise from Adam's fall.
They were either Eucharistical, expressions of thankfulness for blessings
received, or expiatory, offered for the remission of sin. Whether these
Sacrifices were first taken up at Men's arbitrary pleasure, or positively
instituted and commanded by God, (...). Chrysostom. Homil. XVIII. in Genes. p.
173. Tom. 2.
might admit of a very large enquiry. But to me the case seems plainly this,
That as to Eucharistical Sacrifices, such as first fruits, and the like
oblations, Men's own reason might suggest and persuade them, that it was fit to
present them as the most natural significations of a thankful mind. And thus
far there might be Sacrifices in the state of Innocence: for Man being created
under such excellent circumstances as he was in Paradise, could not but know
that he owed to God all possible gratitude and subjection; obedience he owed
him as his Supreme Lord and Master, gratitude, as his great Patron and
Benefactor, and was therefore obliged to pay to him some Eucharistical
Sacrifices, as a testimony of his grateful acknowledgment, that he had both his
being and preservation from him. But when sin had changed the scene, and
Mankind was sunk under a state of guilt, he was then to seek for a way how to
pacify God's anger: and this was done by bloody and expiatory sacrifices,
which God accepted in the sinners stead. And as to these, it seems reasonable
to suppose that they should be founded upon a positive Institution, because
pardon of sin being a matter of pure grace and favor, whatever was a means to
signify and convey that, must be appointed by God himself, first revealed to
Adam, and by him communicated to his Children. The Deity propitiated by these
atonements was wont to testify his acceptance of them by some external and
visible sign; Thus Cain sensibly perceived that God had respect to Abel's
sacrifice, and not to his: though what this sign was, it is not easy to
determine. Most probably it was fire from Heaven coming down upon the Oblation,
and consuming it: For so it frequently was in the Sacrifices of the Mosaic
dispensation, Genesis 15.17.
and so we find it was in that famous Sacrifice of Abraham, a Lamp of Fire
passed between the parts of the Sacrifice. Thus when it is said, God had respect
to Abel and to his offering, Theodotion renders it, (...), Psalm 20.3.
he burnt it; and to this custom the Psalmist alludes in that Petition,
Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt Sacrifice, (...) let thy
burnt-offering be reduced into ashes.

8. WHERE it was that this Public Worship was performed, is next to be
enquired into. That they had fixed and determinate Places for the discharge of
their religious Duties, those especially that were done in common, is greatly
probable, Nature and the reason of things would put them upon it. And this most
think is intended in that phrase, where it is said of Cain and Abel, Apud. P.
Fag. in Genesis 4.
that they brought their oblations, that is, (as Aben-Ezra and others expound
it) (...) to the place set apart for divine worship. And this probably was the
reason, why Cain though vexed to the heart to see his Brother preferred before
him, did not presently set upon him, the solemnity and religion of the Place,
and the sensible appearances of the Divine Majesty having struck an awe into
him, but deferred his murderous intentions till they came into the Field, and
there fell upon him. For their Sacrifices they had Altars, whereon they offered
them, contemporary no doubt with Sacrifices themselves, though we read not of
them till after the Flood, Gen 8.20.
when Noah built an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt-offerings upon it:
Genesis 12.7, 8. vid. chap. 13.4-18.
So Abraham immediately after his being called to the worship of the true God,
in Sichem built an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him, and removing
thence to a Mountain Eastward, he built another Altar, and called on the Name
of the Lord, as indeed he did almost in every place where he came. Thus also
when he dwelt at Beersheba in the Plains of Mamre, Genesis 21.33.
he planted a Grove there, and called on the Name of the Lord the everlasting
God. This no doubt was the common Chapel or Oratory, whither Abraham and his
numerous Family, and probably those whom he gained to be Proselytes to his
Religion were wont to retire for their public adorations, as a Place
infinitely advantageous for such Religious purposes. And indeed the Ancient
devotion of the World much delighted in Groves, in Woods and Mountains, partly
for the convenience of such Places, as better composing the thoughts for divine
contemplations, and resounding their joynt-praises of God to the best
advantage, Judge. 6.25.
partly because the silence and retiredness of the Place was apt to beget a
kind of sacred dread and horror in the mind of the Worshipper. Hence we find in
Ophrah where Gideon's Father dwelt, an Altar to Baal, and a Grove that was by
it; and how common the superstitions and idolatries of the Heathen-world were
in Groves and High Places, no Man can be ignorant, that is never so little
conversant either in profane or sacred stories. For this reason that they were
so much abused to idolatry, God commanded the Israelites to destroy their
Altars, break down their Images, and cut down their Groves: Exodus 34.13.
and that they should not plant a Grove of any Trees near unto the Altar of the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.21.
lest he should seem to countenance what was so universally prostituted to
false worship and idolatry. But to return to Abraham. He planted a Grove, (...)
a Tree, which the Ancients generally make to have been a large spreading Oak;
and some foundation there is for it in the sacred Text; Genesis 13.18.
for the place where Abraham planted it is called the Plain of Mamre, or as in
the Hebrew, he dwelt (...) among the Oaks of Mamre, (...). LXX. Ita Verse.
Samaritana: nec. aliter Arabs in Genes. 18.1.
and so the Syriack renders it (...) The House of the Oak: The name whereof
Antiquit. Id. l. 1. c. 11. p. 19.
Josephus tells us, was Ogyges; and it is not a conjecture to be Vid. Dick
Delph. Phoenic. c. 12. p. 137. and Append. p. 38.
despised, that Noah might probably inhabit in this place, and either give the
name to it, or at least derive his from it, Ogyges being the Name by which he
is usually described in foreign Writers. This very Oak De loc. Hebr. in voce
Arboch.
S. Hierom assures us, and (...), etc. Eusebius. (...) in voc. (...).
Eusebius intimates as much, was yet standing till the time of Constantine, and
worshipped with great superstition. And Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 4. p. 447.
Sozomen tells us more particularly that there was a famous Mart held there
every Summer, and a Feast celebrated by a general confluence of the
neighboring Countries, and persons of all Religions, both Christians, Jews and
Gentiles, (...), every one doing honor to this Place according to the
different Principles of their Religion: but that Constantine being offended
that the Place should be profaned with the superstitions of the Jews, and the
idolatry of the Gentiles, wrote with some severity to Macarius the Bishop of
Jerusalem, and the Bishops of Palestine, that they should destroy the Altars
and Images, and deface all Monuments of Idolatry, and restore the Place to its
ancient Sanctity. Which was accordingly done, and a Church erected in the
Place, where God was purely and sincerely worshipped. From this Oak, the
ordinary place of Abraham's worship and devotion, the Religion of the Gentiles
doubtless derived its Oaks and Groves, and particularly the Druids, the great
and almost only Masters and Directors of all Learning and Religion among the
Ancient Britains, hence borrowed their Original; who are so notoriously known
to have lived wholly under Oaks and in Groves, and there to have delivered
their Doctrines and Precepts, and to have exercised their Religious and
mysterious Rites, that hence they fetched their denomination, either from (...)
(as the Ancients generally thought) or more probably from the old Cetlic word
Deru, both signifying an Oak, and which the Welsh, the Descendants of the
Ancient Britains, still call Derw at this day. But of this enough.

9. FROM the place where, we proceed to the times when they usually paid their
Devotions. And seeing Order is necessary in all undertakings, and much more in
the actions of Religion, we cannot think that Mankind was left at a roving
uncertainty in a matter of so great importance, but that they had their stated
and solemn times of Worship: especially when we find among all Nations, even
the most rude and unpolished Heathens, times peculiarly set apart for the
honor of their gods, and the public solemnities of Religion. And so no
question it was in the more early Ages of the World, they had fixed and
appropriate Seasons, when they met together to do homage unto God, and to offer
up their joynt-acknowledgments to Heaven. Genesis 4.3.
Thus we read of Cain that he brought his oblation in process of time, (...) at
the end of days, at one of those fixed and periodical returns, when they used
to meet in the Religious Assemblies, the word (...) denoting not simply an end,
but a determinate and an appointed end. I know many with great zeal and
eagerness contend, that the Sabbath or Seventh Day from the Creation was set
apart, and universally observed as the time of Public Worship, and that from
the beginning of the World. But alas the foundation upon which this opinion is
built, is very weak and sandy, having nothing to rely on, Genesis 2.3.
but one place where it is said, that God resting on the Seventh Day from all
his Works, blessed the Seventh Day and sanctified it. Which words are
reasonably thought to have been set down by Moses by way of Prolepsis, as it
was in his time, if they relate at all to the Sabbath, and are not rather to be
understood of God's blessing and sanctifying the Seventh Day, as having then
completed all his Works in the creating of Man, and in whom, as in the crown
and glory of the Creation, he would sanctify himself. For that it should be
meant of a Weekly Sabbath, has as little countenance from this Text, as it
has from the practice of those times, there being no footsteps or shadow of
any such Sabbath kept through all the Patriarchal periods of the Church, till
the times of Moses, which besides the evidence of the story, is universally
owned by the Ancient Jews, and very many of the Fathers do expressly assert it.

10. THE last circumstance concerns the Persons by whom the Public Worship was
administered. Impossible it is that any Society should be regularly managed,
where there are not some peculiar Persons to superintend, direct, and govern
the affairs of it. And God who in all other things is a God of Order, is much
more so in matters of Religion: and therefore no doubt from the beginning
appointed those, whose care and business it should be to discharge the public
parts of Piety and Devotion in the name of the rest. Now the Priesthood in
those times was vested in the Heads of Tribes, and in the firstborn of every
Family. To the Patriarch or Head of every Tribe it belonged to bless the
Family, to offer Sacrifice, to interceed for them by Prayer, and to minister in
other solemn acts of Religion. And this Office hereditarily descended to the
firstborn, who had power to discharge it during the life of his Father; for it
was not necessary, that he who was Priest by virtue of his primogeniture,
should be also the eldest of the House. Jacob, who succeeded in his Brother's
right, offered Sacrifices in the life of his Father Isaac, and Abraham was a
Priest, though Sem the Head of the Family, and ten degrees removed from him in
a direct line, was then alive, yea survived Abraham (as some learned men think)
near Forty Years. Every firstborn had three great Prerogatives, a double
portion of the Paternal inheritance, a Lordship and Principality over his
Brethren, and a right to the Priesthood, to instruct them in the knowledge of
Divine things, and to manage the common Offices of Religion. So that in those
times there was a particular Priesthood in every Family, the administration
whereof was usually appropriate to the firstborn. Thus Noah, Abraham, and
Isaac offered Sacrifices, and Job (who lived about that time, or not long
after) both for his Children and his Friends. Thus Esau was a Priest by his
primogeniture, and that goodly Raiment of her son Esau which Rebeccah put upon
Jacob, when he went in to his Father, is by many not improbably understood of
the Sacerdotal Vestments, wherein as firstborn he was wont to execute his
Office. Of these Priests we are to understand that Place, Exodus 19.22.
Let the Priests which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves. This could
not be meant of the Levitical Priests, (the Aaronical Order not being yet
instituted) and therefore must be understood of the Priesthood of the
firstborn, and so Solomon Jarchi's gloss expounds it. Thus when Moses had
built an Altar at the foot of the Mountain, he sent young men of the children
of Israel, Exodus 24.5.
which offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings unto the Lord.
Where for young men, the Chaldee Paraphrase and the Jerusalem Targum have
(...) the firstborn of the children of Israel; so has that of Jonathan, who
expressly adds this reason, for unto that very Hour the worship remained among
the firstborn, the Tabernacle of the Covenant not being yet made, nor the
Aaronical Priesthood set up. So when Jacob bequeathed his blessing to Reuben,
Genesis 49.3.
Reuben thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power, the same Jewish Paraphrasts
tell us, that there were three things in this blessing conveyed and confirmed
to Reuben, the Birthright, the Kingdom and the Priesthood, but that for his
enormous and unnatural sin they were transferred to others, the primogeniture
to Joseph, the Kingdom to Judah, and the Priesthood to Levi. But though the
Sacerdotal function ordinarily belonged to the firstborn, yet was it not so
wholly invested in them, but that it might in some cases be exercised by
younger Brothers, especially when passing into other Families, and themselves
becoming Heads of Tribes and Families. Abraham we know was not a firstborn,
and it is highly probable that Sem himself was not Noah's eldest Son, Moses was
a Priest, yea (...) as the Jews call him, the Priest of Priests, and yet was
but Amram's second Son, and Aaron's younger Brother. So that the case in short
seemed to lie thus: The Patriarch or surviving Head of every Tribe was a kind
of High Priest over all the Families that were descended from him, the
firstborn in every Family was the ordinary Priest, who might officiate in his
Father's stead, and who after his decease succeeded in his room, the younger
Brethren, when leaving their Father's house, and themselves becoming heads of
Families, and their seats removed too far distant to make use of the ordinary
Priesthood, did themselves take the office upon them, and exercise it over all
those that were under them, and sprung from them, though the main honor and
dignity was reserved for the Priesthood of the firstborn. Thus Abraham, though
but a second Son, yet when become the head of a great Family, and removed into
another Country, became a Priest, and that not only during the life of his
Father, but of Sem himself, the grand surviving Patriarch of that time. I
observe no more concerning this, than that this right of the firstborn was a
prime honor and privilege, and therefore the reason (say the Beres. Rabba
fol. 71. col. 1. ap. Seldom de success. ad leg. Ebr. c. 5. p. 45. Heb. 12.16.
Jews) why Jacob was so greatly desirous of the birthright, was because in
those days the Priesthood was entailed upon it. And for this chiefly no doubt
it was that Esau is called (...), a profane person, for selling his
birthright for a mess of Pottage, because thereby he made so light of the
sacred honor of the Priesthood, the Venerable office of ministering before God.

11. HAVING thus seen what were the Laws, what the Worship of those times, it
remains briefly to consider what was the face of the Church, and the state of
Religion under the several Patriarchs of this Economy. Not to meddle with the
story either of the Creation or Apostasy of Adam, no sooner was he fallen from
that innocent and happy state wherein God had placed him, but Conscience began
to stir, and he was sensible that God was angry, and saw it necessary to
propitiate the offended Deity by Prayer and Invocation, by Sorrow and
Repentance, and probably by offering Sacrifice; Genesis 3.21.
a conjecture that has at least some countenance from those Coats of Skins
wherewith God clothed our first Parents, which seem likely to have been the
Skins of Beasts slain for Sacrifice; for that they were not killed for food is
evident, because flesh was not the ordinary diet (if it was at all) of those
first Ages of the World. And God might purposely make choice of this sort of
covering, to put our first Parents in mind of their great degeneracy, how deep
they were sunk into the animal life, and by gratifying brutish and sensual
appetites at so dear a rate, how like they were become to the Beasts that
perish. And if this were so, it possibly might give birth to that Law of Moses,
Levit. 7.8.
that every Priest that offered any man's burnt-offering, should have to
himself the skin of the burnt-offering which he had offered. But however this
was, it is certain that Adam was careful to instruct his Children in the
knowledge of Divine things, and to maintain Religion and the worship of God in
his Family. For we find Cain and Abel bringing their oblations, and that at a
certain time, though they had a different success. I omit the Traditions of the
East, that the cause of the difference between Cain and Abel was about a Wife,
and that they sought to decide the case by Sacrifice, and that when Abel's
sacrifice was accepted, Cain out of envy and indignation fell upon his brother,
struck his head with a stone, and slew him. The present they brought was
according to their different ways and institutions of life: (...). Chrysostom.
Homil. XVIII. in Genes. p. 174.
Cain as an Husbandman brought of the fruit of the ground, Abel as a Shepherd
brought of the firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat thereof: But the one was
accepted, and the other rejected. The cause whereof certainly was not that the
one was little and inconsiderable, the other large and noble; the one only a
dry oblation, the other a burnt-offering; or that Cain had entertained a
conceived prejudice against his Brother; the true cause lay in the different
temper and disposition of their minds; Abel had great and honorable thoughts
of God, and therefore brought of the best that he had, Cain mean and unworthy
apprehensions, and accordingly took what came first to hand; Abel came with a
grateful sense of the goodness of Heaven, with a mind piously and heartily
devoted to the Divine Majesty, and an humble reliance upon the Divine
acceptance; Cain brought his oblation indeed, but looked no further, was not
careful to offer up himself a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, as
being the most reasonable service, too confidently bearing up himself, as we
may suppose, upon the prerogative of his primogeniture. By which means Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained
witness, Heb. 11.4.
that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. For he had respect unto
Abel, Genesis 4.4, 5.
and to his offering: But unto Cain, and to his offering he had not respect.
And if in that fire, by which God testified his respect by consuming one
oblation, and not the other, there was (as the Jews say) seen the face of a
Lion, it doubtless prefigured the late promised Messiah, The Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, our great expiatory sacrifice, of whom all other sacrifices were but
types and shadows, and in whom all our oblations are rendered grateful unto God,
The odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing unto God.

12. ABEL being taken away by his envious and enraged Brother, God was pleased
to repair the loss by giving his Parents another Son, whom they called Seth,
and he accordingly proved a very Virtuous and Religious man. He was (if we may
believe the Ancients) a great Scholar; the first inventor of Letters, and
Writing, an accurate Astronomer, and taught his Children the knowledge of the
Stars, who having heard from their Grandfather Adam, that the World was to be
twice destroyed, once by Fire, Antiquit. Jud. lib. 1. c. 3. p. 8.
and again by Water (if the story be true which Josephus without any great
warrant reports) wrote their Experiments and the principles of their Art upon
two Pillars, one of Brick, the other of Stone, that if the one perished, the
other might remain, and convey their notions to posterity, one of which Pillars
Josephus adds, was said to be standing in Syria in his time. But that which
rendered Seth most renowned, was his piety and devotion; a good man he was, one
who asserted and propagated Religion and the true worship of God, as he had
received it from his Father Adam, notwithstanding the declensions and
degeneracy, and possibly oppositions of his Brother Cain and his party. The
Eastern Writers, both Jews and Vid. testimonia eorum citat. ap. Hotting. Smeg.
Orient. cap. 8. p. 226. and seqq.
Arabians, confidently assure us, that Seth and his retinue withdrew from Cain,
who dwelt in the Valley, where he had killed his brother Abel, into a very high
mountain (on the top whereof their Father Adam was buried) so high, if we could
believe them, that they could hear the Angels singing Anthems, and did daily
join in with that Heavenly Quire. Here they wholly devoted themselves to the
daily worship of God, and obtained a mighty name and veneration for the
holiness and purity of their lives. When Seth came to lie upon his deathbed,
he summoned his Children, their Wives and Families together, blessed them, and
as his last Will commanded them to worship God, adjuring them by the blood of
Abel (their usual and solemn oath) that they should not descend from the holy
Mount, to hold any correspondence or commerce with Cain or his wicked faction.
And then breathed his last. A command, say my Authors, which they observed for
seven generations, and then came in the promiscuous mixtures.

13. TO Seth succeeded his Son Enos, who kept up the glory and purity of
Religion, and the honor of the holy Line. Of his time it is particularly
recorded, then began men to call upon the name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26.
The ambiguity of the word (...) signifying sometimes to profane, sometimes to
begin, has begotten various apprehensions among learned men concerning this
place, and led them not only into different, but quite contrary senses. The
words are by some rendered thus, Then men profaned in calling upon the name of
the Lord; which they thus explain, that at that time when Enos was born the
true worship and service of God began to sink and fail, corruption and idolatry
mightily prevailing by reason of Cains wicked and apostate Family; and that as
a sad memorial of this corrupt and degenerate Age, holy Seth called his son's
name Enosh, which not only simply signifies a man, but a poor, calamitous,
miserable man. And this way go many of the Jews, and some Christian writers of
great name and note. Nay Maimonides, one of the wisest and soberest of all the
Jewish writers, begins his Tract about De Idol cap. 1. Sect. 1.
Idolatry (...) from the times of Enosh, referring to this very passage; he
tells us, that men did then grievously err, and that the minds of the wise men
of those days were grown gross and stupid; yea, that Enos himself was (...)
among those that erred, and that their Idolatry consisted in this, That they
worshipped the Stars and the Host of Heaven. Vid. ap. Hotting. loc. cit. p. 230.
Others there are who expressly assert, that Enosh was the first that invented
Images, to excite the Spirit of the Creatures, (...) that by their mediation
men might invocate and call upon God. But how infirm a foundation this Text is
to build all this upon, is evident. For besides, what Dionys. Voss. not. in
Maimon. p. 4. Heideg. de Hist. Part. exerc. 6. p. 223.
some have observed, that the Hebrew phrase is not tolerably reconcilable with
such a sense, if it were, yet (...) as one of the R. Eliez. Maas. Beres. c 22.
ibid.
Rabbis has well noted, that there wants a foundation for any such exposition,
no mention being made in Moses his story of any such false Gods as were then
worshipped, no footsteps of Idolatry appearing in the World till after the
Flood. Nor indeed is it reasonable to suppose, that the Creation of the World
being yet fresh in memory, and Divine Traditions so lately received from Adam,
and God frequently communicating himself to men, that the case being thus, men
could in so short a time be fallen under so great an apostasy, as wholly to
forget and renounce the true God, and give Divine honors to senseless and
inanimate creatures; I can hardly think that the Cainites themselves should be
guilty of this, much less Enosh and his Children. The meaning of the words then
is plainly this, That in Enosh his time the holy Line being greatly multiplied,
they applied themselves to the worship of God in a more public and remarkable
manner, either by framing themselves into more distinct societies for the
exercise of public worship, or by meeting at more fixed and stated times, or
by invocating God under more solemn and peculiar rites than they had done
before. And this probably they did the rather, to obviate that torrent of
profaneness and impiety, which by means of the sons of Cain they saw flowing
in upon the World. This will be further confirmed, if we take the words as by
some they are rendered, then men began to be called by the name of the Lord,
that is, the difference and separation that was between the children of Seth
and Cain every day ripening into a wider distance, the posterity of Seth began
to take to themselves a distinctive title, that the World might the better
distinguish between those who kept to the service of God, and those who threw
off Religion, and let loose the reins to disorder and impiety. And hereof we
meet with clear intimation in the story of those times when we read of (...)
the sons of God (who doubtless were the pious and devout posterity of Seth,
Genesis 6.2.
calling themselves after the name of the Lord, whom they constantly and
sincerely worshipped, notwithstanding the fancy of Josephus, and the Fathers,
that they were Angels, or that of the Jewish Paraphrasts, that they were (...)
the sons of great men and Princes) in opposition to the (...) the sons of men,
the impure and debauched posterity of Cain, who made light of Religion, and
were wholly governed by earthly and sensual inclinations. And the matching of
these sons of God with the daughters of men, that is, those of the Family of
Cain, and the fatal consequences of those unhappy marriages, was that which
provoked God to destroy the World. I have no more to add concerning Enosh, than
that we are told, that dying he gave the same commands to his Children, which
he had received of his Father, that they should make Religion their great care
and business, and keep themselves pure from society and converse with the Line
of Cain.

14. AFTER Enosh was his son Kenan, who, as the Arabian Elmacin. ap. Hotting.
p. 233.
Historian informs us, ruled the people committed to him by a wise and
excellent government, and gave the same charge at his death that had been given
to him. Id. ibid. p. 234.
Next Kenan comes Mahaleleel, who carries devotion and piety in his very name,
signifying, one that praises God, of whom they say, that he trained up the
people in ways of justice and piety, blessed his Children at his death, and
having charged them to separate from the Cainites, appointed his son Jared to
be his successor; whose name denotes a descent, probably either because of the
notable decrease and declension of piety in his time, or because in his days
some of the Sethites descended from the holy Mountain to mix with the posterity
of Cain. For so the Elmac. and Patric. apud Hotting. ubi. supr. p. 235.
Oriental writers inform us, that a great noise and shout coming up from the
Valley, an hundred of the holy Mountaineers agreed to go down to the sons of
Cain, whom Jared endeavored to hinder by all the arts of counsel and
persuasion. But what can stop a mind bent upon an evil course? down they went,
and being ravished with the beauty of the Cainite-women, promiscuously
committed folly and lewdness with them; from whence sprang a race of Giants,
men of vast and robust bodies, but of more vicious and ungovernable tempers,
who made their Will their Law, and Might the standard and rule of Equity.
Attempting to return back to the holy Mount, Heaven had shut up their way, the
stones of the Mountain burning like fire when they came upon them; which
whether the Reader will have faith enough to believe, I know not. Jared being
near his death, advised his Children to be wise by the folly of their Brethren,
and to have nothing to do with that profane generation. His son Enoch followed
in his steps, a man of admirable strictness and piety, and peculiarly exemplary
for his innocent and holy conversation, it being particularly noted of him,
that he walked with God: Genesis 5.24.
He set the Divine Majesty before him, as the guide and pattern, the spectator
and rewarder of his actions, in all his ways endeavored to approve himself to
his All-seeing eye, by doing nothing but what was grateful and acceptable to
him; he was the great instance of virtue and goodness in an evil Age, and by
the even tenor and constancy of a holy and a religious life showed his firm
belief and expectation of a future state, and his hearty dependence upon the
Divine goodness for the rewards of a better life. And God, who is never
behind-hand with his servants, crowned his extraordinary obedience with an
uncommon reward. Heb. 11.5, 6.
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and was not
found, because God had translated him: For before his translation he had this
testimony, that he pleased God. And what that faith was, is plain by what
follows after, a belief of God's Being and his Bounty, Without faith it is
impossible to please him: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. What this
translation was, and whither it was made, whether into that Terrestrial
Paradise out of which Adam was expelled and banished, and whereunto Enoch had
desired of God he might be translated, as some fancy, or whether placed among
the Stars, as others, or carried into the highest Heavens, as others will have
it, were nice and useless speculations. It Is certain he was taken out of these
mutable Regions, and set beyond the reach of those miseries and misfortunes, to
which a present state of sin and mortality does betray us; translated,
probably, both Soul and Body, that he might be a type and specimen of a future
Resurrection, and a sensible demonstration to the World that there is a reward
for the righteous, and another state after this, wherein good Men shall be
happy for ever. I pass by the fancy of the Jews as vain and frivolous, that
though Enoch was a good Man, yet was he very mutable and inconstant, and apt to
be led aside, and that this was the reason, why God translated him so soon,
lest he should have been debauched by the charms and allurements of a wicked
World. He was an eminent Prophet, and a fragment of his Prophecy is yet extant
in S. Jude's Epistle, by which it appears, that wickedness was then grown
rampant, and the manners of men very corrupt and vicious, and that he as
plainly told them of their faults, and that Divine vengeance that would
certainly overtake them. Of Methuselah his Son nothing considerable is upon
Record, but his great Age, living full DCCCCLXIX. Years (the longest proportion
which any of the Patriarchs arrived to) and died in that very Year wherein the
Flood came upon the World.

15. FROM his Son Lamech, concerning whom we find nothing memorable, we proceed
to his Grandchild Noah, by the very imposition of whose Name his Parents
presaged that he would be a refreshment and comfort to the World, and highly
instrumental to remove that curse which God by an Universal Deluge was bringing
upon the Earth, He called his Name Noah, Genesis 5.29.
saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed; he was one in whom his
Parents did acquiesce and rest satisfied, that he would be eminently useful and
serviceable to the World. Indeed he proved a person of incomparable sanctity
and integrity, a Preacher of righteousness to others, and who as carefully
practiced it himself. Genesis 6.9.
He was a just man, and perfect in his generation, and he walked with God. He
did not warp and decline with the humor of the Age he lived in, but maintained
his station, and kept his Line. He was upright in his Generation. It Is no
thanks to be religious, when it is the humor and fashion of the Times: the
great trial is, when we live in the midst of a corrupt generation. It is the
crown of virtue to be good, when there are all manner of temptations to the
contrary, when the greatest part of Men go the other way, when virtue and
honesty are laughed and drolled on, and censured as an over-wise and affected
singularity; when lust and debauchery are accounted the modes of Gallantry, and
pride and oppression suffered to ride in prosperous triumphs without control.
Thus it was with Noah, he contended with the Vices of the Age, and dared to own
God and Religion, when almost all Mankind besides himself had rejected and
thrown them off. For in his time wickedness openly appeared with a brazen
Forehead, and violence had covered the face of the Earth, the promiscuous
mixtures of the Children of Seth and Cain had produced Giants and mighty Men,
men strong to do evil, and who had as much will as power, (...), Antiquit. Jud.
lib. 1. c. 4. p. 8.
as Josephus describes them, a race of men insolent and ungovernable, scornful
and injurious, and who bearing up themselves in the confidence of their own
strength, despised all justice and equity, and made every thing truckle under
their extravagant lusts and appetites. De Dea Syria. p. 882. Tom. 2.
The very same character does Lucian give of the Men of this Age, speaking of
the times of Deucalion (their Noah) and the Flood, (...) (says he) (...), etc.
Men exceedingly scornful and contumelious, and guilty of the most unrighteous
and enormous actions, violating all Oaths and Covenants, throwing off kindness
and hospitality, and rejecting all addresses and supplications made to them.
For which cause great miseries overtook them: for Heaven and Earth, Seas and
Rivers conspired together to pour out mighty Floods upon the World; which swept
all away, but Deucalion only, who for his prudence and piety was left to repair
Mankind. And so he goes on with the relation consonant to the accounts of the
Sacred story. This infection had spread it self over all parts, and was become
so general and Epidemical, that all Flesh had corrupted their ways, and scarce
any besides Noah lest to keep up the face of a Church, and the profession of
Religion. Things being come to this pass quickly alarmed the Divine Justice,
and made the World ripe for vengeance; the patience of God was now tired out,
and he resolved to make Mankind feel the just effects of his incensed severity.
But yet in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy: he tells them, that though
he would not suffer his patience to be eternally prostituted to the wanton
humors of wicked men, yet that he would bear with them CXX. Years longer in
order to their reformation. So loath is God to take advantage of the sins of
men, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto
Repentance. In the mean time righteous Noah found favor with Heaven (a good
man has a peculiar guardianship and protection in the worst of times) and God
orders him to prepare an Ark for the saving of his House. An Hundred Years was
this Ark in building, not but that it might have been finished in a far less
time, but that God was willing to give them so long a space for wise and sober
considerations, Noah preaching all the while both by his doctrine and his
practice, that they would break off their sins by repentance, and prevent their
ruin. But they that are filthy, will be filthy still; the hardened World
persisted in their impieties, till the wrath of God came upon them to the
uttermost; and destroyed the World of the ungodly. God shut up Noah, his Wife,
his three Sons and their Wives into the Ark, together with provisions, and so
many Creatures of every sort as were sufficient not only for food, but for
reparation of the kind (Miracles must not be expected, where ordinary means may
be had) and then opened the Windows of Heaven, and broke up the Fountains of
the Deep, and brought in the Flood that swept all away. Twelve months Noah and
his Family continued in this floating habitation* when the Waters being gone,
and the Earth dried, he came forth, and the first thing he did, was to erect an
Altar, and offer up an Eucharistical Sacrifice to God for so remarkable a
deliverance (some of the Jews tell us, that coming out of the Ark he was bitten
by a Lion, and rendered unfit for Sacrifice, and that therefore Sem did it in
his room) he did not concern himself for food, or a present habitation, but
immediately betook himself to his devotion. God was infinitely pleased with the
pious and grateful sense of the good man, and openly declared that his
displeasure was over, and that he would no more bring upon the World such
effects of his severity as he had lately done, and that the Ordinances of
Nature should duly perform their constant motions, and regularly observe their
periodical revolutions. And because Man was the principal Creature in this
lower World, he restored to him his Charter of Dominion and Sovereignty over
the Creatures, and by enacting some Laws against Murder and Cruelty secured the
peace and happiness of his life: and then established a Covenant with Noah and
all Mankind, that he would no more drown the World, for the ratification and
ensurance whereof he placed the Rainbow in the Clouds, as a perpetual sign and
memorial of his Promise. Noah after this betook himself to Husbandry, and
planting Vineyards, and being unwarily overtaken with the fruit of the Vine,
became a scorn to Cham one of his own Sons, while the two others piously
covered their Fathers shame. Awaking out of his sleep, and knowing what had
been done, he prophetically cursed Cham and his Posterity; blessed Sem, and in
Japhet foretold the calling of the Gentiles to the worship of God, and the
knowledge of the Messiah, that God should enlarge Japhet, and that he should
dwell in the Tents of Shem. He died in the DCCCCL. Year of his Age, having seen
both Worlds, that before the Flood, and that which came after it.

16. SEM and Japhet were the two good Sons of Noah, in the assigning whose
primogeniture, though the Scripture be not positive and decretory, yet do the
most probable reasons appear for Japhet, especially if we compute their Age.
Genesis 11.10.
Sem was an Hundred Years old two Years after the Flood (for then he begat
Arphaxad) now the Flood happened just in the DC. Year of Noah's Age; whence it
follows that Sem was born, 7.11.
when his Father was Five Hundred and Two Years old. But Noah being expressly
said to have begotten Sons in the Five Hundredth Year of his Age, 5.32.
plain it is that there must be one Son at least two Years Elder than Sem,
which could be no other than Japhet, Cham being acknowledged by all the Younger
Brother. 10.21.
And hence it is that Sem is called, the Brother (...) of Japhet the Greater,
or as we render it, the Elder. They were both pious and devout Men, having been
brought up under the religious Institutions, not only of their Father Noah, but
their Grandfather Lamech, and their Great-grand-father Methuselah, who had for
some Hundreds of Years conversed with Adam. The holy story records nothing
concerning the state of Religion in their days, and little heed is to be given
to the Eastern Writers, when they tell us of Sem, that according to the command
of his Father he took the Body of Adam, which Noah had secretly hidden in the
Ark, and joining himself to Melchisedeck, they went and buried it in the heart
of the Earth, an Angel going before, and conducting them to the place, with a
great deal more, with little truth, and to as little purpose. As for the
Patriarchs born after the Flood, little notice is taken of them besides the
bare mention of their names, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber. Of this last they say, that
he was a great Prophet, that he instituted Schools and Seminaries for the
advancement and propagation of Religion: Elmac. and Patricid. ubi supr. p. 265.
and there was great reason for him to bestir himself, if it be true, what the
Arabian Historians tell us, that now Idolatry began mightily to prevail, and
men generally carved to themselves the Images of their Ancestors, to which upon
all occasions they addressed themselves with the most solemn veneration, the
Demons giving answers through the Images which they worshipped. Antiq. Jud. l.
1. c. 7. p. 15.
Heber was the Father of the Jewish Nation, who from him are said to have
derived the title of Hebrews, (...), as Josephus tells us, (though there want
not those who assign other reasons of the name) and that the Hebrew Language
was preserved in his family, which till his time had been the mother tongue,
and the common Language of the World. To Eber succeeded his son Peleg, a name
given him out of a Prophetical foresight of that memorable division that happened
in his time. For now it was that a company of bold daring persons combining
themselves under the conduct and command of Nimrod, resolved to erect a vast
and stupendous Fabric, partly to raise themselves a mighty reputation in the
World, partly to secure themselves from the Invasion of an after-deluge, and
probably as a place of retreat and defense, the better to enable them to put in
practice that oppression and tyranny which they designed to exercise over the
World. But whatever it was, God was displeased with the attempt, and to show
how easily he can baffle the subtillest Councils, and in a moment subvert the
firmest projects, on a sudden he confounded the Language of these foolish
Builders, so that they were forced to desist from their vain and ambitious
design, as not being able to understand and converse with one another. To Peleg
succeeded his son Rehu, to Rehu Serug, to him Nachor, to Nachor Terah, who
dwelt in Ur of the Chaldaeans, where conversing with those Idolatrous Nations,
he lapsed himself into the most gross Idolatry. So apt are men to follow a
multitude to do evil, so fatally mischievous is ill company, and a bad example.
But the best way to avoid the plague, is to remove out of the house of
infection. Away goes Terah to Haran, where by repentance he is said to have
recovered himself out of the snare of the Devil.

17. ABRAHAM the second son of Terah succeeds in the Patriarchal Line. In his
minority he was educated in the Idolatries of his Father's house, who, they
say, was a maker of Statues and Images: And the Schalch. Hakk. p. 8. citante
Hotting. Smeg. Orient. c. 8 p. 291. confer Maimon. Mor. Nevoch. part. 3. c. 29.
p. 421.
Jews tell us many pleasant stories of Abraham's going into the shop in the
absence of his Father, his breaking the Images, and jeering those that came to
buy, or worship them; of his Father's carrying him to Nimrod to be punished,
his witty answers, and miraculous escapes. But God who had designed him for
higher and nobler purposes, called him at length out of his Father's house,
fully discovered himself to him, and by many solemn promises and federal
compacts peculiarly engaged him to himself. He was a man entirely devoted to
the honor of God, and had consecrated all his services to the interests of
Religion, scarce any duty either toward God or men for which he is not eminent
upon record. Toward God, how great was his zeal and care to promote his
worship? erecting Altars almost in every place, whereon he publicly offered
his prayers and sacrifice. His love to God wholly swallowed up the love and
regard that he had to his dearest interests, witness his entire resignation of
himself, his cheerful renouncing all the concernments of his Estate and Family,
and especially his readiness to sacrifice his only son, the son of his old age,
and which is above all, the son of the promise, when God by way of trial
required it of him. How vigorous and triumphant was his faith, especially in
the great promise of a son, which he firmly embraced against all humane
probabilities to the contrary? Against hope he believed in hope, and being
strong in faith, gave glory to God. How hearty was his dependence upon the
Divine Providence, when called to leave his Father's house, and to go into a
strange Country, how cheerfully did he obey and go out, though he knew not
whither he went? How unconquerable was his patience, how even the composure of
his mind in all conditions? in fifteen several journeys that he undertook, and
ten difficult temptations which he underwent, he never betrayed the least
murmuring or hard thought of God. Toward others he showed the greatest
tenderness and respect, the most meek and unpassionate temper, a mind inflamed
with a desire of peace and concord: Admirable his justice and equity in all his
dealings, his great hospitality and bounty toward strangers, and for that end
(say the Jews) he got him an house near the entering into Haran, that he might
entertain strangers as they went in, or came out of the City, at his own table;
as indeed he seems to have had that most excellent and Divine temper of mind,
an universal love and charity toward all men. But his greatest charity
appeared in the care that he took of the Souls of men. Maimonides tells us,
Mor. Nevoch. part. 2. cap. 39. p. 301.
that he kept a public School of institution, whither he gathered men
together, and instructed them in that truth, which he himself had embraced, and
he gives us an account by what methods of reasoning and information he used to
convince and persuade them. But whatever he did toward others, we are sure he
did it toward those that were under his own charge. He had a numerous family,
and a vast retinue, and he was as careful to inform them in the knowledge of
the true God, and to instruct them in all the duties of Religion. It Is the
character which God himself gave of him, I know Abraham, that he will command
his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord, to do justice and judgment. And so he did, his house being a School of
piety, wherein Religion was both taught and practiced, many reclaimed from the
errors and idolatries of the times, and all his domestics and dependants
solemnly dedicated to God by Circumcision. Therefore when it is said, that he
brought with him all the Souls which they had gotten in Haran, Genesis 12.5.
the Paraphrase of Onkelos renders it, (...) the Souls which they had subjected
to the Law in Haran; Jonathans Targum, and much at the same rate that of
Jerusalem, (...) the Souls which they had made proselytes in Haran, or as
Solomon Jarchi expresses it, a little more after the Hebrew mode, the Souls
which they had gathered, (...) under the wings of the Divine Majesty; Genesis
14.14.
and he further adds, that Abraham proselyted the men, and Sarah the women. So
when elsewhere we read of his trained servants, some of the Jewish Masters
expound it by (...) those that were initiated and trained up in the knowledge
of the Law. Such being the temper of this holy man, God was pleased frequently
to converse with him, and to impart his mind to him, acquainting him with the
secret counsels and purposes of his Providence, whence he is styled the friend
of God. But that which showed him to be most dear to Heaven, was the Covenant
which God solemnly made with him, wherein binding Abraham and his seed to a
sincere and universal obedience, he obliged himself to become their God, to be
his shield and his exceeding great reward, to take his posterity for his
peculiar people, to increase their number, and to enlarge their power, to
settle them in a rich and a pleasant Country (a type of that Heavenly and
better Country that is above) and which was the crown of all, that in his seed
all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, that is, the promised Messiah
should proceed out of his loins, who should be a common blessing to mankind, in
whom both Jew and Gentile should be justified and saved, and he by that means
become (spiritually) the Father of many Nations. This Covenant was ratified and
ensured on God's part by a solemn oath, Heb. 6.13, 14.
For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he
swear by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I
will multiply thee. On Abraham's part it was sealed with the Sacrament of
Circumcision, which God instituted as a peculiar federal rite, to distinguish
Abraham's posterity from all other people. Abraham died in the CLXXV. year of
his Age, and was buried in the Sepulcher which himself had purchased of the
sons of Heth. Contemporary with Abraham was his Nephew Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
a just man, but vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; for dwelling
in the midst of an impure and debauched generation, In seeing and hearing he
vexed his righteous Soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. This
endeared him to Heaven, who took a particular care of him, and sent an Angel on
purpose to conduct him and his family out of Sodom, before he let loose that
fatal vengeance that overturned it.

18. Abraham being dead, Isaac stood up in his stead, the son of his Parents
old age, and the fruit of an extraordinary promise. Being delivered from being
a sacrifice, he frequented (say the Jews) the School of Sem, wherein he was
educated in the knowledge of Divine things till his marriage with Rebeccah. But
however that was, he was a good man, we read of his going out to meditate or
pray in the field at even-tide, Genesis 24.63.
and elsewhere we find him publicly sacrificing and calling upon God. In all
his distresses God still appeared to him, animated him against his fears, and
encouraged him to go on in the steps of his Father, renewing the same promises
to him which he had made to Abraham. Nay, so visible and remarkable was the
interest which he had in Heaven, that Abimelech King of the Philistines and his
Courtiers thought it their wisest course to confederate with him for this very
reason, Genesis 26.28, 29.
because they saw certainly that the Lord was with him, and that he was the
blessed of the Lord. Religion is the truest interest, and the wisest portion,
it is the surest protection, and the safest refuge. When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. Isaac dying in the
CLXXX. year of his life, the Patriarchate devolved upon his son Jacob, by
virtue of the primogeniture which he had purchased of his brother Esau, and
which had been confirmed to him by the grant and blessing of his Father (though
subtly procured by the artifice and policy of his Mother) who also told him,
that God Almighty would bless and multiply him and his seed after him, and that
the blessing of Abraham should come upon them. He entirely devoted himself to
the fear and service of God, kept up his Worship, and vindicated it from the
encroachments of Idolatry, he erected Altars at every turn, and zealously
purged his house from those Teraphim or Idols which Rachel had brought along
with her out of Laban's house, either to prevent her Father's enquiring at them
which way Jacob had made his escape, or to take away from him the instruments
of his Idolatry, or possibly that she might have wherewith to propitiate and
pacify her Father in case he should pursue and overtake them, as Josephus
thinks, Antiq. Jud. lib. 1. c. 19. p. 31.
though surely then she would have produced them, when she saw her Father so
zealous to retrieve them. He had frequent Visions and Divine condescensions,
God appearing to him, and ratifying the Covenant that he had made with Abraham,
and changing his name from Jacob to Israel, as a memorial of the mighty
prevalency which he had with Heaven. In his later time he removed his family
into Egypt, where God had prepared his way by the preferment of his son Joseph
to be Viceroy and Lord of that vast and fertile Country, advanced to that
place of state and grandeur by many strange and unsearchable methods of the
Divine Providence. By his two Wives, the Daughters of his Uncle Laban, and his
two Handmaids he had twelve Sons, who afterward became founders of the Twelve
Tribes of the Jewish Nation; to whom upon his deathbed he bequeathed his
blessings, consigning their several portions, and the particular fates of every
Tribe, among whom that of Judah is most remarkable, to whom it was foretold,
Genesis 49.10.
that the Messiah should arise out of that Tribe, that the Regal Power and
Political Sovereignty should be annexed to it, and remain in it till the
Messiah came, at whose coming the Scepter should depart, and the Lawgiver from
between his knees: And thus all their own Paraphrasts, both Onkelos, Jonathan,
and he of Jerusalem do expound it, that there should not want Kings or Rulers
of the house of Judah, nor Scribes to teach the Law of that race, (...) until
the time that Messiah the King shall come, whose the Kingdom is. And so it
accordingly came to pass, for at the time of Christ's Birth, Herod, who was a
stranger, had usurped the Throne, debased the authority of their great
Sanhedrim, murdered their Senators, divested them of all Judiciary power, and
kept them so low, that they had not power left to put a man to death. And unto
him shall the gathering of the people be. A prophecy exactly accomplished, when
in the first Ages of Christianity the Nations of the World flocked to the
standard of Christ at the publication of the Gospel. Jacob died CXLVII. years
old, and was buried in Canaan, in the Sepulcher of his Fathers: After whose
decease his posterity for some hundreds of years were afflicted under the
Egyptian yoke. Till God remembering the Covenant he had made with their Fathers,
powerfully rescued them from the Iron Furnace, and conducted them through the
wilderness into the Land of Promise, where he framed and ordered their
Commonwealth, appointed Laws for the government of their Church, and settled
them under a more fixed and certain dispensation.

19. HITHERTO we have surveyed the state of the Church in the constant
succession of the Patriarchal Line. But if we step a little further into the
History of those times, we shall find that there were some extraordinary
persons without the Pale of that holy Tribe, renowned for the worship of God,
and the profession of Religion; among whom two are most considerable,
Melchisedeck and Job. Melchisedeck was King of Salem in the land of Canaan, and
Priest of the most high God. The short account which the Scripture gives of him
has left room for various fancies and conjectures. The opinion that has most
generally obtained is, that Melchisedeck was Sem, one of the sons of Noah, who
was of a great Age, and lived above LXX. years after Abraham's coming into
Canaan, and might therefore well enough meet him in his triumphant return from
his conquest over the Kings of the Plain. But notwithstanding the universal
authority which this opinion assumes to it self, it appears not to me with any
tolerable probability, partly because Canaan, where Melchisedeck lived, was
none of those Countries which were allotted to Sem and to his posterity, and
unlikely it is that he should be Prince in a foreign Country: partly, because
those things which the Scripture reports concerning Melchisedeck, do no ways
agree to Sem, as that he was without Father and Mother, without genealogy,
etc. whenas Moses does most exactly describe and record Sem and his Family,
both as to his Ancestors, and as to his posterity. That therefore which seems
most probable in the case, is, that he was one of the Reguli, or petty Kings
(whereof there were many) in the land of Canaan, but a pious and devout man,
and a worshipper of the true God, as there were many others in those days among
the Idolatrous Nations; he being extraordinarily raised up by God from among
the Canaanites, and brought in without mention of Parents, original or end,
without any Predecessor or Successor in his office, that he might be a fitter
type of the Royal and Eternal Priesthood of Christ. And for any more particular
account concerning his person, it were folly and rashness over-curiously to
enquire after what God seems industriously to have concealed from us. The great
character under which the Scripture takes notice of him, is his relation to our
blessed Savior, who is more than once said to be a Priest, (...), after the
order, in the same way and manner that Melchisedeck was, or (as the Apostle
explains himself) after the similitude of Melchisedeck. Heb. 7.15.
Our Lord was such a Priest as Melchisedeck was, there being a nearer
similitude and conformity between them, than ever was between any other Priests
whatsoever. A subject which S. Paul largely and particularly treats of. Passing
by the minuter instances of the parallel, taken from the name of his person,
Melchisedeck, that is, King of righteousness, and his title to his Kingdom,
King of Salem, that is, of Peace; we shall observe three things especially
wherein he was a type of Christ. First, in the peculiar qualification of his
person, something being recorded of him uncommon to the rest of men, and that
is, that he was without Father, Heb. 7.3.
without Mother, and without descent. Not that Melchisedeck like Adam was
immediately created, or in an instant dropped down from Heaven, but that he has
no kindred recorded in the story, which brings him in without any mention of
Father or Mother, (...), Homil. 12. in Hebr. p. 1838.
as Chrysostom glosses, we know not what Father or Mother he had: He was (says
S. Paul) (...), without genealogy, without having any pedigree extant upon
record, whence the ancient Syriack Version truly expresses the sense of the
whole passage thus, Whose neither Father nor Mother are written, (...) among
the generations, that is, the genealogies of the ancient Patriarchs. And thus
he eminently typified Christ, of whom this is really true: He is without Father
in respect of his humane nature, begotten only of a pure Virgin; without
Mother, in respect of his Divinity, being begotten of his Father before all
Worlds, by an eternal and ineffable generation. Secondly, Melchisedeck typified
our Savior in the duration and continuance of his office; for so it is said of
him, that he was without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of
life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides a Priest continually. By which
we are not to understand that Melchisedeck never died, for being a man he was
subject to the same common Law of mortality with other men: But the meaning is,
that as he is said to be without Father and Mother, because the Scripture
speaking of him makes no mention of his Parents, his Genealogy and descent: So
he is said to abide a Priest for ever, without any beginning of days, or end of
life, because we have no account of any that either preceeded, or succeeded him
in his office, no mention of the time either when he took it up, or laid it
down. And herein how lively and eminent a type of Christ, the true
Melchisedeck, who as to his Divine nature was without beginning of days from
Eternal Ages, and who either in the execution or virtue of his office abides
for ever. There is no abolition, no translation of his office, no expectation
of any to arise that shall succeed him in it: He was made a Priest not after
the Law of a carnal Commandment, a transient and mutable dispensation, but
after the power of an endless life. Thirdly, Melchisedeck was a type of Christ
in his excellency above all other Priests. S. Paul's great design is to evince
the pre-eminence and precedence of Melchisedeck above all the Priests of the
Mosaic ministration, yea, above Abraham himself, the Founder and Father of the
Jewish Nation, from whom they reckoned it so great an honor to derive
themselves. And this the Apostle proves by a double instance. First, that
Abraham, in whose loins the Levitical Priests then were, paid tithes to
Melchisedeck, when he gave him the tenth of all his spoils, as due to God and
his Ministers, thereby confessing himself and his posterity inferior to him.
Heb. 7.4, 5, 6. etc.
Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave
the tenth of the spoils. Secondly, that Melchisedeck conferred upon Abraham a
solemn benediction, it being a standing part of the Priests office to bless the
people. And this was an undeniable argument of his superiority. Ibid. Ver. 6, 7.
He whose descent is not counted from them (the legal Priests) received tithes
of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises: And without all
contradiction the less is blessed of the better. Whereby it evidently appears,
that Melchisedeck was greater than Abraham, and consequently than all the
Levitical Priests that descended from him. Now herein he admirably prefigured
and shadowed out our blessed Savior, a person peculiarly chosen out by God,
sent into the World upon a nobler and a more important errand, owned by more
solemn and mighty attestations from Heaven, than ever was any other person; his
office incomparably beyond that of the legal Economy, his person greater, his
undertaking weightier, his design more sublime and excellent, his oblation more
valuable and meritorious, his prayers more prevalent and successful, his office
more durable and lasting, than ever any whose business it was to intercede and
mediate between God and man.

20. THE other extraordinary person under this Economy is Job, concerning whom
two things are to be enquired into, Who he was, and when he lived. For the
first, we find him described by his Name, his Country, his Kindred, his
Quality, his Religion, and his Sufferings, though in many of them we are left
under great uncertainties, and to the satisfaction only of probable
conjectures. For his name, among many conjectures two are especially
considerable, though founded upon very different reasons, one that it is from
(...) signifying one that grieves or groans, mystically pre saging those
grievous miseries and sufferings that afterward came upon him; the other, more
probably, from (...) to love; or to desire, noting him the desire and delight
of his Parents, earnestly prayed for, and affectionately embraced with the
tenderest endearments. His Country was the land of Uz, though where that was,
is almost as much disputed, as about the source of Nilus: Some will have it
Armenia, others Palestine, or the land of Canaan, and some of the Jewish
Masters assure us, that (...) his School, or place of institution was at
Tiberias, and nothing more commonly showed to Travelers than Job's Well in the
way between Ramah and Jerusalem; others place it in Syria near Damascus, so
called from Uz, the supposed Founder of that City; others a little more
Northward at Apamea, now called Hama, where his house is said to be showed at
this day: Most make it to be part of Idumaea near mount Seir, or else Arabia
the Desert (probably it was in the confines of both) this part of Arabia being
nearest to the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, who invaded him, and most applicable to
his dwelling among the Sons of the East, to the situation of his friends who
came to visit him, and best corresponding with those frequent Arabisms
discernable both in the Language and Discourses of Job and his Friends; not to
say that this Country produced persons exceedingly addicted to Learning and
Contemplation, and the studies of natural Philosophy, whence the wise men who
came out of the East to worship Christ are thought by many to have been
Arabians. For his kindred and his friends, we find four taken notice of, who
came to visit him in his distress; Eliphaz the Temanite, the son probably of
Teman, and grandchild of Esau by his eldest son Eliphaz, the Country deriving
its name Teman from his Father, and was situate in Idumaea in the borders of
the Desert Arabia: Bildad the Shuhite, a descendant in all likelihood of Shuah,
one of the sons of Abraham by his wife Keturah, whose seat was in this part of
Arabia: Zophar the Naamathite, a Country lying near those parts: And Elihu the
Buzite, of the offspring of Buz the son of Nahor, and so nearly related to Job
himself. He was the son of Barachel, of the kindred of Ram, who was the head of
the Family, and his habitation was in the parts of Arabia the Desert near
Euphrates, or at least in the Southern part of Mesopotamia bordering upon it.
As for Job himself, he is made by some a Canaanite, of the posterity of Cham;
by others to descend from Sem by his son Amram, whose eldest sons name was Uz;
by most from Esau, the Father of the Idumaean Nations; but most probably either
from Nahor, Abraham's brother, whose sons were Huz, Buz, Chesed, etc. or from
Abraham himself by some of the sons which he had by his wife Keturah, whereby
an account is most probably given, how Job came to be imbued with those seeds
of Piety and true Religion, for which he was so eminently remarkable, as
deriving them from those Religious principles and instructions which Abraham
and Nahor had bequeathed to their posterity. His quality and the circumstances
of his External state were very considerable, a man rich and honorable; His
substance was seven thousand Sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five hundred
yoke of Oxen, and five hundred she-Asses, and a very great household, so that he
was the greatest of all the men of the East; himself largely describes the
great honor and prosperity of his fortunes, that he washed his steps in
Butter, and the rock poured out rivers of Oil; when he went out to the gate
through the City, and prepared his seat in the street, the young men saw him,
and hid themselves, the aged arose and stood up, the Princes refrained talking,
and laid their hand on their mouth, etc. He delivered the poor that cried, and
the fatherless and him that had none to help him, the blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon him, etc. He brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of their teeth, etc. Indeed so great his state and dignity, that
it has led many into a persuasion, that he was King of Idumaea, a powerful and
mighty Prince; a fancy that has received no small encouragement from the common
but groundless confounding of Job with Jobah King of Edom, of the race of Esau.
For the story gives no intimation of any such royal dignity, to which Job was
advanced, but always speaks of him as a private person, though exceeding
wealthy and prosperous, and thereby probably of extraordinary power and
estimation in his Country. Nay, that he might not want fit Companions in his
Regal capacity, three of his friends are made Kings as well as he, the LXX.
Translators themselves stiling Eliphaz King of the Temanites, Bildad of the
Suchites, and Zophar King of the Minaeans, though with as little, probably less
reason than the former.

21. BUT whatever his condition was, we are sure he was no less eminent for
Piety and Religion, he was a man perfect and upright, one that feared God, and
eschewed evil. Though living among the Idolatrous Gentiles, he kept up the true
and sincere worship of God, daily offered up Sacrifices and Prayers to Heaven,
piously instructed his Children and Family, lived in an entire dependence upon
the Divine Providence, in all his discourses expressed the highest and most
honorable sentiments and thoughts of God, and such as best became the Majesty
of an Infinite Being; in all transactions he was just and righteous,
compassionate and charitable, modest and humble, indeed by the character of God
himself, who knew him best, There was none like him in the Earth, a perfect and
an upright man, fearing God, and eschewing evil: his mind was submissive and
compliant, his patience generous and unshaken, great even to a Proverb, You
have heard of the Patience of Job. And enough he had to try it to the utmost,
if we consider what sufferings he underwent; those evils which are wont but
singly to seize upon other men, all centred and met in him. Plundered in his
Estate by the Sabaean and Chaldaean Free-booters (whose standing livelihood
were spoils and robberies) and not an Ox or Ass left of all the Herd, not a
Sheep or a Lamb either for Food or Sacrifice: Undone in his Posterity, his
Seven Sons, and Three Daughters being all slain at once by the fall of one
House: blasted in his credit and good name, and that by his nearest friends,
who traduced and challenged him for a dissembler and an hypocrite. Ruined in
his health, being smitten with sore boils from the crown of the Head to the
sole of the Foot, till his Body became a very Hospital of Diseases: tormented
in his mind with sad and uncomfortable reflections, The arrows of the Almighty
being shot within him, the poison whereof drank up his spirit, the terrors of
God setting themselves in array against him. All which were aggravated and set
home by Satan, the grand Engineer of all those torments, and all this
continuing for at least Twelve Months (say the Jews) probably for a much longer
time; and yet endured with great courage and fortitude of mind, till God put a
period to this tedious Trial, and crowned his sufferings with an ample
restitution. We have seen who this excellent Person was, we are next to enquire
when he lived. Vid. Maimon. Mor. Nevoch. part. 3. cap. 22. p. 395.
And here we meet with almost an infinite variety of Opinions, some making him
contemporary with Abraham, others with Jacob, which had he been, we should
doubtless have found some mention of him in their story, as well as we do of
Melchisedeck: others again refer him to the time of the Law given at Mount
Sinai, and the Israelites travels in the Wilderness; others to the times of the
Judges after the settlement of the Israelites in the Land of Promise, nay, some
to the reign of David and Solomon; and I know not whether the Reader will not
smile at the fancy of the Turkish Chronologists, who make Job Major-domo to
Solomon, Ang. Busbequ. de Legate. Turcic. Epist. 1. p. 94.
as they make Alexander the Great, the General of his Army. Others go further,
and place him among those that were carried away in the Babylonish Captivity,
yea in the time of Ahasuerus, and make his fair Daughters to be of the number
of those beautiful young Virgins that were sought-for for the King. Follies
that need no confutation. It Is certain that he was elder than Moses, his
Kindred and Family, his way of sacrificing, the Idolatry rise in his time,
evidently placing him before that Age; besides that there are not the least
footsteps in all his Book of any of the great things done for the Israelites
deliverance, which we can hardly suppose should have been omitted, being
examples so fresh in memory, and so apposite to the design of that Book. Most
probable therefore it is, that he lived about the time of the Israelitish
Captivity in Egypt, though whether, as some Jews will have it, born that very
Year that Jacob came down into Egypt, and dying that Year that they went out of
Egypt, I dare not peremptorily affirm. And this no question is the reason why
we find nothing concerning him in the Writings of Moses, the History of those
Times being crowded up into a very little room, little being recorded even of
the Israelites themselves for near Two Hundred Years, more than in general that
they were heavily oppressed under the Egyptian Yoke. More concerning this great
and good Man, and the things relating to him, if the Reader desire to know, he
may among others consult the elaborate exercitations of the younger Spanhemius
in his Historia Jobi, where the largest curiosity may find enough to satisfy
it.

22. AND now for a Conclusion to this Economy, if we reflect a little upon the
state of things under this period of the World, we shall find that the Religion
of those early Ages was plain and simple, unforced and natural, and highly
agreeable to the common dictates and notions of Men's minds. They were not
educated under any foreign Institutions, nor conducted by a Body of numerous
Laws and written Constitutions, Phil. lib. de Abrah. page 350.
but were (...) (as Philo says of them) tutored and instructed by the dictates
of their own minds, and the Principles of that Law that was written in their
hearts, following the order of Nature and right Reason, as the safest, and most
ancient Rule. Eusebius. Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 7. c. 6. page 304.
By which means (as one of the Ancients observes) (...), they maintained a free
and uninterrupted course of Religion, conducting their lives according to the
rules of Nature, so that having purged their minds from lust and passion, and
attained to the true knowledge of God, they had no need of external and written
Laws. Their Creed was short and perspicuous, their notions of God great and
venerable, their devotion and piety real and substantial, their worship grave
and serious, and such as became the grandeur and majesty of the Divine being,
their Rites and Ceremonies few and proper, their obedience prompt and sincere,
and indeed the whole conduct of their conversation discovering it self in the
most essential and important duties of the humane life. According to this
standard it was that our blessed Savior mainly designed to reform Religion in
his most excellent Institutions, to retrieve the piety and purity, the
innocence and simplicity of those first and more uncorrupted Ages of the World,
to improve the Laws of Nature, and to reduce Mankind from ritual observances to
natural and moral duties, as the most vital and essential parts of Religion,
and was therefore pleased to charge Christianity with no more than two positive
Institutions, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, that Men might learn, Demonstrat.
Evangel. lib. 1. cap. 5. and 6. p. 9, 10. etc. and loc. supr. cit.
that the main of Religion lies not in such things as these. Hence Eusebius
undertakes at large to prove the faith and manners of the Holy Patriarchs, who
lived before the times of Moses, and the belief and practice of Christians to
be (...), one and the same. Which he does not only assert and make good in
general, but deduce from particular instances, the examples of Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Melchisedeck, Job, etc. whom he expressly proves to have believed and
lived (...), altogether after the manner of Christians: Nay, that they had the
name also as well as the thing, (...), as he shows from that place (which he
proves to be meant of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) (...), Touch not my Christians,
mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And in short, that as they had the
same common Religion, so they had the common blessing and reward.

SECT II. Of the MOSAICAL Dispensation.
Moses the Minister of this Economy. His miraculous preservation. His learned
and noble education. The Divine temper of his mind. His conducting the
Israelites out of Egypt. Their arrival at Mount Sinai. The Law given, and how.
Moral Laws; the Decalogue whether a perfect Compendium of the Moral Law. The
Ceremonial Laws, what. Reduced to their proper Heads. Such as concerned the
matter of their Worship. Sacrifices, and the several kinds of them.
Circumcision. The Passover, and its typical relation. The place of Public
Worship. The Tabernacle and Temple, and the several parts of them, and their
typical aspects considered. Their stated times and feasts, weekly, monthly,
annual. The Sabbatical Year. The Year of Jubilee. Laws concerning the Persons
ministering; Priests, Levites, the High Priest, how a type of Christ. The Design
of the Ceremonial Law, and its abolition. The Judicial Laws, what. The Mosaic
Law how divided by the Jews into affirmative and negative Precepts, and why.
The several ways of Divine revelation. Urim and Thummim what, and the manner of
its giving Answers. Bath-Col. Whether any such way of revelation among the
Jews. Revelation by Dreams. By Visions. The Revelation of the Holy Spirit,
what. Moses his way of Prophecy wherein exceeding the rest. The pacate way of
the spirit of prophecy. This spirit when it ceased in the Jewish Church. The
state of the Church under this Dispensation briefly noted. From the giving of
the Law till Samuel. From Samuel till Solomon. Its condition under the
succeeding Kings till the Captivity. From thence till the coming of Christ. The
state of the Jewish Church in the time of Christ more particularly considered.
The prophanations of the Temple. The Corruption of their Worship. The abuse of
the Priesthood. The Depravation of the Law by false glosses. Their Oral and
unwritten Law. Its original and succession according to the mind of the Jews.
Their unreasonable and blasphemous preferring it above the written Law. Their
religious observing the Traditions of the Elders. The Vow of Corban, what. The
superseding Moral Duties by it. The Sects in the Jewish Church. The Pharisees,
their denomination, rise, temper and principles. Sadducees, their impious
Principles, and evil lives. The Essenes, their original, opinions, and way of
life. The Herodians, who. The Samaritans. Karraeans. The Sect of the Zealots.
The Roman Tyranny over the Jews.

1. THE Church, which had hitherto lain dispersed in private Families, and had
often been reduced to an inconsiderable number, being now multiplied into a
great and a populous Nation, God was pleased to enter into Covenant, not any
longer with particular Persons, but with the Body of the People, and to govern
the Church by more certain and regular ways and methods, than it had hitherto
been. This Dispensation began with the delivery of the Law, and continued till
the final period of the Jewish state, consisting only of meats and drinks, and
diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of
reformation. In the survey whereof we shall chiefly consider what Laws were
given for the Government of the Church, by what Methods of revelation God
communicated his mind and will to them, and what was the state of the Church,
especially toward the conclusion of this Economy.

2. THE great Minister of this Dispensation was Moses the Son of Amram, of the
House of Levi, a Person, whose signal preservation when but an Infant presaged
him to be born for great and generous undertakings. Pharaoh King of Egypt
desirous to suppress the growing numbers of the Jewish Nation had afflicted and
kept them under with all the rigorous severities of tyranny and oppression. But
this not taking its effect, he made a Law that all Hebrew Male-children should
be drowned as soon as born, knowing well enough how to kill the root, if he
could keep any more Branches from springing up. But the wisdom of Heaven
defeated his crafty and barbarous designs. Among others that were born at that
time was Moses a goodly Child, and whom his Mother was infinitely desirous to
preserve: but having concealed him, till the saving of his might endanger the
losing her own life, her affection suggested to her this little stratagem: she
prepared an Ark made of Paper-reeds, and pitched within, and so putting him
a-board this little Vessel, threw him into the River Nilus, committing him to
the mercy of the waves, and the conduct of the Divine Providence. God, who
wisely orders all events, Antiq. Jud. l. 2. c. 5. p 56.
had so disposed things, that Pharaohs daughter (whose name, say the Jews, was
Bithia; Thermuth says Josephus, say the Arabians, Sihhoun) being troubled with
a distemper that would not endure the hot Bathes, was come down at this time to
wash in the Nile, where the cries of the tender Babe soon reached her ears. She
commanded the Ark to be brought ashore, which was no sooner opened, but the
mournful oratory of the weeping Infant sensibly struck her with compassionate
resentments: And the Jews add, R. Eliez. c. 48. apud Hotting. Smeg. Orient. c.
8. p. 402.
that she no sooner touched the Babe, but she was immediately healed, and cried
out that he was a holy Child, and that she would save his life; for which (say
they) she obtained the favor to be brought under the wings of the Divine
Majesty, and to be called the daughter of God. His Sister Miriam, who had all
this while beheld the scene afar off, officiously proffered her service to the
Princess to call an Hebrew Nurse, and accordingly went and brought his Mother.
To her care he was committed with a charge to look tenderly to him, and the
promise of a reward. But the hopes of that could add but little, where nature
was so much concerned. Home goes the Mother joyful and proud of her own pledge,
and the royal charge, carefully providing for his tender years. His
infant-state being passed, he was restored to the Princess, who adopted him for
her own son, bred him up at Court, where he was polished with all the arts of a
noble and ingenuous education, instructed in the modes of civility and
behavior, in the methods of policy and government, Learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians, whose renown for wisdom is not only once and again taken
notice of in holy Writ, but their admirable skill in all liberal Sciences,
Natural, Moral and Divine, beyond the rate and proportion of other Nations, is
sufficiently celebrated by foreign Writers. To these accomplishments God was
pleased to add a Divine temper of mind, a great zeal for God, not able to
endure any thing that seemed to clash with the interests of the Divine honor
and glory; a mighty courage and resolution in God's service, whose edge was not
to be taken off either by threats or charms; He was not afraid of the Kings
commandment, Heb. 11.27.
nor feared the wrath of the King, for he endured as seeing him that is
invisible. His contempt of the World was great and admirable, sleighting the
honors of Pharaoh's Court, and the fair probabilities of the Crown, the
treasures and pleasures of that rich, soft and luxurious Country, out of a firm
belief of the invisible rewards of another World; He refused to be called the
son of Pharaoh's daughter, Ver. 24, 25, 26.
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures in Egypt; Loc. supr. cit. p. 57.
for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. Josephus relates, that when
but a child he was presented by the Princes to her Father, as one whom she had
adopted for her son, and designed for his successor in the Kingdom, the King
taking him up into his arms, put his Crown upon his head, which the child
immediately pulled off again, and throwing it upon the ground, trampled it
under his feet. An action which however looked upon by some Courtiers then
present, (...), as portending a fatal Omen to the Kingdom, did however
evidently presage his generous contempt of the grandeur and honors of the
Court, and those plausible advantages of Sovereignty that were offered to him.
His patience was insuperable, not tired out with the abuses and disappointments
of the King of Egypt, with the hardships and troubles of the Wilderness, and
which was beyond all, with the cross and vexatious humors of a stubborn and
unquiet generation. He was of a most calm and treatable disposition, his spirit
not easily ruffled with passion; he who in the cause of God and Religion could
be bold and fierce as a Lion, was in his own patient as a Lamb, God himself
having given this character of him, That he was the meekest man upon the Earth.

3. THIS great personage thus excellently qualified, God made choice of him to
be the Commander and conducter of the Jewish Nation, and his Ambassador to the
King of Egypt, to demand the enfranchisement of his people, and free liberty to
go serve and worship the God of their Fathers. And that he might not seem a
mere pretender to Divine revelation, but that he really had an immediate
commission from Heaven, God was pleased to furnish him with extraordinary
Credentials, and to seal his Commission with a power of working Miracles beyond
all the Arts of Magic, and those tricks for which the Egyptian Sorcerers were
so famous in the World. But Pharaoh unwilling to part with such useful Vassals,
and having oppressed them beyond possibility of reconcilement, would not
hearken to the proposal, but sometimes downright rejected it, otherwhiles
sought by subtle and plausible pretenses to evade and shift it off; till by
many astonishing Miracles, and severe Judgments God extorted at length a grant
from him. Under the conduct of Moses they set forwards after at least two
hundred years servitude under the Egyptian yoke; and though Pharaoh sensible of
his error, with a great Army pursued them, either to cut them off, or bring
them back, God made way for them through the midst of the Sea, the waters
becoming like a wall of Brass on each side of them, till being all passed to
the other shore, those invisible cords which had hitherto tied up that liquid
Element, bursting in sunder, the waters returned and overwhelmed their enemies
that pursued them. Thus God by the same stroke can protect his friends, and
punish his enemies. Nor did the Divine Providence here take its leave of them,
but became their constant guard and defense in all their journeys, waiting upon
them through their several stations in the wilderness; the most memorable
whereof was that at Mount Sinai in Arabia: The place where God delivered them
the pattern in the Mount, according to which the form both of their Church and
State was to be framed and modelled. In order hereunto Moses is called up into
the Mount, where by Fasting and Prayer he conversed with Heaven, and received
the body of their Laws. Three days the people were by a pious and devout care
to sanctify and prepare themselves for the promulgation of the Law, they might
not come near their Wives, were commanded to wash their clothes, as an emblem
and representation of that cleansing of the heart, and that inward purity of
mind, wherewith they were to entertain the Divine will. On the third day in the
morning God descended from Heaven with great appearances of Majesty and terror,
with thunders and lightnings, with black clouds and tempests, with shouts and
the loud noise of a trumpet (which trumpet, say the Jews, was made of the horn
of that Ram that was offered in the room of Isaac) with fire and smoke on the
top of the Mount, ascending up like the smoke of a Furnace; the Mountain it
self greatly quaking, Heb. 12.21.
the people trembling; nay, so terrible was the sight, that Moses (who had so
frequently, so familiarly conversed with God) said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. All which pompous trains of terror and magnificence God made use of at
this time, to excite the more solemn attention to his Laws, and to beget a
greater reverence and veneration for them in the minds of the people, and to
let them see how able he was to call them to account, and by the severest
penalties to vindicate the violation of his Law.

4. THE Code and Digest of those Laws, which God now gave to the Jews as the
terms of that National Covenant that he made with them, consisted of three
sorts of Precepts, Moral, Ecclesiastical and Political; which the Jews will
have intimated by those three words, that so frequently occur in the writings
of Moses, Laws, Statutes and Judgments. By (...) Laws, they understand the
Moral Law, the notices of good and evil naturally implanted in men's minds: By
(...) or Statutes, Ceremonial Precepts, instituted by God with peculiar
reference to his Church: By (...) or Judgments, Political Laws concerning
Justice and Equity, the order of humane society, and the prudent and peaceable
managery of the Commonwealth. The Moral Laws inserted into this Code are those
contained in the Decalogue, Deuteronomy. 4.13.
(...) as they are called, the ten words that were written upon two Tables of
Stone. These were nothing else but a summary Comprehension of the great Laws of
Nature, engraven at first upon the minds of all men in the World; the most
material part whereof was now consigned to writing, and incorporated into the
body of the Jewish Law. I know the Decalogue is generally taken to be a
complete System of all natural Laws: But whoever impartially considers the
matter, will find that there are many instances of duty so far from being
commanded in it, that they are not reducible to any part of it, unless hooked
in by subtilties of wit, and drawn thither by forced and unnatural inferences.
What provision except in one case or two do any of those Commandments make
against neglects of duty? Where do they oblige us to do good to others, to
love, assist, relieve our enemies? Gratitude and thankfulness to benefactors is
one of the prime and essential Laws of Nature, and yet no where that I know of
(unless we will have it implied in the Preface to the Law) commanded or
intimated in the Decalogue: With many other cases, which it is naturally evident
are our duty, whereof no footsteps are to be seen in this Compendium, unless
hunted out by nice and sagacious reasonings, and made out by a long train of
consequences, never originally intended in the Commandment, and which not one
in a thousand are capable of deducing from it. It is probable therefore that
God reduced only so many of the Laws of Nature into writing, as were proper to
the present state and capacities of that people to whom they were given,
super-adding some, and explaining others by the Preaching and Ministry of the
Prophets, who in their several Ages endeavored to bring men out of the Shades
and Thickets, into clear light and Noonday, by clearing up men's obligations to
those natural and essential duties, in the practice whereof humane nature was
to be advanced unto its just accomplishment and perfection. Hence it was that
our Lord, who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill and perfect it, has
explained the obligations of the natural Law more fully and clearly, more
plainly and intelligibly, rendered our duty more fixed and certain, and extended
many instances of obedience to higher measures, to a greater exactness and
perfection, than ever they were understood to have before. Thus he commands a
free and universal charity, not only that we love our friends and relations,
but that we love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that
hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us: He has
forbidden malice and revenge with more plainness and smartness; obliged us not
only to live according to the measures of sobriety, but extended it to
self-denial, and taking up the Cross, and laying down our lives, whenever the
honor of God, and the interest of Religion calls for it; he not only commands
us to do no wrong, but when we have done it, to make restitution; not only to
retrench our irregular appetites, but to cut off our right hand, and pluck out
our right eye, and cast them from us, that is, mortify and offer violence to
those vicious inclinations, which are as dear to us, as the most useful and
necessary parts and members of our body. Besides all this, had God intended the
Decalogue for a perfect summary of the Laws of Nature, we cannot suppose that
he would have taken any but such into the collection, whereas the Fourth
Commandment concerning the Seventh day is unquestionably Typical and
Ceremonial, and has nothing more of a Natural and Eternal obligation in it,
than that God should be served and honored both with public and private
worship, which cannot be done without some portions of time set apart for it:
but that this should be done just at such a time, and by such proportions, upon
the Seventh rather than the Sixth or the Eighth day, is no part of natural
Religion. And indeed the reasons and arguments that are annexed to it, to
enforce the observance of it, clearly show that it is of a later date, and of
another nature than the rest of those Precepts in whose company we find it,
though it seems at first sight to pass without any peculiar note of
discrimination from the rest. As for the rest they are Laws of Eternal
righteousness, and did not derive their value and authority from the Divine
sanction which God here gave them at Mount Sinai, but from their own moral and
internal goodness and equity, being founded in the nature of things, and the
essential and unchangeable differences of good and evil. By which means they
always were, always will be obligatory and indispensable, being as Eternal and
Immutable as the nature of God himself.

5. THE second sort of Laws were Ceremonial, Divine Constitutions concerning
Ritual observances, and matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance and relation, and
were instituted for a double end, partly for the more orderly government of the
Church, and the more decent administration of the worship of God; partly that
they might be types and figures of the Evangelical state, shadows of good
things to come, visible and symbolical representments of the Messiah, and those
great blessings and privileges which he was to introduce into the World; which
doubtless was the reason why God was so infinitely punctual and particular in
his directions about these matters, giving orders about the minutest
circumstances of the Temple-ministration, because every part of it had a glance
at a future and better state of things. The number of them was great, and the
observation burdensome, the whole Nation groaning under the servility of that
yoke. They were such as principally related to God's worship, and may be
reduced either to such as concerned the worship it self, or the circumstances
of time, place and persons that did attend it. Their worship consisted chiefly
in three things, Prayers, Sacrifices and Sacraments. Prayers were daily put up
together with their Offerings, and though we have very few Constitutions
concerning them, yet the constant practice of that Church, and the particular
forms of Prayer yet extant in their writings, are a sufficient evidence.
Sacrifices were the constant and most solemn part of their public worship;
Exodus 29.
yea, they had their (...) their continual burnt-offering, a Lamb offered
Morning and Evening with a Measure of Flower, Oil and Wine, the charge whereof
was defrayed out of the Treasury of the Temple. The rest of their Sacrifices
may be considered either as they were Expiatory, or Eucharistical. Expiatory
were those that were offered as an atonement for the sins of the people, to
pacify the Divine displeasure, and to procure his pardon, which they did by
virtue of their Typical relation to that great Sacrifice which the Son of God
was in the fullness of time to offer up for the sins of the World. They were
either of a more general relation, for the expiation of sin in general, whole
burnt-offerings, which were entirely (the skin and the entrails only excepted)
burnt to ashes; or of a more private and particular concernment, designed for
the redemption of particular offenses, whereof there were two sorts: (...) or
the sin-offering, for involuntary offenses committed through error or
ignorance, which according to the condition and capacity of the Person were
either for the Priest, or the Prince, or the whole Body of the People, or a
private Person. The other (...) or the trepass offering, for sins done
wittingly, studied and premeditated transgressions, and which the Man could not
pretend to be the effects of surprise or chance. Eucharistical Sacrifices were
testimonies of gratitude to God for mercies received, whereof three sorts
especially. 1. (...) or the meat offering, made up of things without life, oil,
fine flower, incense, etc. which the worshipper offered as a thankful return
for the daily preservation and provisions of life, and therefore it consisted
only of the fruits of the ground. 2. (...) or the peace offering; this was done
either out of a grateful sense of some blessing conferred, or as a voluntary
offering to which the Person had obliged himself by vow in expectation of some
safety or deliverance which he had prayed for. In this Sacrifice God had his
part, the fat which was the only part of it burnt by fire, the Priest his, as
the instrument of the ministration, the Offerer his, that he might have
wherewith to rejoice before the Lord. 3. (...) a thanksgiving-offering, or a
Sacrifice of praise, it was a mixed kind of Sacrifice, consisting of living
Creatures, and the fruits of the Earth, which they might offer at their own
will, but it must be eaten the same day, and none of it left until the morrow.
What other provisions we meet with concerning ceremonial uncleanness,
first fruits, the firstborn, tenths, etc. are conveniently reducible to some
of these heads which we have already mentioned. The last part of their worship
concerned their Sacraments, which were two, Circumcision, and the Paschal
Supper. Circumcision was the federal Rite annexed by God as a Seal to the
Covenant which he made with Abraham and his Posterity, and accordingly renewed
and taken into the Body of the Mosaical constitutions. It was to be administered
the eighth day, which the Jews understand not of so many days complete, but the
current time, six full days, and part of the other. In the room of this,
Baptism succeeds in the Christian Church. The Passover, which was the eating of
the Paschal Lamb, was instituted as an Annual memorial of their signal and
miraculous deliverance out of Egypt, and as a typical representation of our
spiritual Redemption by Christ from the bondage of sin and that Hell that
follows it. It was to be celebrated with a Male-lamb without blemish taken out
of the Flock, to note the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World,
who was taken from among men, a Lamb without blemish and without spot, holy,
harmless, and separate from sinners. The Door-posts of the House were to be
sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, to signify our security from the Divine
vengeance by the blood of sprinkling. The Lamb was to be roasted and eaten
whole, typifying the great sufferings of our blessed Savior, who was to pass
through the fire of Divine wrath, and to be wholly embraced and entertained by
us in all his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet. None but those that were
clean and circumcised might eat of it, to show that only true believers, holy
and good men can be partakers of Christ and the merits of his Death; It was to
be eaten standing, with their Loins girt, and their staff in their hand, to put
them in mind what haste they made out of the house of bondage, and to intimate
to us what present diligence we should use to get from under the empire and
tyranny of sin and Satan, under the conduct and assistance of the Captain of
our Salvation. The eating of it was to be mixed with bitter herbs, partly as a
memorial of that bitter servitude which they underwent in the Land of Egypt,
partly as a type of that repentance and bearing of the cross (duties difficult
and unpleasant) which all true Christians must undergo. Lastly, it was to be
eaten with unleavened Bread, all manner of leaven being at that time to be
banished out of their Houses with the most critical diligence and curiosity, to
represent what infinite care we should take to cleanse and purify our hearts,
1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
to purge out the old leaven, that we may be a new lump: and that since Christ
our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore we should keep the Feast (the
Festival commemoration of his Death) not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.

6. THE Places of their Public Worship were either the Tabernacle made in the
Wilderness, or the Temple built by Solomon, between which in the main there was
no other difference, than that the Tabernacle was an ambulatory Temple, as the
Temple was a standing Tabernacle, together with all the rich costly Furniture
that was in them. The parts of it were three, the Holiest of all, whither none
entered but the High Priest, and that but once a Year, this was a type of
Heaven; the holy place, whither the Priests entered every Day to perform their
Sacred Ministrations; and the outward Court, whither the People came to offer
up their Prayers and Sacrifices. In the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holiest of all
there was the Golden Censer, typifying the Merits and Intercession of Christ;
the Ark of the Covenant, as a representation of him who is the Mediator of the
Covenant between God and man; the Golden Pot of Manna, a type of our Lord, the
true Manna, the Bread that came down from Heaven; the Rod of Aaron that budded,
signifying the Branch of the Root of Jesse, that though our Savior's Family
should be reduced to a state of so much meanness and obscurity, as to appear
but like the trunk or stump of a Tree, Isa. 11.1-10.
Romans 15.12.
yet there should come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch grow
out of his roots, which should stand for an Ensign of the People, and in him
should the Gentiles trust. And within the Ark were the two Tables of the
Covenant, to denote him, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and who is the end and perfection of the Law: Over it were the
Cherubims of glory shadowing the Mercy-seat, who looking toward each other,
and both to the Mercy-seat denoted the two Testaments, or Dispensations of the
Church, which admirably agree, and both direct to Christ the Mediator of the
Covenant. The Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat was the Golden covering to the Ark,
where God veiling his Majesty was wont to manifest his Presence, to give
Answers, and show Himself reconciled to the People, herein eminently
prefiguring our Blessed Savior, who interposes between us, and the Divine
Majesty, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through faith in his
blood for the remission of sins; so that now we may come boldly to the Throne
of Grace, and find mercy to help us. Within the Sanctuary, or the Holy Place
was the Golden Candlestick with Seven-Branches, representing Christ, who is the
Light of the World, and who enlightens every one that comes into the World,
Rev. 4.5.
and before whose Throne there are said to be seven Lamps of Fire, which are
the seven spirits of God: The Table, compassed about with a Border and a Crown
of Gold, denoting the Ministry, and the Shewbread set upon it, shadowing out
Christ, the Bread of Life, who by the Ministry of the Gospel is offered to the
World: here also was the Golden Altar of Incense, whereon they burnt the sweet
Perfumes Morning and Evening, to signify to us that our Lord is the true
Altar, by whom all our Prayers and Services are rendered the odor of a sweet
smell acceptable unto God; Psalm 141.2.
to this the Psalmist refers, Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as
Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the Evening Sacrifice. The third
part of the Tabernacle, as also of the Temple, was the Court of Israel, wherein
stood the Brazen Altar, upon which the Holy Fire was continually preserved, by
which the Sacrifices were consumed, one of the Five great Prerogatives that
were wanting in the second Temple. Here was the Brazen Laver, with its Basis,
made of the brazen Looking-glasses of the Women that assembled at the Door of
the Tabernacle, wherein the Priests washed their Hands and their Feet, when
going into the Sanctuary, and both they and the People, when about to offer
Sacrifice; to teach us to purify our hearts and to cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, especially when we approach to offer up our
services to Heaven; hereunto David alludes, I will wash mine hands in
innocence, Psalm 26.6.
so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord. Solomon in building the Temple made an
addition of a fourth Court, the Court of the Gentiles, whereinto the unclean
Jews and Gentiles might enter, and in this was the Corban or Treasury, and it
is sometimes in the New Testament called the Temple. To these Laws concerning
the Place of Worship we may reduce those that relate to the holy Vessels and
Utensils of the Tabernacle and the Temple, Candlesticks, Snuffers, Dishes, etc.
which also had their proper mysteries and significations.

7. THE stated times and seasons of their worship are next to be considered,
and they were either Daily, Weekly, Monthly, or Yearly. Their Daily worship was
at the time of the Morning, and the Evening Sacrifice; their Weekly solemnity
was the Sabbath, which was to be kept with all imaginable care and strictness,
they being commanded to rest in it from all servile labors, and to attend the
Duties and Offices of Religion, a type of that rest that remains for the People
of God. Their monthly Festivals were the New Mons, wherein they were to blow
the Trumpets over their Sacrifices and Oblations, and to observe them with
great expressions of joy and triumph, in a thankful resentment of the blessings
which all that Month had been conferred upon them. Their Annual Solemnities
were either ordinary or extraordinary; Ordinary were those that returned every
Year, whereof the first was the Passover, to be celebrated upon the Fourteenth
day of the first Month, as a Memorial of their great deliverance out of Egypt:
The second, Pentecost, called also the Feast of Weeks, because just seven
Weeks, or fifty days after the Passover: Instituted it was partly in memory of
the promulgation of the Law, published at Mount Sinai fifty days after their
celebration of the Passover in Egypt, partly as a thanksgiving for the
in-gathering of their Harvest, which usually was fully brought in about this
time. The third was the Feast of Tabernacles, kept upon the Fifteenth day of
the Seventh Month for the space of Seven days together; at which time they
dwelt in Booths made of green Boughs, as a memento of that time when they
sojourned in Tents and Tabernacles in the Wilderness, and a sensible
demonstration of the transitory duration of the present life, that the Earthly
house of our Tabernacle must be dissolved, and that therefore we should secure
a building of God, an house not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. These
were the three great solemnities, wherein all the Males were obliged to appear
at Jerusalem, and to present themselves and their offerings in testimony of
their homage and devotion unto God: Besides which they had some of lesser
moment, such as their Feast of Trumpets, and that of Expiation. The Annual
Festivals extraordinary were those that recurr'd but once in the periodical
return of several years; such was the Sabbatical year, wherein the Land was to
lie fallow, and to rest from ploughing and sowing, and all manner of
cultivation; and this was to be every seventh year, typifying the Eternal
Sabbatism in Heaven, where good men shall rest from their labors, and their
works shall follow them. But the great Sabbatical year of all was that of
Jubilee, which returned at the end of seven ordinary Sabbatick years, that is,
every fiftieth year, the approach whereof was proclaimed by the sound of
Trumpets; in it servants were released, all debts discharged, and mortgaged
Estates reverted to their proper heirs. And how evidently did this shadow out
the state of the Gospel, and our Lord's being sent to preach good tidings to
the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1, 2. Luke 4.18.
to preach liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, that they might lift up
their heads, because their redemption drew nigh?

8. LASTLY, They had Laws concerning the persons by whom their public worship
was administered; and here there was appointed an High Priest, who had his
proper offices and rules of duty, his peculiar attire and consecration;
ordinary Priests, whose business was to instruct the people, to Pray and offer
sacrifice, to bless the Congregation, and judge in cases of Leprosy, and such
like; at their Ordination, they were to be chosen before all the people, to be
sprinkled with the water of Expiation, their Hair shaved, and their Bodies
washed, afterward anointed, and sacrifices to be offered for them, and then
they might enter upon their Priestly ministrations. Next to these were the
Levites, who were to assist the Priests in preparing the Sacrifices, to bear
the Tabernacle (while it lasted) and lay up its Vessels and Utensils, to
purify and cleanse the Vessels and Instruments, to guard the Courts and
Chambers of the Temple, to watch weekly in the Temple by their turns, to sing
and celebrate the praises of God with Hymns and Musical Instruments, and to
join with the Priests in judging and determining Ceremonial causes; they were
not to be taken into the full discharge of their Function till the thirtieth,
nor to be kept at it beyond the fiftieth year of their age; God mercifully
thinking it fit to give them then a Writ of Ease, whose strength might be
presumed sufficiently impaired by truckling for so many years under such
toilsom and laborious ministrations. Though the Levitical Priests were types of
Christ, yet it was the High Priest, who did eminently typifie him, and that in
the unity and singularity of his office; for though many Orders and Courses of
inferior Priests and Ministers, yet was there but one High Priest, There is one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; in the qualifications
necessary to his election, as to place, he was to be taken out of the Tribe of
Levi; as to his person, which was to be every ways perfect and comely, and the
manner of his Consecration; in his singular capacity, that he alone might enter
into the holy of holies, which he did once every year upon the great day of
Expiation, with a mighty pomp and train of Ceremonies, killing Sacrifices,
burning Incense, sprinkling the blood of the Sacrifice before and upon the
Mercy-seat, going within the veil, and making an atonement within the holy
place. All which immediately referred to Christ, who by the sacrifice of
himself, and through the veil of his own flesh entered, not into the holy place
made with hands, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. All which might be represented more at large, but that I intend not a
discourse about these matters.

9. BESIDES the Laws which we have hitherto enumerated, there were several
other particular Commands, Ritual Constitutions about Meats and Drinks, and
other parts of humane life. Such was the difference they were to make between
the Creatures, some to be clean, and others unclean; such were several sorts of
pollution and uncleanness, which were not in their own nature sins, but
Ceremonial defilements; of this kind were several provisions about Apparel,
Diet, and the ordering Family-affairs, all evidently of a Ceremonial aspect,
but too long to be insisted on in this place. The main design of this
Ceremonial Law was to point out to us the Evangelical state, Heb. 10.1.
The Law had only a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things themselves, the body was Christ, and therefore though the Law came
by Moses, John 1.17.
yet grace and truth (the truth of all those types and figures) came by Christ.
It was time for Moses to resign the Chair, when once this great Prophet was
come into the World. Ceremonies could no longer be of use, when once the
substance was at hand: well may the Stars disappear at the rising of the Sun:
the Messiah being cut off, should cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to
cease. At the time of Christ's death the veil of the Temple from top to bottom
rent in sunder, to show that his death had revealed the mysteries, and
destroyed the foundations of the legal Economy, and put a period to the whole
Temple-ministration. Nay, Jom. cap 4. fol. 39. ap. Buxtorf. Recens. Oper. Talm.
p. 218.
the Jews themselves confess, that forty years before the destruction of the
Temple (a date that corresponds exactly with the death of Christ) the Lot did
no more go up into the right hand of the Priest (this is meant of his
dismission of the Scapegoat) nor the scarlet Ribbon, usually laid upon the
forehead of the Goat, any more grow white, (this was a sign that the Goat was
accepted for the remission of their sins) nor the Evening Lamp burn any longer,
and that the gates of the Temple opened of their own accord. By which as at
once they confirm what the Gospel reports of the opening of the Sanctum
Sanctorum by the scissure of the veil; so they plainly confess, that at that
very time their Sacrifices and Temple-services began to cease and fail: As
indeed the reason of them then ceasing, the things themselves must needs vanish
into nothing.

10. THE third sort of Laws given to the Jews were Judicial and Political,
these were the Municipal Laws of the Nation, enacted for the good of the State,
and were a kind of appendage to the second Table of the Decalogue, as the
Ceremonial Laws were of the first. They might be reduced to four general heads;
such as respected men in their private and domestical capacities, concerning
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants; such as
concerned the Public and the Commonwealth, relating to Magistrates, and Courts
of Justice, to Contracts and matters of right and wrong, to Estates and
Inheritances, to Executions and Punishments, etc. such as belonged to
strangers, and matters of a foreign nature, as Laws concerning Peace and War,
Commerce and Dealing with persons of another Nation; or lastly, such as secured
the honor and the interests of Religion, Laws against Apostates and Idolaters,
Wizards, Conjurers and false Prophets, against Blasphemy, Sacrilege, and such
like; all which not being so proper to my purpose, I omit a more particular
enumeration of them. These Laws were peculiarly calculated for the Jewish
State, and that while kept up in that Country wherein God had placed them, and
therefore must needs determine and expire with it. Nor can they be made a
pattern and standard for the Laws of other Nations; for, though proceeding from
the wisest Lawgiver, they cannot reasonably be imposed upon any State or
Kingdom, unless where there is an equal concurrence of circumstances, as there
were in that people, for whom God enacted them. They went off the Stage with
the Jewish Polity, and if any parts of them do still remain obligatory, they
bind not as Judicial Laws, but as branches of the Law of Nature, the reason of
them being Immutable and Eternal. I know not whether it may here be useful to
remark what the Jews so frequently tell us of, that the entire body of the
Mosaic Law consists of DCXIII. Precepts, intimated (say they) in that place
where it is said Moses commanded us a Law, Deuteronomy. 33.4.
where the Numeral Letters of the word (...) or Law make up the number of DCXI.
and the two that are wanting to make up the complete number are the two first
Precepts of the Decalogue, which were not given by Moses to the people, Auth.
Tzeror Hammor ap. Voys. de leg. Div. c. 23. p. 338.
but immediately by God himself. Others say that there are just DCXIII. letters
in the Decalogue, and that every letter answers to a Law: But some that have
had the patience to tell them, assure us that there are two whole words
consisting of seven letters supernumerary, which in my mind quite spoils the
computation. These DCXIII. Precepts they divide into CCXLVIII. Affirmative,
according to the number of the parts of man's body (which they make account are
just so many) to put him in mind to serve God with all his bodily powers, R.
Moses Tract. de Number* praec. ap. Voys. ib.
as if every member of his body should say to him, (...) make use of me to
fulfill the command; and into CCCLXV. Negative, according to the number of the
days of the year, that so every day may call upon a man, and say to him, (...)
oh do not in me transgress the Command: Vid. Menass. Ben Israel de Resurr. lib.
2. c. 18.
Or as others will have it, they answer to the Veins or Nerves in the body of
man; that as the complete frame and compages of man's body is made up of
CCXLVIII. Members, and CCCLXV. Nerves, and the Law of so many affirmative, and
so many negative Precepts, it denotes to us, that the whole perfection and
accomplishment of man lies in an accurate and diligent observance of the Divine
Law. Each of these divisions they reduce under twelve houses, answerable to the
twelve Tribes of Israel. In the Affirmative Precepts the first House is that of
Divine Worship, consisting of twenty Precepts; the second, the House of the
Sanctuary, containing XIX; the third, the House of Sacrifices, wherein are
LVII; the fourth, that of Cleanness and Pollution, containing XVIII; the fifth,
of Tithes and Alms, under which are XXXII; the sixth, of Meats and Drinks,
containing VII; the seventh, of the Passover, concerning Feasts, containing
XX; the eighth, of Judgment, XIII; the ninth, of Doctrine, XXV; the tenth, of
Marriage, and concerning Women, XII; the eleventh, of Judgments criminal, VIII;
the twelfth, of Civil Judgments, XVII. In the Negative Precepts, the first
House is concerning the worship of the Planets, containing XLVII Commands; the
second, of separation from the Heathens, XIII; the third, concerning the
reverence due to holy things, XXIX; the fourth, of Sacrifice and Priesthood,
LXXXII; the fifth, of Meats, XXXVIII; the sixth, of Fields and Harvest, XVIII;
the seventh, of Doctrine, XLV; the eighth, of Justice, XLVII; the ninth, of
Feasts, X; the tenth, of Purity and Chastity, XXIV; the eleventh, of Wedlock,
VIII; the twelfth, concerning the Kingdom, IV. A method not contemptible, as
which might minister to a distinct and useful explication of the whole Law of
Moses.

11. THE next thing considerable under the Mosaical Economy, was the methods
of the Divine revelation, by what ways God communicated his mind to them,
either concerning present emergencies or future events, and this was done,
(...), as the Apostle tells us, at sundry times, or by sundry degrees and
parcels, and in diverse manners, by various methods of revelation, whereof
three most considerable, the Urim and Thummim, the audible voice, and the
spirit of Prophecy, imparted in dreams, visions, etc. We shall make some brief
remarks upon them, referring the Reader, who desires fuller satisfaction
herein, to those who purposely treat about these matters. The Urim and Thummim
was a way of revelation peculiar to the High Priest: Exodus 28.30.
Thou shall put on the breast plate of Judgment, the Urim and the Thummim, and
they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goes in before the Lord, and Aaron
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the
Lord continually. Thus Eleazar the Priest is commanded to ask counsel after the
Judgment of Urim before the Lord. Numb. 27.21.
What this Urim and Thummim was, and what the manner of receiving answers by
it, is difficult, if not impossible to tell, there being scarce any one
difficulty that I know of in the Bible that has more exercised the thoughts
either of Jewish or Christian Writers. Whether it was some addition to the
Highpriests breast plate made by the hand of some curious Artist, or whether
only those two words engraven upon it, or the great name Jehovah carved and put
within the foldings of the breast plate, or whether the twelve stones
resplendent with light, and completed to perfection with the Tribes names
therein, or whether some other mysterious piece of artifice immediately framed
by the hand of Heaven, and given to Moses, when he delivered him the two Tables
of the Law, is vain and endless to enquire, because impossible to determine.
Nor is the manner of its giving answers less uncertain: Whether at such times
the fresh and orient luster of the stones signified the answer in the
Affirmative, while their dull and dead color spoke the Negative; or whether it
was by some extraordinary protuberancy and thrusting forth of the letters
engraven upon the stones, from the conjunction whereof the Divine Oracle was
gathered; or whether probably it might be, that when the High Priest enquired
of God, with this breast plate upon him, God did either by a lively voice, or
by immediate suggestions to his mind, give him a distinct and perspicuous
answer, illuminating his mind with the Urim, or the light of the knowledge of
his will in those cases, and satisfying his doubts and scruples with the
Thummim of a perfect and complete determination of those difficulties that were
propounded to him, thereby enabling him to give a satisfactory and infallible
answer in all the particulars that lay before him. And this several of the Jews
seem to intend, when they make this way of revelation one of the degrees of the
Holy Ghost, and say that no sooner did the High Priest put on the Pectoral, and
had the case propounded to him, but that he was immediately clothed with the
Holy Spirit. But it is to little purpose to hunt after that where fancy and
conjecture must decide the case. Indeed among the various conjectures about
this matter, Christoph. Castr. de Vaticin. lib. 3. cap. 3.
none appears with greater probability than the opinion of those who conceive
the Urim and Thummim to have been a couple of Teraphim, or little Images
(probably formed in humane shape) put within the hollow foldings of the
Pontifical breast plate, from whence God by the ministry of an Angel vocally
answered those interrogatories which the High Priest made: Nothing being more
common even in the early Ages of the World, than such Teraphim in those Eastern
Countries, usually placed in their Temples, and whence the Demon was wont
oracularly to determine the cases brought before him. And as God permitted the
Jews the use of Sacrifices, which had been notoriously abused to Superstition
and Idolatry in the Heathen World, so he might indulge them these Teraphim
(though now converted to a sacred use) that so he might by degrees wean them
from the Rites of the Gentile World, to which they had so fond an inclination.
And this probably was the reason, why when Moses is so particular in describing
the other parts of the Sacerdotal Ornaments, nothing at all is said of this,
because a thing of common use among the Nations, with whom they had conversed,
and notoriously known among themselves. And such we may suppose the Prophet
intended, when he threatened the Jews, that they should abide without a
Sacrifice, Hos. 3.4.
without an Image or Altar, without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim. A notion
very happily improved by an ingenious Pen, whose acute conjectures, Joan.
Spencer. Dissertat. de Vrim and Thum. Edit. Cantabr. 1670.8.
and elaborate dissertations about this matter justly deserve commendation even
from those who differ from it. It seems to have been a kind of political
Oracle, and to be consulted only in great and weighty cases, as the Election of
Supreme Magistrates, making War, Cod. Jom. cap. 7. Sect. 5. page 167.
etc. and only by Persons of the highest rank, none being permitted (say the
Jews) to enquire of it, (...) unless in a case wherein the King, or the
Sanhedrim, or the whole Congregation was concerned.

12. A SECOND way of Divine Revelation was by an audible voice, accompanied
many times with Thunder, descending as it were from Heaven, and directing them
in any emergency of affairs. This the Jewish Writers call (...), the daughter
or Echo of a Voice, which they confess to have been the lowest kind of
revelation, and to have been in use only in the times of the second Temple,
when all other ways of Prophecy were ceased. But notwithstanding their common
and confident assertions whether ever there was any such standing way of
revelation as this, is justly questionable (nay, Dr. Lightf. H. Hebr. in Matthew.
3.17.
it is peremptorily denied by one incomparably versed in the Talmudick
Writings, who adds, that if there was any such thing at any time, it was done
by Magic Arts, and diabolical delusions) partly because it is only delivered
by Jewish Writers, whose faith and honesty is too well known to the World to be
trusted in stories that make so much for the honor of their Nation, not to
mention their extravagant propension to lies and fabulous reports; partly,
because by their own confession God had withdrawn all his standing Oracles and
ordinary ways of Revelation, their notorious impieties having caused Heaven to
retire, and therefore much less would it correspond with them by such immediate
converses; partly, because this seemed to be a way more accommodate to the
Evangelical dispensation at the appearance of the Son of God in the World. A
voice from Heaven is the most immediate testimony, and therefore fittest to do
honor to him who came down from Heaven, and was sure to meet with an obdurate
and incredulous Generation, and to give evidence to that Doctrine that he
published to the World. Thus by a Bath-Col or a Voice from Heaven God bare
witness to our Savior at his Baptism, and a second time at his
Transfiguration, and again at the Passover at Jerusalem, when there came a
Voice from Heaven, which the People took for Thunder, or the Communication of
an Angel, and most of S. John's intelligences from above recorded in his Book
of Revelation are ushered in with an, I heard a Voice from Heaven.

13. BUT the most frequent and standing method of Divine communications was
that whereby God was wont to transact with the Prophets, and in extraordinary
cases with other Men, which was either by Dreams, Visions, or immediate
Inspirations. The way by Dreams was when the Person being overtaken with a deep
sleep, and all the exterior senses locked up, God presented the Species and
Images of things to their understandings, and that in such a manner, that they
might be able to apprehend the will of God, which they presently did upon their
awaking out of sleep. These Divine Dreams the Jews distinguish into two sorts,
Monitory, such as were sent only by way of instruction and admonition, to give
Men notice of what they were to do, or warning of what they should avoid, such
were the Dreams of Pharaoh, Abimelech, Laban, etc. or else they were
Prophetical, when God by such a powerful energy acted upon the mind and
imagination of the Prophet, as carried the strength and force of a Divine
evidence along with it. This was sometimes done by a clear and distinct
impression of the thing upon the mind without any dark or enigmatical
representation of it, such as God made to Samuel, when he first revealed
himself to him in the Temple: sometimes by apparition, yet so as the Man though
a-sleep was able to discern an Angel conversing with him. By Visions, God
usually communicated himself two ways, First, when something really appeared to
the sight; thus Moses beheld the Bush burning, and stood there while God
conversed with him; Manoah and his Wife saw the Angel, while he took his leave,
and in a flaming Pyramid went up to Heaven; the three Angels appeared to
Abraham a little before the fatal ruin of Sodom; all which apparitions were
unquestionably true and real, the Angel assuming an humane shape, that he might
the freelier converse with, and deliver his message to those to whom he was
sent. Secondly, by powerful impressions upon the imagination, usually done
while the Prophet was awake, and had the free and uninterrupted exercise of his
reason, though the Vision often overpowered, and cast him into a trance, that
the Soul being more retired from sensible objects might the closer intend those
Divine notices that were represented to it. Thus all the Prophets had the
Idea's of those things that they were to deliver to the People, the more
strongly impressed upon their fancies, and this commonly when they were in the
greatest solitude and privacy, and their powers most called in, that the
Prophetical influx might have the greater force upon them. In some such way S.
Paul was caught up into the third Heaven, probably not so much by any real
separation of his Soul from his Body, or local translation of his Spirit
thither, as by a profound abstraction of it from his corporeal Senses, God,
during the time of the trance, entertaining it with an internal and admirable
scene of the glory and happiness of that state, as truly and effectually, as if
his Soul had been really conveyed thither.

14. THIRDLY, God was wont to communicate his mind by immediate Inspirations,
whereby he immediately transacted with the understandings of Men, without any
relation to their fancy or their senses. It was the most pacate and serene way
of Prophecy, God imparting his mind to the Prophet not by Dreams or Visions,
but while they were awake, their powers active, and their minds calm and
undisturbed. This the Jews call (...) the Holy Spirit, or that kind of
Revelation that was directly conveyed into the mind by the most efficacious
irradiation and inspiration of the Holy Spirit; Vid. Maimon. Mor. Nevoch. part.
2. cap. 45. p. 317.
God by these Divine illapses enabling the Prophet clearly and immediately to
apprehend the things delivered to him. And in this way the (...) or holy
Writings were dictated and conveyed to the World, in which respect the Apostle
says, that all Scripture is (...), given by divine inspiration. The highest
pitch of this Prophetical revelation was (...) the gradus Mosaicus, or that way
of Prophecy that God used toward Moses, of whom it is particularly said, Exodus
33.11.
that the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a Man speaks unto his
friend: and elsewhere it is evidently distinguished from all inferior ways of
Prophecy, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known
unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a Dream: my Servant Moses is
not so, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8.
with him I will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: Clearly implying a
mighty pre-eminence in God's way of revelation to Moses above that of other
Prophets, which the Jewish Writers make to have lain in four things. First,
that in all God's communications to Moses he immediately spoke to his
understanding, without any impressions upon fancy, any visible appearances, any
Dreams or Visions of the Night. Secondly, that Moses had prophecies conveyed to
him without any fears or consternations, whereas the other Prophets were
astonished and weakened at the sight of God. Thirdly, that Moses had no previous
dispositions or preparations to make him capable of the Divine revelation, but
could directly go to God and consult him, as a man speaks with his friend,
other Prophets being forced many times by some preparatory arts to invite the
Prophetic spirit to come upon them. Fourthly, that Moses had a freedom and
liberty of spirit to prophecy at all times, and could when he pleased have
recourse to the Sacred Oracle. But as to this the Scripture intimates no such
thing, the spirit of Prophecy retiring from him at some times as well as from
the rest of the Prophets. And indeed the Prophetic spirit did not reside in
the holy men by way of habit, but occasionally, as God saw fitting to pour it
out upon them; it was not in them as light is in the Sun, but as light in the
Air, and consequently depended upon the immediate irradiations of the Spirit of
God.

15. THESE Divine Communications were so conveyed to the minds of the Prophets
and inspired persons, that they always knew them to be Divine revelations; so
mighty and perspicuous was the evidence that came along with them, that there
could be no doubt, but they were the birth of Heaven. It Is true, when the
Prophetic spirit at any time seized upon wicked men, they understood not its
effect upon them, nor were in the least improved and bettered by it; the
revelation passed through them, as a sound through a Trunk, or water through a
Leaden-pipe, without any particular and distinct apprehension of the thing, or
useful impression made upon their minds, as is evident besides others in the
case of Caiaphas and Balaam, of which last the Jews say expressly (...) that he
prophesied according to the will of God, but understood not what he prophesied.
But it was otherwise with the true Prophets, they always knew who 'twas that
acted them, and what was the meaning of that intelligence that was communicated
to them. In the Gentile world, when the Demon entered into the inspired person,
he was usually carried out to the furious transports of rage and madness. But
in the Prophets of God, although the impulse might sometimes be very strong and
violent, (whence the Prophet Jeremy complains, Mine heart within me is broken,
all my bones shake, I am like a drunken man, like a man whom wine has
overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness) so as
a little to ruffle their imagination, yet never so as to discompose their
reason, or hinder them from a clear perception of the notices conveyed upon
their minds; (...), Adv. Montan. Haere^. XLVIII. p. 176. Ibid. page 177.
says Epiphanius, the Prophet had his Oracles dictated by the Holy Spirit,
which he delivered strenuously, and with the most firm and unshaken consistency
of his rational powers; and afterward, (...), that the Prophets were often in
a bodily ecstasie, but never in an ecstasie of mind, their understandings never
being rendered useless and unserviceable to them. Indeed it was absolutely
necessary that the Prophet should have a full satisfaction of mind concerning
the truth and Divinity of his message; for how else should they persuade
others, that the thing was from God, if they were not first sufficiently
assured themselves; and therefore even in those methods that were most liable
to doubts and questions, such as communications by dreams, we cannot think but
that the same Spirit that moved and impressed the thing upon them, did also by
some secret and inward operations settle their minds in the firmest belief and
persuasion of what was revealed and suggested to them. All these ways of
immediate revelation ceased some hundreds of years before the final period of
the Jewish Church. A thing confessed not only by Christians but by Jews
themselves, Nizz. p. 159. citante Hotting. Th. Phil. l. 2. c. 3. p. 564.
(...) There was no Prophet in the second Temple; indeed they universally
acknowledge, that there were five things wanting in the second Temple, built
after their return from the Babylonish Captivity, which had been in that of
Solomon, viz. the Ark of the Covenant, the fire from Heaven that lay upon the
Altar, the Schekinah or presence of the Divine Majesty, the Urim and Thummim,
and the spirit of Prophecy, which ceased (as they tell us) about the second
year of Darius, to be sure at the death of Malachy, the last of that order,
after whom there arose no Prophet in Israel, whom therefore the Jews call,
(...) the seal of the Prophets. Indeed it is no wonder that Prophecy should
cease at that time, if we consider that one of the prime ends of it did then
cease, which was to be a seal and an assurance of the Divine inspiration of the
holy Volumes, now the Canon of the Old Testament being consigned and completed
by Ezra with the assistance of Malachy, and some of the last Prophets, God did
not think good any longer to continue this Divine and Miraculous gift among
them: But especially if we consider the great degeneracy into which that Church
was falling; their horrid and crying sins having made God resolve to reject
them, the departure of the Prophetic spirit showed that God had written them a
bill of divorce, and would utterly cast them off; that by this means they might
be awakened to a more lively expectation of that new state of things, which the
Messiah was coming to establish in the World, wherein the Prophetic spirit
should revive, and be again restored to the Church, which accordingly came to
pass, as we shall elsewhere observe.

16. THE third thing propounded, was to consider the state of Religion, and the
Church under the successive periods of this Economy. And here we shall only
make some general remarks, a particular survey of those matters not consisting
with the design of this discourse. Ecclesiastical Constitutions being made in
the Wilderness, and the place for public worship framed and erected, no sooner
did they come into the promised Land, but the Tabernacle was set down at
Gilgal, where, if the Jewish Chronology say true, it continued fourteen years,
till they had subdued and divided the Land: Then fixed at Shiloh, and the
Priests and Levites had Cities and Territories assigned to them, where it is
not to be doubted but there were Synagogues, or places equivalent for prayer
and the ordinary solemnities of Religion, and Courts for the decision of
Ecclesiastical causes. Prosperity and a plentiful Country had greatly
contributed to the depravation of men's manners, and the corruption of Religion
till the times of Samuel, the great Reformer of that Church, who erected
Colleges, and instituted Schools of the Prophets, reduced the Societies of the
Levites to their Primitive order and purity, forced the Priests to do their
duty, diligently to minister in the affairs of God's worship, and carefully to
teach and instruct the people: A piece of reformation no more than necessary,
For the word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision.
CCCLXIX. years (say the Jews) the Tabernacle abode at Shiloh, from whence it
was translated to Nob a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, probably about the time
that the Ark was taken, thence after thirteen years to Gibeon, where it
remained fifty years; and lastly, by Solomon to Jerusalem. The Ark being taken
out to carry along with them for their more prosperous success in their War
against the Philistines, was ever after exposed to an ambulatory and unsettled
course: For being taken captive by the Philistines, it was by them kept
prisoner seven months, thence removed to Bethshemesh, and thence to
Kiriath-jearim, where it remained in the house of Abinadab twenty years, thence
solemnly fetched by David, and after three months rest by the way in the house
of Obed-Edom, brought triumphantly to Jerusalem, and placed under the covert of
a Tent which he had purposely erected for it. David being settled in the Throne,
like a pious Prince took especial care of the affairs of Religion, he fixed the
High Priest and his second, augmented the courses of the Priests from eight to
four and twenty, appointed the Levites, and Singers, and their several turns
and times of waiting, assigned them their proper duties and ministeries, settled
the Nethinim or Porters, the posterity of the Gibeonites, made Treasurers of
the revenues belonging to holy uses, and of the vast sums contributed toward
the building of a Temple, as a more solemn and stately place for Divine
worship, which he was fully resolved to have erected, but that God commanded it
to be reserved for the peaceable and prosperous Reign of Solomon, who
succeeding in his Father's Throne, accomplished it, building so stately and
magnificent a Temple, that it became one of the greatest wonders of the World.
Under his son Rehoboam happened the fatal division of the Kingdom, when ten parts
of twelve were rent off at once, and brought under the Empire of Jeroboam, who
knew no better way to secure his new-gotten Sovereignty, than to take off the
people from hankering after the Temple and the worship at Jerusalem, and
therefore out of a cursed policy erected two Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel,
persuading the people there to pay their public adorations, appointing
Chaplains like himself, Priests of the lowest of the people; and from this time
Religion began visibly to ebb and decline in that Kingdom, and Idolatry to get
ground amongst them.

17. THE two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin were loyal both to God and their
Prince, continuing obedient to their lawful Sovereign, and firmly adhering to
the worship of the Temple, though even here too impiety in some places
maintained its ground, having taken root in the Reign of Solomon, who through
his overgreat partiality and fondness to his Wives had been betrayed to give
too much countenance to Idolatry. The extirpation hereof was the design and
attempt of all the pious and good Princes of Judah: Jehosaphat set himself in
good earnest to recover Religion and the state of the Church to its ancient
purity and luster, he abolished the Groves and high places, and appointed
itinerant Priests and Levites to go from City to City to expound the Law, and
instruct the people in the knowledge of their duty; 2 Chronicles. 19.4.
nay, he himself held a royal Visitation, Going quite through the Land, and
bringing back the people to the Lord God of their Fathers. But under the
succeeding Kings Religion again lost its ground, and had been quite extinct
during the tyranny and usurpation of Athaliah, but that good Jehoiada the
High Priest kept it alive by his admirable zeal and industry. While he lived,
his Pupil Joas (who owed both his Crown and his life to him.) promoted the
design, and purged the Temple, though after his Tutors death he apostatized to
profaneness and idolatry. Nor indeed was the reformation effectually advanced
till the time of Hezekiah, who no sooner ascended the Throne, but he summoned
the Priests and Levites, exhorted them to begin at home, and first to reform
themselves, then to cleanse and repair the Temple; he resetled the Priests and
Levites in their proper places and offices, and caused them to offer all sorts
of Sacrifices, and the Passover to be universally celebrated with great
strictness and solemnity; he destroyed the Monuments of Idolatry, took away the
Altars in Jerusalem, and having given commission, the people did the like in
all parts of the Kingdom, breaking the Images, cutting down the Groves,
throwing down the Altars and high places, until they had utterly destroyed them
all. But neither greatness nor piety can exempt any from the common Laws of
mortality, Hezekiah dies, and his son Manasseh succeeds, a wicked Prince, under
whose influence impiety like a land-floud broke in upon Religion, and laid all
waste before it. But his Grandchild Josiah made some amends, he gave signal
instances of an early piety; for in the eighth year of his Reign, while he was
yet young, 2 Chronicles. 34.3.
he began to seek after the God of David his Father, and in the twelfth year he
began to purge Judah and Jerusalem; he defaced whatever had been abused and
prostituted to Idolatry and Superstition throughout the whole Kingdom, repaired
God's house, and ordered its worship according to the prescript of the Mosaic
Law, a copy whereof they had found in the ruins of the Temple, solemnly
engaged himself and his people to be true to Religion and the worship of God,
and caused so great and solemn a Passover to be held, that there was no
Passover like to it kept in Israel from the days of Samuel. And more he had
done, had not an immature death cut him off in the midst both of his days, and
his pious designs and projects. Not many years after God being highly provoked
by the prodigious impieties of that Nation, delivered it up to the Army of the
King of Babylon, who demolished the City, harassed the Land, and carried the
people captive unto Babylon. And no wonder the Divine patience could hold no
longer, 2 Chronicles. 36.14.
when all the chief of the Priests and the people transgressed very much, after
all the abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, which
he had hallowed in Jerusalem. Seventy years they remained under this captivity,
during which time the Prophet Daniel gave lively and particular accounts of the
Messiah, that he should come into the World to introduce a Law of everlasting
righteousness, to die as a sacrifice and expiation for the sins of the people,
and to put a period to the Levitical sacrifices and oblations. And whereas
other prophecies had only in general defined the time of the Messiah's coming,
he particularly determines the period, that all this should be at the end of
LXX. weeks, that is, at the expiration of CCCCXC. years; which exactly fell in
with the time of our Savior's appearing in the World. The seventy years
captivity being run out, by the favor of the King of Babylon they were set
free, and by him permitted and assisted to repair Jerusalem, and rebuild the
Temple, which was accordingly done under the government of Nehemiah, and the
succeeding Rulers, and the Temple finished by Zorobabel, and things brought
into some tolerable state of order and decency, and so continued till the Reign
of Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, by whom the Temple was profaned and
violated, and the Jewish Church miserably afflicted and distressed; he thrust
out Onias the High Priest, and put in his brother Jason, a man lost both to
Religion and good manners, and who by a vast sum of money had purchased the
Priesthood of Antiochus: At this time Matthias a Priest, and the head of the
Asmonaean Family, stood up for his Country; after whom came Judas Macchabaeus,
Antiquit Jud. lib. 12. c. 19. p. 425.
(...), as Josephus truly characters him, a man of a generous temper, and a
valiant mind, ready to do or suffer any thing to assert the Liberties and
Religion of his Country, followed both in his zeal and prosperous success by
his two Brothers Jonathan and Simon, successively Highpriests and Commanders
after him. Next him came John surnamed Hyrcanus, then Aristobulus, Alexander,
Hyrcanus, Aristobulus junior, Alexander, Antigonus; in whose time Herod the
Great having by the favor of Antony obtained of the Roman Senate the
Sovereignty over the Jewish Nation, Lib. 15. cap. 2. p. 512.
and being willing that the Priesthood should entirely depend upon his
arbitrary disposure, abrogated the succession of the Asmonaean Family, and put
in one Ananel, (...), as Josephus calls him, an obscure Priest, of the line of
those who had been Priests in Babylon. To him succeeded Aristobulus, to him
Jesus the son of Phabes, to him Simon, who being deposed, next came Matthias,
deposed also by Herod, next him Joazar, who underwent the same fate from
Archelaus, then Jesus the son of Sie, after whom Joazar was again restored to
the Chair, and under his Pontificate (though before his first deposition)
Christ was born, things every day growing worse among them, till about seventy
years after the wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost, and brought the
Romans, who finally took away their place and Nation.

18. BEFORE we go off from this part of our discourse, it may not be amiss to
take a more particular view of the state of the Jewish Church, as it stood at
the time of our Savior's appearing in the World, as what may reflect some
considerable light upon the History of CHRIST and his Apostles. And if we cast
our eyes upon it at this time, How was the Gold become dim, and the most fine
Gold changed! How miserably deformed was the face of the Church, how strangely
degenerated from its Primitive Institution! whereof we shall observe some
particular instances. Their Temple though lately repaired and rebuilt by Herod,
De Bell Jud. lib. 7. (...). p. 958.
and that with so much pomp and grandeur, that Josephus, who yet may justly be
presumed partial to the honor of his own Nation, says of it, that it was the
most admirable structure that was ever seen or heard of both for the
preparation made for it, the greatness and magnificence of the thing it self,
and the infinite expense and cost bestowed upon it, as well as for the glory of
that Divine worship that was performed in it, yet was it infinitely short of
that of Solomon; besides that it had been often exposed to rudeness and
violence. Not to mention the horrible prophanations of Antiochus, it had been
of late invaded by Pompey, who boldly ventured into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and
without any scruple curiously contemplated the mysteries of that place, but
suffered no injury to be offered to it. After him came Crassus, who to the
others boldness added Sacrilege, seizing what the others piety and modesty had
spared, plundering the Temple of its vast wealth and treasure. Herod having
procured the Kingdom, besieged and took the City and the Temple, and though to
ingratiate himself with the People he endeavored what in him lay to secure it
from rapine and impiety, and afterward expended incredible Sums in its
reparation, yet did he not stick to make it truckle under his wicked policies
and designs. Joseph. Antiqu. Jud. l. 17. c. 8. p. 596. and de Bell. Jud. l. 1.
c. 21. p. 772.
The more to indear himself to his Patrons at Rome, he set up a Golden Eagle of
a vast dimension (the Arms of the Roman Empire) over the great Gate of the
Temple: a thing so expressly contrary to the Law of Moses, which forbids all
Images, and accounted so monstrous a profanation of that holy place, that
while Herod lay a dying the People in a great tumult and up-roar gathered
together and pulled it down. A great part of it was become an Exchange and a
Market; the place where Men were to meet with God, and to trade with Heaven,
was now turned into a Warehouse for Merchants, and a Shop for Usurers, and the
House of Prayer into a Den of Thieves. The worship formerly wont to be
performed there with pious and devout affections, was now shrunk into a mere
shell and outside, they drew near to God with their mouths, and honored him
with their lips, but their hearts were far from him; Rites of humane invention
had justled out those of Divine Institution, and their very Prayers were made
traps to catch the unwary People, and to devour the Widow and the Fatherless.
Their Priesthood was so changed and altered, that it retained little but its
ancient Name; the Highpriests who by their Original Charter were lineally to
succeed, and to hold their place for life, were become almost annual, scarce a
Year passing over, wherein one was not thrust out, H. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10. p. 28.
and another put in, (...), as Eusebius notes out of their own Historian. Nay,
which was far worse, it was become not only annual, but venal, Herod exposing
it to sale, and scarce admitting any to the Sacerdotal Office, who had not
first sufficiently paid for his Patent; and which was the natural consequence
of that, the place was filled with the refuse of the People, Men of mean
abilities, and debauched manners, who had neither parts nor piety to recommend
them, he being the best and the fittest man, De Bell. Jud. l. 4. (...). p. 872.
that offered most. Nay into so strange a degeneracy were they fallen in this
matter, that Josephus reports, that one Phannias was elected High Priest, not
only a rustic and illiterate fellow, not only not of the Sacerdotal Line, but
so intolerably stupid and ignorant, that when they came to acquaint him, he
knew not what the High Priesthood meant. And not content to be imposed upon,
and tyrannized over by a Foreign Power, Joseph. Antiqu. l. 20. c. 8. page 698.
they fell a quarrelling among themselves, and mutually preyed upon one
another; the Highpriests falling out with the inferior Orders, and both
Parties going with an armed retinue after them, ready to clash and fight
wherever they met, the High Priest sending his Servants to fetch away the
Tithes due to the inferior Priests, insomuch that many of the poorest of them
were famished for want of necessary food.

19. THEIR Law, which had been delivered with so much majesty and magnificence,
and for which they themselves pretended so great a reverence, they had
miserably corrupted and depraved (the moral part of it especially) and that two
ways. First, by gross and absurd interpretations, which the Teachers of those
times had put upon it. The Scribes and Pharisees, who ruled the Chair in the
Jewish Church, had by false and corrupt glosses debased the majesty and purity
of the Law, and made it to serve the purposes of an evil life: they had taught
the People, that the Law required no more than external righteousness, that if
there was but a visible conformity of the life, they needed not be solicitous
about the government of their minds, or the regular conduct of their thoughts
or passions; that so Men did but carry themselves fair to the eye of the World,
it was no great matter how things went in the secret and unseen retirements of
the Soul, nay, that a punctual observance of some external Precepts of the Law
would compensate and quit scores with God for the neglect or violation of the
rest. They told Men that when the Law forbad murder, so they did not actually
kill another, and sheath their Sword in their Brother's bowels, it was well
enough, Men were not restrained from furious and intemperate passions, they
might be angry, yea, though by peevish and uncomely speeches they betrayed the
rancor and malice of their minds. They confessed the Law made it adultery
actually to embrace the bosom of a stranger, but would not have it extend to
wanton thoughts and unchaste desires, or that it was adultery for a man to lust
after a Woman, and to commit folly with her in his heart: they told them that
in all oaths and vows, if they did but perform what they had sworn to God, the
Law took no further notice of it, when as every vain and unnecessary oath, all
customary and trifling use of the name of God was forbidden by it. They made
them believe that it was lawful for them to proceed by the rigorous Law of
retaliation, to exact their own to the utmost, and to right and revenge
themselves; when as the Law requires a tender, compassionate, and benevolent
temper of mind, and is so far from owning the rigorous punctilio's of revenge,
that it obliges to meekness and patience, to forgiveness and charity, and which
is the very height of charity, not only to pardon, but to love and befriend our
greatest enemies, quite contrary to the doctrine which these men taught, that
though they were to love their neighbors; that is, Jews, yet might they hate
their enemies. In these and such like instances they had notoriously abused and
evacuated the Law, and in a manner rendered it of no effect. And therefore when
our Lord, as the great Prophet sent from God, came into the World, the first
thing he did after the entrance upon his public Ministry, was to cleanse and
purify the Law, and to remove that rubbish which the Jewish Doctors had cast
upon it. He rescued it out of the hands of their poisonous and pernicious
expositions, restored it to its just authority, and to its own primitive sense
and meaning, he taught them that the Law did not only bind the external act,
but prescribe to the most inward motions of the mind, and that whoever
transgresses here, is no less obnoxious to the Divine Justice, and the
penalties of the Law, than he that is guilty of the most gross and palpable
violations of it: he showed them how infinitely more pure and strict the
command was, than these Impostors had represented it, and plainly told them
that if ever they expected to be happy, they must look upon the Law with an
other-guise eye, and follow it after another rate, than their blind and
deceitful Guides did, For I say unto you, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you can in no case enter into the
Kingdom of God.

20. THE other way by which they corrupted and dishonored the Law, and weakened
the power and reputation of it, was by preferring before it their Oral and
unwritten Law. For besides the Law consigned to Writing, they had their (...)
their Law delivered by word of mouth, whose pedigree they thus deduce. They
tell us that when Moses waited upon God Forty Days in the Mount, he gave him a
double Law, one in Writing, the other Traditionary, containing the sense and
explication of the former: being come down into his Tent, he repeated it first
to Aaron, then to Ithamar and Eleazar his Sons, then to the Seventy Elders, and
lastly to all the People, the same Persons being all this while present. Aaron
who had now heard it four times recited, Moses being gone out, again repeated
it before them: after his departure out of the Tent, his two Sons who by this
had heard it as often as their Father, made another repetition of it, by which
means the Seventy Elders came to hear it four times, and then they also
repeated it to the Congregation, who had now also heard it repeated four times
together, once from Moses, then from Aaron, then from his Sons, and lastly,
from the Seventy Elders, after which the Congregation broke up, Pirk. Aboth.
cap. 1. Sect. 1, 2, 3. p. 1.
and every one went home, and taught it his Neighbor. This Oral Law Moses upon
his Deathbed repeated to Joshua, he delivered it to the Elders, they to the
Prophets, the Prophets to the men of the great Synagogue, the last of whom was
Symeon the Just, who delivered it to Antigonus Sochaeus, and he to his
Successors, the wise Men, whose business it was to recite it, and so it was
handed through several Generations, the names of the Persons who delivered it
in the several Ages from its first rise under Moses till above an Hundred Years
after Christ, Jad. Chazak ex quo loc. satis prolixum citat Jos. Voys. de leg.
div. c. 9. and seqq. ubi varias Judaeorum de Legis hujus origin and
successione sententias videre est.
being particularly enumerated by Maimonides. At last it came to R. Jehuda,
commonly styled by the Jews (...) our holy Master, the Son of Rabban Symeon
(who flourished a little before the time of the Emperor Antoninus) who
considering the unsettled and tottering condition of his own Nation, and how apt
these traditionary Precepts would be to be forgotten or mistaken, by the
weakness of Men's memories, or the perverseness of their wits, or the dispersion
of the Jews in other Countries, collected all these Laws and Expositions, and
committed them to Writing, stiling his Book Mishnaioth, or the Repetition. This
was afterward illustrated and explained by the Rabbines dwelling about
Babylon, with infinite cases and controversies concerning their Law, whose
resolutions were at last compiled into another Volume, which they called
Gemara, or Doctrine, and both together constitute the entire Body of the
Babylonish Talmud, the one being the Text, the other the Comment. The folly and
vanity of this account, though it be sufficiently evident to need no
confutation with any wise and discerning Man, yet have the Jews in all Ages
made great advantage of it, magnifying and extolling it above the written Law
with Titles and Elogies that hyperbolize into blasphemy. They tell us, Vid.
Buxtorf. de Abbrev. p. 222. and de Synag. Jud. cap. 3. Hotting. These. Phil.
lib. 2. c. 3.
that this is (...) the foundation of the Law, for whose sake it was that God
entered into Covenant with the Israelites, that without this the whole Law would
lie in the dark, yea be mere obscurity and darkness it self, as being contrary
and repugnant to it self, and defective in things necessary to be known: that
it is joy to the heart, and health to the bones, that the words of it are more
lovely and desirable than the words of the Law, and a greater sin to violate
the one than the other; that it is little or no commendation for a Man to read
the Bible, but to study the Mishna is that for which a Man shall receive the
reward of the other World, and that no Man can have a peaceable and quiet
conscience, who leaves the study of the Talmud to go to that of the Bible; that
the Bible is like Water, the Mishna like Wine; the Talmud like spiced Wine;
that all the words of the Rabbis are the very words of the living God, from
which a Man might not depart, though they should tell him his right hand were
his left, and his left his right; nay they blush not, nor tremble to assert,
(...) that to study in the holy Bible is nothing else but to lose our time; I
will mention but one bold and blasphemous sentence more, that we may see how
far these desperate wretches are given over to a spirit of impiety and
infatuation, they tell us, that he that dissents from his Rabbin or Teacher,
(...) dissents from the Divine Majesty, but he that believes the words of the
wise men, believes God himself.

21. STRANGE! that Men should so far offer violence to their reason, so far
conquer and subdue their conscience, as to be able to talk at this wild and
prodigious rate: and stranger it would seem, but that we know a Generation of
Men, great Patrons of Tradition too, in another Church, who mainly endeavor to
debase and suppress the Scriptures, and value their unwritten Traditions at
little less rate than this. But I let them pass. This is no novel and up-start
humor of the Jews, they were notoriously guilty of it in our Savior's days,
whom we find frequently charging them with their superstitious observances of
many little rites and usages derived from the Traditions of the Elders, wherein
they placed the main of Religion, and for which they had a far more sacred
regard, than for the plain and positive commands of God. Mark 7.2, 3. and seqq.
Such were their frequent washings of their Pots and Cups, their brazen Vessels
and Tables, the purifying themselves after they came from Market (as if the
touching of others had defiled them) the washing their hands before every Meal,
and many other things which they had received to hold. In all which they were
infinitely nice and scrupulous, making the neglect of them of equal guilt with
the greatest immorality, Matthew. 15.1. Talm. Tr. Sota cap. 1. vid. Iuxtorf. Syn.
Jud. c. 11. p. 236.
not sticking to affirm, that he who eats Bread with unwashen hands, (...), is
as if he lay with an Harlot. This it is plain they thought a sufficient charge
against our Lord's Disciples, that they were not zealous observers of these
things. Mark 7.2 -- 5
When they saw some of his Disciples eat Bread with defiled (that is to say,
with unwashen) hands, they found fault; and asked him, Why walk not thy
Disciples according to the Tradition of the Elders, but eat Bread with unwashen
hands? To whom our Savior smartly answered, that they were the Persons of whom
the Prophet had spoken, who honored God with their lips, but their hearts were
far from him, that in vain did they worship him, while for Doctrines they
taught the commandments of men, laying aside and rejecting the commandments of
God, that they might hold the Tradition of men. For they were not content to
make them of equal value and authority with the Word of God, but made them a
means wholly to evacuate and supersede it. Whereof our Lord gives a notorious
instance in the case of Parents. They could not say but that the Law obliged
Children to honor and revere their Parents, and to administer to their
necessities in all straits and exigencies, but then had found out a fine way to
evade the force of the command, and that under a pious and plausible pretense.
Moses said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: and who so curses Father or
Mother let him die the death. But ye say, If a man shall say to his Father or
Mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me, he shall be free: And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his
Father, or Mother. By which is commonly understood, that when their Parents
required relief and assistance from their Children, they put them off with this
excuse, that they had consecrated their Estate to God, and might not divert it
to any other use. Though this seems a specious and plausible pretense, yet it
is not reasonable to suppose, that either they had, Vid. Lud. Cappell. diatrib.
de Corban. Grot. Annot. in Math. 15.5. Coccei. in Excerpt. Gemar. Sanbed. p.
273 Hotting. Th. Phi. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5. p. 31.
or would pretend that they had entirely devoted whatever they had to God, and
must therefore refer to some other custom. Now among the many kinds of oaths
and vows that were among the Jews they had one, which they called (...) the vow
of interdict; whereby a man might restrain himself as to this or that
particular person, and this or that particular thing; as, he might vow not to
accept of such a courtesy from this friend or that neighbor, or that he would
not part with this or that thing of his own to such a man, to lend him his
Horse; or give him any thing toward his maintenance, etc. and then the thing
became utterly unlawful, and might not be done upon any consideration
whatsoever, lest the Man became guilty of the violation of his Vow. The form of
this Vow frequently occurs in the Jewish Writings, and even in the very same
words wherein our Lord expresses it, (...) Be it Corban or a gift (that is, a
thing sacred) whereby I may be any ways profitable to thee, that is, be that
thing unlawful or prohibited to me, wherein I may be helpful and assistant to
thee. And nothing more common than this way of vowing in the particular case of
Parents, whereof there are abundant instances in the writings of the Jewish
Masters, who thus explain the forementioned Vow, (...) Whatever I shall gain
hereafter, shall be sacred, as to the maintenance of my Father; or as
Maimonides expresses it, That what I provide, my Father shall eat nothing of
it, that is, says he, he shall receive no profit by it; and then as they tells
us, (...) He that had thus vowed, might not transgress or make void his Vow. So
that when indigent Parents craved relief and assistance from their Children,
and probably wearied them with importunity, it was but vowing in a passionate
resentment, that they should not be better for what they had, and then they
were safe, and might no more dispose any part of their Estate to that use, than
they might touch the Corban, that which was most solemnly consecrated to God.
By which means they were taught to be unnatural under a pretense of Religion,
and to suffer their Parents to starve, lest themselves should violate a
senceless and unlawful Vow. So that though they were under the precedent
obligations of a natural duty, a duty as clearly commanded by God as words
could express it, yet a blind Tradition, a rash and impious Vow, made for the
most part out of passion or covetousness, should cancel and supersede all these
obligations, it being unlawful henceforth to give them one penny to relieve
them: Ye suffer him no more (says our Lord) to do ought for his Father or his
Mother, making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye
have delivered.

22. THE last instance that I shall note of the corruption and degeneracy of
this Church, is the many Sects and divisions that were in it, a thing which the
Jews themselves in their writings confess would happen in the days of the
Messiah, whose Kingdom should be overrun with heretical opinions. That Church
which heretofore like Jerusalem had been at unity within it self, was now
miserably broken into Sects and Factions, whereof three most considerable,
Pharisees, Sadducees, and the Essenes. The Pharisees derive their name from
(...), which may admit of a double signification, and either not unsuitable to
them: It may refer to them as (...), Explainers or Interpreters of the Law,
which was a peculiar part of their work, and for which they were famous and
venerable among the Jews; or more probably to their separation (the most proper
and natural importance of the word) so called, (...), Haeres. xvi. p. 21.
as Epiphanius observed of old, because separated from all others in their
extraordinary pretenses of piety, the very Jews themselves thus describing a
Pharisee, Baal Aruch in voc. (...).
he is one (...), that separates himself from all uncleanness, and from all
unclean meats, and from the people of the Earth, (the common rout) who
accurately observe not the difference of Meats. It is not certain when this
Sect first thrust up its head into the World, probably not long after the times
of the Macchabees, it is certain they were of considerable standing, and great
account in the time of our Savior: R. Ged. Schal. Kabb. p. 104. citante
Hotting. Th. Phil. l. 1. c. 1, p. 27.
To be sure strangely wide of the mark are those Jewish Chronologists who say,
that the Sect of the Pharisees arose in the times of Tiberius Caesar, and
Ptolomy the Egyptian, under whom the Septuagint translation was accomplished;
as if Ptolomy Philadelphus and Tiberius Caesar had been Contemporaries, between
whom there is the distance of no less than CCLX. years. But when ever it began,
a bold and daring Sect it was, not fearing to affront Princes, and persons of
the greatest quality, crafty and insinuative, and who by a show of great zeal,
and infinite strictness in Religion, beyond the rate of other men, had procured
themselves a mighty reverence from the people; so strict, L'Emper. not. in
Benjam. Itiner. p. 147. Itiner. p. 6.
that (as a Learned man observes) Pharisee is used in the Talmudick writings to
denote a pious and holy man; and Benjamin the Jew speaking of R. Ascher, says,
he was (...) a truly devout man, separate from the affairs of this world. And
yet under all this seeming severity they were but Religious villains, spiteful
and malicious, griping and covetous, great oppressors, merciless dealers, heady
and seditious, proud and scornful, indeed guilty of most kinds of immorality,
of whose temper and manners I say the less in this place, having elsewhere
given an account of them. They held that the Oral Law was of infinitely greater
moment and value than the written Word; that the Traditions of their
Forefathers were above all things to be embraced and followed, Vid. Joseph.
Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2. p. 617. and de Bell. Jud. l. 2. (...). p. 788.
the strict observance whereof would entitle a man to Eternal Life; that the
Souls of men are Immortal, and had their dooms awarded in the Subterraneous
Regions; that there is a Metempsuchosis or Transmigration of pious Souls out of
one Body into another; that things come to pass by fate, and an inevitable
necessity, and yet that Man's will is free, that by this means men might be
rewarded and punished according to their works. I add no more concerning them,
than that some great men of the Church of Rome say with some kind of boasting,
that such as were the Pharisees among the Jews, such are the Religious (they
mean the Monastical Orders of their Church) among Christians. Much good may it
do them with the comparison, I confess my self so far of their mind, that there
is too great a conformity between them.

23. NEXT the Pharisees come the Sadducees, as opposite to them in their
temper, as their principles; so called (as Epiphanius and some others will have
it) from (...) justice, as pretending themselves to be very just and righteous
men, but this agrees not with the account given of their lives. They are
generally thought to have been denominated from Sadock the Scholar of Antigonus
Sochaeus, who flourished about the year of the World MMMDCCXX. CCLXXXIV. years
before the Nativity of our Savior. They pass under a very ill character even
among the writers of their own Nation, (...) impious men, and of very loose and
debauched manners: which is no more than what might be expected as the natural
consequence of their principles, this being one of their main dogmata or
opinions, that the Soul is not Immortal, and that there is no future state
after this life. Pirk. Aboth. cap. 1. Sect. 3. p.m. 1.
The occasion of which desperate principle is said to have been a mistake of
the doctrine of their Master Antigonus, who was wont to press his Scholars not
to be like mercenary Servants, who serve their Masters merely for what they can
get by them; but to serve God for himself, without expectation of rewards.
This, Sadock and Baithos, two of his disciples misunderstanding, thought their
Master had peremptorily denied any state of future rewards; and having laid
this dangerous foundation, these unhappy superstructures were built upon it;
that there is no Resurrection, for if there be no reward, what need that the
Body should rise again; that the Soul is not Immortal, nor exists in the
separate state, for if it did, it must be either rewarded or punished; and if
not the Soul, then by the same proportion of reason no spiritual substance,
neither Angel, nor Spirit; that there is no Divine Providence, but that God is
perfectly placed as beyond the commission, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. (...).
p. 788.
so beyond the inspection and regard of what sins or evils are done or happen
in the World, as indeed what great reason to believe a wise and righteous
Providence, if there be no reward or punishment for virtue and vice in another
life? These pernicious and Atheistical opinions justly exposed them to the
reproach and hatred of the people, who were wont eminently to style them (...)
the Heretics, Infidels, Epicureans, no words being thought had enough to
bestow upon them. They rejected the Traditions so vehemently asserted by the
Pharisees, and taught that men were to keep to the Letter of the Law, and that
nothing was to be imposed either upon their belief or practice, but what was
expressly owned and contained in it. Antiquit. Jud. l. 18. c. 2. p. 617.
Josephus observes, that they were the fewest of all the Sects, (...), but
usually men of the better rank and quality; as what wonder, if rich and great
men, who tumble in the pleasures and advantages of a prosperous fortune, be
willing to take sanctuary at those opinions, that afford the greatest patronage
to looseness and debauchery, and care not to hear of being called to account in
another World, for what they have done in this? For this reason the Sadducees
ever appeared the greatest sticklers to preserve the peace, and were the most
severe and implacable Justicers against the Authors or fomenters of tumults and
seditions, lest they should disturb and interrupt their soft and easy course
of life, the only happiness their principles allowed them to expect.

24. THE Essenes succeed, a Sect probably distinct from either of the former.
Passing by the various conjectures concerning the derivation of their name,
which when dressed up with all advantages are still but bare conjectures, they
began about the times of the Macchabees, when the violent persecutions of
Antiochus forced the Jews for their own safety to retire to the Woods and
Mountains. And though in time the storm blew over, yet many of them were too
well pleased with these undisturbed solitudes to return, and therefore combined
themselves into Religious societies, leading a solitary and contemplative
course of life, and that in very great numbers, there being usually above four
thousand of them, Hist. Not. lib. 5. c. 17. p. 80.
as both Philo and Josephus tell us. Pliny takes notice of them, and describes
them to be a solitary generation, remarkable above all others in this, that
they live without Women, without any embraces, without money, conversing with
nothing but Woods and Palm Trees; that their number increased every day as fast
as any died, persons flocking to them from all quarters, to seek repose here,
after they had been wearied with the inquietudes of an improsperous fortune.
Vid. Phil. lib. quod omnis probus liber. p. 876, 877. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l.
18. c. 2. p. 617. praecipue de Bell. Jud. lib. 2. (...). p. 785, and seqq.
They paid a due reverence to the Temple, by sending gifts and presents
thither, but yet worshipped God at home, and used their own Rites and
Ceremonies. Every seventh day they publicly met in their Synagogues, where the
younger seating themselves at the feet of the elder, one reads some portions
out of a Book, which another, eminently skilled in the principles of their
Sect, expounds to the rest (their dogmata, like the Philosophy of the Ancients,
being obscurely and enigmatically delivered to them) instructing them in the
rules of piety and righteousness, and all the duties that concerned God,
others, or themselves. They industriously tilled and cultivated the ground, and
lived upon the fruits of their own labors; had all their revenues in common;
there being neither rich, nor poor among them: Their manners were very harmless
and innocent, exact observers of the rules of Justice, somewhat beyond the
practice of other men. As for that branch of them that lived in Egypt, whose
excellent Manners and Institutions are so particularly described and commended
by Philo, and whom Eusebius and others will needs have to have been Christians
converted by S. Mark, we have taken notice of elsewhere in S. Mark's Life. We
find no mention of them in the History of the Gospel, probably because living
remote from Cities and all places of public concourse, they never concerned
themselves in the actions of Christ or his Apostles. What their principles were
in matters of speculation is not much material to enquire, their Institutions
mainly referring to practice. Out of a great regard to wisdom and virtue they
neglected all care of the body, renounced all conjugal embraces, abstained very
much from Meats and Drinks, some of them not eating or drinking for three,
others for five or six days together, accounting it unbecoming men of such a
Philosophical temper and genius, to spend any part of the day upon the
necessities of the body: Their way they called (...), worship, and their rules
(...), doctrines of wisdom; their contemplations were sublime and speculative,
and of things beyond the ordinary notions of other Sects; they traded in the
names and mysteries of Angels, and in all their carriages bore a great show of
modesty and humility. And therefore these in all likelihood were the very
persons, whom S. Paul primarily designed (though not excluding others who
espoused the same principles) when he charges the Colossians to let no man
beguile them of their reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of
Angels, Col. 2.18 -- 20, 21, 22, 23.
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind, that being dead to the rudiments of the World, they should no
longer (...), be subject to these dogmata or ordinances, such as Touch not,
taste not, handle not, (the main principles of the Essenian Institution) being
the commandments and doctrines of men; which things have indeed a show of
wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any
honor to the satisfying of the flesh. Besides these three greater, there were
several other lesser Sects in the Jewish Church, such as the Herodians,
supposed to have been either part of Herod's guard, or a combination of men,
who to ingratiate themselves with the Prince, maintained Herod to be the
Messiah, and at their own charge celebrated his Coronation-days, as also the
Sabbath, when they used to set lighted Candles crowned with Violets in their
windows; Comm. in Matthew. 22. p. 66. Tom. 9.
an opinion which S. Hierom justly laughs at as trifling and ridiculous.
Probably they were a party that had espoused Herod's interest, and endeavored
to support his new-gotten Sovereignty. For Herod being a stranger, and having
by the Roman power usurped the Kingdom, was generally hateful and burdensome to
the people, and therefore beside the assistance of a foreign power, needed some
to stand by him at home. They were peculiarly active in pressing people to pay
Tribute to Caesar, Loc. citat.
Herod being obliged (as S. Hierom observes) by the Charter of his Sovereignty
to look after the Tribute due to Caesar, and they could not do him a more
acceptable service, by this means endearing him to his great Patrons at Rome.
In matters of opinion they seem to have sided with the Sadducees; Matthew. 16.6.
Mark 8.15.
what S. Matthew calls the leaven of the Sadducees, S. Mark styles the leaven
of Herod. Probable it is, that they had drawn Herod to be of their principles,
that as they asserted his right to the Kingdom, he might favor and maintain
their impious opinions. And it is likely enough that a man of so debauched
manners might be easily tempted to take shelter under principles that so
directly served the purposes of a bad life. Another Sect in that Church were
the Samaritans, the posterity of those who succeeded in the room of the ten
captivated Tribes, a mixture of Jews and Gentiles; they held, that nothing but
the Pentateuch was the Word of God, that Mount Gerizim was the true place of
public and solemn worship, that they were the descendents of Joseph, and heirs
of the Aaronical Priesthood, and that no dealing or correspondence was to be
maintained with strangers, nor any unclean thing to be touched. The Karraeans
were a branch of the Sadducees, but rejected afterward their abominable and
unsound opinions, they are the true Textualists, adhering only to the writings
of Moses and the Prophets, and expounding the Scripture by it self,
peremptorily disowning the absurd glosses of the Talmud, and the idle
Traditions of the Rabbis, insomuch that they admit not so much as the Hebrew
points into their Bibles, accounting them part of the Oral and Traditionary
Law; for which reason they are greatly hated by the rest of the Jews. They are
in great numbers about Constantinople, and in other places at this day. There
was also the Sect of the Zealots, frequently mentioned by Josephus, a
Generation of men insolent and ungovernable, fierce and savage, who under a
pretense of extraordinary zeal for God and the honor of his Law, committed the
most enormous outrages against God and Man; but of them we have given an
account in the Life of S. Simon the Zealot. And yet as if all this had not been
enough to render their Church miserable within it self, their sins and
intestine divisions had brought in the Roman power upon them, who set
Magistrates and Taskmasters over them, depressed their great Sanhedrim, put in
and out Senators at pleasure, made the Temple pay tribute, and placed a
Garrison at hand to command it, abrogated a great part of their Laws, and
stripped them so naked both of Civil and Ecclesiastical Order and Authority, that
they had not power left so much as to put a man to death. All evident
demonstrations that Shiloh was come, and the Scepter departed, that the
Sacrifice and Oblation was to cease, the Messiah being cut off, who came to
finish transgression, to make an end of sins, to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.

SECT. III. Of the EVANGELICAL Dispensation.
The gradual revelations concerning the Messiah. John the Baptist Christ 's
forerunner. His extraordinary Birth. His austere Education, and way of Life.
His Preaching, what. His initiating proselytes by Baptism. Baptism in use in
the Jewish Church. Its Original, whence. His resolution and impartiality. His
Martyrdom. The character given him by Josephus, and the Jews. The Evangelical
Dispensation wherein it exceeds that of Moses. Its perspicuity and perfection.
Its agreeableness to humane nature. The Evangelical promises better than those
of the Law, and in what respects. The aids of the Spirit plentifully afforded
under the Gospel. The admirable confirmation of this Economy. The great extent
and latitude of it. Judaism not capable of being communicated to all mankind.
The comprehensiveness of the Gospel. The Duration of the Evangelical Covenant.
The Mosaical Statutes in what sense said to be for ever. The Typical and
transient nature of that State. The great happiness of Christians under the
Economy of the Gospel.

1. GOD having from the very infancy of the World promised the Messiah, as the
great Redeemer of Mankind, was accordingly pleased in all Ages to make gradual
discoveries and manifestations of him, the revelations concerning him in every
Dispensation of the Church still shining with a bigger and more particular
light, the nearer this Sun of Righteousness was to his rising. The first Gospel
and glad tidings of him commenced with the fall of Adam, God out of infinite
tenderness and commiseration promising to send a person who should triumphantly
vindicate and rescue mankind from the power and tyranny of their Enemies, and
that he should do this by taking the humane nature upon him, and being born of
the seed of the Woman. No further account is given of him till the times of
Abraham, to whom it was revealed, that he should proceed out of his loins, and
arise out of the Jewish Nation, though both Jew and Gentile should be made
happy by him. To his Grandchild Jacob God made known out of what Tribe of that
Nation he should rise, the Tribe of Judah; and what would be the time of his
appearing, viz. the departure of the Scepter from Judah, the abrogation of the
Civil and Legislative power of that Tribe and People (accomplished in Herod the
Idumaean, set over them by the Roman power.) And this is all we find concerning
him under that Economy. Under the Legal Dispensation we find Moses foretelling
one main errand of his coming, which was to be the great Prophet of the Church,
Deuteronomy. 18.15 -- 18, 19.
to whom all were to hearken as an extraordinary person sent from God to
acquaint the World with the Counsels and the Laws of Heaven. The next news we
hear of him is from David, who was told that he should spring out of his house
and family, and who frequently speaks of his sufferings, and the particular
manner of his death, by piercing his hands and his feet, Psalm 22.15. Psalm
16.10. Psalm 68.18. Psalm 110.1. Isai. 7.14.
of his powerful Resurrection, that God would not leave his Soul in Hell, nor
suffer his holy one to see corruption, of his triumphant Ascension into Heaven,
and glorious session at God's right hand. From the Prophet Isaiah we have an
account of the extraordinary and miraculous manner of his Birth, that he should
be born of a Virgin, -- 61.1, 2. -- 53.1, 2, 3. etc.
and his name be Immanuel, of his incomparable furniture of gifts and graces
for the execution of his office, of the entertainment he was to meet with in
the World, and of the nature and design of those sufferings which he was to
undergo. The place of his Birth was foretold by Micah, Mic. 5 2.
which was to be Bethlehem-Ephratah, the least of the Cities of Judah, but
honored above all the rest with the nativity of a Prince, who was to be Ruler
in Israel, whose goings forth had been from everlasting. Lastly, Dan. 9.24-26.
the Prophet Daniel fixes the particular period of his coming, expressly
affirming, That the Messiah should appear in the World, and be cut off as a
Victim and Expiation for the sins of the people at the expiration of LXX.
prophetical weeks, or CCCCXC. years, which accordingly punctually came to pass.

2. FOR the date of the prophetic Scriptures concerning the time of the
Messiah's coming being now run out, In the fullness of time God sent his Son
made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law:
This being the truth of which God spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets,
which have been since the World began. But because it was not fit that so great
a Person should come into the World, without an eminent Harbinger to introduce
and usher in his Arrival, God had promised that he would send his Messenger,
Mal. 3.1. -- 4.5, 6.
who should prepare his way before him, even Elijah the Prophet, whom he would
send before the coming of that great day of the Lord, who should turn the
hearts of the Fathers to the Children, etc. This was particularly accomplished
in John the Baptist, who came in the power and spirit of Elias. Comment. in
Joan. 1.15.
He was the Morning star to the Son of Righteousness, (...), as S. Cyril says
of him, the great and eminent Forerunner, a Person remarkable upon several
accounts. First for the extraordinary circumstances of his Nativity, his Birth
foretold by an Angel, sent on purpose to deliver this joyful Message, a sign
God intended him for great undertakings, this being never done but where God
designed the Person for some uncommon services; his Parents aged, and though
both righteous before God, yet hitherto Childless; Heaven does not dispense all
its bounty to the same Person, Children, though great and desirable blessings,
are yet often denied to those, for whom God has otherwise very dear regards.
Elizabeth was barren, and they were both well stricken in years. But is any
thing too hard for the Lord? said God to Abraham in the same case; God has the
Key of the Womb in his own keeping, it is one of the Divine Prerogatives, that
he makes the barren Woman to keep house, and to be a joyful Mother of Children.
A Son is promised, and mighty things said of him: a promise which old Zachary
had scarce faith enough to digest, and therefore had the assurance of it sealed
to him by a miraculous dumbness imposed upon him till it was made good, the
same Miracle at once confirming his faith, and punishing his infidelity.
Accordingly his Mother conceived with Child, and as if he would do part of his
errand before he was born, he leaped in her Womb at her salutation of the
Virgin Mary, then newly conceived with Child of our Blessed Savior; a piece of
homage paid by one, to one, yet unborn.

3. THESE presages were not vain and fallible, but produced a Person no less
memorable for the admirable strictness and austerity of his life. For having
escaped Herod's butcherly and merciless Executioners (the Divine providence
being a shelter and a cover to him) and been educated among the rudenesses and
solitudes of the Wilderness, his manners and way of life were very agreeable to
his Education. His Garments borrowed from no other Wardrobe than the backs of
his Neighbour-creatures, the skins of Beasts, Camels hair, and a Leathern
girdle, and herein he literally made good the character of Elias, who is
described as an hairy man, 2 Kings 1.8.
girt with a Leathern girdle about his Loins. His Diet suitable to his Garb,
his Meat was Locusts, and wild Honey: Locusts, accounted by all Nations among
the meanest and vilest sorts of food; wild honey, such as the natural artifice
and labor of the Bees had stored up in caverns and hollow Trees, without any
elaborate curiosity to prepare and dress it up. Indeed his abstinence was so
great, and his food so unlike other Men's, that the Evangelist says of him, that
he came neither eating nor drinking, as if he had eaten nothing, or at least
what was worth nothing. But Meat commends us not to God; it is the devout mind,
and the honest life that makes us valuable in the eye of Heaven. The place of
his abode was not in Kings houses, in stately and delicate Palaces, but where
he was born and bred, the Wilderness of Judaea, Luke 1.80.
he was in the Deserts until the time of his showing unto Israel. Divine grace
is not confined to particular places, it is not the holy City, or the Temple at
Mount Sion makes us nearer unto Heaven; God can, when he please, consecrate a
Desert into a Church, make us gather Grapes among Thorns, and Religion become
fruitful in a barren Wilderness.

4. PREPARED by so singular an Education, and furnished with an immediate
Commission from God, he entered upon the actual administration of his Office: In
those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the Wilderness of Judaea, and
saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. He was (...), as
Justin Martyr calls him, Dial. cum Tryph. p. 268.
the Herald to Proclaim the first approach of the Holy Jesus, his whole
Ministry tending to prepare the way to his entertainment, accomplishing herein
what was of old foretold concerning him, For this is he that was spoken of by
the Prophet Esaias, saying, The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. He told the Jews, that the
Messiah whom they had so long expected was now at hand, and his Kingdom ready
to appear, that the Son of God was come down from Heaven, a Person as far
beyond him in dignity, as in time and existence, to whom he was not worthy to
minister in the meanest Offices; that he came to introduce a new and better
state of things, to enlighten the World with the clearest Revelations of the
Divine will, and to acquaint them with counsels brought from the bosom of the
Father, to put a period to all the types and umbrages of the Mosaic
Dispensation, and bring in the truth and substance of all those shadows, and to
open a Fountain of grace and fullness to Mankind; to remove that state of guilt
into which humane nature was so deeply sunk, and as the Lamb of God by the
expiatory Sacrifice of himself to take away the sin of the World, not like the
continual Burnt-offering, the Lamb offered Morning and Evening only for the
sins of the House of Israel, but for Jew and Gentile, Barbarian and Scythian,
bond and free: he told them, that God had a long time born with the sins of
Men, and would now bring things to a quicker issue, and that therefore they
should do well to break off their sins by repentance, and by a serious
amendment and reformation of life dispose themselves for the glad tidings of
the Gospel; that they should no longer bear up themselves upon their external
privileges, the Fatherhood of Abraham, and their being God's select and
peculiar People, that God would raise up to himself another Generation, a
Posterity of Abraham from among the Gentiles, who should walk in his steps, in
the way of his unshaken faith, and sincere obedience; and that if all this did
not move them to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, the Axe was laid to
the root of the Tree, to extirpate their Church, and to hew them down as fuel
for the unquenchable Fire. His free and resolute preaching together with the
great severity of his life procured him a vast Auditory, and numerous
Proselytes, for there went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and the Region
round about Jordan, Persons of all ranks and orders, of all Sects and Opinions,
Pharisees and Sadducees, Soldiers and Publicans, whose Vices he impartially
censured and condemned, and pressed upon them the duties of their particular
places and relations. Those whom he gained over to be Proselytes to his
Doctrine, he entered into this new Institution of life by Baptism (and hence he
derived his Title of the Baptist) a solemn and usual way of initiating
Proselytes, no less than Circumcision, Maim Issur. Biah. cap. 13. vid. Jac.
Alting Dissert. Philol. VII. de Proselyt. Sect. 25. p. 249. Numb. 15.16.
and of great antiquity in the Jewish Church. In all times (says Maimonides) if
any Gentile would enter into Covenant, remain under the wings of the Schechina,
or Divine Majesty, and take upon him the yoke of the Law, he is bound to have
(...) Circumcision, Baptism, and a Peace Offering: and if a Woman, Baptism, and
an Oblation, because it is said, As ye are, so shall the stranger be; as ye
your selves entered into Covenant by Circumcision, Baptism, and a
Peace Offering, so ought the Proselyte also in all Ages to enter in. Though
this last he confesses is to be omitted during their present state of
desolation, and to be made when their Temple shall be rebuilt. This Rite they
generally make contemporary with the giving of the Law. So Maimonides, Ibid.
Sect. 24. p. 248.
By three things (says he) the Israelites entered into Covenant (he means the
National Covenant at Mount Sinai) by Circumcision, Baptism, and an Oblation;
Baptism being used some little time before the Law; Exodus 19.10. Vid. k.
Bechai, fol. 87. col. 2. ibid.
which he proves from that place, Sanctify the People to day and to morrow,
and let them wash their Clothes. This the Rabbis unanimously expound
concerning Baptism, and expressly affirm, that wherever we read of the Washing
of Clothes, there an obligation to Baptism is intended. Thus they entered into
the first Covenant, upon the frequent violations whereof God having promised to
make a new and solemn Covenant with them in the times of the Messiah, they
expected a second Baptism as that which should be the Rite of their Initiation
into it. And this probably is the reason, why the Apostle writing to the
Hebrews, Hebr. 6.2.
speaks of the Doctrine of Baptisms (in the plural number) as one of the
primary and elementary Principles of the faith, wherein the Catechumens were to
be instructed; meaning that besides the Baptism whereby they had been initiated
into the Mosaic Covenant, there was another by which they were to enter into
this new Economy, that was come upon the World. Hence the Sanhedrim (to whom
the cognizance of such cases did peculiarly appertain) when told of John's
Baptism, never expressed any wonder at it, as a new upstart Ceremony, it being
a thing daily practiced in their Church, nor found fault with the thing it
self, which they supposed would be a federal Rite under the dispensation of the
Messiah, but only quarrelled with him for taking upon him to administer it,
when yet he denied himself to be one of the prime Ministers of this new state.
They said unto him, John 1.25.
Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that
Prophet? Either of which had he owned himself, they had not questioned his
right to enter Proselytes by this way of Baptism. It is called the Baptism of
Repentance, this being the main qualification that he required of those, who
took it upon them, as the fittest means to dispose them to receive the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Messiah; and to entitle them to that pardon of sin which
the Gospel brought along with it; whence he is said to baptize in the
Wilderness, Mark 1.4.
and to preach the Baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins. And the
success was answerable, infinite Multitudes flocking to it, and were baptized
of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. Nor is it the least part of his
happiness, that he had the honor to baptize his Savior, which though modestly
declined, our Lord put upon him, and was accompanied with the most signal and
miraculous attestations which Heaven could bestow upon it.

5. AFTER his Preparatory Preachings in the Wilderness he was called to Court
by Herod, at least he was his frequent Auditor, was much delighted with his
plain and impartial Sermons, and had a mighty reverence for him, the gravity of
his Person, the strictness of his Manners, the freedom of his Preaching
commanding an awe and veneration from his Conscience, and making him willing in
many things to reform; But the bluntness of the holy Man came nearer, and
touched the King in the tenderest part, smartly reproving his adultery and
incestuous embraces, for that Prince kept Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife.
And now all corrupt interests were awakened to conspire his ruin. Extravagant
Lusts love not to be controlled and checked, Herodias resents the affront,
cannot brook disturbance in the pleasures of her Bed, or the open challenging
of her honor, and therefore by all the arts of Feminine subtilty meditates
revenge. The issue was, the Baptist is cast into Prison, as the praeludium to a
sadder fate. For among other pleasures and scenes of mirth performed upon the
King's Birthday, Herod being infinitely pleased with the Dancing of a young
Lady, Daughter of this Herodias, promised to give her Her request, and solemnly
ratified his promise with an Oath. She prompted by her Mother, asks the Head of
John the Baptist, which the King partly out of a pretended reverence to his
Oath, partly out of a desire not to be interrupted in his unlawful pleasures,
presently granted, and it was as quickly accomplished. Thus died the Holy man,
a man strict in his conversation beyond the ordinary measures of an Anchoret,
bold and resolute, faithful and impartial in his Office, endued with the power
and spirit of Elias, a burning and a shining light, under whose light the Jews
rejoiced to sit, exceedingly taken with his temper and principles. He was the
happy Messenger of the Evangelical tidings, and in that respect more than a
Prophet, a greater not arising among them that were born of Women. In short, he
was a Man loved of his Friends, revered and honored by his Enemies; Josephus
gives this character of him, that he was a good man, Antiquit. Jud. lib. 18. c.
7. p. 626.
and pressed the Jews to the study of virtue, to the practice of piety toward
God, and justice and righteousness toward men, and to join themselves to his
Baptism, which he told them would then become effectual, and acceptable to God,
when they did not only cleanse the body, but purify the mind by goodness and
virtue. And though he gives somewhat a different account of Herod's condemning
him to die, from what is assigned in the Sacred History, yet he confesses, that
the Jews universally looked upon the putting him to death as the cause of the
miscarriage of Herod's Army, and an evident effect of the Divine vengeance and
displeasure. Zemach David Part. 1. ad Ann. 770. Millen. 4. and Chron. Templi
secund. fol. 54. col. 4.
The Jews in their Writings make honorable mention of his being put to death
by Herod, because reproving him for the company of his Brother Philip's Wife,
stiling him Rabbi Johanan the High Priest, and reckoning him one (...) of the
wise men of Israel. Where he is called High Priest, probably with respect to
his being the Son of Zachariah, Head or Chief of one of the XXIV. Families or
courses of the Priests, who are many times called Chief or Highpriests in
Scripture.

6. THE Evangelical state being thus proclaimed and ushered in by the Preaching
and Ministry of the Baptist, our Lord himself appeared next more fully to
publish and confirm it, concerning whose Birth, Life, Death, and Resurrection,
the Doctrine he delivered, the Persons he deputed to Preach and convey it to
the World, and its success by the Ministry of the Apostles, large and
particular accounts are given in the following work. That which may be proper
and material to observe in this place is, what the Scripture so frequently
takes notice of, the excellency of this above the preceding dispensations,
especially that brought in by Moses, so much magnified in the Old Testament,
and so passionately admired and adhered to by the Jews at this day. Jesus is
the Mediator (...), Heb. 8.6.
as the Apostle calls it, of a better Covenant. And better it is in several
regards; besides the infinite difference between the Persons, who were employed
to introduce and settle them, Moses and our Lord. The pre-eminence eminently
appears in many instances, whereof we shall remark the most considerable. And
first, the Mosaic dispensation was almost wholly made up of types and shadows,
the Evangelical has brought in the truth and substance, John 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Their
Ordinances were but shadows of good things to come, sensible representations of
what was to follow after, the Body is Christ, the perfection and accomplishment
of their whole ritual Ministration. Their Ceremonies were Figures of those
things that are true, the Land of Canaan typified Heaven, Moses and Joshua were
types of the Blessed Jesus, and the Israelites after the flesh of the true
Israel which is after the Spirit, and all their Expiatory Sacrifices did but
represent that Great Sacrifice whereby Christ offered up himself, and by his
own blood purged away the sins of mankind, indeed the most minute and
inconsiderable circumstances of the Legal Economy were intended as little
lights, that might gradually usher in the state of the Gospel. A curious Artist
that designs a famous and excellent piece is not wont to complete and finish it
all at once, but first with his Pencil draws some rude lines and rough draughts
before he puts his last hand to it. By such a method the wise God seems to have
delivered the first draughts and Images of those things by Moses to the Church,
the substance and perfection whereof he designed should be brought in by
Christ. And how admirably did God herein condescend to the temper and humor of
that people; for being of a more rough and childish disposition, apt to be
taken with gaudy and sensible objects, by the external and pompous institutions
of the Ceremonial Dispensation he prepared them for better things, as children
are brought on by things accommodate to their weak capacities. The Church was
then an heir under age, and was to be trained up in such a way, as agreed best
with its Infant-temper, till it came to be of a more ripe manly age, able to
digest Evangelical mysteries, and then the cover and the veil was taken off,
and things made to appear in their own form and shape.

7. HENCE in the next place appears our happiness above them, that we are
redeemed from those many severe and burdensome impositions wherewith they were
clogged, and are now obliged only to a more easy and reasonable service. That
the Law was a very grievous and servile Dispensation, is evident to any that
considers, how much it consisted of carnal ordinances, costly duties,
chargeable sacrifices, and innumerable little Rites and Ceremonies. Under that
state they were bound to undergo (yea even newborn Infants) the bloody and
painful Ceremony of Circumcision, to abstain from many sorts of food, useful
and pleasant to man's life, to keep multitudes of solemn and stated times, new
Moons, and Ceremonial Sabbaths, to take long and tedious journeys to Jerusalem
to offer their sacrifices at the Temple, to observe daily washings and
purifications, to use infinite care and caution in every place; for if by
chance they did but touch an unclean thing, besides their present confinement,
it put them to the expenses of a sacrifice, with hundreds more troublesome and
costly observances required of them. A cruel bondage, heavy burdens, and
grievous to be born; under the weight whereof good men did then groan, and
earnestly breath after the time of reformation; Acts 15.10.
the very Apostles complained that it was a yoke upon their necks, which
neither their Fathers nor they were able to bear. But this yoke is taken off
from our shoulders, and the way open into the liberties of the children of God.
The Law bore a heavy hand over them, as children in their minority, we are got
from under the rod and lash of its tutorage and Pedagogie, and are no more
subject to the severity of its commands, to the exact punctilio's and
numerousness of its impositions. Our Lord has removed that low and troublesome
Religion, and has brought in a more manly and rational way of worship, more
suitable to the perfections of God, and more accommodate to the reason and
understandings of men. A Religion incomparably the wisest and the best that
ever took place in the World. God did not settle the Religion of the Jews, and
their way of worship, because good and excellent in it self, but for its
suitableness to the temper of that people. Happy we, whom the Gospel has freed
from those intolerable observances to which they were obliged, and has taught
us to serve God in a better way, more easy and acceptable, more humane and
natural, and in which we are helped forwards by greater aids of Divine
assistence, than were afforded under that Dispensation. All which conspire to
render our way smooth and plain, Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light.

8. THIRDLY, the Dispensation of the Gospel is founded upon more noble and
excellent promises: Heb. 8.6.
A better Covenant established upon better promises. And better promises they
are both for the nature and clearness of their revelation. They are of a more
sublime and excellent nature, as being promises of spiritual and eternal
things, such as immediately concern the perfection and happiness of mankind,
grace, peace, pardon, and eternal life. The Law strictly considered as a
particular Covenant with the Jews at Mount Sinai had no other promises but of
temporal blessings, plenty and prosperity, and the happiness of this life. This
was all that appeared above-ground, and that was expressly held forth in that
transaction, whatever might otherwise by due inferences, and proportions of
reason be deduced from it. Now this was a great defect in that Dispensation, it
being by this means, considering the nature and disposition of that people, and
the use they would make of it, apt to entangle and debase the minds of men, and
to arrest their thoughts and desires in the pursuit of more sublime and better
things. I do not say but that under the Old Testament there were promises of
spiritual things, and of eternal happiness, as appears from David's Psalms, and
some passages in the Books of the Prophets: But then these though they were
under the Law, yet they were not of the Law, that is, did not properly belong
to it as a legal Covenant; God in every age of the Jewish Church raising up
some extraordinary persons, who preached notions to the people above the common
standard of that Dispensation, and who spoke things more plainly, by how much
nearer they approached the times of the Messiah. But under the Christian
Economy the promises are evidently more pure and spiritual; not a temporal
Canaan, external prosperity, or pardon of ceremonial uncleanness, but remission
of sins, reconciliation with God, and everlasting life are proposed and offered
to us. Not but that in some measure temporal blessings are promised to us as
well as them, only with this difference, to them earthly blessings were pledges
of spiritual, to us spiritual blessings are ensurances of temporal, so far as
the Divine wisdom sees fit for us. Nor are they better in themselves, than they
are clearly discovered and revealed to us. Whatever spiritual blessings were
proposed under the former state were obscure and dark, and very few of the
people understood them: But to us the veil is taken off, and we behold the
glory of the Lord with open face, especially the things that relate to another
World; 1 John 2.25. 2 Timothy 1.10.
for this is the promise that he has promised us, even Eternal Life. Hence our
Lord is said to have brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel.
Which he may be justly said to have done, inasmuch as he has given the greatest
certainty, and the clearest account of that state. He has given us the
greatest assurance and certainty of the thing, that there is such a state. The
happiness of the other World was a notion not so firmly agreed upon either
amongst Jews or Gentiles. Among the Jews it was peremptorily denied by the
Sadducees, a considerable Sect in that Church, which we can hardly suppose they
would have done, had it been clearly propounded in the Law of Moses. And among
the Heathens the most sober and considering persons did at some times at least
doubt of it, witness that confession of Socrates himself, the wisest and best
man that ever was in the Heathen World, who when he came to plead his cause
before his Judges, and had bravely discoursed of the happy state of good men in
the other Life, Apolog. Socrat. ap. Platon. Sect. 22. p. m. 45. Ib. Sect. 23.
ad fin. Apol.
plainly confessed, that he could be content (...), to die a thousand times
over, were he but assured that those things were true; and being condemned,
concludes his Apology with this farewell, And now, Gentlemen, I am going off
the stage, it is your lot to live, and mine to die, but whether of us two shall
fare better, is (...), unknown to any but to God alone. But our blessed Savior
has put the case past all peradventure, having plainly published this doctrine
to the World, and sealed the truth of it, and that by raising others from the
dead, and especially by his own Resurrection and Ascension, which were the
highest pledge and assurance of a future Immortality. But besides the security,
he has given the clearest account of the nature of it. It Is very probable that
the Jews generally had of old, as it is certain they have at this day, the most
gross and carnal apprehensions concerning the state of another Life. But to us
the Gospel has perspicuously revealed the invisible things of the other World;
told us what that Heaven is, which is promised to good men, a state of
spiritual joys, of chaste and rational delights, a conformity of ours to the
Divine Nature, a being made like to God, and an endless and uninterrupted
communion with him.

9. BUT because in our lapsed and degenerate state we are very unable without
some foreign assistance to attain the promised rewards, hence arises in the
next place another great privilege of the Evangelical Economy, that it is
blessed with larger and more abundant communications of the Divine Spirit, than
was afforded under the Jewish state. Under the one it was given by drops, under
the other it is poured forth. The Law laid heavy and hard commands, but gave
little strength to do them, it did not assist humane nature with those powerful
aids that are necessary for us in our present state, it could do nothing in
that it was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. Heb. 7.18.
and by reason of the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, it could make
nothing perfect: 'Twas this made it an heavy yoke, when the commands of it were
uncouth and troublesome, and the assistances so small and inconsiderable.
Whereas now the Gospel does not only prescribe such Laws as are happily
accommodate to the true temper of humane nature, and adapted to the reason of
mankind, such as every wise and prudent man must have pitched upon, but it
affords the influences of the Spirit of God, by whose assistance our vitiated
faculties are repaired, and we enabled under so much weakness, and in the midst
of so many temptations to hold on in the paths of piety and virtue. Hence it is
that the plentiful effusions of the Spirit were reserved as the great blessing
of the Evangelical state, Isai. 44.3, 4.
that God would then pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground, that he would pour out his Spirit upon their seed, and his blessing
upon their offspring, whereby they should spring up as among the grass, as
willows by the watercourse: That he would give them a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26,
27.
and put his Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his statutes, and
keep his judgments to do them: And this is the meaning of those branches of the
Covenant, so often repeated, I will put my Law into their minds, and write it in
their hearts, that is, by the help of my Grace and Spirit I Will enable them to
live according to my Laws, as readily and willingly, as if they were written in
their hearts. For this reason the Law is compared to a dead letter, the Gospel
to the Spirit that gives life, thence styled the ministration of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 3.6, 7.
and as such said to exceed in glory, and that to such a degree, that what
glory the Legal Dispensation had in this case is eclipsed into nothing. Verse
10, 11.
For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason
of the glory that excels, for if that which was done away was glorious, much
more that which remains is glorious. Hence the Spirit is said to be Christ's
peculiar mission, Joh. 14.16, 17. Ephesians. 4.8. Tit. 3.6.
I will pray the Father, and he will send you another comforter, even the
Spirit of truth, which was done immediately after his Ascension, when he
ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, even the Holy Ghost, which he shed
on them abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior: For the Holy Ghost was not
yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. John 7.39.
Not but that he was given before, even under the old Economy, but not in
those large and diffusive measures, wherein it was afterward communicated to
the World.

10. FIFTHLY, The Dispensation of the Gospel had a better establishment and
confirmation than that of the Law; for though the Law was introduced with great
scenes of pomp and Majesty, yet was the Gospel ushered in by more kindly and
rational methods, ratified by more and greater miracles, whereby our Lord
unquestionably evinced his Divine Commission, and showed that he came from God,
doing more miracles in three years than were done through all the periods of
the Jewish Church, and many of them such as were peculiar to him alone. He
often raised the dead, which Moses never did, commanded the winds and waves of
the Sea, expelled Devils out of Lunaticks and possessed persons, who fled
as soon as ever he commanded them to be gone, cured many inveterate and
chronical distempers with the speaking of a word, and some without a word
spoken, virtue silently going out from him. He searched men's hearts, and
revealed the most secret transactions of their minds; had this miraculous power
always residing in him, and could exert it when, and upon what occasions he
pleased, and impart it to others, communicating it to his Apostles and
followers, and to the Primitive Christians for the three first Ages of the
Church; he never exerted it in methods of dread and terror, but in doing such
miracles as were highly useful and beneficial to the World. And as if all this
had not been enough, he laid down his own life after all to give testimony to
it. Covenants were ever wont to be ratified with blood, and the death of
sacrifices. But when our Lord came to introduce the Covenant of the Gospel, he
did not consecrate it with the blood of Bulls and Goats, but with his own most
precious blood, as of a Lamb without spot and blemish. And could he give a
greater testimony to the truth of his doctrine, and those great things he had
promised to the World, than to seal it with his blood? Had not these things
been so, 'twere infinitely unreasonable to suppose, that a person of so much
wisdom and goodness as our Savior was, should have made the World believe so,
and much less would he have chosen to die for it, and that the most acute and
ignominious death. But he died, and rose again for us, and appeared after his
Resurrection: His enemies had taken him away by a most bitter and cruel death,
had guarded and secured his Sepulcher with all the care, power and diligence
which they could invent. And yet he rose again the third day in triumph,
visibly conversed with his Disciples for forty days together, and then went to
Heaven. By which he gave the most solemn and undeniable assurance to the World,
Romans 1.4.
that he was the Son of God (for he was declared to be the Son of God with
power by the Resurrection from the dead) and the Savior of mankind, and that
those doctrines which he had taught were most true, and did really contain the
terms of that solemn transaction, which God by him had offered to men in order
to their eternal happiness in another World.

11. THE last instance I shall note of the excellency of this above the
Mosaical Dispensation, is the universal extent and latitude of it, and that
both in respect of place and time. First, it is more universally extensive as to
place, not confined as the former was to a small part of mankind, but common
unto all. Psalm. 76.1, 2. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
Heretofore in Judah only was God known, and his name was great in Israel, he
showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; but he
did not deal so with any other Nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his
Laws. In those times Salvation was only of the Jews, a few Acres of Land like
Gideon's Fleece was watered with the dew of Heaven, while all the rest of the
World for many Ages lay dry and barren round about it, Acts 14.16.
God suffering all Nations in times past to walk in their own ways, the ways of
their own superstition and Idolatry, being aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, Ephesians. 2.13.
strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in
the World, that is, they were without those promises, discoveries, and
declarations which God made to Abraham and his Seed, and are therefore
peculiarly described under this character, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5.
the Gentiles which knew not God. Indeed the Religion of the Jews was in it
self incapable to be extended over the World, many considerable parts of it, as
Sacrifices, First Fruits, Oblations, etc. (called by the Jews themselves (...)
statutes belonging to that land) being to be performed at Jerusalem and the
Temple, which could not be done by those Nations that lay a considerable
distance from the Land of promise. They had, it is true, now and then some few
Proselytes of the Gentiles, who came over and imbodied themselves into their
way of worship; but then they either resided among the Jews, or by reason of
their vicinity to Judaea were capable to make their personal appearance, and to
comply with the public Institutions of the Divine Law. Other Proselytes they
had, called Proselytes of the Gate, who lived dispersed in all Countries, whom
the Jews call (...) the pious of the Nations, Men of devout minds, and
Religious lives, but these were obliged to no more than the observation of the
Seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, that is, in effect to the Precepts of the
Natural Law. But now the Gospel has a much wider sphere to move in, as vast and
large as the whole World it self, it is communicable to all Countries, and may
be exercised in any part or corner of the Earth. Mark 16.15. Romans 10.18. Tit.
2.11. Coloss. 1.13. Galat. 3.28.
Our Lord gave Commission to his Apostles to go into all Nations, and to Preach
the Gospel to every Creature; and so they did, their sound went into all the
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World, by which means, the grace of
God that brings salvation appeared unto all men, and the Gospel was Preached to
every Creature under Heaven. So that now there is neither Jew, Acts 10.35.
nor Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female, but we are all one
in Christ Jesus, and in every Nation he that fears God, and works
righteousness is accepted with him. The Prophet had long since foretold it of
the times of Christ, that the House of God, that is, his Church should be
called an House of Prayer for all People; Isai. 56.7.
the Doors should be open, and none excluded that would enter in. And the
Divine providence was singularly remarkable in this affair, that after our
Lord's Ascension, when the Apostles were going upon their Commission, and were
first solemnly to proclaim it at Jerusalem, there were dwelling there at that
time Parthians, Medes, Elamites, etc. persons out of every Nation under Heaven,
that they might be as the First Fruits of those several Countries, which were
to be gathered in by the preaching of the Gospel, which was accordingly done
with great success, the Christian Religion in a few years spreading its
triumphant Banners over the greatest part of the then known World.

12. AND as the true Religion was in those Days pent up within one particular
Country, so the more public and ordinary worship of God was confined only to
one particular place of it, viz. Jerusalem, hence called the Holy City. Here
was the Temple, here the Priests that ministered at the Altar, here all the more
public Solemnities of Divine adoration, Psalm. 122.4.
Thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel,
to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. Now this was not the least part of
the bondage of that dispensation to be obliged thrice every Year to take such
long and tedious Journies, many of the Jews living some Hundreds of Miles
distance from Jerusalem, and so strictly were they limited to this place, that
to build an Altar, and offer Sacrifices in any other place (unless in a case or
two wherein God did extraordinarily dispense) although it were to the true God,
was, though not false, yet unwarrantable worship; for which reason the Jews at
this day abstain from Sacrifices, because banished from Jerusalem and the
Temple, the only legal place of offering. But behold the liberty of the Gospel
in this case, we are not tied to present our devotions at Jerusalem, a pious
and sincere mind is the best Sacrifice that we can offer up to God and this may
be done in any part of the World no less acceptably, than they of old
sacrificed in the Temple. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
Mountain, Joh. 4.21-23.
(Mount Gerizim) nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, as our Lord told
the Woman of Samaria; in spirit and in truth] in spirit, in opposition to that
carnal and Idolatrous worship that was in use among the Samaritans, (...).
Philo de Spec. Leg. p. 755.
who worshipped God under the representation of a Dove: in truth, in opposition
to the typical and figurative worship of the Jews, which was but a shadow of
the true worship of the Gospel. The great Sacrifice required in the Christian
Religion is not the fat of Beasts, or the first fruits of the Ground, but an
honest heart, and a pious life, and a grateful acknowledgment of our dependence
upon God in the public Solemnities of his praise and worship. For the Law and
the Gospel did not differ in this, that the one commanded public worship, the
other not, but that under the one public worship was fixed to one only place,
under the other it is free to any where the providence of God has placed us, it
being part of the duty bound upon us by natural and unalterable obligations,
that we should publicly meet together for the solemn Celebration of the Divine
honor and service.

13. NOR is the Economy of the Gospel less extensive in time than place; the
Old Testament was only a temporary dispensation, that of the Gospel is to last
to the end of the World; the Law was to continue only for a little time the
Gospel is an Everlasting Covenant; the one to be quickly antiquated and
abolished, the other never to be done away by any other to succeed it. The Jews
indeed stickle hard for the perpetual and immutable obligation of the Law of
Moses, and frequently urge us with those places, Genesis 17.7. 1 Kings 9.3. Genesis
17.8. Exodus 12.14. Levit. 23.14.
where the Covenant of Circumcision is called an Everlasting Covenant, and God
said to choose the Temple at Jerusalem to place his name there for ever, to give
the Land of Canaan to Abraham and his seed for an everlasting possession, thus
the Law of the Passover is called an Ordinance for ever, the command of the
First Fruits a statute for ever, and the like in other places, which seem to
intimate a perpetual and unalterable Dispensation. But the answer is short and
plain, that this phrase (...) for ever (though when it is applied to God it
always denotes Eternity) yet when it is attributed to other things, it implies
no more than a periodical duration, limited according to the will of the
Lawgiver, or the nature of the thing; thus the Hebrew Servant was to serve his
Master for ever, Exodus 21.6. 1 Samuel 2.36.
that is, but for seven years, till the next year of Jubilee: He shall walk
before mine anointed for ever, says God concerning Samuel, that i^ be a Priest
all his days. Thus when the Ritual services of the Mosaic Law are called
Statutes for ever, the meaning is, that they should continue a long time
obligatory, until the time of the Messiah, in whose days the Sacrifice and
Oblation was to cease, and those carnal Ceremonies to give way to the more
spiritual services of the Gospel. Indeed the very typical nature of that
Dispensation evidently argued it to be but for a time, the shadow being to
cease, that the substance might take place; and though many of them continued
some considerable time after Christ's death, yet they lost their positive and
obligatory power, and were used only as things indifferent in compliance with
the inveterate prejudices of new Converts, lately brought over from Judaism,
and who could not quickly lay aside that great veneration which they had for
the Rites of the Mosaic Institution. Though even in this respect it was not
long before all Jewish Ceremonies were thrown off, and Moses quite turned out
of doors. Whereas the Evangelical state is to run parallel with the age and
duration of the World, it is the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Rev. 14.6.
Heb. 1.1, 2.
the Everlasting Gospel, the last Dispensation that God will make to the World,
God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son; in which respect the
Gospel in opposition to the Law is styled a Kingdom that cannot be moved. Heb.
12.28.
The Apostle in the foregoing Verses speaking concerning the Mosaical state,
Whose voice (says he) then shook the Earth, but now he has promised, saying,
Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but also the Heaven (a phrase
peculiar to the Scripture to note the introducing a new scene and state of
things) and this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things
that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain, that is, that the state of the Gospel may endure for ever.
Hence Christ is said to have an unchangeable Priesthood, to be a Priest for
ever, to be consecrated for evermore. From all which it appears, how
incomparably happy we Christians are under the Gospel, above what the Jews were
in the time of the Law; God having placed us under the best of Dispensations,
freed us from those many nice and troublesome observances to which they were
tied, put us under the clearest discoveries and revelations, and given us the
most noble, rational, and masculine Religion, a Religion the most perfective of
our natures, and the most conducive to our happiness; while their Covenant at
best was faulty, and after all could not make him that did the service perfect
in things pertaining to the Conscience. Luke 10.23, 24.
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see, for I tell you that
many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have
not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

The End of the APPARATUS.
Antiquitates Apostolicae: OR, THE LIVES, ACTS and MARTYRDOMS OF THE HOLY
APOSTLES OF OUR SAVIOR.

To which are added The Lives of the two EVANGELISTS, SS. MARK and LVKE.

AS ALSO A brief Enumeration and Account of the Apostles and their Successors
for the first Three Hundred Years in the Five great Apostolical Churches.

By WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 28. (...).

Chrysostom. Praefat. in Epist. ad Philem. page 1733. (...).

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXVI.

TO THE READER.
IT will not, I suppose, seem improbable to the Reader, when I tell him, with
how much reluctance and unwillingness I set upon this undertaking. Besides the
disadvantage of having this piece annexed to the Elaborate Book of that
excellent Prelate, so great a Master both of Learning and Language, I was
intimately conscious to my own unfitness for such a Work at any time, much more
when clogged with many habitual Infirmities and Distempers. I considered the
difficulty of the thing it self, perhaps not capable of being well managed by a
much better Pen than mine; few of the Ancient Monuments of the Church being
extant, and little of this nature in those few that are. Indeed I could not but
think it reasonable, that all possible honor should be done to those, that
first Preached the Gospel of peace, and brought glad tidings of good things,
that it was fit men should be taught how much they were obliged to those
excellent Persons, who were willing at so dear a rate to plant Christianity in
the World, who they were, and what was that Piety and that Patience, that
Charity and that Zeal, which made them to be reverenced while they lived, and
their Memories ever since to be honorably celebrated through the World,
infinitely beyond the glories of Alexander, and the triumphs of a Pompey or a
Caesar. But then how this should be done out of those few imperfect Memoires,
that have escaped the general shipwreck of Church-Antiquities, and much more by
so rude and unskilful a hand as mine, appeared, I confess, a very difficult
task, and next door to impossible. These, with some other considerations, made
me a long time obstinately resolve against it, till being overcome by
importunity, I yielded to do it, as I was able, and as the nature of the thing
would bear.

THAT which I primarily designed to my self, was to draw down the History of
the New Testament especially from our Lord's death, to enquire into the first
Originals and Plantations of the Christian Church by the Ministry of the
Apostles, the success of their Doctrine, the power and conviction of their
Miracles, their infinite Labors and hardships, and the dreadful Sufferings
which they underwent; to consider in what instances of Piety and Virtue they
ministered to our imitation, and served the purposes of Religion and an Holy
Life. Indeed the accounts that are left us of these things are very short and
inconsiderable, sufficient possibly to excite the appetite, not to allay the
hunger of an importunate Enquirer into these matters. A consideration that
might give us just occasion to lament the irreparable loss of those Primitive
Records, which the injury of time has deprived us of, the substance being
gone, and little left us but the shell and carcass. Had we the Writings of
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, and Scholar, says Irenaeus, to S. John, Apud
Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 39. p. 111.
(wherein, as himself tells us, he set down what he had learnt from those who
had familiarly conversed with the Apostles, the sayings and discourses of
Andrew and Peter, of Philip and Thomas, etc.) Had we the Ancient Commentaries
of Hegesippus, Clemens Alexandrinus his Institutions, Africanus his
Chronography, and some others, the Reader might expect more entire and
particular relations, But alas! these are long since perished, and little
besides the names of them transmitted to us. Nor should we have had most of
that little that is left us, had not the commendable care and industry of
Eusebius preserved it to us. H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 2. p. 4.
And if he complained in his time (when those Writings were extant) that
toward the composing of his History he had only some few particular accounts
here and there left by the Ancients of their times; what cause have we to
complain, when even those little portions have been ravished from us? So that
he that would build a work of this nature, must look upon himself as condemned
to a kind of Egyptian Task, to make Brick without Straw, at least to pick it up
where he can find it, though after all it amounts to a very slender parcel.
Which as it greatly hinders the beauty and completeness of the structure, so
does it exceedingly multiply the labor and difficulty. For by this means I
have been forced to gather up those little fragments of Antiquity, that lie
dispersed in the Writings of the Ancients, thrown some into this corner, and
others into that: which I have at length put together, like the pieces of a
broken Statue, that it might have at least some kind of resemblance of the
person, whom it designs to represent.

HAD I thought good to have traded in idle and frivolous Authors, Abdias
Babylonius, the Passions of Peter and Paul, Joachim Perionius, Peter de
Natalibus, and such like, I might have presented the Reader with a larger, not
a better account. But besides the averseness of my nature to falsehoods and
trifles, especially in matters wherein the honor of the Christian Religion is
concerned, I knew the World to be wiser at this time of day, than to be imposed
upon by Pious frauds, and cheated with Ecclesiastical Romances, and Legendary
Reports. For this reason I have more fully and particularly insisted upon the
Lives of the two first Apostles, so great a part of them being secured by an
unquestionable Authority, and have presented the larger portions of the Sacred
History, many times to very minute circumstances of action. And I presume the
wise and judicious Reader will not blame me, for choosing rather to enlarge upon
a story, which I knew to be infallibly true, than to treat him with those,
which there was cause enough to conclude to be certainly false.

THE Reader will easily discern, that the Authors I make use of are not all of
the same rank and size. Some of them are Divinely inspired, whose Authority is
Sacred, and their reports rendered not only credible, but unquestionable, by
that infallible and unerring Spirit that presided over them. Others such, of
whose faith and testimony, especially in matters of fact, there is no just
cause to doubt, I mean the genuine Writings of the Ancient Fathers, or those,
which though unduly assigned to this or that particular Father, are yet
generally allowed to be Ancient, and their credit not to be despised, because
their proper Parent is not certainly known. Next these come the Writers of the
middle and later Ages of the Church, who though below the former in point of
credit, have yet some particular advantages that recommend them to us. Such I
account Symeon Metaphrastes, Nicephorus Callistus, the Menaea and Menologies of
the Greek Church, etc. wherein though we meet with many vain and improbable
stories, yet may we also rationally expect some real and substantial accounts
of things, especially seeing they had the advantage of many Ancient and
Ecclesiastic Writings, extant in their times, which to us are utterly lost.
Though even these too I have never called in, but in the want of more Ancient
and Authentic Writers. As for others, if any passages occur either in
themselves of doubtful and suspected credit, or borrowed from spurious and
uncertain Authors, they are always introduced or dismissed with some kind of
censure or remark, that the most easy and credulous Reader may know what to
trust to, and not fear being secretly surpised into a belief of doubtful and
fabulous reports. And now after all I am sufficiently sensible, how lank and
thin this Account is, nor can the Reader be less satisfied with it, than I am
my self; and I have only this piece of justice and charity to beg of him, that
he would suspend his censure, till he has taken a little pains to enquire into
the state of the Times and Things I Write of: And then however he may challenge
my prudence in undertaking it, he will not, I hope, see reason to charge me
with want of care and faithfulness in the pursuance of it.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction.
The Life of S. Peter.
SECT. I. Of S. Peter, from his Birth, till his first coming to Christ. Page 1.
SECT. II. Of S. Peter, from his first coming to Christ, till his being called
to be a Disciple. 7. SECT. III. Of S. Peter, from his Election to the
Apostolate, till the confession which he made of Christ. 10. SECT. IV. Of S.
Peter, from the time of his Confession, till our Lord's last Passover. 14.
SECT. V. Of S. Peter, from the last Passover, till the Death of Christ. 20.
SECT. VI. Of S. Peter, from Christ's Resurrection, till his Ascension. 25.
SECT. VII. S. Peter's Acts, from our Lord's Ascension, till the dispersion of
the Church. 29. SECT. VIII. Of S. Peter's Acts, from the dispersion of the
Church at Jerusalem, till his contest with S. Paul at Antioch. 37. SECT. IX. Of
S. Peter's Acts, from the End of the Sacred story, till his Martyrdom. 43.
SECT. X. The Character of his Person and Temper, and an account of his
Writings. 49. SECT. XI. An Enquiry into S. Peter's going to Rome. 54.
The Life of S. Paul.
SECT. I. Of S. Paul, from his Birth, till his Conversion. Page 61. SECT. II.
Of S. Paul, from his Conversion, till the Council at Jerusalem. 67. SECT. III.
Of S. Paul, from the time of the Synod at Jerusalem, till his departure from
Athens. 73. SECT. IV. Of S. Paul's Acts at Corinth and Ephesus. 82. SECT. V. S.
Paul's Acts, from his departure from Ephesus, till his Arraignment before
Felix. 88. SECT. VI. Of S. Paul, from his first Trial before Felix, till his
coming to Rome. 95. SECT. VII. S. Paul's Acts, from his coming to Rome, till
his Martyrdom. 101. SECT. VIII. The description of his Person and Temper,
together with an account of his Writings. 108. SECT. IX. The principal
Controversies that exercised the Church in his time. 116.
The Life of S. Andrew. Page 131. The Life of S. James the Great. 139. The Life
of S. John. 149. The Life of S. Philip. 163. The Life of S. Bartholomew. 169.
The Life of S. Matthew. Page 175. The Life of S. Thomas. Page 183. The Life of
S. James the Less. 189. The Life of S. Simon the Zealot. 197. The Life of S.
Jude. 201. The Life of S. Matthias. 207. The Life of S. Mark the Evangelist.
213. The Life of S. Luke the Evangelist. 221.
Diptycha Apostolica, Or, an Enumeration of the Apostles, and their Successors
for the first three hundred years in the five great Churches said to have been
founded by them. page 227.
The goodly CEDAR of Apostolic and Catholic EPISCOPACY, compared with the
modern Shoots and Slips of divided NOVELTIES in the Church before the
Introduction of the Apostles Lives Place (...) Figure at Page ^.



THE INTRODUCTION.
Christ's faithfulness in appointing Officers in his Church. The dignity of the
Apostles above the rest. The importance of the word (...). The nature of the
Apostolic Office considered. Respect had in founding it to the custom among
the Jews. Their Apostoli, who. The number of the Apostles limited. Why twelve,
the several conjectures of the Ancients. Their immediate election. Their work
wherein it consisted. The Universality of their Commission. Apostolical
Churches, what. How soon the Apostles propagated Christianity through the
World. An argument for the Divinity of the Christian Religion inferred thence.
The power conveyed to the Apostles, equally given to all. Peter 's superiority
over the rest disproved both from Scripture and Antiquity. The Apostles how
qualified for their Mission. Immediately taught the Doctrine they delivered.
Infallibly secured from Error in delivering it. Their constant and familiar
converse with their Master. Furnished with a power of working Miracles. The
great evidence of it to prove a Divine Doctrine. Miraculous powers conferred
upon the Apostles particularly considered. Prophecy, what, and when it ceased.
The gift of discerning Spirits. The gift of Tongues. The gift of
Interpretation. The unreasonable practice of the Church of Rome in keeping the
Scripture and Divine Worship in an Unknown Tongue. The gift of Healing: Greatly
advantageous to Christianity. How long it lasted. Power of Immediately
inflicting corporal punishments; and the great benefit of it in those times.
The Apostles enabled to confer miraculous powers upon others. The Duration of
the Apostolical Office. What in it extraordinary, what ordinary. Bishops in
what sense styled Apostles.

1. JESUS CHRIST, the great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, being
appointed by God to be the Supreme Ruler and Governor of his Church, was, like
Moses, faithful in all his house: but with this honorable advantage, that
Moses was faithful as a servant, Christ as a Son over his own house, which he
erected, established and governed with all possible care and diligence. Nor
could he give a greater instance either of his fidelity toward God, or his
love and kindness to the Souls of men, than that after he had purchased a
Family to himself, and could now no longer upon earth manage its interests in
his own person, he would not return back to Heaven, till he had constituted
several Orders of Officers in his Church, who might superintend and conduct its
affairs; and according to the various circumstances of its state, administer to
the needs and exigencies of his Family. Accordingly therefore he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ;
till we all come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. The first and prime Class of Officers is that of Apostles: God has set
some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. First Apostles,
as far in office as honor before the rest, their election more immediate,
their commission more large and comprehensive, the powers and privileges
wherewith they were furnished greater and more honorable: Prophecy, the gift
of Miracles, and expelling Demons, the order of Pastors and Teachers were all
spiritual powers, and ensigns of great authority, (...), says Sermon. de util.
lection. S. Script. Tom. 8. Edit. Savil. p. 114.
Chrysostom, but the Apostolic eminency is far greater than all these, which
therefore he calls a spiritual Consulship, an Apostle having as great
pre-eminence above all other officers in the Church, as the Consul had above
all other Magistrates in Rome. These Apostles were a few select persons whom
our Lord chose out of the rest, to devolve part of the Government upon their
shoulders, Luke 6.13.
and to depute for the first planting and settling Christianity in the World: He
chose twelve, whom he named Apostles: of whose Lives and Acts being to give an
Historical account in the following work, it may not possibly be unuseful to
premise some general remarks concerning them, not respecting this or that
particular person, but of a general relation to the whole, wherein we shall
especially take notice of the importance of the word, the nature of the
employment, the fitness and qualification of the persons, and the duration and
continuance of the Office.

II. The word (...), or sent, is among ancient Writers applied either to
things, actions, or persons. To things; thus those Dimissory letters that were
granted to such who appealed from an Inferior to a Superior Judicature, were
in the language of the L. Vnic. ff. lib. 49. Tit. 6. vid. L. 106. Tit. 16. lib.
50. and Paul. I C. Sentent. lib. 9. Tit. 39.
Roman Laws usually called Apostoli: thus a Packet-boat was styled, (...),
because sent up and down for advice and dispatch of business: thus though in
somewhat a different sense, the lesson taken out of the Epistles is in the
Ancient Greek Vid. Chrysostom. Liturg. in Ritual. Graec. p. 68.
Liturgies called (...), because usually taken out of the Apostles Writings.
Sometimes it is applied to actions, and so imports no more than mission, or the
very act of sending; thus the setting out a Fleet, or a Naval expedition was
wont to be called (...), so Suid. in voc. (...). ex Demosth. vid. Harpocr. Lex.
in Dec. Rhet.
Suidas tells us, that as the persons designed for the care and management of
the Fleet were called (...), so the very sending forth of the Ships themselves,
(...), were styled (...). Lastly, what principally falls under our present
consideration, it is applied to persons, and so imports no more than a
messenger, a person sent upon some special errand, for the discharge of some
peculiar affair in his name that sent him. Phil. 2.25. 2 Cor. 8.23. John 13.16.
Thus Epaphroditus is called the Apostle or Messenger of the Philippians, when
sent by them to S. Paul at Rome: thus Titus and his Companions are styled
(...), the Messengers of the Churches. So our Lord; he that is sent, (...), an
Apostle or Messenger is not greater than him that sent him. This then being the
common notion of the word, our Lord fixes it to a particular use, applying it
to those select persons, whom he had made choice of to act by that peculiar
authority and commission, which he had derived upon them. Twelve, whom he also
named Apostles; that is, Commissioners, those who were to be Ambassadors for
Christ, to be sent up and down the World in his name, to plant the Faith, to
govern and superintend the Church at present, and by their wise and prudent
settlement of affairs, to provide for the future exigencies of the Church.

III. The next thing then to be considered is the nature of their Office; and
under this enquiry we shall make these following remarks. First, it is not to
be doubted but that our Lord in founding this Office had some respect to the
state of things in the Jewish Church, I mean not only in general, that there
should be superior and subordinate Officers, as there were superior and
inferior Orders under the Mosaic dispensation; but that herein he had an eye
to some usage and custom common among them. Now among the Jews as all
Messengers were called (...), or Apostles, (...). Eusebius. in Calen. MS. apud
Heins. exercit. in Luc. 6.
so were they wont to dispatch some with peculiar letters of authority and
Commission, whereby they acted as Proxies and Deputies of those that sent them,
thence their Proverb, (...) every man's Apostle is as himself, that is,
whatever he does is looked upon to be as firm and valid, as if the person
himself had done it. Thus when Saul was sent by the Sanhedrim to Damascus to
apprehend the Jewish converts, he was furnished with letters from the
High Priest, enabling him to act as his Commissary in that matter. Indeed
Haeres. 30. p. 60.
Epiphanius tells us of a sort of persons called Apostles, who were Assessors
and Counselors to the Jewish Patriarch, constantly attending upon him to
advise him in matters pertaining to the Law, and sent by him (as Ibid. p. 63.
he intimates) sometimes to inspect and reform the manners of the Priests and
Jewish Clergy, and the irregularities of Country-Synagogues, with commission to
gather the Tenths and First Fruits due in all the Provinces under his
jurisdiction. Such Apostles we find mentioned both by Epist. 25: p. 153.
Julian the Emperor in an Epistle to the Jews, and in a Law of the Emperor L.
14. C. Th. de Judaeis lib. 16. Tit. 8.
Honorius, employed by the Patriarch to gather once a year the Aurum Coronarium
or Crown-Gold, a Tribute annually paid by them to the Roman Emperors. But these
Apostles could not under that notion be extant in our Savior's time; though
sure we are there was then something like it, Lib. de legati ad Caium, p. 1023.
vid. p. 1035. E.
Philo the Jew more than once mentioning the (...), the sacred messengers
annually sent to collect the holy treasure paid by way of First Fruits, and to
carry it to the Temple at Jerusalem. However our Lord in conformity to the
general custom of those times, of appointing Apostles or Messengers, as their
Proxies and Deputies to act in their names, called and denominated those
Apostles, whom he peculiarly chose to represent his person, to communicate his
mind and will to the World, and to act as Ambassadors or Commissioners in his
room and stead.

IV. Secondly, We observe that the persons thus deputed by our Savior were not
left uncertain, but reduced to a fixed definite number, confined to the just
number of Twelve: he ordained twelve that they should be with him. Mark 3.15.
A number that seems to carry something of mystery and peculiar design in it,
as appears in that the Apostles were so careful upon the fall of Judas
immediately to supply it. The Fathers are very wide and different in their
conjectures about the reason of it. Sermon. 3. in Psalm. 103. Col. 1192. Tom. 8.
vid. in Psalm. 59. Col. 603.
S. Augustine thinks our Lord herein had respect to the four quarters of the
World, which were to be called by the preaching of the Gospel, which being
multiplied by three (to denote the Trinity, in whose name they were to be
called) make Twelve. Adv: Marcion. lib. 4. c. 13. p. 425.
Tertullian will have them typified by the twelve fountains in Elim, the
Apostles being sent out to water and refresh the dry thirsty World with the
knowledge of the truth; by the twelve precious stones in Aaron's breast plate,
to illuminate the Church, the garment which Christ our great High Priest has
put on; by the twelve stones which Joshua chose out of Jordan to lay up within
the Ark of the Testament, respecting the firmness and solidity of the Apostles
Faith, their being chosen by the true Jesus or Joshua at their Baptism in
Jordan, and their being admitted in the inner Sanctuary of his Covenant. By
others we are told that it was shadowed out by the twelve Spies taken out of
every Tribe, and sent to discover the Land of Promise: or by the twelve gates
of the City in Ezekiel's vision; or by the twelve Bells appendant to Aaron's
garment, J. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 260.
their sound going out into all the World, and their words unto the ends of the
Earth. But it were endless, and to very little purpose to reckon up all the
conjectures of this nature, there being scarce any one number of Twelve
mentioned in the Scripture, which is not by some of the Ancients adapted and
applied to this of the Twelve Apostles, wherein an ordinary fancy might easily
enough pick out a mystery. That which seems to put in the most rational plea
is, that our Lord pitched upon this number, in conformity either to the twelve
Patriarchs as founders of the twelve Tribes of Israel, or to the twelve (...),
or chief heads, as standing Rulers of those Tribes among the Jews, as we shall
afterward possibly more particularly See S. Peter's Life, Sect. 3. Number. 2.
remark. Thirdly, these Apostles were immediately called and sent by Christ
himself, elected out of the body of his Disciples and followers, and received
their Commission from his own mouth. Indeed Matthias was not one of the first
election, being taken in upon Judas his Apostasy after our Lord's Ascension
into Heaven. But besides that he had been one of the seventy Disciples, called
and sent out by our Savior, that extraordinary declaration of the Divine will
and pleasure that appeared in determining his election, was in a manner
equivalent to the first election. As for S. Paul, he was not one of the Twelve,
Gal. 1.1.
taken in as a supernumerary Apostle, but yet an Apostle as well as they, and
that not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, as he pleads his own
cause against the insinuations of those Impostors who traduced him as an
Apostle only at the second hand; whereas he was immediately called by Christ as
well as they, and in a more extraordinary manner; they were called by him,
while he was yet in his state of meanness and humiliation, he, when Christ was
now advanced upon the Throne, and appeared to him encircled with those glorious
emanations of brightness and majesty, which he was not able to endure.

V. Fourthly, The main work and employment of these Apostles was to preach the
Gospel, to establish Christianity, and to govern the Church that was to be
founded, as Christ's immediate Deputies and Vicegerents: they were to instruct
men in the doctrines of the Gospel, to disciple the World, and to baptize and
initiate men into the Faith of Christ; to constitute and ordain Guides and
Ministers of Religion, persons peculiarly set apart for holy ministrations, to
censure and punish obstinate and contumacious offenders, to compose and
overruled disorders and divisions, to command or countermand as occasion was,
being vested with an extraordinary authority and power of disposing things for
the edification of the Church. This Office the Apostles never exercised in its
full extent and latitude during Christ's residence upon Earth; for though upon
their election he sent them forth to Preach and to Baptize, yet this was only a
narrow and temporary employment, and they quickly returned to their private
stations, the main power being still executed and administered by Christ
himself, the complete exercise whereof was not actually devolved upon them,
till he was ready to leave the World: John 20, 21, 22, 23.
for then it was that he told them, as my father has sent me, even so send I
you; receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted,
and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. Whereby he conferred in
some proportion the same authority upon them, which he himself had derived from
his Father. Fifthly, This Commission given to the Apostles was unlimited and
universal, not only in respect of power, as enabling them to discharge all acts
of Religion relating either to Ministry or Government, but in respect of place,
(...). Chrysostom. Sermon. (...). p. 115. Tom. 8. Edit. Savil.
not confining them to this or that particular Province, but leaving them the
whole World as their Diocese to Preach in, they being destinati Nationibus
Magistri, in De praescript. Haeret. c. 20. p. 208.
Tertullian's phrase, designed to be the Masters and Instructors of all
Nations: so runs their Commission, Mark 16.15.
Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, to
all men, the (...) of the Evangelist answering to the (...) amongst the Jews,
to all creatures, whereby they used to denote all men in general, but
especially the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews. Indeed while our Savior
lived, the Apostolical ministry extended no further than Judaea; but he being
gone to Heaven, the partition wall was broken down, and their way was open into
all places and Countries. And herein how admirably did the Christian Economy
transcend the Jewish dispensation! The preaching of the Prophets like the
(...). Macar. Homil. 14. p. 171.
light that comes in at the window, was confined only to the house of Israel,
while the doctrine of the Gospel preached by the Apostles was like the light of
the Sun in the Firmament, that diffused its beams, and propagated its heat and
influence into all quarters of the World; their sound going out into all the
Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World. It Is true, for the more
prudent and orderly management of things they are generally said by the
Ancients to have divided the World into so many quarters and portions, to which
they were severally to betake themselves; Peter to Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
etc. S. John to Asia, S. Andrew to Scythia, etc. But they did not strictly tie
themselves to those particular Provinces that were assigned to them; but as
occasion was, made excursions into other parts; though for the main they had a
more peculiar inspection over those parts that were allotted to them; usually
residing at some principal City of the Province, as S. John at Ephesus, S.
Philip at Hierapolis, etc. whence they might have a more convenient prospect of
affairs round about them, and hence it was that these places more peculiarly
got the title of Apostolical Churches, because first planted, or eminently
watered and cultivated by some Apostle, Matrices and Originales Fidei, as De
praescript. Haeret. c. 21. p. 209.
Tertullian calls them, Mother-Churches, and the Originals of the Faith,
because here the Christian doctrine was first sown, and hence planted and
propagated to the Countries round about, Ecclesias apud unamquamque civitatem
condiderunt, Ibid. c. 20. p. 208.
a quibus traducem fidei and semina doctrinae, caeterae exinde Ecclesiae
mutuatae sunt, as his own words are.

VI. In pursuance of this general Commission we find the Apostles not long
after our Lord's Ascension traversing almost all parts of the then known World;
S. Andrew in Scythia and those Northern Countries, S. Thomas and Bartholomew in
India, S. Simon and S. Mark in Afric, Egypt, and the parts of Libya and
Mauritania, S. Paul, and probably Peter and some others in the farthest Regions
of the West: And all this done in the space of less than forty years, viz.
before the destruction of the Jewish State by Titus and the Roman Army. For so
our Lord had expressly foretold, Matthew. 24.14.
that the Gospel of the Kingdom should be preached in all the World for a
witness unto all Nations, before the end came, that is, the end of the Jewish
State, which the Apostles a little before had called the end of the World,
Verse. 3.
(...), the shutting up or consummation of the Age, the putting a final period
to that present State and dispensation that the Jews were under. And indeed
strange it is to consider, that in so few years these Evangelical Messengers
should overrun all Countries; with what an incredible swiftness did the
Christian Faith like lightning pierce from East to West, and diffuse it self
over all quarters of the World, and that not only unassisted by any secular
advantages, but in defiance of the most fierce and potent opposition, which
every where set it self against it? It Is true the impostures of Muhammed in a
very little time gained a great part of the East. But besides that this was not
comparable to the universal spreading of Christianity, his doctrine was
calculated on purpose to gratify men's lusts, and especially to comply with the
loose and wanton manners of the East, and, which is above all, had the sword to
hew out its way before it: and we know how ready even without force in all
changes and revolutions of the World, the conquered have been to follow the
Religion of the Conquerors. Whereas the Apostles had no visible advantages,
nay, had all the enraged powers of the World to contend against them. And yet
in despite of all went on in triumph, and quickly made their way into those
places, where for so many Ages no other conquest ever came; those parts of
Britain (as Adv. Jud. c. 7. p. 189.
Tertullian observes) which were unconquerable and unapproachable by the power
of the Roman Armies, submitting their necks to the yoke of Christ. A mighty
evidence (as he there argues) of Christ's Divinity, and that he was the true
Messiah. And indeed no reasonable account can be given of the strange and
successful progress of the Christian Religion in those first Ages of it, but
that it was the birth of Heaven, and had a Divine and Invisible power going
along with it to succeed and prosper it. Lib. quod Chr. sit Deus, c. 1. Tom. 5.
p. 726.
S. Chrysostom discourses this argument at large, some of whose elegant
reasonings I shall here transcribe. He tells the Gentile (with whom he was
disputing) that he would not prove Christ's Deity by a demonstration from
Heaven, by his Creation of the World, his great and stupendous miracles, his
raising the dead, curing the blind, expelling Devils; nor from the mighty
promises of a future state, and the resurrection of the dead (which an Infidel
might easily not only question, but deny) but from what was sufficiently
evident and obvious to the meanest Idiot, his planting and propagating
Christianity in the World. For it is not (says he) in the power of a mere man,
in so short a time to encircle the World, to compass Sea and Land, and in
matters of so great importance to rescue mankind from the slavery of absurd and
unreasonable customs, and the powerful tyranny of evil habits: and these not
Romans only, but Persians, and the most barbarous Nations of the World. A
reformation which he wrought not by force and the power of the sword; nor by
pouring into the world numerous Legions and Armies: but by a few inconsiderable
men (no more at first than Eleven) a company of obscure and mean, simple and
illiterate, poor and helpless, naked and unarmed persons, who had scarce a
shoe to tread on, or a coat to cover them. And yet by these he persuaded so
great a part of mankind to be able freely to reason, not only of things of the
present, but of a future state; to renounce the Laws of their Country, and
throw off those ancient and inveterate customs, which had taken root for so
many Ages, and planted others in their room; and reduced men from those easy
ways, whereinto they were hurried, into the more rugged and difficult paths of
virtue. All which he did, while he had to contend with opposite powers, and
when he himself had undergone the most ignominious death, even the death of the
Cross. Afterward he addresses himself to the Jew, and discourses with him much
after the same rate. Consider ( says Ibid. c. 11. p. 746.
he) and bethink thy self, what it is in so short a time to fill the whole
World with so many famous Churches, to convert so many Nations to the Faith, to
prevail with Men to forsake the Religion of their Country, to root up their
rites and customs, to shake off the Empire of lust and pleasure, and the Laws
of vice like dust; to abolish and abominate their Temples and their Altars,
their Idols and their Sacrifices, their profane and impious Festivals as dirt
and dung; and instead hereof to set up Christian Altars in all places, among
the Romans, Persians, Scythians, Moors and Indians; and not there only, but in
the Countries beyond this World of ours. For even the British Islands that lie
beyond the Ocean, and those that are in it, have felt the power of the
Christian Faith; Churches and Altars being erected there to the service of
Christ. A matter truly great and admirable, and which would clearly have
demonstrated a Divine and Supereminent Power, although there had been no
opposition in the case, but that all things had run on calmly and smoothly, to
think that in so few years the Christian Faith should be able to reclaim the
whole World from its vicious customs, and to win them over to other manners,
more laborious and difficult, repugnant both to their native inclinations, and
to the Laws and Principles of their education, and such as obliged them to a
more strict and accurate course of life; and these persons not one or two, not
twenty or an hundred, but in a manner all Mankind: and this brought about by no
better instruments than a few rude and unlearned, private and unknown
tradesmen* who had neither estate nor reputation, learning nor eloquence,
kindred nor Country to recommend them to the World; a few Fishermen and
Tent-makers, and whom distinguished by their Language as well as their
Religion, the rest of the World scorned as barbarous. And yet these were the
men, by whom our Lord built up his Church, and extended it from one end of the
World unto the other. Other considerations there are with which the Father does
urge and illustrate this argument, which I forbear to insist on in this place.

VII. Sixthly, The power and authority conveyed by this Commission to the
Apostles, was equally conferred upon all of them. They were all chosen at the
same time, all equally empowered to Preach and Baptize, all equally entrusted
with the power of binding and loosing, all invested with the same mission, and
all equally furnished with the same gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost. Indeed
the Advocates of the Church of Rome do with a mighty zeal and fierceness
contend for S. Peter's being Head and Prince of the Apostles, advanced by
Christ to a supremacy and prerogative not only above, but over the rest of the
Apostles; and not without reason, the fortunes of that Church being concerned
in the supremacy of S. Peter. No wonder therefore they ransack all corners,
press and force in whatever may but seem to give countenance to it. Witness
those thin and miserable shifts, which Bellarmine calls arguments, to prove and
make it good; so utterly devoid of all rational conviction, so unable to
justify themselves to sober and considering men, that a Man would think they
had been contrived for no other purpose, than to cheat fools, and make wise men
laugh. And the truth is, nothing with me more shakes the reputation of the
wisdom of that learned man, than his making use of such weak and trifling
arguments in so important and concerning an Article, so vital and essential to
the constitution of that Church. As when he argues Peter's De Romans Pontif. lib.
1. c. 17, 18. and seq.
superiority from the mere changing of his name, (for what is this to supremacy?
besides that it was not done to him alone, the same being done to James and
John) from his being first reckoned up in the Catalogue of Apostles, his
walking with Christ upon the water, his paying tribute for his Master and
himself, his being commanded to let down the Net, and Christ's teaching in
Peter's ship, (and this ship must denote the Church, and Peter's being owner of
it, entitle him to be supreme Ruler and Governor of the Church, so Bellarmine
in terms as plain as he could well express it) from Christ's first washing
Peter's feet (though the story recorded by the Evangelist says no such thing)
and his foretelling only his death: all which, and many more prerogatives of S.
Peter, to the number of no less than XXVIII. are summoned in to give in
evidence in this cause; and many of these two drawn out of Apocryphal and
supposititious Authors, and not only uncertain, but absurd and fabulous: and
yet upon such arguments as these do they found his paramount authority. A plain
evidence of a desperate and sinking cause, when such twigs must be laid hold on
to support and keep it above water. Had they suffered Peter to be content with
a primacy of Order (which his age and gravity seemed to challenge for him) no
wise and peaceable man would have denied it, as being a thing ordinarily
practiced among equals, and necessary to the well governing a society: but when
nothing but a primacy of Power will serve the turn, as if the rest of the
Apostles had been inferior to him, this may by no means be granted, as being
expressly contrary to the positive determination of our Savior, when the
Apostles were contending about this very thing, which of them should be
accounted the greatest, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. Luke 22.24, 25, 26.
he thus quickly decides the case, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship
over them, and they that are great, exercise authority upon them. But ye shall
not be so: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister, and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant. Than which nothing
could have been more peremptorily spoken, to rebuke this naughty spirit of
pre-eminence. Nor do we ever find S. Peter himself laying claim to any such
power, or the Apostles giving him the least shadow of it. In the whole course
of his affairs there are no intimations of this matter; in his Epistle he
styles himself but their fellow-Presbyter, and expressly forbids the Governors
of the Church to Lord it over God's heritage. When dispatched by the rest of
the Apostles upon a message to Samaria, he never disputes their authority to do
it; when accused by them for going in unto the Gentiles, does he stand upon his
prerogative? no, but submissively apologizes for himself; nay, when smartly
reproved by S. Paul at Antioch (when, if ever, his credit lay at stake) do we
find him excepting against it as an affront to his supremacy, and a saucy
controlling his superior? surely the quite contrary; he quietly submitted to
the reproof, as one that was sensible how justly he had deserved it. Nor can it
be supposed but that S. Paul would have carried it toward him with a greater
reverence, had any such peculiar sovereignty been then known to the World. How
confidently does S. Paul assert himself to be no whit inferior to the chiefest
Apostles, not to Peter himself? the Gospel of the uncircumcision being
committed to him, as that of the circumcision was to Peter. Is Peter often named
first among the Apostles? elsewhere others, sometimes James, sometimes Paul and
Apollos, are placed before him. Did Christ honor him with some singular
commendations? an honorable elogium conveys no super-eminent power and
sovereignty. Was he dear to Christ? we know another, that was the beloved
Disciple. So little warrant is there to exalt one above the rest, where Christ
made all alike. Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari
consortio praediti, and honoris and potestatis. Cyprian de unitat. Ecsles. p.
180.
If from Scripture we descend to the ancient Writers of the Church; we shall
find that though the Fathers bestow very great and honorable Titles upon
Peter; yet they give the same, or what are equivalent to others of the
Apostles. Orat. in S. Jac. ap. Phot. Cod. cclxxv. Col. 1525.
Hesychius styles S. James the Great, the Brother of our Lord, the Commander of
the new Jerusalem, the Prince of Priests, the Exarch or chief of the Apostles,
(...), the top or crown amongst the heads, the great light amongst the Lamps,
the most illustrious and resplendent amongst the stars: 'twas Peter that
preached, but 'twas James that made the determination, etc. Of S. Andrew he
gives this encomium, Encom. S. Thom. ibid. Cod. cclxix. col. 1488.
that he was the sacerdotal Trumpet, the first born of the Apostolic Quire,
(...), the prime and firm Pillar of the Church, Peter before Peter, the
foundation of the foundation, the first fruits of the beginning. Peter and John
are said to be (...), equally honorable, by S. Cyril In Conc. Ephesians. Council.
Tom. 2. p. 209.
with his whole Synod of Alexandria. S. John (says Prolog. in Joan. p. 2.
Chrysostom) was Christ's beloved, the Pillar of all the Churches in the World,
who had the Keys of Heaven, drank of his Lord's cup, was washed with his
Baptism, and with confidence lay in his bosom. And of De Pet. fill. Zeb. p.
378. Tom. 1.
S. Paul he tells us, that he was the most excellent of all men, the Teacher of
the World, the Bridegroom of Christ, the Planter of the Church, the wise
Master Builder, greater than the Apostles, and much more to the same purpose.
Elsewhere he says, In illud, sal. Aquil. and Prisc. p. 218. Tom. 5.
that the care of the whole World was committed to him, that nothing could be
more noble or illustrious: yea that (his Miracles considered) he was more
excellent than Kings themselves. And a little after Ibid. p. 221.
he calls him the tongue of the Earth, the light of the Churches, (...), the
foundation of the faith, the pillar and ground of truth. And in a discourse on
purpose, wherein he compares Peter and Paul together, he makes them of equal
esteem and virtue; (e) Sermon. in Petr. and Paul. p. 261. Tom. 6.
(...); What greater than Peter? What equal to Paul? a Blessed pair! (...), who
had the Souls of the whole World committed to their charge. But instances of
this nature were endless and infinite. If the Fathers at any time style Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, they mean no more by it, than the best and purest
Latin writers mean by princeps, the first or chief person of the number, more
considerable than the rest, either for his age or zeal. Thus H. Eccl. l. 2. c.
14. p. 52.
Eusebius tells us, Peter was (...), the prolocutor of all the rest, (...), for
the greatness and generosity of his mind, that is, in In Matthew. c. 16. p. 483.
Chrysostom's language, he was the mouth and chief of the Apostles, (...),
because eager and forward at every turn, and ready to answer those questions
which were put to others. In short, as he had no Prerogative above the rest,
besides his being the Chairman and President of the Assembly, so was it
granted to him upon no other considerations, than those of his age, zeal, and
gravity, for which he was more eminent than the rest.

VIII. We proceed next to enquire into the fitness and qualification of the
Persons commissionated for this employment; and we shall find them admirably
qualified to discharge it, if we consider this following account. First, They
immediately received the Doctrine of the Gospel from the mouth of Christ
himself; he intended them for Legati a latere, his peculiar Ambassadors to the
World, and therefore furnished them with instructions from his own mouth; and
in order hereunto he trained them up for some years under his own Discipline
and institution: he made them to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, when to others it was not given; treated them with the affection of a
Father, and the freedom and familiarity of a friend. Henceforth I call you not
servants, Joh. 15.15.
for the servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends:
for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. They
heard all his Sermons, were privy both to his public and private discourses;
what he preached abroad, he expounded to them at home; he gradually instructed
them in the knowledge of Divine things, and imparted to them the notions and
mysteries of the Gospel, not all at once, but as they were able to bear them.
By which means they were sufficiently capable of giving a satisfactory account
of that doctrine to others, which had been so immediately, so frequently
communicated to themselves. Secondly, They were infallibly secured from error
in delivering the Doctrines and Principles of Christianity: for though they
were not absolutely priviledg'd from failures and miscarriages in their lives,
(these being of more personal and private consideration) yet were they
infallible in their Doctrine, this being a matter whereupon the salvation and
eternal interests of men did depend. Joh. 16.13.
And for this end they had the spirit of truth promised to them, who should
guide them into all truth. Under the conduct of this unerring Guide they all
steered the same course, taught and spoke the same things, though at different
times, and in distant places: and for what was consigned to writing, all
Scripture was given by inspiration of God, and the holy men spoke not, but as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Hence that exact and admirable harmony that
is in all their writings and relations, as being all equally dictated by the
same spirit of truth. Thirdly, They had been eyewitnesses of all the material
passages of our Savior's life, continually conversant with him from the
commencing of his public ministry, till his ascension into Heaven; they had
surveyed all his actions, seen all his miracles, observed the whole method of
his conversation, and some of them attended him in his most private solitudes
and retirements. And this could not but be a very rational satisfaction to the
minds of men, when the publishers of the Gospel solemnly declared to the World,
that they reported nothing concerning our Savior, but what they had seen with
their own eyes, and of the truth whereof they were as competent Judges, as the
acutest Philosopher in the World. Nor could there be any just reason to suspect
that they imposed upon men in what they delivered; for besides their naked
plainness and simplicity in all other passages of their lives, they cheerfully
submitted to the most exquisite hardships, tortures, and sufferings, merely to
attest the truth of what they published to the World. Next to the evidence of
our own senses, no testimony is more valid and forcible, than his who relates
what himself has seen. Act. 1.8.
Upon this account our Lord told his Apostles, that they should be witnesses to
him both in Judaea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the Earth. And so
necessary a qualification of an Apostle was this thought to be, that it was
almost the only condition propounded in the choice of a new Apostle after the
fall of Judas: Act. 1.21, 22.
Wherefore (says Peter) of these men which have companied with us all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of
John, unto the same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to
be a witness with us of his resurrection. Accordingly we find the Apostles
constantly making use of this argument as the most rational evidence to
convince those whom they had to deal with. Act. 10.39, 40, etc.
We are witnesses of all things which Jesus did both in the Land of the Jews,
and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the
third day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses,
chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose
from the dead: And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify
that it is he that is ordained of God to be Judge of the quick and dead. Thus
S. John after the same way of arguing appeals to sensible demonstration, That
which was from the beginning, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3.
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life: (For the life was
manifested, and we have seen it and bear witness, and show unto you that
Eternal Life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us) That which
we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us. This, to name no more, S. Peter thought a sufficient vindication of
the Apostolical doctrine from the suspicion of forgery and imposture, We have
not followed cunningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17.
when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
were eyewitnesses of his majesty. God had frequently given testimony to the
divinity of our blessed Savior, by visible manifestations and appearances from
Heaven, and particularly by an audible voice, This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased. Now this Voice which came from Heaven (says he) we heard, when
we were with him in the holy Mount.

IX. Fourthly, The Apostles were invested with a power of working Miracles, as
the readiest means to procure their Religion a firm belief and entertainment in
the minds of Men. For Miracles are the great confirmation of the truth of any
doctrine, and the most rational evidence of a divine commission. For seeing God
only can create, and control the Laws of nature, produce something out of
nothing, and call things that are not, as if they were, give eyes to them that
were born blind, raise the dead, etc. things plainly beyond all possible powers
of nature; no man that believes the wisdom and goodness of an infinite being,
can suppose that this God of truth should affix his seal to a lie, or
communicate this power to any that would abuse it, to confirm and countenance
delusions and impostures. Nicodemus his reasoning was very plain and
convictive, when he concludes that Christ must needs be a Teacher come from
God, Joh. 3.2.
for that no man could do those Miracles that he did, except God were with him.
The force of which argument lies here, that nothing but a Divine power can work
Miracles, and that Almighty God cannot be supposed miraculously to assist any
but those, whom he himself sends upon his own errand. The stupid and barbarous
Lycaonians, when they beheld the Man who had been a Cripple from his Mothers
womb, cured by S. Paul in an instant only with the speaking of a word, Act
14.10, 11.
saw that there was something in it more than humane, and therefore concluded
that the Gods were come down to them in the likeness of Men. Upon this account
2 Cor. 12.12.
S. Paul reckons Miracles among the (...), the signs and evidences of an
Apostle, whom therefore (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 29. in Romans p. 302, 303.
Chrysostom brings in elegantly pleading for himself, that though he could not
show as the signs of his Priesthood and Ministry, long Robes, and gaudy
Vestments, with Bells sounding at their borders, as the Aaronical Priests did
of old; though he had no golden Crowns or holy Mitres, yet could he produce
what was infinitely more venerable and regardable than all these,
unquestionable Signs and Miracles: He came not with Altars and Oblations, with
a number of strange and symbolick Rites; but what was greater, raised the dead,
cast out Devils, cured the blind, healed the lame, making the Gentiles obedient
by word and deed, thorough many signs and wonders wrought by the power of the
spirit of God. These were the things that clearly showed that their mission and
ministry was not from men, nor taken up of their own heads, but that they acted
herein by a Divine warrant and authority. That therefore it might plainly
appear to the World, that they did not falsify in what they said, or deliver
any more than God had given them in commission, he enabled them to do strange
and miraculous operations, Hebr. 2.4.
bearing them witness both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost. This was a power put into the first draught of their
commission, when confined only to the Cities of Israel; Matt. 10.7, 8.
As ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils, freely you have received,
freely give: but more fully confirmed upon them, when our Lord went to Heaven,
then he told them, that these signs should follow them that believe, Mark
16.17, 18 -- 20.
that in his Name they should cast out Devils, and speak with new tongues; that
they should take up serpents, and if they drank any deadly thing it should not
hurt them, that they should lay hands on the sick and they should recover: And
the event was accordingly, for they went forth, and preached every where, the
Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following When Paul
and Barnabas came up to the Council at Jerusalem, this was one of the first
things they gave an account of, all the multitude keeping silence, Act. 15.12.
while they declared what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the
Gentiles by them. Thus the very shadow of Peter as he passed by cured the sick:
Act. 19.11, 12.
thus God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his body
were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs, or aprons, and the diseases departed
from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. So that besides the innate
characters of Divinity which the Christian religion brought along with it,
containing nothing but what was highly reasonable, and very becoming God to
reveal; it had the highest external evidence that any Religion was capable of,
the attestation of great and unquestionable Miracles, done not once or twice,
not privately and in corners, not before a few simple and credulous persons,
but frequently and at every turn, publicly and in places of the most solemn
concourse, before the wisest and most judicious enquirers, and this power of
miracles continued not only during the Apostles time, but for some Ages after.

X. But because besides Miracles in general, the Scripture takes particular
notice of many gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost conferred upon the Apostles
and first Preachers of the Gospel, it may not be amiss to consider some of the
chiefest and most material of them, as we find them enumerated by the Apostle,
1 Cor. 12.9, 10.
only premising this observation, that though these gifts were distinctly
distributed to persons of an inferior order, so that one had this, and another
that, yet were they (probably) all conferred upon the Apostles, and doubtless
in larger proportions than upon the rest. First, we take notice of the gift of
Prophecy, a clear evidence of divine inspiration, and an extraordinary mission,
Rev. 19.10.
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. It had been for many Ages
the signal and honorable privilege of the Jewish Church, and that the
Christian Economy might challenge as sacred regards from men, and that it
might appear that God had not withdrawn his Spirit from his Church in this new
state of things, it was revived under the dispensation of the Gospel, according
to that famous Prophecy of Joel exactly accomplished (as Peter told the Jews)
upon the day of Pentecost, when the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost were so
plentifully shed upon the Apostles and Primitive Christians; Joel 2.18, 19.
Act. 2.16, 17, 18.
This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, It shall come to pass in
the last days (says God) I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your
Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and your young Men shall see Visions,
and your old Men shall dream Dreams; and on my servants, and on my Hand-maidens
I will pour out in those days of my spirit, and they shall prophecy. It lay in
general in revealing and making known to others the mind of God, but discovered
it self in particular instances; partly in foretelling things to come, and what
should certainly happen in aftertimes: a thing set beyond the reach of any
finite understanding; for though such effects as depend upon natural agents, or
moral and political causes, may be foreseen by studious and considering
persons, yet the knowledge of futurities, things purely contingent, that merely
depend upon men's choice, and their mutable and uncertain wills, can only fall
under his view, who at once beholds things past, present, and to come. Now this
was conferred upon the Apostles and some of the first Christians, as appears
from many instances in the History of the Apostolic Acts, and we find the
Apostles writings frequently interspersed with prophetical predictions
concerning the great apostasy from the faith, the universal corruption and
degeneracy of manners, the rise of particular heresies, the coming of
Antichrist, and several another things which the spirit said expressly should
come to pass in the latter times; besides that S. John's whole Book of
Revelation is almost entirely made up of Prophecies concerning the future state
and condition of the Church. Sometimes by this spirit of prophecy God declared
things that were of present concernment to the exigences of the Church, as when
he signified to them that they should set apart Paul and Barnabas for the
conversion of the Gentiles, and many times immediately designed particular
persons to be Pastors and Governors of the Church. Thus we read of the gift
that was given to Timothy by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, that is, his Ordination, to which he was particularly pointed out
by some prophetic designation. But the main use of this prophetic gift in
those times was to explain some of the more difficult and particular parts of
the Christian doctrine, especially to expound and apply the ancient Prophecies
concerning the Messiah and his Kingdom in their public Assemblies; 1 Cor. 13.2.
whence the gift of prophecy is explained by understanding all mysteries, and
all knowledge, that is, the most dark and difficult places of Scripture, the
types and figures, the ceremonies and prophecies of the Old Testament. And thus
we are commonly to understand those words, Prophets, and prophesying, that so
familiarly occur in the New Testament. Having gifts differing according to the
grace that is given to us, Romans 12.8.
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith, that
is, expound Scripture according to the generally-received principles of Faith
and Life. So the Apostle elsewhere prescribing Rules for the decent and orderly
managing of Divine worship in their public Assemblies, 1 Cor. 14.29, 30, 31,
32.
let the Prophets (says he) speak two or three (that is, at the same Assembly)
and let the other judge; and if while any is thus expounding, another has a
Divine afflatus, whereby he is more particularly enabled to explain some
difficult and emergent passage, let the first hold his peace: for ye may all,
all that have this gift, prophecy one by one, that so thus orderly proceeding,
all may learn, and all may be comforted. Nor can the first pretend that this
interruption is an unseasonable check to his revelation, seeing he may command
himself; for though among the Gentiles the prophetic and ecstatick impulse did
so violently press upon the inspired Person, that he could not govern himself,
yet in the Church of God the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, may be so ruled and restrained by them, as to make way for others.
This order of Christian Prophets considered as a distinct Ministry by it self
is constantly placed next to the Apostolical Office, and is frequently by S.
Paul preferred before any other spiritual Gifts then bestowed upon the Church.
When this spirit of Prophecy ceased in the Christian Church, we cannot
certainly find. It continued some competent time beyond the Apostolic Age.
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308.
Justin Martyr, expressly tells Trypho the Jew, (...), the gifts of Prophecy are
even yet extant among us; an argument, as he there tells him, that those things
which had of old been the great Privileges of their Church, were now
translated into the Christian Church. And H. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 3. p. 168.
Eusebius speaking of a Revelation made to one Alcibiades, who lived about the
time of Irenaeus, adds, that the Divine Grace had not withdrawn its Presence
from the Church, but that they still had the Holy Ghost as their Counselor to
direct them.

XI. Secondly, They had the gift of discerning spirits, whereby they were
enabled to discover the truth or falsehood of men's pretenses, whether their
gifts were real or counterfeit, and their persons truly inspired or not. For
many men, acted only by diabolical impulses, might entitle themselves to Divine
inspirations, and others might be imposed upon by their delusions, and mistake
their dreams and fancies for the Spirits dictates and revelations; or might so
subtly and artificially counterfeit revelations, that they might with most
pass for current, especially in those times when these supernatural gifts were
so common and ordinary; and our Lord himself had frequently told them that
false Prophets would arise, and that many would confidently plead for
themselves before him, that they had prophesied in his name. That therefore the
Church might not be imposed upon, God was pleased to endue the Apostles, and it
may be some others, with an immediate faculty of discerning the Caffe from the
Wheat, true from false Prophets; nay, to know when the true Prophets delivered
the revelations of the Spirit, and when they expressed only their own
conceptions. This was a mighty privilege, but yet seems to me to have extended
farther, to judge of the sincerity or hypocrisy of men's hearts in the
profession of Religion, that so bad men being discovered, suitable censures and
punishments might be passed upon them, and others cautioned to avoid them. Thus
Peter at first sight discovered Ananias and Saphira, and the rotten hypocrisy
of their intentions, before there was any external evidence in the case; and
told Simon Magus, though baptized before upon his embracing Christianity, that
his heart was not right in the sight of God, Acts 8.21, 23.
for I perceive (says he) that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity. Thirdly, the Apostles had the gift of Tongues, furnished with
variety of utterance, able to speak on a sudden several Languages which they
had never learnt, as occasion was administered, and the exigences of persons and
Nations with whom they conversed, did require. For the Apostles being
principally designed to convert the World, and to plant Christianity in all
Countries and Nations; it was absolutely necessary that they should be able
readily to express their minds in the Languages of those Countries to which
they addressed themselves: seeing otherwise it would have been a work of time
and difficulty, and not consistent with the term of the Apostles lives, had
they been first to learn the different Languages of those Nations, before they
could have preached the Gospel to them. Hence this gift was diffused upon the
Apostles in larger measures and proportions than upon other men; 1 Cor. 14.18.
I speak with Tongues more than you all, says S. Paul; that is, than all the
gifted persons in the Church of Corinth. Our Lord had told the Apostles before
his departure from them, that they should be endued with power from on high,
which upon the day of Pentecost was particularly made good in this instance,
when in a moment they were enabled to speak almost all the Languages of the
then known World, and this as a specimen and first fruits of the rest of those
miraculous powers that were conferred upon them.

XII. A fourth gift was that of Interpretation, or unfolding to others what had
been delivered in an unknown tongue. For the Christian Assemblies in those days
were frequently made up of men of different Nations, and who could not
understand what the Apostles or others had spoken to the Congregation; this God
supplied by this gift of interpretation, enabling some to interpret what others
did not understand, and to speak it to them in their own native Language. 1
Cor. 14.
S. Paul largely discourses the necessity of this gift in order to the
instructing and edifying of the Church, seeing without it their meetings could
be no better than the Assembly at Babel after the confusion of Languages, where
one man must needs be a Barbarian to another, and all the praying and preaching
of the Minister of the Assembly be to many altogether fruitless and
unprofitable, and no better than a speaking into the Air. What Is the speaking
though with the tongue of Angels to them that do not understand it? How can the
Idiot and unlearned say Amen, who understands not the language of him that
gives thanks? The duty may be done with admirable quaintness and accuracy, but
what is he the better, from whom it is locked up in an unknown tongue? A
consideration that made the Apostle solemnly profess, Verse. 19.
that he had rather speak five words in the Church with his understanding, that
by his voice he may teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue. Therefore if any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be but by two,
or at most by three, Verse 27, 28.
and let one interpret what the rest have spoken: but if there be no
interpreter, none present able to do this, let him keep silence in the Church,
and speak to himself and to God. A man that impartially reads this discourse of
the Apostle, may wonder how the Church of Rome in defiance of it can so openly
practice, so confidently defend their Bible and Divine Services in an unknown
tongue, so flatly repugnant to the dictates of common reason, the usage of the
first Christian Church, and these plain Apostolical commands. But this is not
the only instance wherein that Church has departed both from Scripture, Reason,
and the practice of the first and purest Ages of Christianity. Indeed there is
some cause why they are so zealous to keep both Scripture and their Divine
Worship in a strange Language, lest by reading the one the People should become
wise enough to discover the gross errors and corruptions of the other. Fifthly,
The Apostles had the gift of Healing, of curing Diseases without the arts of
Physic; the most inveterate distempers being equally removable by an Almighty
power, and vanishing at their speaking of a word. This begot an extraordinary
veneration for them and their Religion among the common sort of men, who, as
they are strongliest moved with sensible effects, so are most taken with those
miracles that are beneficial to the life of man. Hence the infinite Cures done
in every place, God mercifully providing that the Body should partake with the
Soul in the advantages of the Gospel, the cure of the one ushering in many
times the conversion of the other. This gift was very common in those early
days, bestowed not upon the Apostles only, but the ordinary Governors of the
Church, Jam. 5.14, 15, 16.
who were wont to lay their hands upon the sick, and sometimes to anoint them
with Oil (a symbolick rite in use among the Jews, to denote the grace of God)
and to pray over, and for them in the name of the Lord Jesus, whereby, upon a
hearty confession and forsaking of their sins, both health and pardon were at
once bestowed upon them. How long this gift, with its appendant ceremony of
Unction lasted in the Church, is not easy to determine; that it was in use in
Ad Scapul. c. 4. p. 71.
Tertullian's time, we learn from the instance he gives us of Proculus a
Christian, who cured the Emperor Severus, by anointing him with Oil; for which
the Emperor had him in great honor, and kept him with him at Court all his
life; it afterward vanishing by degrees, as all other miraculous powers, as
Christianity gained firm footing in the World. As for Extreme Unction, so
generally maintained and practiced in the Church of Rome, nay, and by them made
a Sacrament, I doubt it will receive very little countenance from this
Primitive usage. Indeed could they as easily restore sick men to health, as
they can anoint them with Oil, I think no body would contradict them; but till
they can pretend to the one, I think it unreasonable they should use the other.
The best is, though founding it upon this Apostolical practice, they have
turned it to a quite contrary purpose, instead of recovering men to life and
health, to dispose and fit them for dying, when all hopes of life are taken
from them.

XIII. Sixthly, The Apostles were invested with a power of immediately
inflicting corporal punishments upon great and notorious sinners; and this
probably is that which he means by his (...), 1 Cor. 12.10.
operations of powers, or working miracles, which surely cannot be meant of
miracles in general, being reckoned up amongst the particular gifts of the Holy
Ghost, nor is there any other to which it can with equal probability refer. A
power to inflict diseases upon the body, as when S. Paul struck Elymas the
Sorcerer with blindness, and sometimes extending to the loss of life it self,
as in the sad instance of Ananias and Saphira. This was the Virga Apostolica,
the Rod (mentioned by S. Paul) which the Apostles held and shak'd over
scandalous and insolent offenders, 1 Cor. 4.21.
and sometimes laid upon them: What will ye? shall I come to you with a rod? or
in love, and the spirit of meekness? Where, observe (says (...). Chrysostom.
Homil. 14. in 1. ad Corinth. p. 444. vid. Hieron. in loc. Tom. 9. p. 305.
Chrysostom) how the Apostle tempers his discourse; the love and meekness, and
his desire to know, argued care and kindness; but the rod spoke dread and
terror: a Rod of severity and punishment, and which sometimes mortally
chastised the offender. Elsewhere he frequently gives intimations of this
power, when he has to deal with stubborn and incorrigible persons; Having in a
readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled; 2 Cor.
10.6, 8, 9.
for though I should boast something more of our authority (which the Lord has
given us for edification, and not for your destruction) I should not be
ashamed; that I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters. And he
again puts them in mind of it at the close of his Epistle, I told you before,
Chap. 13.2.
and foretell you as if I were present the second time, and being absent now I
write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all others, that if I come
again I will not spare. But he hoped these smart warnings would supersede all
further severity against them; Verse. 10.
Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use
sharpness, according to the power which the Lord has given me to edification,
and not to destruction. Of this nature was the delivering over persons unto
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5 5. vid. Chrysostom and Hieron.
in loc.
the chastising the body by some present pain or sickness, that the spirit
might be saved by being brought to a seasonable repentance. Thus he dealt with
Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20.
who had made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, he delivered them unto
Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. Nothing being more usual in
those times than for persons excommunicate, and cut off from the body of the
Church, to be presently arrested by Satan, as the common Sergeant and
Executioner, and by him either actually possessed, or tormented in their bodies
by some diseases which he brought upon them. And indeed this severe discipline
was no more than necessary in those times, when Christianity was wholly
destitute of any civil or coercive power, to beget and keep up a due reverence
and regard to the sentence and determinations of the Church, and to secure the
Laws of Religion, and the holy censures from being slighted by every bold and
contumacious offender. And this effect we find it had after the dreadful
instance of Ananias and Saphira, Great fear came upon all the Church, Acts 5.11.
and upon as many as heard these things. To what has been said concerning these
Apostolical gifts, let me further observe, That they had not only these gifts
residing in themselves, but a power to bestow them upon others, so that by
imposition of hands, or upon hearing and embracing the Apostle's doctrine, and
being baptized into the Christian Faith, they could confer these miraculous
powers upon persons thus qualified to receive them, whereby they were in a
moment enabled to speak diverse Languages, to Prophecy, to Interpret, and do
other miracles to the admiration and astonishment of all that heard and saw
them. A privilege peculiar to the Apostles; for we do not find that any
inferior Order of gifted persons were entrusted with it. And therefore as
(...). Chrysostom. Homil. 18. in Act. App. p. 580.
Chrysostom well observes, though Philip the Deacon wrought great miracles at
Samaria, to the conversion of many, yea to the conviction of Simon Magus
himself, yet the Holy Ghost fell upon none of them, only they were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus: till Peter and John came down to them, who having
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost, they laid their hands
upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Which when the Magician beheld, he
offered the Apostles money to enable him, that on whom soever he laid his
hands, he might derive these miraculous powers upon them.

XIV. Having seen how fitly furnished the Apostles were for the execution of
their Office, let us in the last place enquire into its duration and
continuance. And here it must be considered, that in the Apostolical Office
there was something extraordinary, and something ordinary. What was
extraordinary was their immediate Commission derived from the mouth of Christ
himself, their unlimited charge to preach the Gospel up and down the World,
without being tied to any particular places; the supernatural and miraculous
powers conferred upon them as Apostles; their infallible guidance in delivering
the doctrines of the Gospel; and these all expired and determined with their
persons. The standing and perpetual part of it was to teach and instruct the
People in the duties and principles of Religion, to administer the Sacraments,
to constitute Guides and Officers, and to exercise the discipline and
government of the Church: and in these they are succeeded by the ordinary
Rulers and Ecclesiastic Guides, who were to superintend and discharge the
affairs and offices of the Church, to the end of the World. Whence it is that
Bishops and Governors came to be styled Apostles, as being their successors in
ordinary; for so they frequently are in the writings of the Church. Thus
Timothy, who was Bishop of Ephesus, is called an Philostorg. H. Eccl. l. 3. c.
2 p. 24.
Apostle; Clemens of Rome, Clemens the Clem. Al. Strom. iib. 4. p. 516.
Apostle; S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria, by H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 24. p. 66.
Eusebius styled both an Apostle and Evangelist; Ignatius, a Bishop and
Chrysostom. Encom. S. Ignat. p. 499. T. 1.
Apostle. A title that continued in after Ages, especially given to those that
were the first planters or restorers of Christianity in any Country. In the
Coptick Calendar, published by De Synedr. lib. 3. c. 15. p. 398.
Mr. Seldom, the VIIth. day of the month Baschnes, answering to our Second of
May, is dedicated to the memory of S. Athanasius the Apostle. Acacius and
Paulus in their Praefix. Oper. de Hares. p. 1.
Letter to Epiphanius, style him (...), a new Apostle and Preacher: and Lib. 6.
Ep. 4. p. 47. vid. Ep. 7. p. 150.
Sidonius Apollinaris writing to Lupus Bishop of Troyes in France, speaks of
the honor due to his eminent Apostleship. An observation which it were easy
enough to confirm by abundant instances, were it either doubtful in it self, or
necessary to my purpose, but being neither, I forbear.

Joan. Euchait. Metropolitae (...). p. 70.
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
THE LIFE OF S. PETER.
St. PETER.
He was crucified at Rome with his head down-wards, and Buried in the Vatican
there. S. Hierom. after he had planted a Christian Church first at Antioch and
afterward at Rome.

S. Peter 's Martyrdom.
Ioh. 21.18.19. Verily verily I say unto thee when thou most young thou
girdedst thy self and walkedst whither thou would but when thou shall be old
thou shall stretch forth thy hands and another shall gird thee and carry thee
whither thou would not This spoke he signifying by what death he should
glorify God.



SECT. I. Of S. Peter, from his Birth, till his First coming to Christ.
Bethsaida S. Peter 's Birthplace: Its dignity of old, and fate at this day.
The time of his Birth enquired into. Some Errors noted concerning it. His
names; Cephas, the imposing of it notes on Superiority over the rest of the
Apostles. The custom of Popes assuming a new Name at their Election to the
Papacy, whence. His kindred and relations; whether He or Andrew the elder
Brother. His Trade and way of life what, before his coming to Christ. The Sea
of Galilee, and the convenience of it. The meanness and obscurity of his Trade.
The remarkable appearances of the Divine Providence in propagating Christianity
in the World by mean and unlikely Instruments.

THE Land of Palestine was, at and before the coming of our Blessed Savior,
distinguished into three several Provinces, Judaea, Samaria, and Galilee. This
last was divided into the Upper, and the Lower. In the Upper, called also
Galilee of the Gentiles, within the division anciently belonging to the Tribe
of Nephthali, stood Bethsaida, formerly an obscure and inconsiderable Village,
till lately reedified and enlarged by Joseph. Antiqu. Judaic. lib. 8. cap. 3.
p. 618.
Philip the Tetrarch, by him advanced to the place and title of a City,
replenished with inhabitants, and fortified with power and strength; and in
honor of Julia the daughter of Augustus Caesar, by him styled Julias. Situate
it was upon the banks of the Sea of Galilee, and had a Wilderness on the other
side, thence called the Desert of Bethsaida, whither our Savior used often to
retire, the privacies and solitudes of the place advantageously ministering to
Divine contemplations. But Bethsaida was not so remarkable for this adjoining
Wilderness, as it self was memorable for a worse sort of Barrenness,
Ingratitude and Unprofitableness under the influences of Christ's Sermons and
Miracles, thence severely upbraided by him, and threatened with one of his
deepest woes, Matthew. 11.21.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. A woe that it seems
stuck close to it, for whatever it was at this time, J. Cotovic. Itiner.
Hierosol. lib. 3. c. 8. p. 358
one who surveyed it in the last Age tells us, that it was shrunk again into a
very mean and small Village, consisting only of a few cottages of Moors and
wild Arabs; and later travelers have since assured us, that even these are
dwindled away into one poor cottage at this day. So fatally does sin undermine
the greatest, the goodliest places; so certainly does God's Word take place,
and not one Iota either of his promises or threatenings fall to the ground. Next
to the honor that was done it by our Savior's presence, who living most in
these parts frequently resorted hither, it had nothing greater to recommend it
to the notice of posterity, than that (besides some other of the Apostles) it
was the Birthplace of S. Peter; a person how inconsiderable soever in his
private fortunes, yet of great note and eminency, as one of the prime
Ambassadors of the Son of God, to whom both Sacred and Ecclesiastical stories
give, though not a superiority, a precedence in the College of Apostles.

2. THE particular time of his Birth cannot be recovered, no probable footsteps
or intimations being left of it: in the general we may conclude him at least
Ten years elder than his Master; his married condition, and settled course of
life at his first coming to Christ, and that authority and respect which the
gravity of his person procured him amongst the rest of the Apostles, can speak
him no less: but for any thing more particular and positive in this matter, I
see no reason to affirm. Indeed might we trust the account, which one (who
pretends to calculate his Nativity with ostentation enough) has given of it, we
are told that he was born three years before the Blessed Virgin, and just XVII.
before the Incarnation of our Savior. But let us view his account. Stengel. de
S. Petro cap. 1.
Not. est An. ab Orb cond. a Diluvio V. C.
4034 2378 734
Ann.
Oct. August. a 1o ejus consul. a pugna Actiae.
8 24 12
Ann.
Herodis Reg. ante B. Virg. ante Chr. not.
20 3 17
When I met with such a pompous train of Epocha's, the least I expected was
truth and certainty. This computation he grounds upon the date of S. Peter's
death, placed (as Ib. c. 49.
elsewhere he tells us) by Bellarmine in the LXXXVI. year of his Age; so that
recounting from the year of Christ LXIX. when Peter is commonly said to have
suffered, he runs up his Age to his Birth, and spreads it out into so many
several dates. But alas, all is built upon a sandy bottom. For besides his
mistake about the year of the World, few of his dates hold due correspondence.
But the worst of it is, that after all this, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2.
c. 9. col. 624.
Bellarmine (upon whose single testimony all this fine fabric is erected) says
no such thing, but only supposes, merely for arguments-sake, that S. Peter
might very well be LXXXVI. ('it is erroneously printed LXXVI.) years old at the
time of his Martyrdom. So far will confidence, or ignorance, or both carry men
aside, if it could be a mistake, and not rather a bold imposing upon the World.
But of this enough, and perhaps more than it deserves.

3. BEING circumcised according to the Rites of the Mosaic Law, the name given
him at his circumcision was Simon or Symeon, a name common amongst the Jews,
especially in their latter times. This was afterward by our Savior not
abolished, but additioned with the title of Cephas, which in Syriack (the
vulgar Language of the Jews at that time) signifying a stone or rock, was
thence derived into the Greek, (...), and by us, Peter: so far was (...).
Hesych. in voc. (...). 1 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
Hesychius out, when rendering (...) by (...), an Expounder or Interpreter,
probably deriving it from (...), which signifies to explain and interpret. By
this new imposition our Lord seemed to denote the firmness and constancy of his
Faith, and his vigorous activity in building up the Church, as a spiritual
house upon the the true rock, the living and cornerstone, chosen of God and
precious, as S. Peter himself expresses it. Nor can our Savior be understood
to have hereby conferred upon him any peculiar Supremacy or Sovereignty above,
much less over the rest of the Apostles; for in respect of the great trusts
committed to them, and their being sent to plant Christianity in the World,
they are all equally styled Foundations: Rev. 21.14.
nor is it accountable either to Scripture, or reason to suppose, that by this
Name our Lord should design the person of Peter to be that very rock, upon
which his Church was to be built. In a fond imitation Pap. Masson. de Episc.
Vrb. in Serg. 4. fol. 172. p. 2. ex Annal. Vict.
of this new name given to S. Peter, those who pretend to be his Successors in
the Sea of Rome, usually lay by their own, and assume a new name upon their
advancement to the Apostolic Chair, it being one of the first questions Sac.
Cerem. Eccles. Romans Sect. 1. fol. 18.
which the Cardinals put to the new-elected Pope, by what name he will please
to be called. This custom first began about the Year 844, when Peter di
Bocca-Porco (or Swines-mouth) being chosen Pope, changed his name into Sergius
the Second: probably not so much to avoid the uncomeliness of his own name, as
if unbefitting the dignity of his place (for this being but his Paternal name
would after have been no part of his Pontifical style and title) as out of a
mighty reverence to S. Peter, accounting himself not worthy to bear his name,
though it was his own baptismal name. Certain it is that none of the Bishops of
that See ever assumed S. Peter's name, and some who have had it as their
Christian name before, have laid it aside upon their election to the Papacy.
But to return to our Apostle.

4. HIS Father was Jonah, probably a Fisherman of Bethsaida, for the Sacred
story takes no further notice of him, than by the bare mention of his Name; and
I believe there had been no great danger of mistake, though Com. de Petr. and
Paul. apud. Sur. ad diem 29. Jun.
Metaphrastes had not told us, that it was not Jonas the Prophet, who came out
of the Belly of the Whale. Brother he was to S. Andrew the Apostle, and some
question there is amongst the Ancients which was the elder Brother. Hares. 51.
p. 192.
Epiphanius (probably from some Tradition current in his time) clearly adjudges
it to S. Andrew, herein universally followed by those of the Church of Rome,
that the precedence given to S. Peter may not seem to be put upon the account
of his Seniority. But to him we may oppose the authority of Sermon. de S. Andr;
quem recitat Metaphrast. ap. Sur. sen potius, Lippoman. Tom. 6. vid. Baron.
not. ad Martyrol. November. XXX. p. 737.
S. Chrysostom, a Person equal both in time and credit, who expressly says, that
though Andrew came later into life than Peter, yet he first brought him to the
knowledge of the Gospel: which Baronius against all pretense of reason would
understand of his entering into eternal life. Besides Hierom. lib. 1. adv.
Jovin. p. 35. Tom. 2.
S. Hierom, Cassian. de Incarn. Dom. lib. 3. c. 12. p. 996.
Cassian, Bed. Comment. in cap. 1. Joan. Tom. 5.
Bid, and others, are for S. Peter being elder Brother, expressly ascribing it
to his Age, that he rather than any other, was President of the College of
Apostles. However it was, it sounds not a little to the honor of their Father,
(as of Zebedee also in the like case) that of but twelve Apostles two of his
Sons were taken into the number. In his Youth he was brought up to Fishing,
which we may guess to have been the stapletrade of Bethsaida, (which hence
probably borrowed its name, signifying an house or habitation of Fishing,
though others render it by Hunting, the word (...) equally bearing either) much
advantaged herein by the Neighborhood of the Lake of Gennesareth (on whose
banks it stood) called also the Sea of Galilee, and the Sea of Tiberias,
according to the mode of the Hebrew Language, wherein all greater confluences
of Waters are called Seas. Of this Lake the Jews have a Midr. Tillin. fol. 41.
ap. Lightf. Cent. Chorograph. in Matthew. c. 70. p. 131.
saying, that of all the seven Seas which God created, he made choice of none
but the Sea of Gennesareth: which however intended by them, is true only in
this respect, that our blessed Savior made choice of it, to honor it with the
frequency of his presence, and the power of his miraculous operations. In
length it was an hundred furlongs, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 3. (...). p. 860.
and about XL. over; the Water of it pure and clear, sweet and most fit to
drink; stored it was with several sorts of Fish, and those different both in
kind and taste from those in other places. Here it was that Peter closely
followed the exercise of his calling; from whence it seems he afterward
removed to Capernaum, Matthew. 8.14. -- 17.24.
(probably upon his marriage, at least frequently resided there) for there we
meet with his House, and there we find him paying Tribute: an House, over which
H. Eccl. lib. 8. c. 30. p. 596.
Nicephorus tells us, that Helen the Mother of Constantine erected a beautiful
Church to the honor of S. Peter. This place was equally advantageous for the
managery of his Trade, standing upon the Influx of Jordan into the Sea of
Galilee, and where he might as well reap the fruits of an honest and
industrious diligence. A mean, I confess, it was, and a more servile course of
life, as which, besides the great pains and labor it required, exposed him to
all the injuries of wind and weather, to the storms of the Sea, the darkness
and tempestuousness of the Night, and all to make a very small return. An
employment, whose restless troubles, constant hardships, frequent dangers, and
amazing horrors are (for the satisfaction of the learned Reader) thus elegantly
described by one, whose Poems may be justly styled Golden Verses, receiving
from the Emperor Antoninus a piece of Gold for every Verse. Oppian. (...). non
long ab init.
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
But meanness is no bar in God's way, the poor, if virtuous, are as dear to
Heaven, as the wealthy and the honorable, equally alike to him, with whom
there is no respect of persons. Nay our Lord seemed to cast a peculiar honor
upon this profession, when afterward calling him and some others of the same
Trade from catching of Fish, to be (as he told them) Fishers of men.

5. AND here we may justly reflect upon the wise and admirable methods of the
Divine Providence, which in planting and propagating the Christian Religion in
the World, made choice of such mean and unlikely instruments, that he should
hide these things from the wise and prudent, and reveal them unto babes, men
that had not been educated in the Academy, and the Schools of Learning, but
brought up to a Trade, to catch Fish, and mend Nets; most of the Apostles being
taken from the meanest Trades, and all of them (S. Paul excepted) unfurnished
of all arts of learning, and the advantages of liberal and ingenuous education:
and yet these were the men that were designed to run down the World, and to
overturn the learning of the prudent. Certainly had humane wisdom been to
manage the business, it would have taken quite other measures, and chosen out
the profoundest Rabbis, the acutest Philosophers, the smoothest Orators, such
as would have been most likely by strength of Reason and arts of Rhetoric to
have triumphed over the minds of men, to grapple with the stubbornness of the
Jews, and baffle the finer notions and speculations of the Greeks. We find that
those Sects of Philosophy that gained most credit in the Heathen-world, did it
this way, by their eminency in some Arts and Sciences, whereby they recommended
themselves to the acceptance of the wiser and more ingenious part of mankind.
(...). Fragm. Epist. page 541. Tom. 1.
Julian the Apostate thinks it a reasonable exception against the Jewish
Prophets, that they were incompetent messengers and interpreters of the Divine
will, because they had not their minds cleared and purged, by passing through
the Circle of polite arts and learning. Why, now this is the wonder of it, that
the first Preachers of the Gospel should be such rude unlearned men, and yet so
suddenly, so powerfully prevail over the learned World, and conquer so many,
who had the greatest parts and abilities, and the strongest prejudices against
it, to the simplicity of the Gospel. When Celsus objected that the Apostles
were but a company of mean and illiterate persons, sorry Mariners and
Fishermen, Contr. Cells. lib. 1. p. 47, 48.
Origin quickly returns upon him with this answer, That hence 'twas plainly
evident, that they taught Christianity by a Divine power, when such persons
were able with such an uncontrouled success to subdue men to the obedience of
the Word; for that they had no eloquent tongues, no subtle and discursive
heads, none of the refined and rhetorical Arts of Greece to conquer the minds
of men. For my part ( says he Lib. 3. p. 135.
in another place) I verily believe that the Holy Jesus purposely made use of
such Preachers of his Doctrine, that there might be no suspicion, that they
came instructed with Arts of Sophistry, but that it might be clearly manifest
to all the World, that there was no crafty design in it, and that they had a
Divine power going along with them, which was more efficacious, than the
greatest volubility of expression, or ornaments of speech, or the artifices
which were used in the Grecian compositions. Had it not been for this Divine
power that upheld it (as he Lib. 1. p. 6.
elsewhere argues) the Christian Religion must needs have sunk under those
weighty pressures that lay upon it, having not only to contend with the potent
opposition of the Senate, Emperors, People, and the whole power of the Roman
Empire, but to conflict with those homebred wants and necessities, wherewith
its own professors were oppressed and burdened.

6. IT could not but greatly vindicate the Apostles from all suspicion of
forgery and imposture in the thoughts of sober and unbyassed persons, to see
their Doctrine readily entertained by men of the most discerning and
inquisitive minds. Had they dealt only with the rude and the simple, the idiot
and the unlearned, there might have been some pretense to suspect, that they
lay in wait to deceive, and designed to impose upon the World by crafty and
insinuative arts and methods. But alas they had other persons to deal with, men
of the acutest wits, and most profound abilities, the wisest Philosophers, and
most subtle disputants, able to weigh an argument with the greatest accuracy,
and to decline the force of the strongest reasonings, and who had their parts
edged with the keenest prejudices of education, and a mighty veneration for the
Religion of their Country, a Religion that for so many Ages had governed the
World, and taken firm possession of the minds of men. And yet notwithstanding
all these disadvantages these plain men conquered the wise and the learned, and
brought them over to that Doctrine that was despised and scorned, opposed and
persecuted, and that had nothing but its own native excellency to recommend it.
A clear evidence that there was something in it beyond the craft and power of
men. Is not this (says an elegant Arnob. adv. Gent. lib. 2. p. 21.
Apologist, making his address to the Heathens) enough to make you believe and
entertain it, to consider that in so short a time it has diffused it self over
the whole World, civilized the most barbarous Nations, softened the roughest and
most intractable tempers, that the greatest Wits and Scholars, Orators,
Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers have quitted
their formerly dear and beloved sentiments, and heartily embraced the Precepts
and Doctrines of the Gospel? Upon this account De Curand. Graec. Affect. Sermon.
9. de Leg. p. 123.
Theodoret does with no less truth than elegancy insult and triumph over the
Heathens: He tells them that whoever would be at the pains to compare the best
Lawmakers either amongst the Greeks or Romans, with our Fishermen and
Publicans, would soon perceive what a Divine virtue and efficacy there was in
them above all others, whereby they did not only conquer their neighbors, not
only the Greeks and Romans, but brought over the most barbarous Nations to a
compliance with the Laws of the Gospel, Ibid. p. 125.
and that not by force of Arms, not by numerous bands of Soldiers, not by
methods of torture and cruelty, but by meek perswasives, and a convincing the
World of the excellency and usefulness of those Laws which they propounded to
them. A thing which the wisest and best men of the Heathen-world could never
do, to make their dogmata and institutions universally obtain; Ibid. p. 128.
nay, that Plato himself could never by all his plausible and insinuative arts
make his Laws to be entertained by his own dear Athenians. Ibid. p. 126.
He farther shows them, that the Laws published by our Fishermen and
Tent-makers could never be abolished (like those made by the best amongst them)
by the policies of Caius, the power of Claudius, the cruelties of Nero, or any
of the succeeding Emperors, but still they went on conquering and to conquer,
Ibid. p. 135.
and made Millions both of Men and Women willing to embrace flames, and to
encounter Death in its most horrid shapes, rather than disown and forsake them:
whereof he calls to witness those many Churches and Monuments every where
erected to the memory of Christian Martyrs, no less to the honor than
advantage of those Cities and Countries, and in some sense to all Mankind.

7. THE sum of the Discourse is, in the Apostles words, that God chose the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28
the weak to confound those that are mighty, the base things of the world,
things most vilified and despised, yea and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are. These were the things, these the Persons whom God sent
upon this errand, to silence the Wise, the Scribe, and the Disputer of this
World, Verse. 22, 23, 24, 25.
and to make foolish the wisdom of this World. For though the Jews required a
sign, and the Greeks sought after wisdom, though the preaching a crucified
Savior was a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness to the learned Graecians,
yet by this foolishness of preaching God was pleased to save them that
believed: and in the event made it appear that the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God stronger than men. That so the honor of all
might entirely redound to himself; Isti primi vocati sunt, ut Dominum
sequerentur: piscatores and illiterati mittuntur ad praedicandum, ne fides
credentium non virtute Dei, sed eloquentia atque doctrina fieri putaretur.
Hieron. comm. in Matthew. c. 4. Tom. 9. p. 17.
so the Apostle concludes, that no Flesh should glory in his presence, but that
he that glories, should glory in the Lord.

SECT. II. Of S. Peter, from his first coming to Christ, till his being called
to be a Disciple.
Peter, before his coming to Christ, a Disciple (probably) of John the Baptist.
His first approaches to Christ. Our Lord's communication with him. His return
to his Trade. Christ' s entering into Peter' s Ship, and preaching to the people
at the Sea of Galilee. The miraculous draught of Fishes. Peter' s great
astonishment at this evidence of our Lord's Divinity. His call to be a
Disciple. Christ 's return to Capernaum, and healing Peter 's Mother-in-Law.

THOUGH we find not whether Peter before his coming to Christ was engaged in
any of the particular Sects at this time in the Jewish Church, yet is it
greatly probable, that he was one of the Disciples of John the Baptist. For
first, it is certain that his brother Andrew was so, and we can hardly think,
these two brothers should draw contrary ways, or that he who was so ready to
bring his brother the early tidings of the Messiah, that the Sun of
righteousness was already risen in those parts, should not be as solicitous to
bring him under the discipline and influences of John the Baptist, the Day Star
that went before him. Secondly, Peter's forwardness and curiosity at the first
news of Christ's appearing, to come to him, and converse with him, show that
his expectations had been awakened, and some light in this matter conveyed to
him by the preaching and ministry of John, who was the voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight,
showing them who it was that was coming after him.

2. HIS first acquaintance with Christ commenced in this manner. The Blessed
Jesus having for thirty years passed through the solitudes of a private life,
had lately been baptized in Jordan, and there publicly owned to be the Son of
God by the most solemn attestations that Heaven could give him; whereupon he
was immediately hurried into the wilderness to a personal contest with the
Devil for forty days together. So natural is it to the enemy of mankind to
malign our happiness, and to seek to blast our joys, when we are under the
highest instances of the Divine grace and favor. His enemy being conquered in
three set battles, and fled, he returned hence, and came down to Bethabar a
beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing his Proselytes, and endeavoring to
satisfy the Jews, who had sent to him curiously to enquire concerning this new
Messiah that appeared among them. Upon the great testimony which the Baptist
gave him, and his pointing to our Lord then passing by him; John 1.37.
two of John's disciples who were then with him presently followed after
Christ, one of which was Andrew, Simon's brother. It was toward Evening when
they came, and therefore probably they stayed with him all night, during which
Andrew had opportunity to inform himself, and to satisfy his most scrupulous
enquiries. Early the next morning (if not that very evening) (...). Comment. de
S. Andr. in Menaeis Graecor. (...).
he hastened to acquaint his brother Simon with these glad tidings. It Is not
enough to be good and happy alone; Religion is a communicative principle, that
like the circles in the water, delights to multiply it self, and to diffuse its
influences round about it, and especially upon those, whom nature has placed
nearest to us. He tells him, they had found the long looked for Messiah, him
whom Moses and the Prophets had so signally foretold, and whom all the devout
and pious of that Nation had so long expected.

3. SIMON (one of those who looked for the Kingdom of God, and waited for
redemption in Israel) ravished with this joyful news, and impatient of delay,
John 1.42.
presently follows his brother to the place: whither he was no sooner come, but
our Lord to give him an evidence of his Divinity, salutes him at first sight by
name, tells him what, and who he was, both as to his name and kindred, what
title should be given him, that he should be called Cephas, or Peter; a name
which he afterward actually conferred upon him. What passed further between
them, and whether these two brothers henceforward personally attended our
Savior's motions in the number of his Disciples, the Sacred Story leaves us in
the dark. It seems probable, that they stayed with him for some time, till they
were instructed in the first rudiments of his doctrine, and by his leave
departed home. For it is reasonable to suppose, that our Lord being unwilling,
at this time especially, to awaken the jealousies of the State by a numerous
retinue, might dismiss his Disciples for some time, and Peter and Andrew
amongst the rest, who hereupon returned home to the exercise of their calling,
where he found them afterward.

4. IT was now somewhat more than a year, since our Lord having entered upon the
public stage of action, Matthew. 4.23.
constantly went about doing good, healing the sick, and preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom, residing usually at Capernaum, and the parts about it, where by
the constancy of his preaching, and the reputation of his miracles, his fame
spread about all those Countries; by means whereof multitudes of people from
all parts flocked to him, greedily desirous to become his Auditors. And what
wonder if the parched and barren Earth thirsted for the showers of Heaven? It
happened that our Lord retiring out of the City, to enjoy the privacies of
contemplation upon the banks of the Sea of Galilee, Luke 5.1.
it was not long before the multitude found him out; to avoid the crowd and
press whereof he stepped into a Ship or Fisher-Boat, that lay near to the shore,
which belonged to Peter, who together with his companions after a tedious and
unsuccessful night, were gone ashore to wash and dry their Nets. He who might
have commanded, was yet pleased to entreat Peter (who by this time was returned
into his Ship) to put a little from the shore. Here being sat, he taught the
people, who stood along upon the shore to hear him. Sermon ended, he resolved
to seal up his doctrine with a miracle, that the people might be the more
effectually convinced, that he was a Teacher come from God. To this purpose, he
had Simon lanch out further, and cast his Net into the Sea: Simon tells him,
they had don't already, that they had been fishing all the last night, but in
vain; and if they could not succeed then (the most proper season for that
employment) there was less hope to speed now, it being probably about Noon. But
because where God commands, it is not for any to argue, but obey; at our Lord's
instance he let down the Net, which immediately enclosed so great a multitude
of Fishes, that the Net began to break, and they were forced to call to their
partners, who were in a Ship hard by them, to come in to their assistance. A
draught so great, that it loaded both their Boats, and that so full, that it
endangered their sinking before they could get safe to shore: An instance,
wherein our Savior gave an ocular demonstration, that, as Messiah, God had put
all things under his feet, Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8.
not only Fowls of the Air, but the Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes
through the paths of the Seas.

5. AMAZED they were all at this miraculous draught of Fishes, whereupon Simon
in an ecstasie of admiration, and a mixture of humility and fear, threw himself
at the feet of Christ, and prayed him to depart from him, as a vile and a
sinful person. So evident were the appearances of Divinity in this miracle,
that he was over-powred and dazzled with its brightness and luster, and
reflecting upon himself, could not but think himself unworthy the presence of
so great a person, so immediately sent from God; and considering his own state
(Conscience being hereby more sensibly awakened) was afraid, that the Divine
vengeance might pursue and overtake him. But our Lord to abate the edge of his
fears, assures him that this miracle was not done to amaze and terrify him,
but to strengthen and confirm his Faith; that now he had nobler work and
employment for him; instead of catching Fish, he should, by persuading men to
the obedience of the Gospel, catch the Souls of men: And accordingly commanded
him and his brother to follow him: (the same command which presently after he
gave to the two Sons of Zebedee.) The word was no sooner spoken, and they
landed, but disposing their concerns in the hands of friends (as we may presume
prudent and reasonable men would) they immediately left all, and followed him;
and from this time Peter and the rest became his constant and inseparable
Disciples, living under the rules of his Discipline and Institutions.

6. FROM hence they returned to Capernaum, Matthew. 8.14. Mark 1.29. Luke 4.38.
John 11.3.
where our Lord entering into Simon's house (the place in all likelihood where
he was wont to lodge during his residence in that City) found his Mother-in-law
visited with a violent Fever. No privileges afford an exemption from the
ordinary Laws of humane Nature; Christ under her roof did not protect this
Woman from the assaults and invasions of a Fever. Lord, behold, he whom thou
love is sick, as they said concerning Lazarus. Here a fresh opportunity
offered it self to Christ of exerting his Divine Power. No sooner was he told
of it, but he came to her bedside, rebuked the Paroxysms, commanded the Fever
to be gone, and taking her by the hand to lift her up, in a moment restored her
to perfect health, and ability to return to the business of her Family, all
cures being equally easy to Omnipotence.

SECT III. Of S. Peter, from his Election to the Apostolate, till the
Confession which he made of Christ.
The Election of the Apostles; and our Lord's solemn preparation for it. The
powers and Commission given to them. Why Twelve chosen. Peter the first in
order, not power. The Apostles when and by whom Baptized. The Tradition of
Euodius of Peter' s being immediately Baptized by Christ, rejected, and its
authorities proved insufficient. Three of the Apostles more intimately
conversant with our Savior. Peter' s being with Christ at the raising Jairus
his Daughter. His walking with Christ upon the Sea. The creatures at God's
command act contrary to their natural Inclinations. The weakness of Peter' s
Faith. Christ' s power in commanding down the storm, an evidence of his
Divinity. Many Disciples desert our Savior's preaching. Peter' s profession of
constancy in the name of the rest of the Apostles.

1. OUR Lord being now to elect some peculiar persons, as his immediate
Vicegerents upon Earth, to whose care and trust he might commit the building up
of his Church, and the planting that Religion in the World, Luke 6.12.
for which he himself came down from Heaven; In order to it he privately
overnight withdrew himself into a solitary Mountain (commonly called the Mount
of Christ, from his frequent repairing thither, though some of the Ancients
will have it to be Mount Tabor) there to make his solemn address to Heaven for
a prosperous success on so great a work. Herein leaving an excellent copy and
precedent to the Governors of his Church, how to proceed in setting apart
persons to so weighty and difficult an employment. Upon this Mountain we may
conceive there was an Oratory or place of prayer (probably intimated by S.
Luke's (...), for such Profeucha's or houses of Prayer, usually uncovered, and
standing in the fields, the Jews had in several places) wherein our Lord
continued all night, not in one continued and entire act of devotion, but
probably by intervals, and repeated returns of duty.

2. EARLY the next morning his Disciples came to him, Matthew. 10.1. Mark 3.14.
Luke 6.13.
out of whom he made choice of Twelve to be his Apostles, that they might be
the constant attendants upon his person, to hear his Discourses, and be
Eyewitnesses of his Miracles; to be always conversant with him while he was
upon Earth, and afterward to be sent abroad up and down the World to carry on
that work which he himself had begun; whom therefore he invested with the power
of working Miracles, which was more completely conferred upon them after his
Ascension into Heaven. Passing by the several fancies and conjectures of the
Ancients, why our Savior pitched upon the just number of Twelve (whereof
before) it may deserve to be considered, whether our Lord being now to appoint
the Supreme Officers and Governors of his Church, which the Apostle styles the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
might not herein have a more peculiar allusion to the twelve Patriarchs, as
founders of their several Tribes, or to the constant Heads and Rulers of those
twelve Tribes of which the body of the Jewish Nation did consist: Especially
since he himself seems elsewhere to give countenance to it, Matthew. 19.28.
when he tells the Apostles that when the Son of man shall fit on the Throne of
his Glory, that is, be gone back to Heaven, and have taken full possession of
his Evangelical Kingdom, which principally commenced from his Resurrection,
that then they also should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel, that is, they should have great powers and authorities in the
Church, such as the power of the Keys, and other Rights of Spiritual Judicature
and Sovereignty, answerable in some proportion to the power and dignity which
the Heads and Rulers of the twelve Tribes of Israel did enjoy.

3. IN the enumeration of these twelve Apostles, Matthew. 10.2.
all the Evangelists constantly place S. Peter in the front; and S. Matthew
expressly tells us, that he was the first, that is, he was the first that was
called to be an Apostle: his Age also and the gravity of his person more
particularly qualifying him for a Primacy of Order amongst the rest of the
Apostles, as that without which no society of men can be managed or maintained.
Less than this, as none will deny him, so more than this, neither Scripture nor
Primitive antiquity do allow him. And now it was, Mark 3.16.
that our Lord actually conferred that name upon him, which before he had
promised him, Simon he surnamed Peter. It may here be enquired, when, and by
whom the Apostles were baptized. That they were is unquestionable, being
themselves appointed to confer it upon others; but when, or how, the Scripture
is altogether silent. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 3. p. 134
Nicephorus from no worse an Author, as he pretends, than Euodius, S. Peter's
immediate successor in the Sea of Antioch, tells us, That of all the Apostles
Christ baptized none but Peter with his own hands; that Peter baptized Andrew,
and the two sons of Zebedee, and they the rest of the Apostles. This, if so,
would greatly make for the honor of S. Peter. But alas! his authority is not
only suspicious, but supposititious, in a manner deserted by S. Peter's best
friends, and the strongest champions of his cause: Baronius himself, however
sometimes Ad An. 31. number 40.
willing to make use of him, elsewhere Ad An. 71. number. 13.
confessing that this Epistle of Euodius is altogether unknown to any of the
Ancients. As for the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, which to the same
purpose he quotes out of Vid. Jo. Moschi Prat. Spir. cap. 176. Bibl. P. Graec*
L. Tom. 2. p. 1133.
Sophronius, (though not Sophronius, but Johannes Moschus, as is notoriously
known, be the Author of that Book) besides, that it is delivered upon an
uncertain report, pretended to have been alleged in a discourse between one
Dionysius Bishop of Ascalon and his Clergy, out of a Book of Clemens, not now
extant; his Authors are much alike, that is, of no great value and authority.

4. AMONGST these Apostles, our Lord chose a Triumvirate, Peter and the two
sons of Zebedee to be his more intimate companions, whom he admitted more
familiarly than the rest, unto all the more secret passages and transactions of
his Life. Mark 5.22.
The first instance of which was on this occasion. Jairus, a Ruler of the
Synagogue, had a daughter desperately sick, whose disease having baffled all
the arts of Physic, was only curable by the immediate agency of the God of
Nature. He therefore in all humility addresses himself to our Savior; which he
had no sooner done, but servants came post to tell him, that it was in vain to
trouble our Lord, for that his daughter was dead. Christ bids him not despond,
if his Faith held out, there was no danger. And suffering none to follow him,
but Peter, James, and John, goes along with him to the house; where he was
derided by the sorrowful friends, and neighbors, for telling them that she was
not perfectly dead. But our Lord entering in, with the commanding efficacy of
two words, restored her at once both to life and perfect health.

5. OUR Lord after this preached many Sermons, and wrought many Miracles:
amongst which, none more remarkable, than his feeding a multitude of five
thousand men, Matthew. 14.17.
besides women and children, but with five Loaves, and two Fishes; of which,
nevertheless, twelve Baskets of fragments were taken up. Which being done, and
the multitude dismissed, he commanded the Apostles to take Ship, it being now
near night, and to cross over to Capernaum, whilst he himself, as his manner
was, retired to a neighboring mountain, to dispose himself to Prayer and
Contemplation. The Apostles were scarce got into the middle of the Sea, when on
a sudden a violent Storm and Tempest began to arise, whereby they were brought
into present danger of their lives. Our Savior, who knew how the case stood
with them, and how much they labored under infinite pains and fears, having
himself caused this Tempest, for the greater trial of their Faith, a little
before morning (for so long they remained in this imminent danger) immediately
conveyed himself upon the Sea, where the Waves received him, being proud to
carry their Master. He who refused to gratify the Devil, when tempting him to
throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, did here commit himself to
a boisterous and instable Element, and that in a violent Storm, walking upon
the water, as if it had been dry ground. But that infinite power that made and
supports the World, as it gave rules to all particular beings, so can when it
pleases countermand the Laws of their Creation, and make them act contrary to
their natural inclinations. If God say the word, the Sun will stand still in
the middle of the Heavens; if Go back, 'twill retrocede, as upon the Dial of
Ahaz: if he command it, the Heavens will become as Brass, and the Earth as
Iron, and that for three years and an half together, as in the case of Elijah's
prayer; if he say to the Sea, Divide, 'twill run upon heaps, and become on both
sides as firm as a wall of Marble. Nothing can be more natural, than for the
fire to burn, and yet at God's command it will forget its nature, and become a
screen and a fence to the three Children in the Babylonian Furnace. What
heavier than Iron, or more natural than for gravity to tend downwards? and yet
when God will have it, Iron shall float like Cork on the top of the water. The
proud and raging Sea that naturally refuses to bear the bodies of men while
alive, became here as firm as Brass, when commanded to wait upon, and do homage
to the God of Nature. Our Lord walking toward the Ship, as if he had an
intention to pass by it, he was espied by them, who presently thought it to be
the Apparition of a Spirit. Hereupon they were seized with great terror and
consternation, and their fears in all likelihood heightened by the vulgar
opinion, that they are evil Spirits that choose rather to appear in the night
than by day. While they were in this agony, our Lord taking compassion on them,
calls to them, and bids them not be afraid, for that it was no other than he
himself. Peter (the eagerness of whose temper carried him forward to all bold
and resolute undertakings) entreated our Lord, that if it was he, he might have
leave to come upon the water to him. Having received his orders, he went out of
the Ship, and walked upon the Sea to meet his Master. But when he found the
wind to bear hard against him, and the waves to rise round about him, whereby
probably the sight of Christ was intercepted, he began to be afraid; and the
higher his fears arose, the lower his Faith began to sink, and together with
that, his body to sink under water: whereupon in a passionate fright he cried
out to our Lord to help him, who, reaching out his arm, took him by the hand,
and set him again upon the top of the water, with this gentle reproof, O thou
of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? It being the weakness of our Faith
that makes the influences of the Divine power and goodness to have no better
effect upon us. Being come to the Ship, they took them in, where our Lord no
sooner arrived, but the winds and waves observing their duty to their Sovereign
Lord, and having done the errand which they came upon, mannerly departed, and
vanished away, and the Ship in an instant was at the shore. All that were in
the Ship being strangely astonished at this Miracle, and fully convinced of the
Divinity of his person, came and did homage to him, with this confession, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God. After which they went ashore, and landed in the
Country of Genezareth, and there more fully acknowledged him before all the
people.

6. THE next day great multitudes flocking after him, John 6.24.
he entered into a Synagogue at Capernaum, and taking occasion from the late
Miracle of the loaves, which he had wrought amongst them, he began to discourse
concerning himself, as the true Manna, and the Bread that came down from
Heaven; largely opening to them many of the more sublime and Spiritual
mysteries, and the necessary and important duties of the Gospel. Hereupon a
great part of his Auditory, who had hitherto followed him, finding their
understandings gravelled with these difficult and uncommon Notions, and that
the duties he required were likely to grate hard upon them, and perceiving now
that he was not the Messiah they took him for, whose Kingdom should consist in
an external Grandeur and plenty, but was to be managed and transacted in a more
inward and Spiritual way; hereupon fairly left him in open field, and
henceforth quite turned their backs upon him. Whereupon our Lord turning about
to his Apostles, asked them whether they also would go away from him? Peter
(spokes-man generally for all the rest) answered, whither should they go to
mend and better their condition? should they return back to Moses? Alas! he
laid a yoke upon them, which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear.
Should they go to the Scribes and Pharisees? they would feed them with Stones
instead of Bread, obtrude humane Traditions upon them for Divine dictates and
Commands. Should they betake themselves to the Philosophers amongst the
Gentiles? they were miserably blind and short-sighted in their Notions of
things, and their sentiments and opinions not only different from, but contrary
to one another. No, 'twas he only had the words of Eternal life, whose doctrine
could instruct them in the plain way to Heaven; that they had fully assented to
what both John and he had said concerning himself, that they were fully
persuaded both from the efficacy of his Sermons, which they heard, and the
powerful conviction of his Miracles, which they had seen, that he was the Son
of the living God, the true Messiah and Savior of the World. But
notwithstanding this fair and plausible testimony, he tells them, that they
were not all of this mind, that there was a Satan amongst them, one that was
moved by the spirit and impulse, and that acted according to the rules and
interest of the Devil: intimating Judas who should betray him. So hard is it to
meet with a body of so just and pure a constitution, wherein some rotten member
or distempered part is not to be found.

SECT. IV. Of S. Peter from the time of his Confession, till our Lord's last
Passover.
Our Savior's Journey with his Apostles to Caesarea. The Opinions of the People
concerning Him. Peter' s eminent Confession of Christ, and our Lord's great
commendation of it. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. The Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven how given. The advantage the Church of Rome makes of these
passages. This confession made by Peter in the name of the rest, and by others
before him. No personal privilege intended to S. Peter: the same things
elsewhere promised to the other Apostles. Our Lord's discourse concerning his
Passion. Peter' s unseasonable Zeal in dissuading him from it, and our Lord's
severe rebuking him. Christ's Transfiguration, and the glory of it: Peter how
affected with it. Peter' s paying Tribute for Christ and himself. This Tribute,
what. Our Savior's discourse upon it. Offending brethren how often to be
forgiven. The young man commanded to sell all. What compensation made to the
followers of Christ. Our Lord's triumphant entrance into Jerusalem. Preparation
made to keep the Passover.

1. IT was some time since our Savior had kept his third Passover at
Jerusalem, Mark 8.27. Matthew. 16.21. Luke 9.18.
when he directed his Journey toward Caesarea Philippi; where by the way having
like a careful Master of his Family first prayed with his Apostles, he began to
ask them (having been more than two Years publicly conversant amongst them)
what the world thought concerning him. They answered, that the Opinions of Men
about him were various and different; that some took him for John the Baptist,
lately risen from the dead, between whose Doctrine, Discipline, and way of
life, in the main there was so great a Correspondence. That others thought he
was Elias; probably judging so, from the gravity of his Person, freedom of his
Preaching, the fame and reputation of his Miracles, especially since the
Scriptures assured them he was not dead, but taken up into Heaven; and had so
expressly foretold, that he should return back again. That others looked upon
him as the Prophet Jeremiah alive again, of whose return the Jews had great
expectations, in so much that some of them thought the Soul of Jeremias was
re-inspired into Zacharias. Or if not thus, at least, that he was one of the
more eminent of the ancient Prophets, or that the Souls of some of these
Persons had been breathed into him; The Doctrine of the (...), or
Transmigration of Souls first broached and propagated by Pythagoras, being at
this time current amongst the Jews, and owned by the Pharisees as one of their
prime Notions and Principles.

2. THIS Account not sufficing, our Lord comes closer and nearer to them; tells
them, It was no wonder if the common People were divided into these wild
thoughts concerning him: but since they had been always with him, had been
hearers of his Sermons, and Spectators of his Miracles, he enquired, what they
themselves thought of him. Peter, ever forward to return an Answer, and
therefore by the Fathers frequently styled The Mouth of the Apostles, (...).
Chrysostom. in Matthew. 16. p. 483.
told him in the name of the rest, That he was the Messiah, The Son of the
living God, promised of old in the Law and the Prophets, heartily desired and
looked for by all good men, anointed and set apart by God to be the King,
Priest, and Prophet of his People. To this excellent and comprehensive
confession of Peter's, Our Lord returns this great Eulogie and Commendation;
Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jonah, Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven* That is, this Faith which thou have now
confessed, is not humane, contrived by Man's wit, or built upon his testimony,
but upon those Notions and Principles which I was sent by God to reveal to the
World, and those mighty and solemn attestations, which he has given from Heaven
to the truth both of my Person and my Doctrine. And because thou have so freely
made this Confession, therefore I also say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: That is, that as thy Name signifies a Stone or Rock, such shall
thou thy self be, firm, solid, and immovable, in building of the Church, which
shall be so orderly erected by thy care and diligence, and so firmly founded
upon that faith which thou have now confessed, that all the assaults and
attempts which the powers of Hell can make against it, shall not be able to
overturn it. Moreover I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: That is, thou
shall have that spiritual authority and power within the Church, whereby as
with Keys thou shall be able to shut and lock out obstinate and impenitent
sinners, and upon their repentance to unlock the door, and take them in again:
And what thou shall thus regularly do, shall be owned in the Court above, and
ratified by God in Heaven.

3. UPON these several passages, the Champions of the Church of Rome, mainly
build the unlimited Supremacy and Infallibility of the Bishops of that See;
with how much truth, and how little reason, it is not my present purpose to
discuss. It may suffice here to remark, that though this place does very much
tend to exalt the honor of S. Peter, yet is there nothing herein personal and
peculiar to him alone, as distinct from, and preferred above the rest of the
Apostles. Does he here make confession of Christ's being the Son of God? Yet,
besides that herein he spoke but the sense of all the rest, this was no more
than what others had said as well as he, yea before he was so much as called to
be a Disciple. Joh. 1.49.
Thus Nathanael at his first coming to Christ expressly told him, Rabbi, thou
art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel. Does our Lord here style him a
Rock? All the Apostles are elsewhere equally called Foundations, yea said to be
the Twelve Foundations, Rev. 21.14. Ephesians. 2.20. Gal. 2.9.
upon which the Wall of the new Jerusalem, that is, the Evangelical Church is
erected; and sometimes others of them besides Peter are called Pillars, as they
have relation to the Church already built. Does Christ here promise the Keys to
Peter? that is, Power of Governing, and of exercising Church Censures, and of
absolving penitent sinners? The very same is elsewhere promised to all the
Apostles, and almost in the very same terms and words. Matthew. 18.17*18.
If thine offending Brother, prove obstinate, tell it unto the Church; but, if
he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen and a
Publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven. And elsewhere, when ready to leave the World, he tells them, As my
Father has sent me, Joh. 20.21.23.
even so send I you: whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them;
and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. By all which it is evident,
that our Lord did not here give any personal prerogative to S. Peter, as
Universal Pastor and Head of the Christian Church, much less to those who were
to be his Successors in the Sea of Rome; But that as he made this Confession in
the name of the rest of the Apostles, so what was here promised unto him, was
equally intended unto all. Nor did the more considering and judicious part of
the Fathers (however giving a mighty reverence to S. Peter) ever understand it
in any other sense. Sure I am that Comment. in loc. Tom. 3. fol. 1. fac. 2.
Origin tells us, that every true Christian that makes this confession with the
same Spirit and Integrity which S. Peter did, shall have the same blessing and
commendation from Christ conferred upon him.

4. THE Holy Jesus knowing the time of his Passion to draw on, began to prepare
the minds of his Apostles against that fatal Hour; telling them what hard and
bitter things he should suffer at Jerusalem, Matthew. 16.21. Mark 8.31. Luke 9.22.
what affronts and indignities he must undergo, and be at last put to death
with all the arts of torture and disgrace, by the Decree of the Jewish
Sanhedrim. Peter, whom our Lord had infinitely encouraged and endeared to him,
by the great things which he had lately said concerning him, so that his
spirits were now afloat, and his passions ready to overrun the banks, not able
to endure a thought that so much evil should befall his Master, broke out into
an over-confident and unseasonable interruption of him: He took him and began
to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee
Besides his great kindness and affection to his Master, the minds of the
Apostles were not yet thoroughly purged from the hopes and expectations of a
glorious reign of the Messiah, so that Peter could not but look upon these
sufferings as unbecoming and inconsistent with the state and dignity of the Son
of God. And therefore thought good to advise his Lord, to take care of himself,
and while there was time to prevent and avoid them. This, our Lord, who valued
the redemption of Mankind infinitely before his own ease and safety, resented
at so high a rate, that he returned upon him with this tart and stinging
reproof, Get thee behind me Satan; The very same treatment which he once gave
to the Devil himself, Luke 4.8.
when he made that insolent proposal to him, To fall down and worship him:
though in Satan it was the result of pure malice and hatred; in Peter only an
error of love, and great regard. However our Lord could not but look upon it as
mischievous and diabolical counsel, prompted and promoted by the great
Adversary of Mankind. A way therefore, says Christ, with thy hellish and
pernicious counsel, Thou art an offense unto me, in seeking to oppose and
undermine that great design, for which I purposely came down from Heaven: In
this thou savourest not the things of God, but those that be of men, in
suggesting to me those little shifts and arts of safety and self-preservation,
which humane prudence, and the love of men's own selves are wont to dictate to
them. By which, though we may learn Peter's mighty kindness to our Savior, yet
that herein he did not take his measures right. A plain evidence that his
infallibility had not yet taken place.

5. ABOUT a week after this, Matthew. 17.1. Mark 9.2. Luke 9.28.
our Savior being to receive a Type and Specimen of his future glorification,
took with him his three more intimate Apostles, Peter, and the two sons of
Zebedee, and went up into a very high Mountain, which the Ancients generally
conceive to have been Mount Thabor, Psalm 89.12.
a round and very high Mountain, situate in the Plains of Galilee. And now was
even literally fulfilled what the Psalmist had spoken, Tabor and Hermon shall
rejoice in thy Name: for what greater joy and triumph, than to be peculiarly
chosen to be the holy Mount, whereon our Lord in so eminent a manner received
from God the Father, honor and glory, and made such magnificent displays of
his Divine power and Majesty? For while they were here earnestly employed in
Prayer, (as seldom did our Lord enter upon any eminent action, but he first
made his address to Heaven) he was suddenly transformed into another manner of
appearance; such a luster and radiancy darted from his face, that the Sun it
self shines not brighter at Noonday; such beams of light reflected from his
garments, as out-did the light it self that was round about them, so exceeding
pure and white, that the Snow might blush to compare with it; nor could the
Fullers art purify any thing into half that whiteness: an evident and sensible
representation of the glory of that state, wherein the just shall walk in
white, and shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father. During this Heavenly
scene* there appeared Moses and Elias, (who, as the Jews say, shall come
together) clothed with all the brightness and majesty of a glorified state,
familiarly conversing with him, and discoursing of the death and sufferings
which he was shortly to undergo, and his departure into Heaven. Behold here
together the three greatest persons that ever were the Ministers of Heaven:
Moses, under God, the Instituter and promulgator of the Law; Elias the great
reformer of it, when under its deepest degeneracy and corruption; and the
blessed Jesus the Son of God, who came to take away what was weak and imperfect
and to introduce a more manly and rational institution, and to communicate the
last Revelation which God would make of his mind to the World. Peter and the
two Apostles that were with him, were in the mean time fallen asleep, heavy
through want of natural rest, (it being probably night when this was done) or
else over powered with these extraordinary appearances, which the frailty and
weakness of their present stare could not bear, were fallen into a Trance. But
now awaking were strangely surprised to behold our Lord surrounded with so much
glory, and those two great persons conversing with him, knowing who they were,
probably by some particular marks and signatures that were upon them, or else
by immediate revelation, or from the discourse which passed betwixt Christ and
them, or possibly from some communication which they themselves might have with
them. While these Heavenly guests were about to depart, Peter in a great
rapture and ecstasie of mind addressed himself to our Savior, telling him how
infinitely they were pleased and delighted with their being there; and to that
purpose desiring his leave, that they might erect three Tabernacles, one for
him, one for Moses, and one for Elias. While he was thus saying, a bright cloud
suddenly over-shadowed the two great Ministers, and wrapped them up: out of which
came a voice, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him:
which when the Apostles heard, and saw the cloud coming over themselves, they
were seized with a great consternation, and fell upon their faces to the
ground, whom our Lord gently touched, bad them arise and disband their fears:
whereupon looking up, they saw none but their Master, the rest having vanished
and disappeared. In memory of these great transactions, De Loc. Sanct. c. 17.
Bid tells us, that in pursuance of S. Peter's petition about the three
Tabernacles, there were afterward three Churches built upon the top of this
Mountain, which in after times were had in great veneration, which might
possibly give some foundation to that report which Bern. a Bridenb. Itiner.
Terrae Sanct. vid. J. Cotovis. Itiner. lib. 3. c. 7. p. 355.
one makes, that in his time there were showed the ruins of those three
Tabernacles, which were built according to S. Peter's desire.

6. After this, our Lord and his Apostles having traveled through Galilee, the
gatherers of the Tribute-money came to Peter, Matthew. 17.24.
and asked him whether his Master was not obliged to pay the Tribute, which
God, under the Mosaic Law, commanded to be yearly paid by every Jew above
Twenty Years old, to the use of the Temple, which so continued to the times of
Vespatian, under whom the Temple being destroyed, it was by him transferred to
the use of the Capitol at Rome, being to the value of half a Shekel, or Fifteen
pence of our money. To this question of theirs, Peter positively answers, yes;
knowing his Master would never be backward, either to give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, or to God the things that are God's. Peter going into
the house to give an account to his Master, and to know his mind concerning it,
Christ prevented him with this question, What think thou, Simon, of whom do
Earthly Kings exact Tribute, of their own Children and Family, or from other
People? Peter answered, Not from their own Servants, and Family, but from
Strangers. To which our Lord presently replied, That then according to his own
argument and opinion, both he himself, as being the Son of God, and they whom
he had taken to be his Menial and Domestic Servants, were free from this Tax
of Head-money, yearly to be paid to God. But rather than give offense, by
seeming to despise the Temple, and to undervalue that Authority that had
settled this Tribute, he resolves to put himself to the expense and charges of
a Miracle, and therefore commanded Peter to go to the Sea, and take up the
first Fish which came to his Hook, in whose mouth he should find a piece of
money (a Stater, in value a Shekel or half a Crown) which he took and gave to
the Collectors, both for his Master and himself.

7. OUR Lord after this, discoursing to them, how to carry themselves toward
their offending Brethren, Matthew. 18.21.
Peter being desirous to be more particularly informed in this matter, asked
our Savior, How often a man was obliged to forgive his Brother, in case of
offense and trespass, whether seven times were not enough? He told him, That
upon his Neighbors repentance, he was not only bound to do it seven times, but
until seventy times seven, that is, he must be indulgent to him, as often as the
offender returns and begs it, and heartily professes his sorrow and repentance.
Which he further illustrates by a plain and excellent Parable, and thence draws
this Conclusion, That the same measures, either of compassion or cruelty, which
men show to their fellow Brethren, they themselves shall meet with at the hands
of God, the Supreme Ruler and Justiciary of the World. Matthew. 19.16. Mark
10.17. Luke 18.18.
It was not long after when a brisk young man addressed himself to our Savior,
to know of him, by what methods he might best attain Eternal life. Our Lord, to
humble his confidence, bad him sell his Estate, and give it to the poor; and
putting himself under his discipline, he should have a much better treasure in
Heaven. The man was rich, and liked not the counsel, nor was he willing to
purchase happiness at such a rate; and accordingly went away under great sorrow
and discontent. Upon which Christ takes occasion to let them know, how hardly
those men would get to Heaven, who build their comfort and happiness upon the
plenty and abundance of these outward things. Peter taking hold of this
opportunity, asked, What return they themselves should make, who had quitted
and renounced whatever they had for his sake and service? Our Savior answers,
that no man should be a loser by his service; that, for their parts, they
should be recompensed with far greater privileges; and that whoever should
forsake houses or lands, kindred and relations, out of love to him, and his
Religion, should enjoy them again with infinite advantages in this World, if
consistent with the circumstances of their state, and those troubles and
persecutions which would necessarily arise from the profession of the Gospel:
however, they should have what would make infinite amends for all; Eternal life
in the other World.

8. OUR Savior in order to his last fatal journey to Jerusalem, that he might
the better comply with the prophecy that went before of him, sent two of his
Apostles, who in all probability were Peter and John, with an Authoritative
Commission to fetch him an Ass to ride on, (he had none of his own; he who was
rich, for our sakes made himself poor; Matthew. 21.1.
he lived upon charity all his life, had neither an Ass to ride on, nor an
House where to lay his head, no nor after his death a Tomb to lie in, but what
the charity of others provided for him) whereon being mounted, and attended
with the festivities of the people, he set forward in his journey; wherein
there appears an admirable mixture of humility and Majesty: The Ass he rode on
became the meanness and meekness of a Prophet; but his arbitrary Commission for
the fetching it, and the ready obedience of its owners, spoke the prerogative
of a King: The Palms born before him, the Garments strewn in his way, and the
joyful Hosannahs and Acclamations of the people, proclaim at once both the
Majesty of a Prince, and the Triumph of a Savior. For such expressions of joy
we find were usual in public and festival solemnities; thus the Herod. lib. 1.
in vit. Comm. p. 17.
Historian describing the Emperor Commodus his triumphant return to Rome, tells
us, that the Senate and whole people of Rome, to testify their mighty kindness
and veneration for him, came out of the City to meet him, (...), carrying Palms
and Laurels along with them, and throwing about all sorts of Flowers that were
then in season. Matthew. 26.17. Mark 14.12. Luke 22.7.
In this manner our Lord being entered the City, he soon after retired to
Bethany, whence he dispatched Peter and John, to make preparation for the
Passover; giving them instructions where he would have it kept. Accordingly
they found the person he had described to them, whom they followed home to his
house. H. Eccl. lib. 1. c 28. p. 104.
Whether this was the house of John the Evangelist (as Nicephorus tells us)
situate near Mount Sion, or of Simon the Leper, or of Nicodemus, or of Joseph
of Arimathea, as others severally conjecture, seeing none of the Evangelists
have thought fit to tell us, it may not become us curiously to enquire.

SECT. V. Of S. Peter, from the last Passover, till the death of Christ.
The Passover celebrated by our Lord and his Apostles. His washing their feet.
Peter' s imprudent modesty. The mystery and meaning of the action. The Traitor,
who. The Lord's Supper instituted. Peter' s confident promise of suffering with
and for Christ. Our Lord's dislike of his confidence, and foretelling his
denial. Their going to the Mount of Olives. Peter renews his resolution. His
indiscreet zeal and affection. Our Savior's Passion, why begun in a Garden.
The bitterness of his Ante-passion. The drowziness of Peter, and the two sons
of Zebedee. Our Lord's great candor toward them, and what it ought to teach
us. Christ' s apprehension, and Peter' s bold attempt upon Malchus. Christ
deserted by the Apostles. Peter' s following his Master to the Highpriests
Hall, and thrice denying him, with Oaths and Imprecations. The Galilean
dialect, what. The Cock-crowing, and Peter' s repentance upon it.

ALL things being now prepared, our Savior with his Apostles comes down for
the celebration of the Passover. And being entered into the house, they all
orderly took their places. Our Lord, who had always taught them by his
practice, no less than by his doctrine, did now particularly design to teach
them humility and charity by his own example. And that the instance might be
the greater, he underwent the meanest offices of the Ministry: toward the end
therefore of the Paschal Supper, he arose from the Table, John 13.4.
and laying aside his upper garment (which, according to the fashion of those
Eastern Countries, being long, was unfit for action) and himself taking a
Towel, and pouring water into a Basin, he began to wash all the Apostles feet;
not disdaining those of Judas himself. Coming to Peter, he would by no means
admit an instance of so much condescension. What? the Master do this to the
Servant? the Son of God to so vile a sinner? This made him a second time refuse
it, Thou shall never wash my feet. But our Lord soon corrects his imprudent
modesty, by telling him, That if he washed him not, he could have no part with
him: Insinuating the mystery of this action, which was to denote Remission of
sin, and the purifying virtue of the Spirit of Christ to be poured upon all
true Christians. Peter satisfied with this answer, soon altered his resolution,
Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands, and my head. If the case be so, let
me be washed all over, rather than come short of my portion in thee. This being
done, -- (...)

Noun. Paraphr. in loc.


he returned again to the Table, and acquainted them with the meaning and
tendency of this mystical action, and what force it ought to have upon them
toward one another. The washing it self denoted their inward and Spiritual
cleansing by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, symbolically typified and
represented by all the washings and Baptisms of the Mosaic Institution: The
washing of the feet respected our entire sanctification in our whole Spirit,
Soul and Body, no part being to be left impure. And then, that all this should
be done by so great a person, their Lord and Master, preached to their very
senses a Sermon of the greatest humility and condescension, and taught them how
little reason they had to boggle at the meanest offices of kindness and charity
toward others, when he himself had stooped to so low an abasure toward them.
And now he began more immediately to reflect upon his sufferings, and upon him,
who was to be the occasion of them; telling them that one of them would be the
Traitor to betray him. Whereat they were strangely troubled, and every one
began to suspect himself, till Peter (whose love and care for his Master
commonly made him start sooner than the rest) made signs to S. John, who lay in
our Savior's bosom, to ask him particularly who it was? which our Savior
presently did, by making them understand, that it was Judas Iscariot, who not
long after left the company.

2. AND now our Lord began the Institution of his Supper, that great solemn
Institution which he was resolved to leave behind him, to be constantly
celebrated in all Ages of the Church, as the standing monument of his love in
dying for mankind. For now he told them, that he himself must leave them, and
that whither he went, they could not come. Peter, John 13.36. Luke 22.31.
not well understanding what he meant, asked him whither it was that he was
going? Our Lord replied, It was to that place, whither he could not now follow
him: but that he should do it afterward: intimating the Martyrdom he was to
undergo for the sake of Christ. To which Peter answered, that he knew no reason
why he might not follow him, seeing that if it was even to the laying down of
his life for his sake, he was most ready and resolved to do it. Our Lord liked
not this over-confident presumption, and therefore told him, they were great
things which he promised, but that he took not the true measures of his own
strength, nor espied the snares and designs of Satan, who desired no better an
occasion than this, to sift and winnow them. But that he had prayed to Heaven
for him, That his faith might not fail: by which means being strengthened
himself, he should be obliged to strengthen and confirm his brethren. And
whereas he so confidently assured him, that he was ready to go along with him,
not only into prison, but even to death it self; our Lord plainly told him,
That notwithstanding all his confident and generous resolutions, before the
Cock crowed twice, that is, (...) -- (...). Tit. Bostr. Com. in Luc. 22. in
Bibl. Pp. Gr. Lat. Tom. 2. p. 829.
before three of the Clock in the morning, he would that very night three
several times deny his Master. With which answer our Lord wisely rebuked his
confidence, and taught him (had he understood the lesson) not to trust to his
own strength, but entirely to depend upon him, who is able to keep us from
falling. Withal insinuating, that though by his sin he would justly forfeit
the Divine grace and favor, yet upon his repentance he should be restored to
the honor of the Apostolate, as a certain evidence of the Divine goodness and
indulgence to him.

3. HAVING sung an Hymn, and concluded the whole affair, he left the house
where all these things had been transacted, Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14 26.
and went with his Apostles unto the Mount of Olives: where he again put them
in mind how much they would be offended at those things which he was now to
suffer; and Peter again renewed his resolute and undaunted promise of
suffering, and dying with him; yea, out of an excessive confidence told him,
That though all the rest should forsake and deny him, yet would not he deny
him. How far will zeal and an indiscreet affection transport even a good man
into vanity and presumption! Peter questions others, but never doubts himself.
So natural is self-love, so apt are we to take the fairest measures of our
selves. Nay, though our Lord had but a little before, once and again reproved
this vain humor, yet does he still, not only persist, but grow up in it. So
hardly are we brought to espy our own faults, or to be so thoroughly convinced
of them, as to correct and reform them. This confidence of his inspired all the
rest with a mighty courage, all the Apostles likewise assuring him of their
constant and unshaken adhering to him. Our Lord returning the same answer to
Peter which he had done before. From hence they went down into the Village of
Gethsemane, where, leaving the rest of the Apostles, he, accompanied with none
but Peter, James, and John, retired into a neighboring Garden, (whither, De
loc. Hebr. in voc. (...). p. 134.
Eusebius tells us, Christians even in his time were wont to come solemnly to
offer up their Prayers to Heaven, and where, as the Georg. Nub. Clim. 3. part.
5. p. 114.
Arabian Geographer informs us, a fair and stately Church was built to the
honor of the Virgin Mary) to enter upon the Ante-scene of the fatal Tragedy
that was now approaching; it bearing a very fit proportion (as some of the
Cyril. comment. in Joan. 18. Tom. 4. Theophylact. in Joan. 18.
Fathers have observed) that as the first Adam fell and ruined mankind in a
Garden, so a Garden should be the place where the second Adam should begin his
Passion, in order to the Redemption of the World. Gardens, which to us are
places of repose and pleasure, and scenes of divertisement and delight, were to
our Lord a school of Temptation, a Theater of great horrors and sufferings, and
the first approaches of the hour of darkness.

4. HERE it was that the Blessed Jesus labored under the bitterest Agony that
could fall upon humane Nature, which the holy Story describes by words
sufficiently expressive of the highest grief and sorrow, he was afraid,
sorrowful, and very heavy, yea, his Soul was (...), exceeding sorrowful, and
that even unto death, he was sore amazed, and very heavy, he was troubled,
(...), his Soul was shaken with a vehement commotion; yea, he was in an Agony,
a word by which the Greeks are wont to represent the greatest conflicts and
anxieties. The effect of all which was, that he prayed more earnestly, offering
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, as the Apostle
expounds it, and sweat, as it were, great drops of blood falling to the ground.
What this bloody sweat was, and how far natural or extraordinary, I am not now
concerned to enquire. Certain it is, it was a plain evidence of the most
intense grief and sadness: for if an extreme fear or trouble will many times
cast us into a cold sweat, how great must be the commotion and conflict of our
Savior's mind, which could force open the pores of his body, locked up by the
coldness of the night, and make not drops of sweat, but great drops, or (as the
word (...) signifies) clods of blood to issue from them. While our Lord was
thus contending with these Ante-Passions, the three Apostles, whom he had left
at some distance from him, being tired out with watching, and disposed by the
silence of the Night, were fallen fast asleep. Our Lord, who had made three
several addresses unto Heaven, that if it might consist with his Father's will,
this bitter Cup might pass from him, (expressing herein the harmless and
innocent desires of humane Nature, which always studies its own preservation)
between each of them came to visit the Apostles, and calling to Peter, asked
him, Whether they could not watch with him one hour? advising them to watch and
pray, that they entered not into temptation, adding this Argument, That the
spirit indeed was willing, but that the flesh was weak, and that therefore
there was the more need that they should stand upon their guard. Observe here
the incomparable sweetness, the generous candor of our blessed Savior, to pass
so charitable a censure upon an action, from whence malice and ill nature might
have drawn monsters and prodigies, and have represented it black as the shades
of darkness. The request which our Lord made to these Apostles, was infinitely
reasonable, to watch with him in this bitter Agony, their company at least
being some refreshment to one, under such sad fatal circumstances; and this but
for a little time, one hour, it would soon be over, and then they might freely
consult their own ease and safety: 'Twas their dear Lord and Master, whom they
now were to attend upon, ready to lay down his life for them, sweating already
under the first skirmishes of his sufferings, and expecting every moment when
all the powers of darkness would fall upon him. But all these considerations
were drowned in a profound security, the men were fast asleep, and though often
awakened and told of it, regarded it not, as if nothing but ease and softness
had been then to be dreamed of. An action that looked like the most prodigious
ingratitude, and the highest unconcernedness for their Lord and Master, and
which one would have thought had argued a very great coldness and indifferency
of affection toward him. But he would not set it upon the Tenters, nor stretch
it to what it might easily have been drawn to: he imputes it not to their
unthankfulness, or want of affection, nor to their carelessness of what became
of him, but merely to their infirmity and the weakness of their bodily temper,
himself making the excuse, when they could make none for themselves, the spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Hereby teaching us, to put the most
candid and favorable construction upon those actions of others, which are
capable of various interpretations, and rather with the Be to suck honey, than
with the Spider to draw poison from them. His last Prayer being ended, he came
to them, and told them with a gentle rebuke, That now they might sleep on if
they pleased, that the hour was at hand, that he should be betrayed, and
delivered into the hands of men.

5. WHILE he was thus discoursing to them, a Band of Soldiers sent from the
Highpriests, with the Traitor Judas to conduct and direct them, rushed into
the Garden, and seized upon him: which when the Apostles saw, they asked him
whether they should attempt his rescue. Peter (whose ungovernable zeal put him
upon all dangerous undertakings) without staying for an answer, drew his Sword,
and espying one more busy than the rest in laying hold upon our Savior, which
was Malchus (who, though carrying Kingship in his name, was but Servant to the
High Priest) struck at him, with an intention to dispatch him: but God
overruling the stroke, it only cut off his right Ear. Our Lord liked not this
wild and unwarrantable zeal, and therefore entreated their patience, whilst he
miraculously healed the Wound. And turning to Peter, bad him put up his Sword
again; told him, that they who unwarrantably use the Sword, should themselves
perish by it; that there was no need of these violent and extravagant courses;
that if he had a mind to be rid of his Keepers, he could ask his Father, who
would presently send more than twelve Legions of Angels to his rescue and
deliverance: But he must drink the Cup which his Father had put into his hand:
for how else should the Scriptures be fulfilled, which had expressly foretold,
That these things must be? Whereupon, all the Apostles forsook him, and fled
from him; and they who before in their promises were as bold as Lions, now it
came to it, like fearful and timorous Hares, ran away from him: Peter and John,
though staying last with him, yet followed the same way with the rest,
preferring their own safety, before the concernments of their Master.

Matthew. 26.57. Mark 14.53. Luke 22.54. John 18.12.
6. NO sooner was he apprehended by the Soldiers, and brought out of the
Garden, but he was immediately posted from one Tribunal to another, brought
first to Annas, then carried to Caiaphas, where the Jewish Sanhedrim met
together in order to his Trial and Condemnation. Peter having a little
recovered himself, and gotten loose from his fears, probably encouraged by his
Companion S. John, returns back to seek his Master: And finding them leading
him to the Highpriests Hall, followed afar off, to see what would be the event
and issue. But coming to the Door, could get no admittance, till one of the
Disciples who was acquainted there, went out and persuaded the Servant, who
kept the Door, to let him in. Being let into the Hall, where the Servants and
Officers stood round the Fire, Peter also came thither to warm himself, where
being espied by the Servant-maid that let him in, she earnestly looking upon
him, charged him with being one of Christ's Disciples; which Peter publicly
denied before all the Company, positively affirming, that he knew him not; And
presently withdrew himself into the Porch, where he heard the Cock crow: An
intimation, which one would have thought should have awakened his Conscience
into a quick sense of his duty, and the promise he had made unto his Master. In
the Porch, another of the Maids set upon him, charging him that he also was one
of them that had been with Jesus of Nazareth: which Peter stoutly denied,
saying, that he knew not Christ; and the better to gain their belief to what he
said, ratified it with an Oath. So natural is it for one sin to draw on another.

7. ABOUT an Hour after, he was a third time set upon, by a Servant of the
High Priest, Malchus his Kinsman, whose Ear Peter had lately cut off: By him he
was charged to be one of Christ's Disciples; Yea, that his very speech betrayed
him to be a Galilean. For the Galileans, though they did not speak a different
language, had yet a different Dialect, using a more confused and barbarous, a
broader and more unpolished way of pronunciation than the rest of the Jews;
whereby they were easily distinguishable in their speaking from other men:
abundant instances whereof there are extant in the Talmad at this day. Nay, not
only gave this evidence, but added, that he himself had seen him with Jesus in
the Garden. Peter still resolutely denied the matter, and to add the highest
accomplishment to his sin, ratified it not only with an Oath, but a solemn
Curse and execration, that he was not the person, that he knew not the man.
It Is but a very weak excuse, which Been negavit hominem, quem sciebat deum.
Ambr. in Luc. 22. Tom. 5. p. 157. vid. Hilar. comment. in Matthew. p. 328.
S. Ambrose, and some others make for this Act of Peter's, in saying, I knew
not the Man. He did well (says he) to deny him to be Man, whom he knew to be
God. Hieron. in Matthew. 26. p. 81. Tom. 9. vid. August. in Joan. Tract. lxvi.
col. 417. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom takes notice of this pious and well-meant excuse made for Peter,
though out of modesty he conceals the name of its Authors, but yet justly
censures it as trifling and frivolous, and which to excuse Man from folly,
would charge God with falsehood: for if he did not deny him, then our Lord was
out, when he said, that, that Night he should thrice deny him, that is, his
Person, and not only his humanity. Certainly the best Apology that can be made
for Peter is, that he quickly repented of this great sin; for no sooner had he
done it, but the Cock crew again; at which intimation our Savior turned about,
and earnestly looked upon him: a glance that quickly pierced him to the Heart,
and brought to his remembrance, what our Lord had once and again foretold him
of, how foully and shamefully he should deny him: whereupon not being able to
contain his sorrow, he ran out of Doors to give it vent, and wept bitterly,
passionately bewailing his folly, and the aggravations of his sin; thereby
endeavoring to make some reparation for his fault, and recover himself into
the favor of Heaven, and to prevent the execution of Divine Justice, by taking
a severe revenge upon himself: by these penitential tears he endeavored to
wash off his guilt; as indeed Repentance is the next step to Innocence.

SECT. VI. Of S. Peter, from Christ's Resurrection, till his Ascension.
Our Lord's care to acquaint Peter with his Resurrection. His going to the
Sepulcher. Christ's appearance to Peter, when, and the Reasons of it: The
Apostles Journey into Galilee: Christ's appearing to them at the Sea of
Tiberias; His being discovered by the great draught of Fishes. Christ's
questioning Peter's love, and why. Feed my Sheep, commended to Peter, imports
no peculiar supereminent power and sovereignty. Peter's death and sufferings
foretold. Our Lord takes his last leave of the Apostles at Bethany. His
Ascension into Heaven. The Chapel of the Ascension. The Apostles joy at their
Lord's Exaltation.

1. WHAT became of Peter after his late Prevarication, whether he followed our
Savior through the several stages of his Trial, and personally attended, as a
Mourner at the Funerals of his Master, we have no account left upon Record. No
doubt he stayed at Jerusalem, and probably with S. John, together with whom we
first find him mentioned, when both setting forwards to the Sepulcher: which
was in this manner. Early on that Morning, whereon our Lord was to return from
the Grave, Mark 16.1.
Mary Magdalen, and some other devout and pious Women brought Spices and
Ointments, with a design to Imbalm the Body of our crucified Lord. Coming to
the Sepulcher at Sunrising, and finding the Door open, they entered in, where
they were suddenly saluted by an Angel, who told them, that Jesus was risen,
and bad them go and acquaint his Apostles, and particularly Peter, that he was
returned from the dead; and that he would go before them into Galilee, where
they should meet with him. Hereupon they returned back, and acquainted the
Apostles with what had passed, who beheld the story as the product of a weak
frighted fancy. But Peter and John presently hastened toward the Garden; John
being the younger and nimbler, Luke 24.12. John 20.2.
out-ran his Companion, and came first thither, where he only looked, but
entered not in, either out of fear in himself, or a great Reverence to our
Savior, Peter, though behind in space, was before in zeal, and being elder and
more considerate, came and resolutely entered in, where they found nothing but
the Linen Clothes lying together in one place, and the Napkin that was about
his Head wrapped together in another; which being disposed with so much care
and order, showed (what was falsely suggested by the Jews) that our Savior's
Body was not taken away by Thieves, who are wont more to consult their escape,
than how to leave things orderly disposed behind them.

2. THE same Day about Noon we may suppose it was, that our Lord himself
appeared alone to Peter; 1 Cor. 15.5.
being assured of the thing, though not so precisely of the time. That he did
so, S. Paul expressly tells us; and so did the Apostles the two Disciples that
came from Emmaus, Luke 24.34.
The Lord is risen, and has appeared unto Simon: which probably intimates,
that it was before his appearing to those two Disciples. And indeed we cannot
but think that our Lord would hasten the manifestation of himself to him, as
compassionating his case, being overwhelmed with sorrow for the late shameful
denial of his Master: and was therefore willing in the first place to honor
him with his presence, at once to confirm him in the Article of his
Resurrection, and to let him see, that he was restored to the place which
before he had in his grace and favor. S. Paul mentioning his several
appearances after his Resurrection, seems to make this the first of them, That
he was seen of Cephas. Not that it was simply the first, for he first appeared
to the Women. But as (...). Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. c. 15. Hom. 38. p. 666 Ibid.
p. 667.
Chrysostom observes, it was the first, that was made to men. He was first seen
by him who most desired to see him. He also adds several probable conjectures,
why our Lord first discovered himself to Peter: As, that it required a more
than ordinary firmness and resolution of mind, to be able to bear such a sight:
For they who beheld him after others had seen him, and had heard their frequent
Testimonies and Reports, had had their Faith greatly prepared and encouraged to
entertain it; But he who was to be honored with the first appearance had need
of a bigger, and more undaunted Faith, left he should be overborn, (...), with
such a strange and unwonted sight: That Peter was the first that had made a
signal confession of his Master, and therefore it was fit and reasonable, that
he should first see him alive after his Resurrection: That Peter had lately
denied his Lord, the grief whereof lay hard upon him, that therefore our
Savior was willing to administer some consolation to him, and as soon as might
be to let him see, that he had not cast him off; like the kind Samaritan, he
made haste to help him, and to pour Oil into his wounded Conscience.

3. SOME time after this, the Apostles began to resolve upon their journey into
Galilee, as he himself had commanded them. If it be enquired why they went no
sooner, seeing this was the first message and intimation, they had received
from him; Comment. in Luc. 24. in fin. p. 170. Tom. 5.
S. Ambrose his resolution seems very rational, that our Lord indeed had
commanded them to go thither, but that their fears for some time kept them at
home; not being as yet fully satisfied in the truth of his Resurrection, till
our Lord by often appearing to them, had confirmed their minds, and put the
case beyond all dispute. They went, as we may suppose, in several Companies,
lest going all in one Body, they should awaken the power and malice of their
enemies, and alarm the care and vigilance of the state, which by reason of the
Noise that our Savior's Trial and Execution had made up and down the City and
Country, John 21.1.
was yet full of jealousies and fears. We find Peter, Thomas, Nathanael, and
the two Sons of Zebedee, and two more of the Disciples arrived at some Town
about the Sea of Tiberias: Where, the Providence of God guiding the Instance of
their employment, Peter accompanied with the rest, returns to his old Trade of
Fishing. They labored all Night, but caught nothing. Early in the Morning a
grave Person, probably in the habit of a Traveller, presents himself upon the
shore: And calling to them, asked them whether they had any meat: When they
told him, No; He advised them to cast the Net on the right side of the Ship,
that so the Miracle might not seem to be the effect of chance, and they should
not fail to speed. They did so, and the Net presently enclosed so great a
draught, that they were scarce able to drag it a shore. S. John amazed with the
strangeness of the matter, told Peter that surely this must be the Lord, whom
the Winds and the Sea, and all the Inhabitants of that watery Region were so
ready to obey. Peter's zeal presently took fire, notwithstanding the coldness
of the Season, and impatient of the least moments being kept from the company
of his dear Lord and Master, -- (...), Nonn. Paraphr. in loc.
without any consideration of the danger to which he exposed himself, he girt
his Fishers Coat about him, and throwing himself into the Sea, swam to shore,
not being able to stay till the Ship could arrive, which came presently after.
Landing, they found a Fire ready made, and Fish laid upon it, either
immediately created by his Divine power, or which came to the shore of its own
accord, and offered it self to his hand. Which notwithstanding, he commands
them to bring of the Fish which they had lately caught, and prepare it for
their Dinner, He himself dining with them; both that he might give them an
instance of mutual love and fellowship, and also assure them of the truth of
his humane nature, since his return from the dead.

4. DINNER being ended, our Lord more particularly addressed himself to Peter;
urging him to the utmost diligence in his care of Souls: and because he knew,
that nothing but a mighty love to himself could carry him through the troubles
and hazards of so dangerous and difficult an employment; an employment attended
with all the impediments, which either the perverseness of men, or the malice
and subtilty of the Devil could cast in the way to hinder it; therefore he
first enquired of him, whether he loved him more than the rest of the Apostles,
herein mildly reproving his former over-confident resolution, that though all
the rest should deny him, yet would not he deny him. Peter modestly replied,
not censuring others, much less preferring himself before them, that our Lord
knew the integrity of his affection toward him. This Question he puts three
several times to Peter, who as often returned the same Answer: It being but
just and reasonable, that he who by a threefold denial had given so much cause
to question should now by a threefold confession (...). Isid. Pelus. lib. 1.
Ep. 103. p. 27. Redditur negationi trinae trina Confessio, ne minus amori
lingua serviat, quam timori; and plus vocis elicuisse videatur mors imminens,
quam vita praesens. Aug. in Joan. Tract. 123. col. 566. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.
give more than ordinary assurance of his sincere affection to his Master.
Peter was a little troubled at this frequent questioning of his love, and
therefore more expressly appeals to our Lord's omnisciency, that He who knew all
things, must needs know that he loved him. To each of these confessions our
Lord added this signal trial of his affection; then, Feed my sheep, that is,
faithfully instruct and teach them, carefully rule and guide them, persuade,
not compel them, feed, not fleece, nor kill them. And so it is plain S. Peter
himself understood it, by the charge which he gives to the Guides and Rulers of
the Church, that they should feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind: Neither as being Lords over God's heritage, but as examples to the flock.
But that by feeding Christ's Sheep and Lambs, here commended to S. Peter,
should be meant an universal and uncontrollable Monarchy and Dominion over the
whole Christian Church, and that over the Apostles themselves and their
Successors in ordinary, and this power and supremacy solely invested in S.
Peter, and those who were to succeed him in the Sea of Rome, is so wild an
inference, and such a melting down words to run into any shape, as could never
with any face have been offered, or been possible to have been imposed upon the
belief of mankind, if men had not first subdued their reason to their interest,
and captivated both to an implicit faith and a blind obedience. For granting
that our Lord here addressed his speech only unto Peter, yet the very same
power in equivalent terms is elsewhere indifferently granted to all the
Apostles, and in some measure to the ordinary Pastors and Governors of the
Church: As when our Lord told them, That all power was given him in Heaven and
in Earth, by virtue whereof they should go teach and baptize all Nations, and
preach the Gospel to every Creature: That they should feed God's flock, Rule
well, inspect and watch over those over whom they had the Authority and the
Rule. Words of as large and more express signification, than those which were
here spoken to S. Peter.

5. OUR Lord having thus engaged Peter to a cheerful compliance with the
dangers that might attend the discharge and execution of his Office, now
particularly intimates to him what that fate was that should attend him:
telling him, that though when he was young he girt himself, lived at his own
pleasure, and went whither he pleased; yet when he was old, he should stretch
forth his hands, and another should gird and bind him, and lead him whither he
had no mind to go: intimating, as the Evangelist tells us, by what death he
should glorify God, that is, by Crucifixion, the Martyrdom which he afterward
underwent. And then rising up, commanded him to follow him; by this bodily
attendance mystically implying his conformity to the death of Christ, that he
should follow him in dying for the truth and testimony of the Gospel. It was
not long after, Acts 1.8. Luke 24.49.
that our Lord appeared to them to take his last farewell of them, when leading
them out unto Bethany, a little Village upon the Mount of Olives, he briefly
told them, That they were the persons, whom he had chosen to be the witnesses
both of his Death and Resurrection; a testimony which they should bear to him
in all parts of the World: In order to which he would after his Ascension pour
out his Spirit upon them in larger measures, than they had hitherto received,
that they might be the better fortified to grapple with that violent rage and
fury, wherewith both Men and Devils would endeavor to oppose them; and that in
the mean time they should return to Jerusalem, and stay till these miraculous
powers were from on high conferred upon them. His discourse being ended, laying
his hands upon them, he gave them his solemn blessing; which done, he was
immediately taken from them, and being attended with a glorious guard and train
of Angels, was received up into Heaven. Paulin Epist. 3. ad Sever. lib. 2. p.
130 Sulp. Sever. Hist. Sacr. lib. 2. p. 145. Hieron. de loc. Heb. in Act. App.
p. 297. Tom. 3.
Antiquity tells us, that in the place where he last trod upon the rock, the
impression of his feet did remain, which could never afterward be filled up or
impaired, over which Helena, Mother of the Great Constantine, afterward built
a little Chapel, called the Chapel of the Ascension; in the floor whereof
upon a whitish kind of stone, modern J. Cotovic. Itin. lib. 2. c. 11. p. 271.
vid. Sands Relat. lib. 3. p. 156.
Travelers tell us, that the impression of his Foot is showed at this day; but
it is that of his right foot only, the other being taken away by the Turks, and
as it is said, kept in the Temple at Jerusalem. Our Lord being thus taken from
them, the Apostles were filled with a greater sense of his glory and majesty,
than while he was wont familiarly to converse with them; and having performed
their solemn adorations to him, Luke 24.52.
returned back to Jerusalem, waiting for the promise of the Holy Ghost, which
was shortly after conferred upon them. They worshipped him, and returned to
Jerusalem with great joy. They who lately were overwhelmed with sorrow at the
very mention of their Lord's departure from them, entertained it now with joy
and triumph, being fully satisfied of his glorious advancement at God's right
hand, and of that particular care and providence which they were sure he would
exercise toward them, in pursuance of those great trusts he had committed to
them.

SECT. VII. S. Peter's Acts, from our Lord's Ascension, till the Dispersion of
the Church.
The Apostles return to Jerusalem. The (...), or upper-room where they
assembled, what. Peter declares the necessity of a new Apostles being chosen in
the room of Judas. The promise of the Holy Ghost made good upon the day of
Pentecost. The Spirit descended in the likeness of fiery cloven tongues, and
why. The greatness of the Miracle. Peter's vindication of the Apostles from the
slanders of the Jews, and proving Christ to be the promised Messiah. Great
numbers converted by his Sermon. His going up to the Temple. What their stated
hours of Prayer. His curing the impotent Gripple there, and discourse to the
Jews upon it. What numbers converted by him. Peter and John seized, and cast
into Prison. Brought before the Sanhedrim, and their resolute carriage there.
Their refusing to obey, when commanded not to preach Christ. The great security
the Christian Religion provides for subjection to Magistrates in all lawful
instances of Obedience. The severity used by Peter toward Ananias and
Saphirak. The great Miracles wrought by him. Again cast into Prison, and
delivered by an Angel. Their appearing before the Sanhedrim; and deliverance,
by the prudent counsels of Gamaliel.

1. THE Holy Jesus being gone to Heaven, the Apostles began to act according to
the Power and Commission he had left with them. In order whereunto, the first
thing they did after his Ascension, was to fill up the vacancy in their
College, lately made by the unhappy fall and Apostasy of Judas. To which end
no sooner were they returned to Jerusalem, but they went (...), into an
upper-room. Where this (...) was, whether in the house of S. John, or of Mary
John-Mark's Mother, or in some of the out-rooms belonging to the Temple, (for
the Temple had over the Cloisters several Chambers for the service of the
Priests and Levites, and as Repositories, where the consecrated Vessels and
Utensils of the Temple were laid up, though it be not probable, that the Jews,
and especially the Priests would suffer the Apostles and their company to be so
near the Temple) I stand not to enquire. It Is certain that the Jews usually had
their (...), private Oratories in the upper parts of their houses, called
(...), Dan. 6.10.
for the more private exercises of their devotions. Thus Daniel had his (...),
his upper-Chamber ((...) the LXX. render it) whither he was wont to retire to
pray to his God: and Benj. Itiner. p. 76.
Benjamin the Jew tells us, that in his time ( Ann. Chr. 1172.) the Jews at
Babylon were wont to pray both in their Synagogues, (...), and in that ancient
upper-room of Daniel, which the Prophet himself built. Such an (...), or
upper-Chamber, Acts 20.8.
was that wherein S. Paul preached at Troas: and such probably this, where the
Apostles were now met together, and in all likelihood the same, where our Lord
had lately kept the Passover, where the Apostles and the Church were assembled
on the day of Pentecost, and which was then the usual place of their Religious
Assemblies, as we have elsewhere observed more at Prim. Christ. Part 1. Chapter 6.
p. 126.
large. Here the Church being met, to the number of about CXX, Peter, as
President of the Assembly, Acts 1.15.
put them in mind, that Judas, one of our Lord's Apostles, being betrayed by
his own covetous and insatiable mind, had lately fallen from the honor of his
place and ministry: that this was no more than what the Prophet had long since
foretold should come to pass, and that the rule and oversight in the Church,
which had been committed unto him, should be devolved upon another: that
therefore it was highly necessary, that one should be substituted in his room,
and especially such a one as had been familiarly conversant with our Savior,
from first to last, that so he might be a competent witness both of his
doctrine and miracles, his life and death, but especially of his Resurrection
from the dead. For seeing no evidence is so valid and satisfactory, as the
testimony of an eyewitness, the Apostles all along mainly insisted upon this,
that they delivered no other things concerning our Savior to the World, than
what they themselves had seen and heard. And seeing his rising from the Dead
was a principle likely to meet with a great deal of opposition, and which would
hardliest gain belief and entertainment with the minds of men, therefore they
principally urged this at every turn, that they were eyewitnesses of his
Resurrection, that they had seen, felt, eaten, and familiarly conversed with
him after his return from the Grave. That therefore such an Apostle might be
chosen, two Candidates were proposed, Joseph called Barsabas, and Matthias. And
having prayed, that the Divine Providence would immediately guide and direct
the choice, they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, who was accordingly
admitted into the number of the twelve Apostles.

Acts 2.1.
2. FIFTY days since the last Passover being now run out, made way for the
Feast of Pentecost. At what time the great promise of the Holy Ghost was fully
made good unto them. The Christian Assembly being met together, for the public
services of their Worship, on a sudden a sound, like that of a mighty wind,
rushed in upon them; representing the powerful efficacy of that Divine Spirit,
that was now to be communicated to them: After which there appeared little
flames of fire, which in the fashion of Cloven Tongues, not only descended, but
sat upon each of them, probably to note their perpetual enjoyment of this gift
upon all occasions, that when necessary, they should never be without it; not
like the Prophetic gifts of old, which were conferred but sparingly, and only
at some particular times and seasons. Numb. 11.25.
As the seventy Elders prophesied and ceased not, but it was only at such times
as the Spirit came down and rested upon them. Hereupon they were all
immediately filled with the Holy Ghost, which enabled them in an instant to
speak several Languages, which they had never learned, and probably never heard
of, together with other miraculous gifts and powers. Thus as the confounding of
Languages became a curse to the old World, separating men from all mutual
offices of kindness and commerce, rendering one part of Mankind Barbarians to
another: so here the multiplying several Languages became a blessing, being
intended as the means to bring men of all Nations into the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, into the fellowship of that Religion,
that would banish discords, cement differences, and unite men's hearts in the
bond of peace. The report of so sudden and strange an action presently spread
it self into all corners of the City, and there being at that time at Jerusalem
multitudes of Jewish Proselytes, Devout men out of every Nation under Heaven,
Parthians, Medes, Elamites (or Persians) the dwellers in Mesopotamia and
Judaea, Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia minor, from Phrygia and Pamphylia, from
Egypt and the parts of Libya and Cyrene, from Rome, from Crete, from Arabia,
Jews and Proselytes (probably drawn thither by the general report and
expectation which had spread it self over all the Percrebuerat Orient toto
vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Judaea profecti rerum
potirentur. Id de imperatore, etc. Sueton. in vit. Vespas. c. 4. p. 728. eadem
habet Tacitus Histor. l. 5. c. 13. p. 540.
Eastern parts, and in a manner over all places of the Roman Empire, of the
Jewish Messiah, that about this time should be born at Jerusalem) they no
sooner heard of it, but universally flocked to this Christian Assembly: where
they were amazed to hear these Galileans speaking to them in their own native
Languages, so various, so vastly different from one another. And it could not
but exceedingly increase the wonder to reflect upon the meanness and
inconsiderableness of the persons, neither assisted by natural parts, nor
polished by education, nor improved by use and custom: which three things
Philosophers require to render a man accurate and extraordinary in any art or
discipline, (...), (...). p. 2.
says Plutarch; Natural disposition without institution is blind, instruction
without a genius and disposition is defective, and exercise without both is
lame and imperfect. Whereas these Disciples had not one of these to set them
off; their parts were mean, below the rate of the common people, the Galileans
being generally accounted the rudest and most stupid of the whole Jewish
Nation; their education had been no higher than to catch Fish, and to mend
Nets; nor had they been used to plead causes, or to deliver themselves before
great Assemblies; but spoke on a sudden, not premeditated discourses, not idle
stories, or wild roving fancies, but the great and admirable works of God, and
the mysteries of the Gospel beyond humane apprehensions to find out, and this
delivered in almost all the Languages of the then known World. Men were
severally affected with it, according to their different tempers and
apprehensions. Some admiring, and not knowing what to think on it, others
deriding it, said, that it was nothing else but the wild raving effect of
drunkenness and intemperance. At so wild a rate are men of profane minds wont
to talk, when they take upon them to pass their censure in the things of God.

3. HEREUPON the Apostles rose up, and Peter in the name of the rest, took this
occasion of discoursing to them: He told them, that this scandalous slander
proceeded from the spirit of malice and falsehood; that their censure was as
uncharitable, as it was unreasonable; that they that are drunken, are drunk in
the night; that it was against nature and custom for men to be in drink so
soon, too early for such a suspicion to take place, (...). Joseph. de vit. sua,
p. 1020.
it being now but about nine of the clock, the hour for Morning Prayer, till
when men even of ordinary sobriety and devotion on Festival days were wont to
fast. That these extraordinary and miraculous passages were but the
accomplishment of an ancient prophecy, the fulfilling of what God had expressly
foretold should come to pass in the times of the Messiah; that Jesus of
Nazareth had evidently approved himself to be the Messiah sent from God by many
unquestionable miracles, of which they themselves had been eyewitnesses: And
though by God's permission, who had determined by this means to bring about the
Salvation of mankind, they had wickedly crucified and slain him, yet that God
had raised him from the dead: That it was not possible he should be holden
always under the dominion of the Grave; nor was it consistent with the justice
and goodness of God, and especially with those Divine predictions which had
expressly foretold he should rise again from the dead: David having more
particularly foretold, That his flesh should rest in hope, that God would not
leave his Soul in Hell, neither suffer his holy one to see corruption; but
would make known to him the ways of life: That this prophecy could not be meant
concerning David himself, by whom it was spoken, he having many Ages since been
turned to ashes, his body resolved into rottenness and putrefaction, his Tomb
yet visible among them, from whence he never did return; that therefore it must
needs have been prophetically spoken concerning Christ, having never been truly
fulfilled in any but him, who both died, and was risen again, whereof they were
witnesses. Yea, that he was not only risen from the dead, but ascended into
Heaven, and according to David's prediction, Sat down on God's right hand,
until he made his Enemies his footstool: which could not be primarily meant of
David, he never having yet bodily ascended into Heaven; that therefore the
whole house of Israel ought to believe, and take notice, that this very Jesus,
whom they had crucified, was the person whom God had appointed to be the
Messiah and the Savior of his Church.

4. THIS discourse in every part of it, like so many daggers, pierced them to
the heart; who thereupon cried out to Peter and his Brethren to know what they
should do. Peter told them, that there was no other way, than by an hearty and
sincere repentance, and a being baptized into the Religion of this crucified
Savior, to expiate their guilt, to obtain pardon of sin, and the gifts and
benefits of the Holy Ghost. That upon these terms the promises of the new
Covenant, which was ratified by the death of Christ, did belong to them, and
their children, and to all that should effectually believe and embrace the
Gospel: Further pressing and persuading them by doing thus, to save themselves
from that unavoidable ruin and destruction, which this wicked and untoward
generation of obstinate unbelieving Jews were shortly to be exposed to. The
effects of his preaching were strange and wonderful: as many as believed were
baptized: there being that day added to the Church no less than three thousand
souls. A quick and plentiful harvest; the late sufferings of our Savior, as
yet fresh bleeding in their memories, the present miraculous powers of the Holy
Ghost, that appeared upon them, the zeal of his Auditors, though heretofore
misplaced and misguided, and above all, the efficacy of Divine grace,
contributing to this numerous conversion.

5. THOUGH the converting so vast a multitude might justly challenge a place
amongst the greatest miracles, yet the Apostles began now more particularly to
exercise their miraculous power. Acts 3.1.
Peter and John going up to the Temple, about three of the clock in the
afternoon, toward the conclusion of one of the solemn hours of prayer, (for
the Jews divided their day into four greater hours, each quarter containing
three lesser under it, three of which were public and stated times of prayer,
instituted ( say they) by the three great Patriarchs of their Nation; Vid.
Drusan Acts 3.1.
the first from six of the clock in the morning till nine, called hence the
third hour of the day, instituted by Abraham, this was called (...) or morning
prayer: the second from nine till twelve, called the sixth hour, and this hour
of prayer ordained by Isaac, this was called (...) or midday prayer: the third
from twelve till three in the afternoon, called the ninth hour, appointed by
Jacob, called (...) or evening prayer; and at this hour it was that these two
Apostles went up to the Temple, where) they found a poor impotent Cripple, who,
though above forty years old, had been lame from his Birth, lying at the
beautiful Gate of the Temple, and asking an Alms of them. Peter earnestly
looking on him, told him, he had no money to give him, but that he would give
him that which was a great deal better, restore him to his health; and lifting
him up by the hand, commanded him in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth to rise up
and walk. The word was no sooner said, than the thing was done: Immediately the
Nerves and Sinews were enlarged, and the Joints returned to their proper use.
The man standing up went into the Temple walking, leaping, and praising God.
The beholding so sudden and extraordinary a Cure begot great admiration in the
minds of the People, whose curiosity drew them to the Apostles to see those who
had been the Authors of it. Which Peter taking notice of, began to discourse to
them to this effect; That there was no reason they should wonder at them, as if
by their own skill and art they had wrought this Cure, it being entirely done
in the Name of their crucified Master, by the Power of that very Christ, that
Holy and Just Person, whom they themselves had denied and delivered up to
Pilate, and preferred a Rebel and a Murderer before him, when his Judge was
resolved to acquit him: and that though they had put him to death, yet that
they were witnesses that God had raised him up again, and that He was gone to
Heaven, where he must remain till the times of the General Restitution: That he
presumed that this in them, as also in their Rulers, was in a great measure the
effect of ignorance, and the not being thoroughly convinced of the Greatness and
Divinity of his Person; which yet God made use of for the bringing about his
Wise and Righteous Designs, the accomplishing of what he had foretold
concerning Christ's Person and Sufferings, by Moses and Samuel, and all the
holy Prophets which had been since the World began: That therefore it was now
high time for them to repent, and turn to God, that their great wickedness
might be expiated, and that when Christ should shortly come in Judgment upon
the Jewish Nation, it might be a time of comfort and refreshing to them, what
would be of vengeance and destruction to other men: that they were the peculiar
persons, to whom the blessings of the promises did primarily appertain, and
unto whom God in the first place sent his Son, that he might derive his
blessing upon them by turning them away from their iniquities. While Peter was
thus discoursing to the People in one place, we may suppose that John was
preaching to them in another; and the success was answerable. The Apostles cast
out the seed, and God immediately gave the increase. There being by this means
no fewer than Five Thousand brought over to the Faith: Acts 4.4.
though it is possible the whole Body of Believers might be comprehended in that
Number.

6. WHILE the Apostles were thus Preaching, Acts 4.1.
the Priests and Sadducees (who particularly appeared in this business, as
being enemies to all tumults, or what ever might disturb their present ease and
quiet, the only portion of happiness they expected; besides that they hated
Christianity, because so expressly asserting the Resurrection) being vexed to
hear this Doctrine vented amongst the People, intimated to the Magistrate, that
this Concourse might probably tend to an Uproar and Insurrection: Whereupon
they came with the Captain of the Temple (Commander of the Tower of Antonia,
which stood close by, on the North side of the Temple, wherein was a Roman
Garrison to prevent or suppress, especially at Festival times, Popular Tumults
and Uproars) who seized on the Apostles, and put them into Prison. The next Day
they were convented before the Jewish Sanhedrim; and being asked by what Power
and Authority they had done this; Peter resolutely answered, That as to the
Cure done to this impotent Person, Be it known to them and all the Jews, that
it was perfectly wrought in the Name of that Jesus of Nazareth, whom they
themselves had crucified, and God had raised from the dead, and whom, though
they had thrown him by as waste and rubbish, yet, God had made head of the
corner; and that there was no other way, wherein they, or others, could expect
salvation, but by this crucified Savior. Great was the boldness of the
Apostles, admired by the Sanhedrim it self, in this matter; especially if we
consider, that this probably was the very Court that had so lately sentenced
and condemned their Master, and being fleshed in such sanguinary proceedings,
had no other way but to go on and justify one cruelty with another: that the
Apostles did not say these things in corners, and behind the curtain, but to
their very faces, and that in the open Court of Judicature, and before all the
people: That the Apostles had not been used to plead in such public places,
nor had been polished with the Arts of education, but were ignorant unlearned
men, known not to be versed in the study of the Jewish Law.

7. THE Council (which all this while had beheld them with a kind of wonder,
and now remembered that they had been the companions and attendants of the late
crucified Jesus) commanded them to withdraw, and debated amongst themselves
what they should do with them. The Miracle they could not deny, the fact being
so plain and evident, and therefore resolved strictly to charge them, that they
should Preach no more in the Name of Jesus. Being called in again, they
acquainted them with the Resolution of the Council, to which Peter and John
replied, That they could by no means yield obedience to it, appealing to
themselves, whether it was not more fit, that they should obey God, rather than
them: And that they could not but testify what they had seen and heard. (...).
Muson. apud Stob..Sermon. 77. dekonor. and obed. parent. debit. p. 458. ubi
pluribus strenue and eleganter hac de re disserit.

(...). Socr. in Apol. apud Plat. (...) 11. p. 25.


Nor did they in this answer make any undue reflection upon the power of the
Magistrates, and the obedience due to them, it being a ruled case by the first
dictates of reason, and the common vote and suffrage of Mankind, that Parents
and Governors are not to be obeyed, when their commands interfere with the
obligations under which we stand to a superior power. All authority is
originally derived from God, and our duty to him may not be superseded by the
Laws of any Authority deriving from him: and even Socrates himself in a
parallel instance, when persuaded to leave off his excellent way of institution
and instructing youth, and to comply with the humor of his Athenian Judges to
save his life, returned this answer, that indeed he loved and honored the
Athenians; but yet resolved to obey God, rather than them. An answer almost the
same both in substance and words, with that which was here given by our
Apostles. In all other cases where the Laws of the Magistrate did not interfere
with the commands of Christ, none more loyal, more compliant than they. As
indeed no Religion in the World ever secured the interests of Civil authority
like the Religion of the Gospel. It positively charges every soul of what rank
or condition soever to be subject to the higher powers, as a Divine ordinance
and institution, and that not for wrath only, but for conscience sake; it puts
men in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates, to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, both to
the King as supreme, and unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him: for
so is the will of God. So far is it from allowing us to violate their persons,
that it suffers us not boldly to censure their actions, to revile the Gods,
despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, or to vilify and injure them
so much, as by a dishonorable thought; commanding us when we cannot obey, to
suffer the most rigorous penalties imposed upon us with calmness, and to
possess our souls in patience. Thus when these two Apostles were shortly after
again summoned before the Council, commanded no more to Preach the Christian
Doctrine, and to be scourged for what they had done already, though they could
not obey the one, they cheerfully submitted to the other without any peevish or
tart reflections, but went away rejoicing. But what the carriage of Christians
was in this matter in the first and best ages of the Gospel, we have in another
place sufficiently discovered to the World. Prim. Christ. Part 3. Chapter 4.
We may not withhold our obedience, till the Magistrate invades God's Throne,
and countermands his authority, and may then appeal to the sense of Mankind.
whether it be not most reasonable that God's authority should first take place,
as the Apostles here appealed to their very Judges themselves. Nor do we find
that the Sanhedrim did except against the Plea. At least whatever they thought,
yet not daring to punish them for fear of the People, they only threatened them,
and let them go: who thereupon presently returned to the rest of the Apostles
and Believers.

8. The Church exceedingly multiplied by these means: And that so great a
Company (most whereof were poor) might be maintained, they generally sold their
Estates, and brought the Money to the Apostles, to be by them deposited in one
common Treasury, and thence distributed according to the several exigences of
the Church: which gave occasion to this dreadful Instance. Acts 5.1.
Ananias and his Wife Saphira having taken upon them the profession of the
Gospel, according to the free and generous spirit of those times, had
consecrated and devoted their Estate to the honor of God, and the necessities
of the Church. And accordingly sold their Possessions, and turned them into
Money. But as they were willing to gain the reputation of charitable Persons,
so were they loath wholly to cast themselves upon the Divine Providence, by
letting go all at once, and therefore privately withheld part of what they had
devoted, and bringing the rest, laid it at the Apostles feet: hoping herein
they might deceive the Apostles, though immediately guided by the Spirit of
God. But Peter at his first coming in, treated Ananias with these sharp
enquiries; Why he would suffer Satan to fill his heart with so big a
wickedness, as by keeping back part of his estate, to think to deceive the Holy
Ghost? That before it was sold, it was wholly at his own disposure; and after,
it was perfectly in his own power fully to have performed his vow: So that it
was capable of no other interpretation, than that herein he had not only abused
and injured men, but mocked God, and, what in him lay, lied to, and cheated the
Holy Ghost; who, he knew, was privy to the most secret thoughts and purposes of
his heart. This was no sooner said, but suddenly to the great terror and
amazement of all that were present, Ananias was arrested with a stroke from
Heaven, and fell down dead to the ground. Not long after his Wise came in, whom
Peter entertained with the same severe reproofs, wherewith he had done her
Husband, adding, that the like sad fate and doom should immediately seize upon
her, who thereupon dropped down dead: As she had been Copartner with him in the
Sin, becoming sharer with him in the punishment. An instance of great severity,
filling all that heard of it with fear and terror, and became a seasonable
prevention of that hypocrisy and dissimulation, wherewith many might possibly
think to have imposed upon the Church.

9. THIS severe Case being extraordinary, the Apostles usually exerted their
power in such Miracles as were more useful and beneficial to the World: Curing
all manner of Diseases, and dispossessing Devils: Acts 5.12.
In so much that they brought the Sick into the Streets, and laid them upon
Beds and Couches, that at least Peter's shadow, as he passed by, might come
upon them. These astonishing Miracles could not but mightily contribute to the
propagation of the Gospel, and convince the World that the Apostles were more
considerable Persons, than they took them for, poverty and meanness being no
bar to true worth and greatness. And methinks Annot. in loc.
Erasmus his reflection here is not unseasonable; that no honor or
sovereignty, no power or dignity was comparable to this glory of the Apostle;
that the things of Christ, though in another way, were more noble and
excellent, than any thing that this World could afford. And therefore he tells
us, that when he beheld the state and magnificence wherewith Pope Julius the
Second appeared first at Bononia, and then at Rome, equalling the triumphs of a
Pompey, or a Caesar; he could not but think how much all this was below the
greatness and majesty of S. Peter, who converted the World, not by Power or
Armies, not by Engines, or artifices of pomp and grandeur, but by Faith in the
power of Christ, and drew it to the admiration of himself: and the same state (
says he) would no doubt attend the Apostles Successors, were they Men of the
same temper and holiness of life. The Jewish Rulers alarmed with this News, and
awakened with the growing numbers of the Church, sent to apprehend the
Apostles, and cast them into Prison. But God who is never wanting to his own
cause, sent that Night an Angel from Heaven to open the Prison doors,
commanding them to repair to the Temple, and to the exercise of their
Ministry. Which they did early in the Morning, and there taught the People.
How unsuccessful are the projects of the wisest Statesmen, when God frowns upon
them! how little do any counsels against Heaven prosper! In vain is it to shut
the doors, where God is resolved to open them; the firmest Bars, the strongest
Chains cannot hold, where once God has designed and decreed our liberty. The
Officers returning the next Morning, found the Prison shut and guarded, but the
Prisoners gone: Wherewith they acquainted the Council, who much wondered at it:
but being told where the Apostles were, they sent to bring them without any
noise or violence before the Sanhedrim: where the High Priest asked them, how
they durst go on to propagate that Doctrine which they had so strictly
commanded them not to preach? Peter in the name of the rest told them, That
they must in this case obey God rather than men: That though they had so
barbarously and contumeliously treated the Lord Jesus, yet that God had raised
him up, and exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior to give both repentance
and remission of sins: That they were witnesses of these things, and so were
those Miraculous Powers which the Holy Ghost conferred upon all true
Christians. Vexed was the Council with this Answer, and began to consider how
to cut them off. But Gamaliel, a grave and learned Senator, having commanded
the Apostles to withdraw, bad the Council take heed what they did to them;
putting them in mind, that several persons had heretofore raised parties and
factions, and drawn vast Numbers after them; but that they had miscarried, and
they and their designs come to naught: that therefore they should do well to
let these men alone: that if their doctrines and designs were merely humane,
they would in time of themselves fall to the ground; but if they were of God,
it was not all their power and policies would be able to defeat and overturn
them: and that they themselves would herein appear to oppose the counsels and
designs of Heaven. With this prudent and rational advice they were satisfied;
and having commanded the Apostles to be scourged, and charged them no more to
preach this doctrine, restored them to their liberty. Who notwithstanding this
charge and threatening returned home in a kind of triumph, that they were
accounted worthy to suffer in so good a cause, and to undergo shame and
reproach for the sake of so good a Master. (...). Arrian. dissert. lib. 1. c.
29. p. 163.
Nor could all the hard usage they met with from men discourage them in their
duty to God, or make them less zealous and diligent both publicly and
privately to preach Christ in every place.

SECT. VIII. Of S. Peter's Acts, from the Dispersion of the Church at
Jerusalem, till his contest with S. Paul at Antioch.
The great care of the Divine Providence over the Church. Peter dispatched by
the Apostles to confirm the Church newly planted at Samaria. His baffling and
silencing Simon Magus there. His going to Lydda, and curing Aeneas. His raising
Dorcas at Joppa. The Vision of all sorts of Creatures presented to him, to
prepare him for the conversion of the Gentiles. His going to Cornelius, and
declaring God's readiness to receive the Gentiles into the Church. The
Baptizing Cornelius and his Family. Peter censured by the Jews for conversing
with the Gentiles. The mighty prejudices of the Jews against the Gentiles noted
out of Heathen Writers. Peter cast into prison by Herod Agrippa: miraculously
delivered by an Angel. His discourse in the Synod at Jerusalem, that the
Gentiles might be received without being put under the obligation of the Law of
Moses. His unworthy compliance with the Jews at Antioch in opposition to the
Gentiles. Severely checked and resisted by S. Paul. The ill use Porphyry makes
of this difference. The conceit of some that it was not Peter the Apostle, but
one of the Seventy.

1. THE Church had been hitherto tossed with gentle storms, but now a more
violent tempest overtook it, Acts 8.1.
by which began in the Proto-Martyr Stephen, and was more vigorously carried on
afterward; occasion whereof the Disciples were dispersed. And God, who always
brings good out of evil, hereby provided, that the Gospel should not be
confined only to Jerusalem. Hitherto the Church had been crowded up within the
City-walls, and the Religion had crept up and down in private corners; but the
professors of it being now dispersed abroad by the malice and cruelty of their
enemies, carried Christianity along with them, Isai. 2.3.
and propagated it into the neighbour-Countries, accomplishing hereby an
ancient prophecy, That out of Sion should go forth the Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Thus God overrules the malice of men, and makes intended
poison to become food, or physic. That Divine Providence that governs the
World, more particularly superintends the affairs and interests of his Church,
so that no weapon formed against Israel shall prosper; curses shall be turned
into blessings, and that become an eminent means to enlarge and propagate the
Gospel, which they designed as the only way to suppress and stifle it. Amongst
those that were scattered, Philip the Deacon was driven down unto Samaria*
where he preached the Gospel, and confirmed his preaching by many miraculous
cures, and dispossessing Devils. In this City there was one Simon, who by
Magic Arts and Diabolical Sorceries sought to advance himself into a great
fame and reputation with the People, insomuch that they generally beheld him as
the great power of God, for so the J. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 69. Iren. l. 1. c. 20.
p. 115.
Ancients tell us, he used to style himself, giving out himself to be the first
and chiefest Deity, the Father, Tertull. de praescript. Haeret. c. 46. p. 219.
who is God over all, that is, that he was that which in every Nation was
accounted the supreme Deity. This man hearing the Sermons, and beholding the
Miracles that were done by Philip, gave up himself amongst the number of
believers, and was baptized with them. The Apostles, who yet remained at
Jerusalem, having heard of the great success of Philip's ministry at Samaria,
thought good to send some of their number to his assistance. And accordingly
deputed Peter and John, who came thither. Where having prayed for, and laid
their hands upon these new converts, they presently received the Holy Ghost.
Simon the Magician observing, that by laying on of the Apostle's hands,
miraculous gifts were conferred upon men, offered them a considerable sum of
money to invest him with this power, that on whom he laid his hands they might
receive the Holy Ghost. Peter perceiving his rotten and insincere intentions,
rejected his impious motion with scorn and detestation: Thy money perish with
thee. He told him that his heart was naught and hypocritical; that he could
have no share nor portion in so great a privilege; that it more concerned him
to repent of so great a wickedness, and sincerely seek to God, that so the
thought of his heart might be forgiven him; for that he perceived that he had a
very vicious and corrupt temper and constitution of mind, and was as yet bound
up under a very wretched and miserable state, displeasing to God, and dangerous
to himself. The Conscience of the man was a little startled with this, and he
prayed the Apostles to intercede with Heaven, that God would pardon his sin,
and that none of these things might fall upon him. But how little cure this
wrought upon him, we shall find elsewhere, when we shall again meet with him
afterward. The Apostles having thus confirmed the Church at Samaria, and
preached up and down in the Villages thereabouts, returned back to Jerusalem,
to join their counsel and assistance to the rest of the Apostles.

2. THE storm, though violent, being at length blown over, the Church enjoyed a
time of great calmness and serenity: during which Peter went out to visit the
Churches lately planted in those parts by those Disciples who had been
dispersed by the persecution at Jerusalem. Acts 9.32.
Coming down to Lydda, the first thing he did was to work a cure upon one
Aeneas, who being crippl'd with the Palsy, had layn bedridden for eight years
together. Peter coming to him, bad him in the name of Christ to arise, and the
man was immediately restored to perfect health. A miracle that was not confined
only to his person, for being known abroad generally brought over the
Inhabitants of that place. The fame of this miracle having flown to Joppa, a
Seaport Town, some six miles thence; the Christians there presently sent for
Peter upon this occasion. Tabitha, whose Greek name was Dorcas, a woman
venerable for her piety and diffusive charity, was newly dead, to the great
lamentation of all good men, and much more to the loss of the poor that had
been relieved by her. Peter coming to the house, found her dressed up for her
Funeral solemnity, and compassed about with the sorrowful Widows, who showed
the Coats and Garments wherewith she had clothed them, the badges of her
charitable liberality. Peter shutting all out, kneeled down and prayed, and
then turning him to the body, commanded her to arise, and lifting her up by the
hand, presented her in perfect health to her friends, and those that were about
her: by which he confirmed many, and converted more to the Faith. After which
he staid some considerable time at Joppa, lodging in the house of Simon a
Tanner.

3. WHILE he abode in this City, Acts 10.9.
retiring one morning to the housetop to pray, (as the Jews frequently did,
having thence a free and open prospect toward Jerusalem and the Temple) it
being now near Noon, which was the conclusion of one of their stated times of
Prayer, he found himself hungry, and called for meat: but while it was
preparing he himself fell into a Trance, wherein was presented to him a large
sheet let down from Heaven, containing all sorts of Creatures, clean and
unclean; a voice at the same time calling to him, that he should rise, kill
freely, and indifferently feed upon them; Peter tenacious as yet of the Rites
and Institutions of the Mosaic Law, rejoined, That he could not do it, having
never eaten any thing that was common or unclean. To which the voice replied,
That what God had cleansed he should not account or call common. Which being
done thrice, the Vessel was again taken up into Heaven, and the Vision
presently disappeared. By this symbolick representment, though Peter at present
knew not what to make of it, God was teaching him a new lesson, and preparing
him to go upon an Errand and Embassy, which the Spirit at the same time
expressly commanded him to undertake. While he was in this doubtful posture of
mind, three messengers knocked at the door, enquiring for him, from whom he
received this account: That Cornelius a Roman, Captain of a Band of Italian
Soldiers at Caesarea, a person of great Piety and Religion (being a Proselyte
of the Gate, who though not observing an exact conformity to the Rites of the
Mosaic Law, did yet maintain some general correspondence with it, and lived
under the obligation of the seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah) had by an
immediate command from God sent for him. The next day Peter accompanied with
some of the Brethren, went along with them, and the day after they came to
Caesarea. Against whose arrival Cornelius had summoned his friends and kindred
to his house. Peter arriving, Cornelius (who was affected with a mighty
reverence for so great a Person) fell at his Feet, and worshipped him: a way of
address frequent in those Eastern Countries toward Princes and great men, but
by the Greeks and Romans appropriated as a peculiar honor to the Gods. Peter
rejecting the honor, as due only to God, entered into the house, where he first
made his Apology to the Company, that though they could not but know, that it
was not lawful for a Jew to converse in the duties of Religion with those of
another Nation, yet that now God had taught him another lesson. And then
proceeded particularly to enquire the reason of Cornelius his sending for him.
Whereupon Cornelius told him, That four days since, being conversant in the
duties of Fasting and Prayer, an Angel had appeared to him, and told him, that
his Prayers and Alms were come up for a memorial before God, that he should
send to Joppa for one Simon Peter, who lodged in a Tanner's house by the Sea
side, who should further make known his mind to him; that accordingly he had
sent, and being now come, they were there met to hear what he had to say to
them. Where we see, that though God sent an Angel to Cornelius to acquaint him
with his will, yet the Angel was only to direct him to the Apostle for
instruction in the Faith; which no doubt was done, partly that God might put
the greater honor upon an institution, that was likely to meet with contempt
and scorn enough from the World; partly to let us see, that we are not to
expect extraordinary and miraculous ways of teaching and information, where God
affords ordinary means.

4. HEREUPON Peter began this discourse, that by comparing things it was now
plain and evident, that the partition wall was broken down; that God had no
longer a particular kindness for Nations or Persons; that it was not the
Nation, but the Religion; not the outward quality of the man, but the inward
temper of the mind that recommends men to God; Vos estis templum Domini, and
Spiritus Sanctus habitat in vobis. Et de Hierosolymis, and de Britannia
aequaliter patet aula coelestis. Regnum enim Dei intra vos est. Hieronym. ad
Paulin. p. 102. Tom. 1.
that the devout and the pious, the righteous and the good man, wherever he
be, is equally dear to Heaven; that God has as much respect for a just and a
virtuous person in the Wilds of Scythia, as upon Mount Sion: that the
reconciling and making peace between God and Man by Jesus Christ, was the
Doctrine published by the Prophets of old, and of late, since the times of
John, preached through Galilee and Judaea, viz. that God had anointed and
consecrated Jesus of Nazareth with Divine Powers and Graces, in the exercise
whereof he constantly went about to do good to men: that they had seen all he
had done amongst the Jews, whom though they had slain and crucified, yet that
God had raised him again the third day, and had openly showed him to his
Apostles and followers, whom he had chosen to be his peculiar witnesses, and
whom to that end he had admitted to eat and drink with him after his
Resurrection, commanding them to preach the Gospel to Mankind, and to testify
that he was the person whom God had ordained to be the great Judge of the
World: that all the Prophets with one consent bore witness of him: that this
Jesus is he, in whose Name whosoever believes, should certainly receive
remission of sins. While Peter was thus preaching to them, the Holy Ghost fell
upon a great part of his Auditory, enabling them to speak several Languages,
and therein to magnify the giver of them. Whereat the Jews, who came along
with Peter, did sufficiently wonder, to see that the gifts of the Holy Ghost
should be poured upon the Gentiles. Peter seeing this, told the Company that he
knew no reason why these persons should not be baptized, having received the
Holy Ghost as well as they; and accordingly commanded them to be baptized. For
whose further confirmation he staid some time longer with them. This act of
Peter's made a great noise among the Apostles and Brethren at Jerusalem, Acts
11.1.
who being lately converted from their Judaism, were as yet zealous for the
Religion of their Country, and therefore severely charged Peter at his return
for his too familiar conversing with the Gentiles. See here the powerful
prejudice of education. The Jews had for several Ages conceived a radicated and
inveterate prejudice against the Gentiles. Indeed the Law of Moses commanded
them to be peculiarly kind to their own Nation; and the Rites and Institutions
of their Religion, and the peculiar form of their Commonwealth made them
different from the fashion of other Countries: a separation which in
aftertimes they drew into a narrower compass. Besides they were mightily
puffed up with their external privileges, that they were the seed of Abraham,
the People whom God had peculiarly chosen for himself, above all other Nations
of the World, and therefore with a lofty scorn proudly rejected the Gentiles as
Dogs and Reprobates, utterly refusing to show them any office of common
kindness and converse. We find the Heathens frequently charging them with this
rudeness and inhumanity. Satyr. p. 439.
Juvenal accuses them, that they would not show a Traveller the right way, nor
give him a draught of Water, if he were not of their Religion. Hist. lib. 5. c.
4, 5. p. 535.
Tacitus tells us, that they had adversus omnes alios hostile odium, a bitter
hatred of all other People: Ap. Joseph. Antiqu. Jud. lib. 11. c. 6.
Haman represented them to Ahasuerus, as (...), etc. A people that would never
kindly mix and correspond with any other, as different in their Manners, as in
their Laws and Religion from other Nations. The friends of Antiochus (as the
Diod. Sicul. lib. 34. apud Phot. Cod. CCXLIV. Col. 1149.
Historian reports) charged them (...) (...), That they alone of all others
were the most unsociable people under Heaven; that they held no converse or
correspondence with any other, but accounted them as their mortal enemies; that
they would not eat or drink with men of another Nation, no nor so much as wish
well to them, their Ancestors having leavened them with an hatred of all
mankind. This was their humor; and that the Gentiles herein did not wrong
them, is sufficiently evident from their ordinary practice, and is openly
avowed by their own Vid. May. mon. in (...) cap. 12. and in Gezelah, cap. 11.
Writings. Nay, at their first coming over to Christianity, though one great
design of it was to soften the manners of men, and to oblige them to a more
extensive and universal charity, yet could they hardly quit this common
prejudice, quarrelling with Peter for no other reason, but that he had eaten
and drunken with the Gentiles: insomuch that he was forced to Apologize for
himself, and to justify his actions as immediately done by Divine warrant and
authority. And then, no sooner had he given them a naked and impartial account
of the whole transaction, from first to last, but they presently turned their
displeasure against him, into thanks to God, that he had granted to the
Gentiles also Repentance unto life.

5. IT was now about the end of Caligula's Reign, when Peter having finished
his visitation of the new planted Churches, was returned unto Jerusalem. Not
long after Herod Agrippa, Grandchild to Herod the great, Acts 12.1.
having attained the Kingdom, the better to ingratiate himself with the People,
had lately put S. James to death. And finding that this gratified the Vulgar,
resolved to send Peter the same way after him. In order whereunto he
apprehended him, cast him into Prison, and set strong guards to watch him: the
Church in the mean time being very instant and importunate with Heaven for his
life and safety. The Night before his intended execution, God purposely sent an
Angel from Heaven, who coming to the Prison, found him fast asleep between two
of his Keepers. So soft and secure a Pillow is a good Conscience, even in the
confines of Death, and the greatest danger. The Angel raised him up, knocked
off his Chains, bad him gird on his Garments, and follow him. He did so, and
having passed the first and second Watch, and entered through the Iron-Gate into
the City (which opened to them of its own accord) after having passed through
one Street more, the Angel departed from him. By this time Peter came to
himself, and perceived that it was no Vision, but a reality that had happened to
him. Whereupon he came to Mary's house, where the Church were met together at
Prayer for him. Knocking at the Door, the Maid, who came to let him in,
perceiving 'twas his voice, ran back to tell them, that Peter was at the Door.
Which they at first looked upon as nothing, but the effect of fright or fancy,
but she still affirming it, they concluded that it was his Angel, or some
peculiar messenger sent from him. The Door being open, they were strangely
amazed at the sight of him: but he briefly told them the manner of his
deliverance, and charging them to acquaint the Brethren with it, presently
withdrew into another place. It Is easy to imagine what a bustle and a stir
there was the next Morning among the Keepers of the Prison, with whom Herod was
so much displeased, that he commanded them to be put to Death.

6. SOME time after this it happened, Acts 15.1.
that a controversy arising between the Jewish and the Gentile Converts, about
the observation of the Mosaic Law, the minds of men were exceedingly
disquieted and disturbed with it; the Jews zealously contending for
Circumcision, and the observance of the Ceremonial Law to be joined with the
belief and profession of the Gospel, as equally necessary to Salvation. To
compose this difference, the best expedient that could be thought on, was to
call a General Council of the Apostles and Brethren, to meet together at
Jerusalem, which was done accordingly, and the case thoroughly scanned and
canvassed. At last Peter stood up, and acquainted the Synod, that God having
made choice of him among all the Apostles, to be the first that preached the
Gospel to the Gentiles; God who was best able to judge of the hearts of men,
had born witness to them, that they were accepted of him, by giving them his
Holy Spirit as well as he had done to the Jews; having put no difference
between the one and the other. That therefore it was a tempting and a provoking
God, to put a Yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, which neither they
themselves nor their Fathers were able to bear: there being ground enough to
believe, that the Gentiles as well as the Jews should be saved by the grace of
the Gospel. After some other of the Apostles had declared their judgments in
the case, it was unanimously decreed, that except the temporary observance of
some few particular things, equally convenient both for Jew and Gentile, no
other burden should be imposed upon them. And so the decrees of the Council
being drawn up into a Synodical Epistle, were sent abroad to the several
Churches, for allaying the heats and controversies that had been raised about
this matter.

Gal. 2.11.
7. PETER a while after the celebration of this Council, left Jerusalem, and
came down to Antioch, where using the liberty which the Gospel had given him,
he familiarly ate and conversed with the Gentile Converts, accounting them, now
that the partition wall was broken down, no longer strangers and foreigners,
but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: This he had
been taught by the Vision of the sheet let down from Heaven; this had been
lately decreed, and he himself had promoted and subscribed it, in the Synod at
Jerusalem: this he had before practiced toward Cornelius and his Family, and
justified the action to the satisfaction of his accusers; and this he had here
freely and innocently done at Antioch, till some of the Jewish Brethren coming
thither, for fear of offending and displeasing them, he withdrew his converse
with the Gentiles, as if it had been unlawful for him to hold Communion with
uncircumcised persons, when yet he knew, and was fully satisfied, that our Lord
had wholly removed all difference, and broken down the Wall of separation
between Jew and Gentile. In which affair, as he himself acted against the light
of his own mind and judgment, condemning what he had approved, and destroying
what he had before built up, so hereby he confirmed the Jewish zealots in their
inveterate error, cast infinite scruples into the minds of the Gentiles,
filling their Consciences with fears and dissatisfactions, reviving the old
feuds and prejudices between Jew and Gentile; by which means many others were
ensnared, yea, the whole number of Jewish Converts followed his example,
separating themselves from the company of the Gentile Christians. Yea, so far
did it spread, that Barnabas himself was carried away with the stream and
torrent of this unwarrantable practice. S. Paul, who was at this time come to
Antioch, unto whom Peter gave the right hand of fellowship, acknowledging his
Apostleship of the Circumcision, observing these evil and unevangelical
actings, resolutely withstood Peter to the face, and publicly reproved him as
a person worthy to be blamed for his gross prevarication in this matter;
severely expostulating and reasoning with him, that he who was himself a Jew,
and thereby under a more immediate obligation to the Mosaic Law, should cast
off that Yoke himself, and yet endeavor to impose it upon the Gentiles, who
were not in the least under any obligation to it. A smart, but an impartial
charge; and indeed so remarkable was this carriage of S. Paul toward our
Apostle, that though it set things right for the present, yet it made some
noise abroad in the World. Yea, Apud Hieron. prooem. in Ep. ad Gal. p. 159.
Tom. 9.
Porphyry himself, that acute and subtle enemy of Christianity, makes use of it
as an argument against them both: charging the one with error and falsehood, and
the other with rudeness and incivility; and that the whole was but a compact of
forgery and deceit, while the Princes of the Church did thus fall out among
themselves. And so sensible were some of this in the first Ages of
Christianity, that rather than such a dishonor and disgrace, as they accounted
it, should be reflected upon Peter; they tell Hieron. Com. in Gal. 2. p. 168
us of two several Cephas's, one the Apostle, the other one of the seventy
Disciples; and that it was the last of these, that was guilty of this
prevarication, and whom S. Paul so vigorously resisted and reproved at Antioch.
But for this plausible and well-meant Evasion the Champions of the Romish
Church conn them no great thanks at this day. Nay, S. Hierom long since fully
confuted it in his Notes upon this place.

SECT. IX. Of S. Peter's Acts from the End of the Sacred Story till his
Martyrdom.
Peter's story prosecuted out of Ecclesiastical Writers. His planting of a
Church, and an Episcopal See at Antioch; when said to be. His first Journey to
Rome, and the happiness it brought to the Roman Empire. His preaching in other
places, and return to Rome. His encounter with Simon Magus. The impostures of
the Magician. His familiarity with the Emperors, and the great honors said to
be done to him. His Statue, and Inscription at Rome. Peter's victory over him
by raising one from the Dead. Simon attempting to fly is by Peter's Prayers
hindered, falls down, and dies. Nero's displeasure against Peter, whence. His
being cast into Prison. His flight thence, and being brought back by Christ
appearing to him. Crucified with his head downwards, and why. The place of his
Martyrdom, and Burial. The original and greatness of S. Peter's Church in Rome.
His Episcopal Chair pretended to be still kept there.

HITHERTO in drawing up the Life of this great Apostle, we have had an
infallible Guide to conduct and lead us: But the sacred Story breaking off
here, forces us to look abroad, and to pick up what Memoires the Ancients have
left us in this matter: which we shall for the main digest according to the
order, wherein Baronius, and other Ecclesiastic Writers have disposed the
series of S. Peter's Life: Reserving what is justly questionable, to a more
particular examination afterward. And that we may present the account more
entire and perfect, we must step back a little in point of time, that so we may
go forward with greater advantage. We are to know therefore, that during the
time of peace and calmness which the Church enjoyed after Readiness Persecution,
when S. Peter went down to visit the Churches, he is said to have gone to
Antioch, where great Numbers of Jews inhabited, and there to have planted the
Christian Faith. That he founded a Church here, Chron. ad Ann. Chr. xliii.
Eusebius expressly tells us, and by Hieron. Comment. in 2. ad Galat. p. 168. T.
9.
others it is said, that he himself was the first Bishop of this See. Sure I am
that Encom. S. Ignat. Mart p. 503. Tom. 1.
S. Chrysostom reckons it one of the greatest honors of that City, that S.
Peter staid so long there, and that the Bishops of it succeeded him in that
See. The care and precedence of this Church he had between Six and Seven Years.
Not that he staid there all that time, but that having ordered and disposed
things to the best advantage, he returned to other affairs and exigencies of
the Church: confirming the new Plantations, bringing in Cornelius and his
Family, and in him the first fruits of the Gentiles conversion to the faith of
Christ. After which he returned unto Jerusalem, where he was imprisoned by
Herod, and miraculously delivered by an Angel sent from Heaven.

2. WHAT became of Peter after his deliverance out of Prison, is not certainly
known: probably he might preach in some parts a little further distant from
Judaea, as we are told Bar. ad An. Chr. xliv. Number. 12. vid. Epist. Agap. ad
Petr. Hieros. in V. Synd. sub Men. Conc. Tom. 4. page 24.
he did at Byzantium, and in the Countries thereabouts (though, I confess, the
evidence to me is not convincing.) After this he resolved upon a Journey to
Rome; where most agree he arrived about the Second Year of the Emperor
Claudius. Hist. lib. 7. c. 6. fol. 296. and seq.
Orosius tells us, that coming to Rome, he brought prosperity along with him to
that City: For besides several other extraordinary advantages which at that
time happened to it, this was not the least observable, that Camillus
Scribonianus Governor of Dalmatia, soliciting the Army to rebel against the
Emperor, the Eagles, their Military Standard, remained so fast in the Ground,
that no power, nor strength was able to pluck them up. With which unusual
accident the minds of the Soldiers were surprised and startled, and turning
their Swords against the Author of the sedition, continued firm and loyal in
their obedience. Whereby a dangerous Rebellion was prevented, likely enough
otherwise to have broken out. This he ascribes to Saint Peter's coming to Rome,
and the first Plantation of the Christian Faith in that City. Heaven beginning
more particularly to smile upon that place at his first coming thither. It Is
not to be doubted, but that at his first arrival, he disposed himself amongst
the Jews his Countrymen, who ever since the time of Augustus, had dwelt in the
Region beyond Tybur. But when afterward he began to preach to the Gentiles, he
was forced to change his Lodging, and was taken in by one Pudens, a Senator
lately converted to the Faith. Here he closely plied his main office and
employment, to establish Christianity in that place. Here we are told Eusebius. H.
Eccl. lib. 2. c. 17. p. 53. Hieron. de script. Eccles. in Phil. p. 270.
he met with Philo the Jew, lately come on his second Embassy unto Rome, in the
behalf of his Countrymen at Alexandria, and to have contracted an intimate
friendship and acquaintance with him. And now it was, says Ad An. 45. Number. 16.
Baronius, that Peter being mindful of the Churches which he had founded in
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and Asia the less, wrote his first
Epistle to them, which he probably infers hence, that Saint Mark being yet with
him at the time of the date of this Epistle, it must be written at least some
time this Year, for that now it was that S. Mark was sent to preach and
propagate the Faith in Egypt. Next to the planting Religion at Rome, he took
care to propagate it in the Western parts. And to that end (if we may believe
one Innoc. Ep. 1. ad Dec. Eug. Council. Tom. 1. p. 751.
of those that pretend to be his Successors) he sent abroad Disciples into
several Provinces. That so their sound might go into all the Earth, and their
words into the ends of the World.

3. IT happened that after S. Peter had been several Years at Rome, Claudius the
Emperor taking advantage of some seditions and tumults raised by the Jews, by a
public Edict Vid. Oros. lib. 7. c. 6. fol. 297.
banished them out of Rome. In the Number of whom S. Peter (they say) departed
thence, and returned back to Jerusalem, where he was present at that great
Apostolical Synod, of which before. After this we are left under great
uncertainties, how he disposed of himself for many Years. Confident we may be,
that he was not idle, but spent his time sometimes in preaching in the Eastern
parts, sometimes in other parts of the World, as in Vid. Innoc. Epist. ubi supr.
Africa, Sicily, Italy, and other places. And here it may not be amiss to
insert a claim in behalf of our own Country: Eusebius telling us (as De Petr.
and Paul. ad diem 29. Jun. Number. 23. vid. etiam N. 10. ibid.
Metaphrastes reports it) that Peter was not only in these Western parts, but
particularly that he was a long time in Britain, where he converted many
Nations to the Faith. But we had better be without the honor of Saint Peter's
company, than build the story upon so sandy a foundation: Metaphrastes his
Authority being of so little value in this case, that it is slighted by the
more learned and moderate Writers of the Church of Rome. But wherever it was,
that Saint Peter employed his time, toward the latter part of Nero's Reign, he
returned to Rome: where he found the minds of People strangely bewitched and
hardened against the embracing of the Christian Religion by the subtilties and
Magic arts of Simon Magus, whom (as we have before related) he had formerly
baffled at Samaria. This Simon was born at J. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 69 -- 91. vid.
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 349.
Gitton, a Village of Samaria, bred up in the Arts of Sorcery and Divination,
and by the help of the Diabolical powers performed many strange feats of wonder
and activity. Insomuch that People generally looked upon him as some great
Deity come down from Heaven. But being discovered and confounded by Peter at
Samaria, he left the East and fled to Rome. Where by Witchcraft and Sorceries
he insinuated himself into the favor of the People, and at last became very
acceptable to the Emperors themselves, insomuch that no honor and veneration
was too great for him. Vbi supr. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr assures us, that he was honored as a Deity, that a Statue was
erected to him in the Insula Tyberina between two Bridges with this
Inscription, SIMONI DEO SANCTO: To Simon the holy God: that the Samaritans
generally, and very many of other Nations did own and worship him as the chief
principal Deity. I know the credit of this Inscription is shrewdly shaken by
some later Antiquaries, who tell us, that the good Father being a Greek might
easily mistake in a Latin Inscription, or be imposed upon by others; and that
the true Inscription was SEMONI SANGO DEO FIDIO, etc. such an Inscription being
in the last Age dug up in the Tyberine Island, and there preserved to this day.
It is not impossible but this might be the foundation of the story. But sure I
am, that it is not only reported by the Martyr, who was himself a Samaritan,
and lived but in the next Age, but by others almost of the same time Iren. adv.
Haer. lib. 1. c. 20. p. 115.
Irenaeus, Tertul. Apol. c. 13. p. 14.
Tertullian, and by others Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 14. p. 51. Aug de Haeres. in Simon
Tom. 6. col. 13. Niceph. lib. 2. c. 14. page 154.
after them. It further deserves to be considered, that J. Martyr was a person
of great learning and gravity, inquisitive about matters of this nature, at
this time at Rome, where he was capable fully to satisfy himself in the truth
of things, that he presented this Apology to the Emperor and the Senate of
Rome, to whom he would be careful what he said, and who as they knew whether it
was true or no, so if false, could not but ill resent to be so boldly imposed
upon by so notorious a fable. But be it as it will, he was highly in favor
both with the People, and their Emperors; especially Nero, who was the Great
Patron of Magicians, Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 30. c. 2. p. 606.
and all who maintained secret ways of commerce with the infernal powers. With
him Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c 14 page 51, 52.
S. Peter thought fit in the first place to encounter, and to undeceive the
People, by discovering the impostures and delusions of that wretched man.

4. THAT he did so, is generally affirmed by the Ancient Fathers, Damas. in
vit. Petr. Conc. Tom. 1. Constable. App. lib. 6. c. 8, 9. p. 944. Arnob. adv. Gent.
lib. 2. p. 23. Epiph. Haeres. 21. p. 31. Sulp. Sev. lib. 2. page 137. and alii.
who tell us of some particular Instances, wherein he baffled and confounded
him. But because the matter is more entirely drawn up by Higes. de Excid.
Hierosol. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 293.
Hegesippus the younger, an Author contemporary with S. Ambrose, if not (which
is most probable) S. Ambrose himself, we shall from him represent the summary
of the story. There was at this time at Rome an eminent young Gentleman, and a
Kinsman of the Emperors, lately dead. The fame which Peter had for raising
persons to life, persuaded his friends that he might be called. Others also
prevailing that Simon the Magician might be sent for. Simon glad of the
occasion to magnify himself before the People, propounded to Peter, that if he
raised the Gentleman unto life, then Peter, who had so injuriously provoked the
great power of God, (as he styled himself) should lose his life: But if Peter
prevailed, he himself would submit to the same fate and sentence. Peter
accepted the terms, and Simon began his Charms and Enchantments: Whereat the
dead Gentleman seemed to move his hand. The People that stood by, presently
cried out, that he was alive, and that he talked with Simon, and began to fall
foul upon Peter, for daring to oppose himself against so great a power. The
Apostle entreated their patience, told them, that all this was but a phantasm
and appearance, that if Simon was but taken from the Bedside, all this
pageantry would quickly vanish. Who being accordingly removed, the Body
remained without the least sign of motion. Peter standing at a good distance
from the Bed, silently made his address to Heaven, and then before them all
commanded the young Gentleman in the Name of the Lord Jesus to arise: who
immediately did so spoke, walked, and ate, and was by Peter restored to his
Mother. The People who saw this, suddenly changed their opinions, and fell upon
the Magician with an intent to stone him. But Peter begged his life, and told
them, that it would be a sufficient punishment to him, to live and see that in
despite of all his power and malice, the Kingdom of Christ should increase and
flourish. The Magician was inwardly tormented with this defeat, and vexed to see
the triumph of the Apostle, and therefore mustering up all his powers, summoned
the People, told them that he was offended at the Galileans, whose Protector
and Guardian he had been, and therefore set them a Day, when he promised that
they should see him fly-up into Heaven. At the time appointed he went up to the
Mount of the Capitol, and throwing himself from the top of the Rock, began his
flight. A sight which the People entertained with great wonder and veneration,
affirming that this must be the power of God, and not of man. Peter standing in
the Crowd, prayed to our Lord, that the People might be undeceived, and that
the vanity of the Impostor might be discovered in such a way, that he himself
might be sensible of it. Immediately the Wings which he had made himself, began
to fail him, and he fell to the ground, miserably bruised and wounded with the
fall: Whence being carried into a neighboring Village, he soon after dyed.
This is the story, for the particular circumstances whereof, the Reader must
rely upon the credit of my Author, the thing in general being sufficiently
acknowledged by most ancient Writers. This contest of Peter's with Simon Magus
is placed by Eusebius under the Reign of Claudius, but by the generality both
of ancient and later Authors, it is referred to the Reign of Nero.

5. SUCH was the end of this miserable and unhappy Man. Which no sooner came to
the ears of the Emperor, to whom by wicked artifices he had indeared himself,
but it became an occasion of hastening Peter's ruin. The Emperor probably had
before been displeased with Peter, not only upon the acount of the general
disagreement and inconformity of his Religion, Vid. Ambr. Orat. in Auxent. Ep.
lib. 5. p. 125. Tom. 3.
but because he had so strictly pressed temperance and chastity, and reclaimed
so many Women in Rome from a dissolute and vicious life, thereby crossing that
wanton and lascivious temper, to which that Prince was so immoderate a slave
and vassal. And being now by his means robbed of his dear favorite and
companion, he resolved upon revenge, commanded Peter (as also S. Paul, who was
at this time at Rome) to be apprehended, and cast into the Mamertine Prison:
Vid. Martyr. Romans ad diem. 14. Mart. p. 165.
where they spent their time in the exercises of Religion, and especially in
Preaching to the Prisoners, and those who resorted to them. And here we may
suppose it was (if not a little before) that Peter wrote his second Epistle to
the dispersed Jews, wherein he endeavors to confirm them in the belief and
practice of Christianity, and to fortify them against those poisonous and
pernicious principles and practices, which even then began to break in upon the
Christian Church.

6. NERO returning from Achaia, and entering Rome with a great deal of pomp and
triumph, resolved now the Apostles should fall as a Victim and Sacrifice to his
cruelty and revenge. While the fatal stroke was daily expected, the Christians
in Rome did by daily prayers and importunities solicit Vid. Ambr. ut supr. and
Heges. ib. p. 279.
S. Peter to make an escape, and to reserve himself to the uses and services of
the Church. This at first he rejected, as what would ill reflect upon his
courage and constancy, and argue him to be afraid of those sufferings for
Christ, to which he himself had so often persuaded others. but the prayers and
the tears of the People overcame him, and made him yield. Accordingly the next
Night having prayed with, and taken his farewell of the Brethren, he got over
the Prison-wall, and coming to the City-gate, he is there said to have met with
our Lord, who was just entering into the City. Peter asked him, Lord, whither
art thou going? from whom he presently received this answer, I am come to Rome,
to be crucified a second time. By which answer, Peter apprehended himself to be
reproved, and that our Lord meant it of his death, that he was to be crucified
in his Servant. Whereupon he went back to the Prison, and delivered himself
into the hands of his Keepers, showing himself most ready and cheerful to
acquiesce in the will of God. And we are told, Romans Subterran. lib. 3. c. 21,
N. 15. Tom. 1. page 292.
that in the stone whereon our Lord stood while he talked with Peter, he left
the impression of his Feet, which stone has been ever since preserved as a very
sacred Relic, and after several translations was at length fixed in the
Church of S. Sebastian the Martyr, where it is kept and visited with great
expressions of reverence and devotion at this day. Before his suffering he was
no question scourged, according to the manner of the Romans, who were wont
first to whip those Malefactors, who were adjudged to the most severe and
capital punishments: Having saluted his Brethren, and especially having taken
his last farewell of S. Paul, he was brought out of the Prison, and led to the
top of the Vatican Mount, near to Tybur, the place designed for his Execution.
The death he was adjudged to was crucifixion, as of all others accounted the
most shameful, so the most severe and terrible. But he entreated the favor of
the Officers, that he might not be crucified in the ordinary way, Orig. lib. 3.
in Genes. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 71. Hieron. de Script.
Eccl. in Petr. p. 262. Heges. p. 279.

Prima Petrum rapuit sententia legibus Neronis,
Pendcre jussum praeminente ligno.
Ille tamen veritus celsae decus aemulando mortis
Ambire tanti gloriam Magistri:
Exigit ut pedibus ^ersum c^put imprimant supinis,
Quo spectetimum stipitem cerebro
Figitur ergo manus subter, sola versus in cacumen,
Hoc mente major, quo minor figura.
Noverat ex humili caelum citius solere adiri,
Dejecit ora, spiritum daturus.
Prudent. Peristeph. Hymn. XI. in Pass. Pet. and Paul.

but might suffer with his Head downwards, and his Feet up to Heaven, affirming
that he was unworthy to suffer in the same posture wherein his Lord had
suffered before him. Happy man (as Sermon. in Petr. and Paul. p. 267. T. 6.
Chrysostom glosses) to be set in the readiest posture of traveling from Earth
to Heaven. His Body being taken from the Cross, is said to have been imbalmed
by Marcellinus the Presbyter after the Jewish manner, and was then buried in
the Vatican, near the Triumphal way. Over his Grave a small Vid. Onuphr. de
VII. Vrb. Basil. c. 4. p. 45, etc.
Church was soon after erected, which being destroyed by Heliogabalus, his Body
was removed to the Cemetery in the Appian way, two Miles from Rome: where it
remained till the time of Pope Cornelius, who re-conveyed it to the Vatican,
where it rested somewhat obscurely until the Reign of Constantine, who out of
the mighty reverence which he had for the Christian Religion, caused many
Churches to be built at Rome, but especially rebuilt and enlarged the Vatican
to the honor of S. Peter. In the doing whereof Himself is said to have been
the first that began to dig the Foundation, and to have carried thence twelve
Baskets of Rubbish with his own hands, in honor, as it should seem, of the
twelve Apostles. He infinitely enriched the Church with Gifts and Ornaments,
which in every Age increased in Splendour and Riches, till it is become one of
the wonders of the World at this day. Of whose glories, stateliness, and
beauty, and those many venerable Monuments of antiquity that are in it, they
who desire to know more, may be plentifully satisfied by Onuphrius. Loc. supr.
laudat.
Only one amongst the rest must not be forgotten: there being kept that very
wooden Chair, wherein S. Peter sat when he was at Rome, by the only touching
whereof many Miracles are said to be performed. But surely Ad Ann. 45. n. 11.
Baronius his wisdom and gravity were from home, when speaking of this Chair,
and fearing that Heretics would imagine, that it might be rotten in so long a
time, he tells us, that it is no wonder that this Chair should be preserved so
long, when Eusebius affirms, that the wooden Chair of S. James Bishop of
Jerusalem was extant in the time of Constantine. But the Cardinal it seems
forgot to consider, that there is some difference between three, and sixteen
hundred Years. But of this enough. S. Peter was crucified according to the
common computation in the Year of Christ, sixty nine, and the thirteenth (or as
Eusebius, the fourteenth) of Nero, how truly may be enquired afterward.

SECT. X. The Character of his Person and Temper: and an Account of his
Writings.
The description of S. Peter' s person. An account of his Temper. A natural
fervor and eagerness predominant in him. Fierceness and animosity peculiarly
remarkable in the Galileans. The abatements of his zeal and courage. His
humility and lowliness of mind. His great love to, and Zeal for Christ. His
constancy and resolution in confessing Christ. His faithfulness and diligence
in his Office. His Writings genuine and supposititious. His first Epistle; what
the design of it. What meant by Babylon, whence it was dated. His second
Epistle a long time questioned, and why. Difference in the style no
considerable objection. Grotius his conceit of its being written by Symeon
Bishop of Jerusalem, exploded. A concurrence of circumstances to entitle S.
Peter to it. Some things in it referred to, which he had preached at Rome,
particularly the destruction of Jerusalem. Written but a little before his
death. The spurious Writings attributed to him, mentioned by the Ancients. His
Acts. Gospel. Petri Praedicatio. His Apocalypse. Judicium Petri. Peter' s
married relation. His Wife the companion of his Travels. Her Martyrdom. His
Daughter Petronilla.

1. HAVING run through the current History of S. Peter's Life, it may not be
amiss in the next place to survey a little his Person and Temper. His Body (if
we may believe the description given of him by Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 37. p.
195.
Nicephorus) was somewhat slender, of a middle size, but rather inclining to
tallness, his complexion very pale, and almost white: The hair of his Head and
Beard curled and thick, but withal short; though Com. in Gal. 2. p. 164. T. 9.
ex lib. dicto (...) seu (...).
S. Hierom tells us out of Clemens his Periods, that he was Bald, which
probably might be in his declining age; his Eyes black, but speckt with red,
which Ad An. 69. n. 31.
Baronius will have to proceed from his frequent weeping; his Eyebrows thin,
or none at all; his Nose long, but rather broad and flat than sharp; such was
the Case and outside. Let us next look inwards, and view the Jewel that was
within. Take him as a Man, and there seems to have been a natural eagerness
predominant in his Temper, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Joan. p. 170.
which as a Whetstone sharpened his Soul for all bold and generous undertakings.
It was this in a great measure that made him so forward to speak, and to return
answers, sometimes before he had well considered them. It was this made him
expose his person to the most eminent dangers, promise those great things in
behalf of his Master, and resolutely draw his Sword in his quarrel against a
whole Band of Soldiers, and wound the Highpriests Servant; and possibly he
had attempted greater matters, had not our Lord restrained, and taken him off
by that seasonable check that he gave him.

2. THIS Temper he owed in a great measure to the Genius and nature of his
Country, of which (...). de Bello Jud. lib. 3. e, 4. p. 833.
Josephus gives this true character, That it naturally bred in men a certain
fierceness and animosity, whereby they were fearlesly carried out upon any
action, and in all things showed a great strength and courage both of mind and
body. The Galileans (says he) being fighters from their childhood, the men
being as seldom overtaken with cowardice, as their Country with want of men.
And yet notwithstanding this, his fervor and fierceness had its intervals;
there being some times when the Paroxysms of his heat and courage did intermit,
and the man was surprised and betrayed by his own fears. Witness his passionate
crying out, when he was upon the Sea in danger of his life, and his fearful
deserting his Master in the Garden, but especially his carriage in the
Highpriests Hall, when the confident charge of a sorry Maid made him sink so
far beneath himself, and notwithstanding his great and resolute promises so
shamefully deny his Master, and that with curses and imprecations. But he was
in danger, and passion prevailed over his understanding, and fear betrayed the
succors which reason offered, and being intent upon nothing but the present
safety of his life, he heeded not what he did, when he disowned his Master, to
save himself; so dangerous is it to be left to our selves, and to have our
natural passions let' loose upon us.

3. CONSIDER him as a Disciple and a Christian, and we shall find him exemplary
in the great instances of Religion. Singular his Humility, and lowliness of
mind. With what a passionate earnestness upon the conviction of a Miracle, did
he beg of our Savior to depart from him: accounting himself not worthy, that
the Son of God should come near so vile a sinner. When our Lord by that
wonderful condescension stoopt to wash his Apostles feet, he could by no means
be persuaded to admit it, not thinking it fit, that so great a person should
submit himself to so servile an office toward so mean a person as himself; nor
could he be induced to accept it, till our Lord was in a manner forced to
threaten him into obedience. When Cornelius heightened in his apprehensions of
him by an immediate command from God concerning him, would have entertained him
with expressions of more than ordinary honor and veneration; so far was he
from complying with it, that he plainly told him, he was no other than such a
man as himself. With how much candor and modesty does he treat the inferior
Rulers and Ministers of the Church. He, upon whom Antiquity heaps so many
honorable titles, stiling himself no other than their fellow-Presbyter.
Admirable his love to, and zeal for his Master, which he thought he could never
express at too high a rate: for his sake venturing on the greatest dangers, and
exposing himself to the most imminent hazards of life. 'Twas in his quarrel
that he drew his Sword against a Band of Soldiers, and an armed multitude; and
'twas love to his Master drew him into that imprudent advice, that he should
seek to save himself, and avoid those sufferings that were coming upon him,
that made him promise and engage so deep, to suffer and die with him. Great was
his forwardness in owning Christ to be the Messiah and Son of God; which drew
from our Lord that honorable Encomium, Blessed art thou Simon Bar Jonah. But
greater his courage and constancy in confessing Christ before his most
inveterate enemies, especially after he had recovered himself of his fall. With
how much plainness did he tell the Jews at every turn to their very faces, that
they were the Murderers and Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory. Nay, with what an
undaunted courage, with what an Heroic greatness of mind did he tell that very
Sanhedrim, that had sentenced and condemned him, that they were guilty of his
murder, and that they could never be saved any other way, than by this very
Jesus, whom they had crucified and put to death.

4. LASTLY, let us reflect upon him as an Apostle, as a Pastor and Guide of
Souls. And so we find him faithful and diligent in his office, with an infinite
zeal endeavoring to instruct the ignorant, reduce the erroneous, to strengthen
the weak, and confirm the strong, to reclaim the vicious, and turn Souls to
righteousness. We find him taking all opportunities of preaching to the people,
converting many thousands at once. How many voyages and travels did he undergo?
with how unconquerable a patience did he endure all conflicts and trials, and
surmount all difficulties and oppositions, that he might plant and propagate
the Christian Faith? Not thinking much to lay down his own life, to promote and
further it. Nor did he only do his duty himself, but as one of the prime
Superintendents of the Church, and as one that was sensible of the value and
the worth of Souls, he was careful to put others in mind of theirs, earnestly
pressing and persuading the Pastors and Governors of it, To feed the flock of
God, 1 Pet. 5.3, 4.
To take upon them the Rule and Inspection of it freely and willingly, not out
of a sinister end, merely of gaining advantages to themselves, but out of a
sincere design of doing good to Souls; that they would treat them mildly and
gently, and be themselves examples of Piety and Religion to them, as the best
way to make their Ministry successful and effectual. And because he could not
be always present to teach and warn men, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 15.
he cea^^d not by Letters to stir up their minds to the remembrance and
practice of what they had been taught. A course, he tells them, which he was
resolved to hold as long as he lived, as thinking it meet while he was in this
Tabernacle, to stir them up, by putting them in mind of these things, that so
they might be able after his decease, to have them always in remembrance. And
this may lead us to the consideration of those Writings, which he left behind
him for the benefit of the Church.

5. NOW the Writings that entitle themselves to this Apostle, were either
genuine, or supposititious. The genuine Writings are his two Epistles, which
make up part of the Sacred Canon. For the first of them, no certain account can
be had when it was written. Though Baronius and most Writers commonly assign it
to the year of Christ Forty Four. But this cannot be, Peter not being at Rome
(from whence it is supposed to have been written) at that time, as we shall see
anon. He wrote it to the Jewish Converts, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia,
and the Countries thereabouts, chiefly upon the occasion of that persecution,
which had been raised at Jerusalem. And accordingly the main design of it, is
to confirm and comfort them under their present sufferings and persecutions,
and to direct and instruct them how to carry themselves in the several states
and relations, both of the Civil, and the Christian life. For the place whence
it was written, it is expressly dated from Babylon. But what, or where this
Babylon is, is not so easy to determine. Some think it was Babylon in Egypt,
and probably Alexandria; and that there Peter preached the Gospel. Others will
have it to have been Babylon the Ancient Metropolis of Assyria, and where great
numbers of Jews dwelt ever since the times of their Captivities. But we need
not send Peter on so long an Errand, if we embrace the Notion of a Learned L.
Capell. Append. ad Hist. App. page 42.
man, who by Babylon will figuratively understand Jerusalem, no longer now the
holy City, but a kind of spiritual Babylon, in which the Church of God did at
this time groan under great servitude and captivity. And this Notion of the
Word he endeavors to make good, by calling in to his assistance two of the
Ancient Cyril. Alex. and Procop Gaz. in Esa. 53.
Fathers, who so understand that of the Prophet, We have healed Babylon, but
she was not healed. Where the Prophet ( say they) by Babylon means Jerusalem,
as differing nothing from the wickedness of the Nations, nor conforming it self
to the Law of God. But generally the Writers of the Romish Church, and the more
moderate of the Reformed party, acquiescing herein in the Judgment of
Antiquity, by Babylon understand Rome. Chap. 18. v. 2, 10, 21.
And so it is plain S. John calls it in his Revelation, either from its
conformity in power and greatness to that ancient City, or from that great
Idolatry which at this time reigned in Rome. And so we may suppose S. Peter to
have written it from Rome, not long after his coming thither, though the
precise time be not exactly known.

6. AS for the Second Epistle, it was not accounted ol old of equal value and
authority with the First, and therefore for some Ages not taken into the Sacred
Canon, as is expressly affirmed by H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3. p. 72. Orig. apud
Niceph. lib. 5. c. 16. p. 365.
Eusebius, and many of the Ancients before him. The Ancient Syriack Church did
not receive it, and accordingly it is not to be found in their ancient Vid.
Edv. Pocock. Praefat. ad Epist. Sir. a se edit.
Copies of the New Testament. Yea, those of that Church at this day do not own
it as Canonical, but only read it privately, as we do the Apocryphal Books. The
greatest Hier. de script. Eccl. in Petr.
exception that I can find against it, was the difference of its style from the
other Epistle; and therefore it was presumed, that they were not both written
by the same hand. But S. Hierom, who tells us the objection, does Quaest. 11.
ad Hedib. Tom. 3. p. 151.
elsewhere himself return the answer, That the difference in the style and
manner of writing might very well arise from hence, that S. Peter according to
his different circumstances, and the necessity of affairs, was forced to use
several Amanuenses and Interpreters; sometimes S. Mark, and after his departure
some other person, which might justly occasion a difference in the style and
character of these Epistles. Not to say, that the same person may vastly alter
and vary his style according to the times when, or the persons to whom, or the
subjects about which he writes, or the temper and disposition he is in at the
time of writing, or the care that is used in doing it. Who sees not the vast
difference of Jeremie's writing in his Prophecy, and in his Book of
Lamentations? between S. John's in his Gospel, his Epistles, and Apocalypse?
How often does S. Paul alter his style in several of his Epistles, in some more
lofty and elegant, in others more rough and harsh? Besides hundreds of
instances that might be given both in Ecclesiastical and Foreign Writers, too
obvious to need insisting on in this place. The learned Annot. in 2 Pet. 1.
Grotius will have this Epistle to have been written by Symeon, S. James his
immediate Successor in the Bishopric of Jerusalem, and that the word [ Peter]
was inserted into the Title by another hand. But as a Judicious Dr. Ham. in
Argum. Epist.
person of our own observes, these were but his Posthume Annotations, published
by others, and no doubt never intended as the deliberate result of that great
man's Judgment: especially since he himself tacitly acknowledges, that all
Copies extant at this day read the Title and Inscription, as it is in our
Books. And indeed there is a concurrence of circumstances to prove S. Peter to
be the Author of it. It bears his name in the Front and Title, yea, somewhat
more expressly than the former, which has only one, this, both his Names.
There Is a passage in it, that cannot well relate to any but him. When he tells
us, that he was present with Christ in the holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18.
When he received from God the Father honor, and glory; Where he heard the
voice which came from Heaven, from the excellent glory, This is my Beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased. This evidently refers to Christ's Transfiguration,
where none were present, but Peter, and the two Sons of Zebedee, neither of
which were ever thought of to be the Author of this Epistle. Besides, that
there is an admirable consent and agreement in many passages between these two
Epistles, as it were easy to show in particular instances. Add to this, that
S. Jude speaking of the Scoffers who should come in the last time, Jud. v. 17,
18.
walking after their own ungodly lusts, cites this as that which had been
before spoken by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Pet. 3.2, 3.
wherein he plainly quotes the words of this Second Epistle of Peter,
affirming, That there should come in the last days scoffers, walking after
their own lusts. And that this does agree to Peter, will further appear by
this, that he tells us of these Scoffers, that should come in the last days,
that is, before the destruction of Jerusalem (as that phrase is often used in
the New Testament) that they should say, Where is the promise of his coming?
Which clearly respects their making light of those threatenings of our Lord,
whereby he had foretold, that he would shortly come in Judgment for the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the Jewish Nation. This he now puts them in mind
of, as what probably he had before told them of Viva voce, Lib. 4. c. 21. p.
422.
when he was amongst them. For so we find he did elsewhere. Lactantiusassuring
us, That amongst many strange and wonderful things which Peter and Paul
preached at Rome, and left upon Record, this was one, That within a short time
God would send a Prince, who should destroy the Jews, and lay their Cities
level with the ground, straightly besiege them, destroy them with Famine, so that
they should feed upon one another: That their Wives and Daughters should be
ravished, and their Childrens brains dashed out before their faces; that all
things should be laid waste by Fire and Sword, and themselves perpetually
banished from their own Country; and this for their insolent and merciless
usage of the innocent and dear Son of God. All which, as he observes, came to
pass soon after their death, when Vespasian came upon the Jews, and
extinguished both their Name and Nation. And what Peter here foretold at Rome,
we need not question but he had done before to those Jews, to whom he wrote
this Epistle. Wherein he especially antidotes them against those corrupt and
poisonous principles, wherewith many, and especially the followers of Simon
Magus began to infect the Church of Christ. And this but a little time before
his death, as appears from that passage in it, where he tells them, Chap. 1. v.
14.
That he knew he must shortly put off his earthly Tabernacle.

7. BESIDES these Divine Epistles, there were other supposititious writings
which in the first Ages were fathered upon S. Peter. Such was the Book called
his Acts, mentioned by Orig. Tom. 20. in Joan.
Origin, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
Eusebius, and others, but rejected by them. Such was his Gospel, which
probably at first was nothing else but the Gospel written by S. Mark, dictated
to him (as is generally thought) by S. Peter; and therefore as In Petro, ut
supr.
S. Hierom tells us, said to be his. Though in the next Age there appeared a
Book under that Title, mentioned by Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 12. p. 213.
Serapion Bishop of Antioch, and by him at first suffered to be read in the
Church, but afterward upon a more careful perusal of it, he rejected it as
Apocryphal, as it was by others after him. Another was the Book styled, His
Preaching, mentioned and quoted both by Strom. lib. 6. p. 635. and in Excerpt.
Graec. ex Hypotyp. p. 809.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and by Orig. Tom. 13. in Joan.
Origin, but not acknowledged by them to be Genuine: Nay, expressly said to have
been forged by Heretics, by an ancient De Haeret. non rebapt. apud Cypr. p.
142.
Author contemporary with S. Cyprian. The next was his Apocalypse, or
Revelation, rejected, as H. Eccl. lib. 7. c. 19. p. 735.
Sozomen tells us, by the Ancients as Spurious, but yet read in some Churches
in Palestine in his time. The last was the Book called, His Judgment, which
probably was the same with that called Vid. Ruffin. Exposit. Symbol. inter
Oper. Hier. Tom. 4. p. 113.
Hermes, or Pastor, a Book of good use and esteem in the first times of
Christianity, and which, as H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
Eusebius tells us, was not only frequently cited by the Ancients, but also
publicly read in Churches.

8. WE shall conclude this Section by considering Peter with respect to his
several Relations: That he was married, is unquestionable, the Sacred History
mentioning his Wifes Mother: his Wife (might we believe Comment. de S. Petr.
apud Sur. ad diem 29. Jun. n. 2.
Metaphrastes) being the Daughter of Aristobulus, Brother to Barnabas the
Apostle. And though Ep. ad Julian. Tom. 1. p. 207.
S. Hierom would persuade us, that he left her behind him, together with his
Nets, when he forsook all to follow Christ; yet we know that Father too well,
to be over-confident upon his word in a case of Marriage or Single life,
wherein he is not over-scrupulous sometimes to strain a point, to make his
opinion more fair and plausible. The best is, we have an infallible Authority
which plainly intimates the contrary, 1 Cor. 9.5. Vid. Clem. Recognit. lib. 7.
fol. 76. p. 2.
the testimony of S. Paul, who tells us of Cephas, that he led about a Wife, a
Sister, along with him, who for the most part mutually cohabited and lived
together, for ought that can be proved to the contrary. Strom. lib. 7. p. 736.
Clemens Alexandrinus gives us this account, though he tells us not the time or
place, That Peter seeing his Wife going toward Martyrdom, exceedingly rejoiced
that she was called to so great an honor, and that she was now returning home,
encouraging and earnestly exhorting her, and calling her by her Name, bad her
to be mindful of our Lord. Such ( says he) was the Wedlock of that blessed
couple, and the perfect disposition and agreement in those things that were
dearest to them. By her he is said to have had a Bar. ad An. 60. n. 32.
Daughter, called Petronilla ( Vbi supr.
Metaphrastes adds a Son) how truly I know not. This only is certain, that
Strom. lib. 3. p. 448.
Clemens of Alexandria reckons Peter for one of the Apostles that was Married
and had Children. And surely he who was so good a man, and so good an Apostle,
was as good in the relation both of an Husband and a Father.

SECT. XI. An Enquiry into S. Peter's going to Rome.
Peter' 's being at Rome granted in general. The account of it given by
Baronius and the Writers of that Church rejected, and disproved. No foundation
for it in the History of the Apostolic Acts. No mention of it in S. Paul' s
Epistle to the Romans. No news of his being there, at S. Paul' s coming to
Rome, nor intimation of any such thing in the several Epistles which S. Paul
wrote from thence. S. Peter' s first being at Rome inconsistent with the time
of the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem. And with an Ancient Tradition, that the
Apostles were commanded to stay Twelve years in Judaea after Christ' s death. A
passage out of Clemens Alexandrinus noted and corrected to that purpose.
Difference among the Writers of the Romish Church in their Accounts. Peter 's
being XXV years Bishop of Rome, no solid foundation for it in Antiquity. The
Planting and Governing that Church equally attributed to Peter and Paul. S.
Peter when (probably) came to Rome. Different dates of his Martyrdom assigned
by the Ancients. A probable account given of it.

1. THOUGH it be not my purpose to swim against the Stream and Current of
Antiquity, in denying S. Peter to have been at Rome, an Assertion easilier
perplexed and entangled, than confuted and disproved; yet may we grant the
main, without doing any great service to that Church, there being evidence
enough to every impartial and considering man, to spoil that smooth and
plausible Scheme of Times, which Baronius and the Writers of that Church have
drawn with so much care and diligence. And in order to this we shall first
enquire, whether that Account which Bellarmine and Baronius give us of Peter's
being at Rome be tolerably reconcilable with the History of the Apostles Acts
recorded by S. Luke, which will be best done by briefly presenting S. Peter's
Acts in their just Series and order of Time, and then seeing what countenance
and foundation their Account can receive from hence.

2. AFTER our Lord's Ascension, we find Peter, for the first year at least,
staying with the rest of the Apostles at Jerusalem. In the next year he was
sent, together with S. John, by the command of the Apostles, to Samaria, to
preach the Gospel to that City, and the parts about it. About three years after
S. Paul meets him at Jerusalem, with whom he staid some time. In the two
following years he visited the late planted Churches, preached at Lydda and
Joppa, where having tarried many days, he thence removed to Caesarea, where he
preached to, and baptized Cornelius and his Family. Whence after some time he
returned to Jerusalem, where he probably staid; till cast into prison by Herod,
and delivered by the Angel. After which we hear no more of him, till three or
four years after we find him in the Council at Jerusalem. After which he had
the contest with S. Paul at Antioch. And thence forward the Sacred Story is
altogether silent in this matter. So that in all this time, we find not the
least footstep of any intimation that he went to Rome. This Ad An. 39. number. 12.
ad An. 34. n. 285.
Baronius well foresaw, and therefore once and again inserts this caution, that
S. Luke did not design to record all the Apostles Acts, and that he has omitted
many things which were done by Peter. Which surely no man ever intended to
deny. But then that he should omit a matter of such vast moment and importance
to the whole Christian World, that not one syllable should be said of a Church
planted by Peter at Rome; a Church that was to be Paramount, the seat of all
Spiritual Power and Infallibility, and to which all other Churches were to vail
and do homage; nay, that he should not so much as mention that ever he was
there, and yet all this said to be done within the time he designed to write
of, is by no means reasonable to suppose. Especially considering, that S. Luke
records many of his journeys and travels, and his preaching at several places,
of far less consequence and concernment. Nor let this be thought the worse of,
because a negative Argument, since it carries so much rational evidence along
with it, that any man who is not plainly biased by Interest, will be satisfied
with it.

3. BUT let us proceed a little further to enquire, whether we can meet any
probable footsteps afterward. About the year Fifty three, toward the end of
Claudius his Reign S. Paul is thought to have writ his Epistle to the Church at
Rome, wherein he spends the greatest part of one Chapter in saluting particular
persons that were there; amongst whom it might reasonably have been expected,
that S. Peter should have had the first place. And supposing with Ad. An. 58.
n. 51.
Baronius, that Peter at this time might be absent from the City, preaching the
Gospel in some parts in the West, yet we are not sure that S. Paul knew of
this, and if he did, it is strange that in so large an Epistle, wherein he had
occasion enough, there should be neither direct nor indirect mention of him, or
of any Church there founded by him. Nay, S. Paul himself intimates, Romans 1.10,
11, 12.
what an earnest desire he had to come thither, that he might impart unto them
some spiritual gifts, to the end they might be established in the Faith, for
which there could have been no such apparent cause had Peter been there so
lately, and so long before him. Well, S. Paul himself not many years after is
sent to Rome, Ann. Chr. LVI, or as Eusebius, LVII, (though Baronius makes it
two years after) about the second year of Nero; when he comes thither, does he
go to sojourn with Peter, as it is likely he would, had he been there? No, but
dwelt by himself in his own hired house. Acts 28.17.
No sooner was he come, but he called the chief of the Jews together,
acquainted them with the cause and end of his coming, explains the doctrine of
Christianity, which when they rejected, he tells them, That henceforth the
Salvation of God was sent unto the Gentiles who would hear it, to whom he would
now address himself. Which seems to intimate, that however some few of the
Gentiles might have been brought over, yet that no such harvest had been made
before his coming, as might reasonably have been expected from S. Peter's
having been so many years amongst them. Within the two first years after S.
Paul's coming to Rome, he wrote Epistles to several Churches, to the
Colossians, Ephesians, Philippians, and one to Philemon, in none whereof there
is the least mention of S. Peter, or from whence the least probability can be
derived, that he had been there. Chap. 4.10, 11
In that to the Colossians, he tells them, that of the Jews at Rome, he had had
no other fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, which had been a comfort unto
him, save only Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus who was called Justus, which
evidently excludes S. Peter. And in that to Timothy, which Baronius confesses
to have been written a little before his Martyrdom, (though probably it was
written the same time with the rest above mentioned) he tells him, 2 Timothy 4.16.
That at his first answer at Rome, no man stood with him, but that all men
forsook him. Which we can hardly believe S. Peter would have done, had he then
been there. He further tells him, That only Luke was with him, that Crescens
was gone to this place, Titus to that, and Tychicus left at another. Strange!
that if Peter was at this time gone from Rome, S. Paul should take no notice of
it as well as the rest. Was he so inconsiderable a person, as not to be worth
the remembering? or his errand of so small importance, as not to deserve a place
in S. Paul's account, as well as that of Crescens to Galatia, or of Titus to
Dalmatia? Surely, the true reason was, that S. Peter as yet had not been at
Rome, and so there could be no foundation for it.

4. IT were no hard matter, further to demonstrate the inconsistency of that
Account which Bellarmine and Baronius give us of Peter's being at Rome, from
the time of the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem. For if S. Paul went up to that
Council Fourteen years after his own Conversion, as he plainly intimates; Gal.
2.1.
and that he himself was converted Ann. XXXV, somewhat less than two years
after the death of Christ, then it plainly appears, that this Council was
holden Ann. XLVIII, in the sixth year of Claudius, if not somewhat sooner, for
S. Paul's (...) does not necessarily imply, that Fourteen years were completely
past, (...) signifying circa, as well as post, but that it was near about that
time. This being granted (and if it be not, it is easy to make it good) then
three things amongst others will follow from it. First, That whereas, according
to Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. c. 6. Col. 615.
Bellarmine and Bar. ad An. 39. n. 15.
Baronius, S. Peter after his first coming to Rome (which they place Ann. XLIV,
and the second of Claudius) was seven years before he returned thence to the
Council at Jerusalem, they are strangely out in their story, there being but
three, or at most four years between his going thither, and the celebration of
that Council. Secondly, That when they tell Ibid. and Bar. ad An 51. n. 1, 3.
us, that S. Peter's leaving Rome to come to the Council, was upon the occasion
of the decree of Claudius, banishing all Jews out of the City, this can no ways
be. For Lib. 7. c. 6. fol. 297. p. 2.
Orosius does not only affirm, but prove it from Josephus, that Claudius his
Decree was published in the Ninth Year of his Reign, or Ann. Chr. LI, Three
Years at least after the Celebration of the Council. Thirdly, That when Ad An.
58. n. 51.
Baronius tells us, that the Reason why Peter went to Rome after the breaking
up of the Synod, was because Claudius was now dead, he not daring to go before
for fear of the Decree, this can be no reason at all, the Council being ended
at least Three Years before that Decree took place: so that he might safely
have gone thither without the least danger from it. It might further be showed
(if it were necessary) that the account which even they themselves give us, is
not very consistent with it self. So fatally does a bad cause draw Men whether
they will or no into Errors and Mistakes.

5. THE truth is, the learned Men of that Church are not well agreed among
themselves, to give in their verdict in this case. And indeed, how should they,
when the thing it self affords no solid foundation for it? Onuphrius a man of
great learning and industry in all matters of antiquity, and who (as the Hier.
Barnab. de vit. Bar. l. 1. c. 18.
writer of Baronius his Life informs us) designed before Baronius to write the
History of the Church, goes a way by himself, in assigning the time of S.
Peter's founding his See both at Antioch and Onuphr. Annot. ad Plat. in vit.
Petr. p. 9. and in Fast.
Rome. For finding by the account of the Sacred story, that Peter did not leave
Judaea for the Ten first Years after our Lord's Ascension, and consequently
could not in that time erect his See at Antioch; he affirms, that he went first
to Rome, whence returning to the Council at Jerusalem, he thence went to
Antioch, where he remained Seven Years, till the Death of Claudius, and having
spent almost the whole Reign of Nero in several parts of Europe, returned in
the last of Nero's Reign to Rome, and there died. An opinion, for which he is
sufficiently chastised by Ad Ann. 39. N. 12.
Baronius, and others of that Party. And here I cannot but remark the ingenuity
(for the learning sufficiently commends it self) of Annot. ad Eusebius. lib. 2. c.
16.
Monsieur Valois, who freely confesses the mistake of Baronius, Petavius, etc.
in making Peter go to Rome, Ann. XLIV, the Second Year of Claudius, when as it
is plain ( says he) from the History of the Acts, that Peter went not out of
Judaea and Syria, till the Death of Herod, Claudii Ann. IV, Two whole years
after. Consonant to which, as he observes, is what Apollonius, a Writer of the
Second Century, reports from a Tradition current in his time, that the Apostles
did not depart a sunder till the Twelfth Year after Christ's Ascension, our
Lord himself having so commanded them. In confirmation whereof, let me add a
passage that I meet with in Clemens of Stromat. lib. 6. p. 636.
Alexandria, where from S. Peter he records this Speech of our Savior to his
Apostles, spoken probably either a little before his Death, or after his
Resurrection. (...). If any Israelite shall repent, and believe in God through
my Name, his sins shall be forgiven him after twelve years. Go ye into the
World, lest any should say, we have not heard. This passage, as ordinarily
pointed in all Editions that I have seen, is scarce capable of any tolerable
sense: for what is the meaning, of a penitent Israelite's being pardoned after
twelve years? It is therefore probable, yea, certain with me, that the stop
ought to be after (...), and (...) joined to the following clause, and then the
sense will run clear and smooth; If any Jew shall repent, and believe the
Gospel, he shall be pardoned; but after twelve years go ye into all the World,
that none may pretend that they have not heard the sound of the Gospel. The
Apostles were first to Preach the Gospel to the Jews for some considerable
time, Twelve Years after Christ's Ascension, in and about Judaea, and then to
betake themselves to the Provinces of the Gentile-World, to make known to them
the glad tidings of Salvation; exactly answerable to the Tradition mentioned by
Apollonius. Besides, the Chronicon Alexandrinum tells us, that Peter came not
to Rome till the Seventh Year of Claudius, Ann. Christi XLIX. So little
certainty can there be of any matter, wherein there is no truth. Nay, the same
excellent Man before H. Vales. Annot. in Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 18. p. 37
mentioned does not stick elsewhere to profess, he wonders at Baronius, that he
should make Peter come from Rome, banished thence by Claudius his Edict, to the
Synod at Jerusalem, the same Year, viz. Ann. Claudii IX, a thing absolutely
inconsistent with that story of the Apostles Acts, recorded by S. Luke, wherein
there is the space of no less than Three Years from the time of that Synod, to
the Decree of Claudius. It being evident, what he observes, that after the
celebration of that Council, S. Paul went back to Antioch, afterward into
Syria and Cilicia to Preach the Gospel; thence into Phrygia, Galatia and Mysia;
from whence he went into Macedonia, and first Preached at Philippi, then at
Thessalonica and Beroea, afterward stayed some considerable time at Athens,
and last of all went to Corinth, where he met with Aquila and Priscilla, lately
come from Italy, banished Rome with the rest of the Jews, by the Decree of
Claudius: all which by an easy and reasonable computation can take up no less
than Three Years at least.

6. THAT which caused Baronius to split upon so many Rocks, was not so much
want of seeing them, which a Man of his parts and industry could not but in a
great measure see, as the unhappy necessity of defending those unsound
principles which he had undertaken to maintain. For being to make good Peter's
five and twenty years presidency over the Church of Rome, he was forced to
confound times, and dislocate stories, that he might bring all his ends
together. What foundation this story of Peter's being five and twenty years
Bishop of Rome, has in antiquity, I find not, unless it sprang from hence, that
Eusebius places Peter's coming to Rome in the Second Year of Claudius, and his
Martyrdom in the Fourteenth of Nero, between which there is the just space of
five and twenty years. Whence those that came after concluded, that he sat
Bishop there all that time. It cannot be denied, but that in S. Hierom's
Translation it is expressly said, that he continued five and twenty years Bishop
of that City. But then it is as evident, that this was his own addition, who
probably set things down as the report went in his time, no such thing being to
be found in the Greek Copy of (...). ad Number. (...). p. 204.
Eusebius. Nor indeed does he ever there or elsewhere positively affirm S.
Peter to have been Bishop of Rome, but only that he preached the Gospel there.
And expressly H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 71.
affirms, that he and S. Paul being dead, Linus was the first Bishop of Rome.
To which I may add, that when the Ancients speak of the Bishops of Rome, and
the first Originals of that Church, they equally attribute the founding, and
the Episcopacy and Government of it to Peter and Paul, making the one as much
concerned in it as the other. Thus Contr. Carpocrat. Haeres. XXVII. p. 91.
Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of that See, places Peter and Paul in the
front, as the first Bishops of Rome, (...), Peter and Paul Apostles became the
first Bishops of Rome, then Linus, etc. And again a little after, (...), the
succession of the Bishops of Rome was in this manner, Peter and Paul, Linus,
Cletus, etc. And De excid. Jud. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 292.
Egesippus speaking of their coming to Rome, equally says of them, that they
were Doctores Christianorum, sublimes operibus, clari magisterio, the
Instructors of the Christians, admirable for miracles, and renowned for their
authority. However granting not only that he was there, but that he was Bishop,
and that for five and twenty years together, yet what would this make for the
unlimited Sovereignty and Universality of that Church, unless a better evidence
than Feed my sheep could be produced for its uncontrollable Supremacy and
Dominion over the whole Christian World?

7. THE sum is this, granting what none that has any reverence for Antiquity
will deny, that S. Peter was at Rome, he probably came thither some few Years
before his death, joined with, and assisted S. Paul in Preaching of the Gospel,
and then both sealed the Testimony of it with their Blood. The date of his
Death is differently assigned by the Ancients. Chron. p. 162.
Eusebius places it Ann. LXIX. in the Fourteenth of Nero, Haeres. 27. p. 51.
Epiphanius in the Twelfth. That which seems to me most probable is, that it
was in the Tenth, or the Year LXV. which I thus compute: Nero's burning of Rome
is placed by Annal. lib. 15. c. 38.41. p. 316, etc.
Tacitus, under the Consulship of C. Lecanius, and M. Licinius, about the Month
of July, that is, Ann. Chr. LXIV. This act procured him the infinite hatred and
clamours of the People, which having in vain endeavored several ways to remove
and pacify, he at last resolved upon this project, to derive the Odium upon
the Christians, whom therefore both to appease the Gods, and please the People,
he condemned as guilty of the fact, and caused to be executed with all manner
of acute and exquisite Tortures. This Persecution we may suppose began about
the end of that, or the beginning of the following Year. And under this
Persecution, I doubt not, it was that S. Peter suffered, and changed Earth for
Heaven.

The End of S. Peter' s Life.
THE LIFE OF S. PAUL.
S. PAUL.
He was beheaded by the command of Nero the Roman Emperor. Place this to the
Epistle for the Conversion of S. Paul.



St Paul's Conversion.
Act. 9.3.4. And as he journied he came near to Damascus and suddenly there
shined round about him a light from heaven and he fell to the earth and heard a
voice saying unto him Saul Saul etc. Ver. 7 And the men which journied with him
stood speechless hearing a voice but seeing no man.



SECT I. Of S. PAVL, from his Birth till his Conversion.
S. Paul, why placed next Peter. Tarsus the place of his Birth; an University,
and a Roman Corporation. His Parents of the old stock of Israel; descended of
the Tribe of Benjamin. Jacob' s Prophecy applied to him by the Ancients. His
Names; Saul, whence; Paul, when assumed, and why. His Education in the Schools
of Tarsus, and in the Trade of Tent-making. The Custom of the Jews in bringing
up their Youth to Manual Trades. His study of the Law under the Tutorage of
Gamaliel. This Gamaliel, who. Why said to have been a Christian. Sitting at the
feet of their Masters the posture of learners. His joining himself to the Sect
of the Pharisees. An Enquiry into the Temper and Manners of that Sect. The
fiery Zeal and Activity of his Temper. His being engaged in Stephen' s
Martyrdom. His violent persecution of the Church. His journey to Damascus. His
Conversion by the way, and the manner of it. His blindness. His rapture into
the third Heaven, when (probably.) His sight restored. His being Baptized, and
preaching Christ.

THOUGH S. Paul was none of the Twelve Apostles, yet had he the honor of being
an Apostle extraordinary, and to be immediately called in a way peculiar to
himself. He justly deserves a place next S. Peter; for as in their lives they
were pleasant and lovely, so in their death they were not divided: especially
if it be true, that they both suffered not only for the same cause, but at the
same time, as well as place. S. Paul was born at Tarsus, the Metropolis of
Cilicia; a City infinitely rich and populous, and what contributed more to the
fame and honor of it, an Academy, furnished with Schools of Learning, where
the Scholars so closely plied their Studies, that as Geograph. lib. 14. p. 463.
Strabo informs us, they excelled in all Arts of polite Learning and Philosophy
those of other places, yea, even of Alexandria, and Athens it self; and that
even Rome was beholden to it for many of its best Professors. It was a Roman
Municipium, or free Corporation, invested with many Franchises and Privileges
by Julius Caesar, and Augustus, who granted to the Inhabitants of it the
honors and immunities of Citizens of Rome. Acts 22.25, 26
In which respect S. Paul owned and asserted it as the privilege of his
Birthright, that he was a Roman, and thereby free from being bound or beaten.
True it is, that De Script. Eccl. in Paul.
S. Hierom (followed herein by Bellon. Observe. lib. 2. c. 99 p. 366.
one, who himself traveled in these parts) makes him born at Gischalis, a well
fortified Town in Judaea, which being besieged and taken by the Roman Army, his
Parents fled away with him and dwelt at Tarsus. But besides that this
contradicts S. Paul, who expressly affirms, that he was born at Tarsus, there
needs no more to confute this opinion, than that Com. in Philem. p. 263. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom elsewhere slights it as a fabulous report.

2. HIS Parents were Jews, and that of the Ancient stock, not entering in by the
Gate of proselytism, but originally descended from that Nation, which surely he
means, when he says, That he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, either because both
his Parents were Jews, or rather, that all his Ancestors had been so. They
belonged to the Tribe of Benjamin, whose Founder was the youngest son of the
old Patriarch Jacob, who thus prophesied of him. Genesis 49.27.
Benjamin shall raven as a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and
at night he shall divide the spoil. This prophetical character Adv. Marc. lib.
5. c. 1. p. 461
Tertullian, and others after him will have to be accomplished in our Apostle.
As a ravening Wolf in the morning devouring the prey, that is, as a persecutor
of the Churches, in the first part of his life destroying the flock of God: In
the evening dividing the spoil, that is, in his declining and reduced age, as
Doctor of the Nations, feeding and distributing to Christ's sheep.

3. WE find him described by two names in Scripture, one Hebrew, and the other
Latin; probably referring both to his Jewish and Roman capacity and relation.
The one, Saul, a name frequent and common in the Tribe of Benjamin ever since
the first King of Israel, who was of that name, was chosen out of that Tribe.
In memory whereof they were wont to give their Children this name at their
Circumcision. His other was, Paul, assumed by him, as some think, at his
Conversion, to denote his humility; as others, in memory of his converting
Sergius Paulus the Roman Governor, in imitation of the Generals and Emperors
of Rome, who were wont from the places and Nations that they conquered, to
assume the name, as an additional honor and title to themselves, as Scipio
Africanus, Caesar Germanicus, Parthicus, Sarmaticus, etc. But this seems no way
consistent with the great humility of this Apostle. More probable therefore it
is, what Praefat. in Ep. ad Romans fol. 132. Tom. 3.
Origin thinks, That he had a double name given him at his Circumcision; Saul,
relating to his Jewish original; and Paul, referring to the Roman Corporation,
where he was born. And this the Scripture seems to favor, when it says, Saul,
who also is called Paul. Or if it was taken up by him afterward, it was
probably done at his Conversion, according to the custom and manner of the
Hebrews, who used many times upon solemn and eminent occasions, especially upon
their entering upon a more strict and religious course of life, to change their
names, and assume one which they had not before.

4. IN his Youth he was brought up in the Schools of Tarsus, fully instructed
in all the liberal Arts and Sciences, whereby he became admirably acquainted
with foreign and external Authors. Together with which he was brought up to a
particular Trade and course of life; according to the great Maxim and principle
of the Jews, That, (...) Talm. Tract. Kiddusch. c. 1. ap. Buxtorf. in voc. (...)
He who teaches not his son a Trade, teaches him to be a Thief. They thought it
not only fit, but a necessary part of Education, for their wisest and most
learned Rabbis to be brought up to a manual Trade, whereby, if occasion was,
they might be able to maintain themselves. Hence (as Annot. in Act. 18.3.
Drusius observes) nothing more common in their writings, than to have them
denominated from their callings, Rabbi Jose the Tanner, Rabbi Jochanan the
Shoemaker, Rabbi Juda the Baker, etc. A custom taken up by the Christians,
especially the Epiph. 80. p. 451.
Monks and Asceticks of the Primitive times, who together with their strict
profession and almost incredible exercises of devotion, each took upon him a
particular Trade, whereat he daily wrought, and by his own hand-labour
maintained himself. And this course of life the Jews were very careful should
be free from all suspicion of scandal. (...) (as they call Buxtorf. ubi supr.
it) a clean, that is, honest Trade, being wont to say, That he was happy that
had his Parents employed in an honest and commendable Calling; as he was
miserable, who saw them conversant in any sordid and dishonest course of life.
The Trade our Apostle was put to, was that of Tent-making, whereat he wrought,
Acts 18.3.
for some particular reasons, even after his calling to the Apostolate. An
honest, but mean course of life, and as De Laud. S. Paul. Tom. 5. p. 512.
Chrysostom observes, an argument that his Parents were not of the nobler and
better rank; however, it was an useful and gainful Trade, especially in those
warlike Countries, where Armies had such frequent use of Tents.

5. HAVING run through the whole circle of the Sciences, and laid the sure
foundations of humane Learning at Tarsus; he was by his Parents sent to
Jerusalem, to be perfected in the study of the Law, and put under the Tutorage
of Rabban Gamaliel. Acts 22.3. and 5.34.
This Gamaliel was the son of Rabban Symeon (probably presumed to be the same
Symeon that came into the Temple, and took Christ into his arms) President of
the Court of the Sanhedrim: he was a Doctor of the Law, a Person of great
wisdom and prudence, and head at that time of one of the Families of the
Schools at Jerusalem. A man of chief eminency and authority in the Jewish
Sanhedrim, and President of it at that very time when our Blessed Savior was
brought before it. He lived to a great Age, and was buried by Onkelos the
Proselyte, Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase (one who infinitely loved and
honored him) at his own vast expense and charge. He it was that made that wise
and excellent speech in the Sanhedrim, in favor of the Apostles and their
Religion. Nay, he himself is Clem. Recognit. lib. 1. p. 16, 17.
said (though I know not why) to have been a Christian, and his sitting amongst
the Senators to have been connived at by the Apostles, that he might be the
better friend to their affairs. Ap. Phot. Cod. CLXXI. Col. 384. extat Luciani
hac de re Epist. ap. Sur. ad 3. Aug. p. 31. and Bar. ad Ann. 415.
Chrysippus, Presbyter of the Church of Jerusalem adds, that he was brothers
son to Nicodemus, together with whom he and his son Abib were baptized by Peter
and John. This account he derives from Lucian, a Presbyter also of that Church
under John Patriarch of Jerusalem, who in an Epistle of his still extant, tells
us, that he had this, together with some other things, communicated to him in a
Vision by Gamaliel himself. Which if true, no better evidence could be desired
in this matter. At the feet of this Gamaliel, S. Paul tells us, he was brought
up, alluding to the custom of the Jewish Masters, who were wont to sit, while
their Disciples and Scholars stood at their feet. Which honorary custom
continued till the death of this Gamaliel, and was then left off. Their own
Sotah. c. 9. halac. 15. apud Lightf. Hor. H. in Matthew. 13.2.
Talmud telling us, That since old Rabban Gamaliel died, the honor of the Law
was perished, Purity and Pharisaism were destroyed: which the Gloss thus
explains, That whilst he lived, men were sound, and studied the Law standing;
but he being dead, weakness crept into the World, and they were forced to sit.

6. UNDER the Tuition of this great Master S. Paul was Educated in the
knowledge of the Law, Gal. 1.14.
wherein he made such quick and vast improvements, that he soon out-stript his
fellow-Disciples. Amongst the various Sects at that time in the Jewish Church,
he was especially Educated in the Principles and Institutions of the Pharisees:
Of which Sect was both his Father and his Master, whereof he became a most
earnest and zealous professor. This being, as himself tells us, the strictest
Sect of their Religion. For the understanding whereof, it may not be amiss a
little to enquire into the Temper and Manners of this Sect. Antiq. Jud. lib.
17. cap. 3. p. 585.
Josephus, though himself a Pharisee, gives this character of them, That they
were a crafty and subtle generation of men, and so perverse even to Princes
themselves, that they would not fear many times openly to affront and oppose
them. And so far had they Id. ibid. lib. 13. c. 23. p. 463.
insinuated themselves into the affections and estimations of the populacy,
that their good or ill word was enough to make, or blast any one with the
People, who would implicitly believe them, let their report be never so false
or malicious. And therefore Alexander Jannaeus, when he lay a dying, wisely
advised his Queen by all means to comply with them, and to seem to Govern by
their counsel and direction, affirming, that this had been the greatest cause
of his fatal miscarriage, and that which had derived the odium of the Nation
upon him, that he had offended this sort of men. Certain it is, that they were
infinitely proud and insolent, surly and ill-natured, that they hated all
mankind but themselves, and censured whoever would not be of their way, as a
Villain and a Reprobate: greatly zealous to gather Proselytes to their party,
not to make them more religious, but more fierce and cruel, more carping and
censorious, more heady and high-minded, in short, twofold more the children of
the Devil, than they were before. All Religion and kindness was confined within
the bounds of their own party, and the first principles wherewith they inspired
their new converts were, That none but they were the godly party, and that all
other persons were slaves and sons of the Earth: and therefore especially
endeavored to inspire them with a mighty zeal and fierceness against all that
differed from them, so that if any one did but speak a good word of our
Savior, he should be presently excommunicated and cast out, persecuted and
devoted to the death. To this end they were wont, not only to separate, but
discriminate themselves from the herd and community, by some peculiar notes and
badges of distinction; such as their long Robes, broad Phylacteries, and their
large Fringes and Borders of their Garments, whereby they made themselves known
from the rest of men. These dogged and ill-natured principles, together with
their seditious, unnatural, unjust, unmerciful, and uncharitable behavior,
which otherwise would have made them stink above-ground in the nostrils of men,
they sought to palliate and varnish over with a more than ordinary pretense and
profession of Religion: but were especially active and diligent in what cost
them little, the outward instances of Religion, such duties especially as did
more immediately refer to God, as frequent fasting, and praying, which they did
very often, and very long, with demure and mortified looks, in a whining and an
affected tone, and this almost in every corner of the streets: and indeed so
contrived the scheme of their Religion, that what they did, might appear
above-ground, where they might be seen of men to the best advantage.

7. THOUGH this seems to have been the general temper and disposition of the
party, yet doubtless there were some amongst them of better and honester
principles than the rest. In which number we have just reason to reckon our
Apostle: who yet was deeply leavened with the active and fiery genius of the
Sect; not able to brook any opposite party in Religion, especially if late and
novel. Insomuch that when the Jews were resolved to do execution upon Stephen,
he stood by and kept the clothes of them that did it. Whether he was any
further engaged in the death of this innocent and good man, we do not find.
However this was enough loudly to proclaim his approbation and consent. And
therefore elsewhere we find him indicting himself for this fact, and pleading
guilty. Acts 22.20.
When the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and
consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. God
chiefly inspects the heart, and if the vote be passed there, writes the man
guilty, though he stir no farther. It Is easy to murder another by a silent
wish, or a passionate desire. In all moral actions God values the will for the
deed, and reckons the man a companion in the sin, who, though possibly he may
never actually join in it, does yet inwardly applaud and like it. The storm
thus begun, increased a pace, and a violent persecution began to arise, which
miserably afflicted and dispersed the Christians at Jerusalem. In which our
Apostle was a prime Agent and Minister, raging about in all parts with a mad
and ungovernable zeal, searching out the Saints, beating them in the
Synagogues, compelling many to blaspheme, imprisoning others, and procuring
them to be put to death. Indeed he was a kind of Inquisitor Haereticae
pravitatis to the High Priest, by whom he was employed to hunt and find out
these upstart Heretics, who preached against the Law of Moses, and the
Traditions of the Fathers. Accordingly having made strange havoc at Jerusalem,
Acts 9.1.
he addressed himself to the Sanhedrim, and there took out a Warrant and
Commission to go down and ransack the Synagogues at Damascus. How eternally
insatiable is fury and a misguided zeal! how restless and unwearied in its
designs of cruelty! it had already sufficiently harassed the poor Christians at
Jerusalem, but not content to have vexed them there, and to have driven them
thence, it persecuted them unto strange Cities, following them even to Damascus
it self, whither many of these persecuted Christians had fled for shelter,
resolving to bring up those whom he found there to Jerusalem, in order to their
punishment and execution. For the Jewish Sanhedrim had not only power of
seizing and scourging offenders against their Law within the bounds of their
own Country, but by the connivence and favor of the Romans, might send into
other Countries, where there were any Synagogues that acknowledged a dependence
in Religious matters upon the Council at Jerusalem, to apprehend them; as here
they sent Paul to Damascus to fetch up what Christians he could find, to be
arraigned and sentenced at Jerusalem.

8. BUT God who had designed him for work of another nature, and separated him
from his Mothers womb to the preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 1.15.
stopped him in his journey. For while he was together with his company
traveling on the Road, not far from Damascus, on a sudden a gleam of light
beyond the splendour and brightness of the Sun, was darted from Heaven upon
them, whereat being strangely amazed and confounded, they all fell to the
ground, a Voice calling to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? To which
he replied, Lord, who art thou? Who told him, That he was Jesus whom he
persecuted, that what was done to the members was done to the head, that it was
hard for him to kick against the pricks, that he now appeared to him, to make
choice of him for a Minister, and a Witness of what he had now seen, and should
after hear; that he would stand by him, and preserve him, and make him a great
instrument in the conversion of the Gentile World. This said, He asked our
Lord, what he would have him to do? who bad him go into the City, where he
should receive his Answer. S. Paul's companions, who had been present at this
transaction, Acts 22.9.
heard the voice, but saw not him that spoke to him: though elsewhere the
Apostle himself affirms, that they saw the light, but heard not the voice of
him that spoke, that is, they heard a confused sound, but not a distinct and
articulate voice; or, more probably, being ignorant of the Hebrew Language,
wherein our Lord spoke to Saint Paul, they heard the words, but knew not the
sense and the meaning of them.

9. S. PAUL by this time was gotten up, but though he found his feet, yet he
had lost his eyes, being stricken blind with the Extraordinary brightness of
the light, and was accordingly led by his companions into Damascus. In which
condition he there remained fasting three days together. At this time, 2 Cor.
12.1.
we may probably suppose it was, that he had that vision and ecstasie, wherein
he was taken up into the third Heaven, where he saw and heard things great and
unutterable, and was fully instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel, and hence
expressly affirms, that he was not taught the Gospel which he preached by man,
Gal. 1.10, 11.
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. There was at this time at Damascus one
Ananias, a very devout and religious man, (one of the seventy Disciples, as the
Ancients inform us, and probably the first planter of the Christian Church in
this City) and though a Christian, yet of great reputation amongst all the
Jews. To him our Lord appeared, commanding him to go into such a street, and to
such an house, and there enquire for one Saul of Tarsus, who was now at Prayer,
and had seen him in a Vision coming to him, to lay his hands upon him, that he
might receive his sight. Ananias startled at the name of the man, having heard
of his bloody temper and practices, and upon what errand he was now come down
to the City. But our Lord to take off his fears, told him, that he mistook the
man, that he had now taken him to be a chosen vessel, to preach the Gospel both
to Jews and Gentiles, and before the greatest Potentates upon Earth,
acquainting him with what great things he should both do and suffer for his
sake, what chains and imprisonments, what racks and scourges, what hunger and
thirst, what shipwracks and death, he should undergo. Upon this Ananias went,
laid his hands upon him, told him that our Lord had sent him to him, that he
might receive his sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, which was no sooner
done, but thick films like scales fell from his eyes, and his sight returned.
And the next thing he did was to be baptized, and solemnly initiated into the
Christian Faith. After which he joined himself to the Disciples of that place,
to the equal joy and wonder of the Church: that the Wolf should so soon lay
down its fierceness, and put on the meek nature of a Lamb; that he who had
lately been so violent a persecutor, should now become not a professor only,
but a preacher of that Faith, which before he had routed and destroyed,

SECT. II. Of S. Paul, from his Conversion, till the Council at Jerusalem.
S. Paul' s leaving Damascus, and why. His Three Years Ministry in Arabia. His
return to Damascus. The greatness of that City. The design of the Jews to
surprise S. Paul, and the manner of his escape. His coming to Jerusalem, and
converse with Peter and James. His departure thence. The Disciples first styled
Christians at Antioch. This when done, and by whom. The solemnity of it. The
importance of the word (...), what. S. Paul' s Journey to Jerusalem with
contributions. His voyage to Cyprus, and planting Christianity there. The
opposition made by Elymas, and his severe punishment. The Proconsuls
conversion. His preaching to the Jews at Antioch of Pisidia. His curing a
Cripple at Lystra; and discourse to the people about their Idolatry. The
Apostles way of arguing noted; and his discourse concerning the Being and
Providence of God illustrated. His confirming the Churches in the Faith. The
controversy at Antioch; and S. Paul' s account of it in the Synod at Jerusalem.

SAINT Paul staid not long at Damascus after his Conversion, but having
received an immediate intimation from Heaven, probably in the Ecstasie wherein
he was caught up thither, he waited for no other counsel or direction in the
case, lest he should seem to derive his Mission and Authority from Men, and
being not disobedient to the Heavenly Vision, he presently rerired out of the
City; and the sooner probably, to decline the Odium of the Jews, and the
effects of that rage and malice, which he was sure would pursue and follow him.
He withdrew into the parts of Arabia, Gal. 1.17, 18.
where he spent the first fruits of his Ministry, Preaching up and down for
three Years together. After which he returned back to Damascus, Preached openly
in the Synagogues, and convinced the Jews of Christ's Messiah-ship, Acts 9.23.
2 Cor. 11.32, 33.
and the truth of his Religion. Angry and enraged hereat, they resolved his
Ruin, which they knew no better way to effect, than by exasperating and
incensing the Civil powers against him. Damascus was a place, not more
venerable for its Antiquity, if not built by, at least it gave title to
Abraham's steward, hence called, Eliezer of Damascus, than it was considerable
for its strength, stateliness and situation: it was the noblest City of all
Syria (as Just. lib. 36. c. 2. p. 425.
Justin of old, and the Arabian Geograph. Nub. Clim. 3. part 5. p. 116. Isai.
7.7.
Geographer has since informed us, and the Prophet Isaiah before both calls it
(...) the head of Syria) seated in a most healthful Air, in a most fruitful
Soil, watered with most pleasant Fountains and Rivers, rich in Merchandise,
adorned with stately Buildings, goodly and magnificent Temples, and fortified
with strong Guards and Garrisons: in all which respects Epist. XXIV. p. 145.
Julian calls it the Holy and great Damascus, (...), the Eye of the whole East.
Situate it was between Libanus and Mount Hermon, and though properly belonging
to Syria, yet Arabiae retro deputabatur (as Adv. Marc. l. 3. c. 13. p. 404
Tertullian tells us) was in aftertimes reckoned to Arabia. Accordingly at
this time it was under the Government of Aretas (Father-in-law to Herod the
Tetrarch) King of Arabia Petraea, a Prince tributary to the Roman Empire. By
him there was an (...), or Governor, who had Jurisdiction over the whole Syria
Damascena, placed over it, who kept constant residence in the City, as a place
of very great importance. To him the Jews made their address, with crafty and
cunning insinuations persuading him to apprehend S. Paul, possibly under the
notion of a Spy, there being War at this time between the Romans, and that
King. Hereupon the Gates were shut, and extraordinary Guards set, and all
Engines that could be laid to take him. But the Disciples to prevent their
cruel designs, at Night put him into a Basket, and let him down over the
City*wall. And the place, we are G. Sion. and J. Hesron. de Vrb. Orient. c. 4.
p. 11
told, is still showed to Travelers, not far from the Gate, thence called S.
Paul's Gate at this day.

2. HAVING thus made his escape, Acts 9.26. Gal. 1.18, 19.
he set forwards for Jerusalem, where when he arrived, he addressed himself to
the Church. But they knowing the former temper and principles of the Man,
universally shunned his company; till Barnabas brought him to Peter, who was
not yet cast into Prison, and to James, our Lord's Brother, Bishop of
Jerusalem, acquainting them with the manner of his conversion, and by them he
was familiarly entertained. Here he staid fifteen days, preaching Christ, and
confuting the Hellenist Jews with a mighty courage and resolution. But snares
were here again laid to entrap him, as malice can as well cease to be, as to be
restless and active. Whereupon he was warned by God in a Vision, that his
Testimony would not find acceptance in that place, that therefore he should
leave it, and betake himself to the Gentiles. Acts 9.30.
Accordingly being conducted by the Brethren to Caesarea, he set sail for
Tarsus, his Native City, from whence not long after he was fetched by Barnabas
to Antioch, to assist him in propagating Christianity in that place. Acts 11.26.
In which employment they continued there a whole Year. And now it was that the
Disciples of the Religion were at this place first called Christians; according
to the manner of all other Institutions, who were wont to take their
denominations from the first Authors and Founders of them. Before this they
were usually styled (...). Eusebius. de loc. Hebr. in voc. (...).
Nazarenes, as being the Disciples and followers of Jesus of Nazareth, a Name
by which the Jews in scorn call them to this day, with the same intent that the
Gentiles of old used to call them Galileans. The name of Nazarenes was
hence-forward fixed upon those Jewish converts, who mixed the Law and the
Gospel, and compounded a Religion out of Judaism and Christianity. The fixing
this honorable Name upon the Disciples of the crucified Jesus was done at
Antioch (as an ancient Joan. Antiochen. in Chronol. MS a Sclden cit. de Synedr.
l. 1. c. 8. p. 226. vid. Suid in voc. (...).
Historian informs us) about the beginning of Claudius his Reign, Ten Years
after Christ's Ascension; nay, he further adds, that Euodius lately ordained
Bishop of that place was the person that imposed this name upon them, stiling
them Christians, who before were called Nazarenes and Galileans, (...), as my
Authors words are. I may not omit, what a learned J. Greg. not. and obs. cap.
36.
Man has observed, that the word (...) used by S. Luke ( they were called)
implies the thing to have been done by some public and solemn act and
declaration of the whole Church, such being the use of the word in the Imperial
Edicts and proclamations of those times, the Emperors being said (...), to
style themselves, when they publicly proclaimed by what titles they would be
called. When any Province submitted it self to the Roman Empire, the Emperor
was wont by public Edict (...), to entitle himself to the Government and
Jurisdiction of it, and the People to several great privileges and immunities.
In a grateful sense whereof the People usually made this time the solemn date
of their common Epoch or computation. Thus (as the forementioned J. Antioch.
Chron. lib. 9.
Historian informs us) it was in the particular case of Antioch, and thence
their public Era was called (...), the Ascription of the People at Antioch.
Such being the general acception of the word, S. Luke (who was himself a Native
of this City) makes use of it to express that solemn declaration, whereby the
Disciples of the Religion entitled themselves to the Name of Christians.

3. IT happened about this time that a terrible Famine, Acts 11.27.
foretold by Agabus, afflicted several parts of the Roman Empire, but
especially Judaea: The consideration whereof made the Christians at Antioch
compassionate the case of their suffering Brethren, and accordingly raised
considerable contributions for their relief and succor, which they sent to
Jerusalem by Barnabas and Paul, who having dispatched their Errand in that
City, went back to Antioch. Where while they were joining in the public
exercises of their Religion, it was revealed to them by the H. Ghost, Acts 13.2.
that they should set apart Paul and Barnabas to preach the Gospel in other
places. Which was done accordingly, and they by Prayer, Fasting and Imposition
of Hands immediately deputed for that service. Hence they departed to Seleucia,
and thence sailed to Cyprus, where at Salamis, a great City in that Island,
they Preached in the Synagogues of the Jews. Hence they removed to Paphos, the
residence of Sergius Paulus the Proconsul of the Island, a Man of great wisdom
and prudence, but miserably seduced by the wicked Artifices of Ear-Jesus a
Jewish Impostor, who called himself Elymas, or the Magician, vehemently opposed
the Apostles, and kept the Proconsul from embracing of the Faith. Nay, Dionys.
Areop. de divin. nomin. c. 8. page 623.
one who pretends to be ancient enough to know it, seems to intimate, that he
not only spoke, but wrote against S. Paul's Doctrine, and the Faith of Christ.
However, the Proconsul calls for the Apostles, and S. Paul first takes Elymas
to task, and having severely checked him for his malicious opposing of the
truth, told him, that the Divine Vengeance was now ready to seize upon him.
Upon which he was immediately struck blind. The Vengeance of God observing
herein a kind of just proportion, that he should be punished with the loss of
his Bodily eyes, who had so wilfully and maliciously shut the eyes of his mind
against the light of the Gospel, and had endeavored to keep not only himself,
but others under so much blindness and darkness. This Miracle turned the Scale
with the Proconsul, and quickly brought him over a Convert to the Faith.

4. AFTER this success in Cyprus, he went to Perga in Pamphilia, Acts 13.13, 14
where taking Titus along with him in the room of Mark, who was returned to
Jerusalem, they went to Antioch the Metropolis of Pisidia. Where entering into
the Jewish Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, after some Sections of the Law were
read, they were invited by the Rulers of the Synagogue to discourse a little to
the People. Which S. Paul did in a large and eloquent Sermon, wherein he put
them in mind of the many great and particular blessings which God had heaped
upon the Jews, from the first Originals of that Nation; that he had crowned
them all with the sending of his Son, to be the Messiah and the Savior, that
though the Jews had ignorantly crucified this just, innocent Person, yet that
God according to his own predictions had raised him up, from the dead, that
through Him they preached forgiveness of sins, and that by Him alone it was
that Men, if ever, must be justified and acquitted from that Guilt and
Condemnation, which all the pompous Ceremonies, and Ministeries of the Mosaic
Law could never do away: That therefore they should do well to take heed lest
by their opposing this way of Salvation, they should bring upon themselves that
prophetical curse, which God had threatened to the Jews of old for their great
contumacy and neglect. This Sermon wanted not its due effects. The
Proselyte-Jews desired the Apostles to discourse again to them of this matter
the next Sabbath Day, the Apostles also persuading them to continue firm in the
belief of these things. The Day was no sooner come, but the whole City almost
flocked to be their Auditors, which when the Jews saw, acted by a spirit of
envy, they began to blaspheme, and to contradict the Apostles, who nothing
daunted, told them that our Lord had charged them first to preach the Gospel to
the Jews, which since they so obstinately rejected, they were now to address
themselves to the Gentiles, who hearing this exceedingly rejoiced at the good
news, and magnified the Word of God, and as many of them as were thus prepared
and disposed toward eternal life, heartily closed with it and embraced it; the
Apostles preaching not there only, but through the whole Country round about.
The Jews more exasperated than before, resolved to be rid of their company, and
to that end persuaded some of the more devout and honorable Women, to deal
with their Husbands, Persons of prime rank and quality in the City, by whose
means they were driven out of those parts. Whereat Paul and Barnabas shaking
off the dust of their Feet, as a Testimony against their ingratitude and
infidelity, departed from them.

5. THE next place they went to was Iconium, Acts 14.1.
where at first they found kind entertainment, and good success, God setting a
Seal to their Doctrine by the Testimony of his Miracles. But here the Jewish
malice began again to ferment, exciting the People to sedition and a mutiny
against them. Insomuch that hearing of a design to stone them, they seasonably
withdrew to Lystra: where they first made their way by a miraculous cure. For
S. Paul seeing an impotent Cripple that had been lame from his Mothers Womb,
cured him with the speaking of a word. The People who beheld the Miracle, had
so much natural Logic, as to infer, that there was a Divinity in the thing,
though mistaking the Author, they applied it to the Instruments, crying out,
That the Gods in humane shape were come down from Heaven; Paul as being chief
Speaker, they termed Mercury, the God of speech and eloquence; Barnabas by
reason of his Age and gravity, they called Jupiter, the Father of their Gods;
accordingly the Syriack Interpreter here renders Jupiter by (...) the Lord, or
Sovereign of the Gods. The fame of this being spread over the City, the Priest
of Jupiter brought Oxen, dressed up with Garlands after the Gentile Rites, to
the House where the Apostles were, to do Sacrifice to them. Which they no
sooner understood, but in detestation of those undue honors offered to them,
they rent their clothes, and told them that they were Men of the same make and
temper, of the same passions and infirmities with themselves, that the design
of their Preaching was to convert them from these vain Idolatries and
superstitions, to the worship of the true God, the great Parent of the World,
who though heretofore he had left Men to themselves, to go on in their own ways
of Idolatrous worship, yet had he given sufficient evidence of himself in the
constant returns of a gracious and benign providence in crowning the Year with
fruitful Seasons, and other acts of common kindness and bounty to Mankind.

6. A SHORT discourse, but very rational and convictive, which it may not be
amiss a little more particularly to consider, and the method which the Apostle
uses to convince these blind Idolaters. He proves Divine honors to be due to
God alone, as the Sovereign Being of the World, and that there is such a
Supreme infinite Being, he argues from his Works both of Creation and
Providence. Creation, He is the living God that made Heaven, and Earth, (...).
Arrian. dissert. lib. 1. c. 16. p. 126.
the Sea, and all things that are therein. Providence, He left not himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave rain from Heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. Than which no argument can
be more apt and proper to work upon the minds of men. That which may be known
of God is manifest to the Gentiles, for God has showed it unto them. For the
invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, even his eternal power
and Godhead, are clearly seen and understood by the things that are made: It
being impossible impartially to survey the several parts of the Creation, and
not see in every place evident footsteps of an infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness. Who can look up unto the Heavens, and not there discern an Almighty
wisdom, beautifully garnishing those upper Regions, distinguishing the
circuits, and perpetuating the motions of the Heavenly lights? placing the Sun
in the middle of the Heavens, that he might equally dispense and communicate
his light and heat to all parts of the World, and not burn the Earth with the
too near approach of his scorching beams: by which means the Creatures are
refreshed and cheared, the Earth impregnated with fruits and flowers by the
benign influence of a vital heat, and the vicissitudes and seasons of the year
regularly distinguished by their constant and orderly revolutions. Whence are
the great Orbs of Heaven kept in continual motion, always going in the same
tract, but because there is a Superior power that keeps these great wheels a
going? Who is it that poises the balancings of the Clouds; that divides a
watercourse for the overflowing of waters, and a way for the lightning of the
Thunder? Who can bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion? Or who can bring forth Mazaroth in his season, or guide Arcturus with
his sons? Do these come by chance? or by the secret appointment of infinite
wisdom? Who can consider the admirable thinness and purity of the Air, its
immediate subserviency to the great ends of the Creation; its being the
treasury of vital breath to all living Creatures, without which the next moment
must put a period to our days, and not reflect upon that Divine wisdom that
contrived it? If we come down upon the Earth, there we discover a Divine
providence, supporting it with the pillars of an invisible power, stretching
the North over the empty space, and hanging the Earth upon nothing; filling it
with great variety of admirable and useful Creatures, and maintaining them all
according to their kinds at his own cost and charges. It Is he that clothes the
Grass with a delightful verdure, that crowns the Year with his loving kindness,
and makes the Valleys stand thick with corn; that causes the Grass to grow for
the Cattle, and Herb for the service of Man, that he may bring forth food out
of the Earth; and Wine that makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make his
face to shine, and Bread which strengthens man's heart; that beautifies the
Lilies that neither toil nor spin, and that with a glory that out shines
Solomon in all his pomp and grandeur. From Land let us ship our observations to
Sea, and there we may descry the wise effects of infinite understanding: A wide
Ocean fitly disposed for the mutual commerce and correspondence of one part of
mankind with another; filled with great and admirable Fishes, and enriched with
the treasures of the deep. What but an Almighty arm can shut in the Sea with
doors, bind it by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass, and tie up its wild
raging waves with no stronger cordage than ropes of Sand? Who but he commands
the storm, and stills the tempest? and brings the Mariner, when at his wits-end
in the midst of the greatest dangers, to his desired Haven? They that go down
to the Sea in ships, and do business in great waters; these see the works of
the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. So impossible is it for a man to stand
in any part of the Creation, wherein he may not discern evidences enough of an
infinitely wise, gracious and Omnipotent Being. Thus much I thought good to
add, to illustrate the Apostles argument; whence he strongly infers, that it is
very reasonable, that we should worship and adore this great Creator and
Benefactor, and not transfer the honors due to him alone upon men of frail and
sinful passions, and much less upon dumb Idols, unable either to make or to
help themselves. An argument, which though very plain and plausible, and
adapted to the meanest understandings, yet was all little enough to restrain
the people from offering Sacrifice to them. But how soon was the wind turned
into another corner? The old spirit of the Jews did still haunt and pursue
them: Who coming from Antioch and Iconium, exasperated and stirred up the
multitude. And they who just before accounted them as Gods, used them now
worse, not only than ordinary men, but slaves. For in a mighty rage they fall
upon S. Paul, stone him, as they thought, dead, and then drag him out of the
City: Whither the Christians of that place coming, probably to interr him, he
suddenly revived, and rose up amongst them, and the next day went thence to
Derbe.

7. HERE they preached the Gospel, and then returned to Lystra, Iconium, and
Antioch of Pisidia, confirming the Christians of those places in the belief and
profession of Christianity, earnestly persuading them to persevere, and not be
discouraged with those troubles and persecutions which they must expect would
attend the profession of the Gospel. And that all this might succeed the
better, with fasting and prayer they ordained Governors and Pastors in every
Church, and having recommended them to the grace of God, departed from them.
From hence they passed through Pisidia and thence came to Pamphilia, and having
preached to the people at Perga, they went down to Attalia. And thus having at
this time finished the whole circuit of their Ministry, they returned back to
Antioch in Syria, the place whence they had first set out. Here they acquainted
the Church with the various transactions and successes of their travels, and
how great a door had hereby been opened to the conversion of the Gentile World.

8. WHILE S. Paul staid at Antioch there arose that famous controversy about
the observation of the Mosaic Rites, Acts 15.1.
set on foot and brought in by some Jewish Converts that came down thither,
whereby great disturbances and distractions were made in the minds of the
people. For the composing whereof the Church of Antioch resolved to send Paul
and Barnabas to consult with the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem. In their way
thither, they declared to the Brethren, as they went along, what success they
had had in the conversion of the Gentiles. Being come to Jerusalem, they first
addressed themselves to Peter, James, and John, the pillars and principal
persons in that place: By whom they were kindly entertained, and admitted to
the right hand of fellowship. And perceiving by the account which S. Paul gave
them, that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to him, as that of
the circumcision was to Peter; they ratified it by compact and agreement, that
Peter should preach to the Jews, and Paul unto the Gentiles. Hereupon a Council
was summoned, wherein Peter having declared his sense of things, Paul and
Barnabas acquainted them what great things God by their Ministry had done
among the Gentiles. A plain evidence, that though uncircumcised, they were
accepted by God as well as the Jews with all their legal Rites and Privileges.
The issue of the debate was, That the Gentiles were not under the obligation of
the Law of Moses, and that therefore some persons of their own should be joined
with Paul and Barnabas, to carry the Canons and decrees of the Council down to
Antioch, for their fuller satisfaction in this matter. But of this affair we
shall give the Reader a more distinct and particular account in another place.

SECT. III. Of S. Paul, from the time of the Synod at Jerusalem, till his
departure from Athens.
S. Paul' s carrying the Apostolic Decree to Antioch. His contest with Peter.
The dissension between him and Barnabas. His Travels to confirm the new-planted
Churches. The conversion of Lydia at Philippi. The Jewish Proseuchae, what; the
frequency of them in all places. The dispossessing of a Pythonesse. S. Paul' s
imprisonment and ill usage at Philippi. The great provision made by the Roman
Laws for the security of its Subjects. His preaching at Thessalonica and
Beroea. His going to Athens. The same of that place. His doctrine opposed by
the Stoics and Epicureans, and why. The great Idolatry and Superstition of
that City. The Altar to the Unknown God. This Unknown God, who. The
Superstition of the Jews in concealing the name of God. This imitated by the
Gentiles. Their general Forms of Invocating their Deities noted. The particular
occasion of these Altars at Athens, whence. S. Paul' s discourse to the
Philosophers in the Areopagus concerning the Divine Being and Providence. The
different entertainment of his Doctrine. Dionysius the Areopagite, who. His
Learning, Conversion, and being made Bishop of Athens. The difference between
him and S. Denis of Paris. The Books published under his name.

SAINT Paul and his Companions having received the Decretal Epistle, returned
back to Antioch; where they had not been long before Peter came thither to
them. And according to the Decree of the Council freely and inoffensively
conversed with the Gentiles: Till some of the Jews coming down thither from
Jerusalem, he withdrew his converse, as if it were a thing unwarrantable and
unlawful. By which means the minds of many were dissatisfied, and their
Consciences very much ensnared. Whereat S. Paul being exceedingly troubled,
publicly rebuked him for it, and that as the case required, Acts 15.36.
with great sharpness and severity. It was not long after, that S. Paul and
Barnabas resolved upon visiting the Churches, which they had lately planted
among the Gentiles. To which end Barnabas determined to take his cousin Mark
along with them. This, Paul would by no means agree to, he having deserted them
in their former journey. A little spark, which yet kindled a great feud and
dissension between these two good men, and arose to that height, that in some
discontent they parted from each other. So natural is it for the best of men
sometimes to indulge an unwarrantable passion, and so far to espouse the
interest of a private and particular humor, as rather to hazard the great Law
of Charity, and violate the bands of friendship, than to recede from it. The
effect was, Barnabas taking his Nephew, went for Cyprus, his native Country, S.
Paul made choice of Silas, and the success of his undertaking being first
recommended to the Divine care and goodness, they set forwards on their journey.

2. THEIR first passage was into Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches as
they went along. And to that end they left with them Copies of the Synodical
Decrees, lately ordained in the Council at Jerusalem. Hence we may suppose it
was that he set sail for Crete, where he preached and propagated Christianity,
and constituted Titus to be the first Bishop and Pastor of that Island, whom he
left there, to settle and dispose those affairs, which the shortness of his own
stay in those parts would not suffer him to do. Hence he returned back unto
Cilicia, and came to Lystra, where he found Timothy, whose Father was a Greek,
his Mother a Jewish convert, by whom he had been brought up under all the
advantages of a pious and religious education, and especially an incomparable
skill and dexterity in the holy Scriptures. S. Paul designed him for the
companion of his travels, and a special instrument in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and knowing that his being uncircumcised would be a mighty prejudice in
the opinion and estimation of the Jews, caused him to be circumcised; being
willing in lawful and indifferent matters (such was Circumcision now become) to
accommodate himself to men's humors and apprehensions for the saving of their
Souls.

Acts 16.6.
3. FROM hence with his company he passed through Phrygia, and the Country of
Galatia, where he was entertained by them with as mighty a kindness and
veneration, as if he had been an Angel immediately sent from Heaven. And being
by Revelation forbidden to go into Asia, by a second Vision he was commanded to
direct his journey for Macedonia. And here it was that S. Luke joined himself
to his company, and became ever after his inseparable companion. Sailing from
Troas, they arrived at the Island Samothracia, and thence to Neapolis, from
whence they went to Philippi, the chief City of that part of Macedonia, and a
Roman Colony: where he staid some considerable time to plant the Christian
Faith, and where his Ministry had more particular success on Lydia, a
Purple-seller, born at Thyatira, baptized together with her whole Family; and
with her the Apostle sojourned during his residence in that place. A little
without this City there was a Proseucha, (...) as the Syriack renders it, an
Oratory, or house of Prayer, whereto the Apostle and his company used
frequently to retire, for the exercise of their Religion, and for preaching the
Gospel to those that resorted thither. The Jews had three sorts of places for
their public worship: The Temple at Jerusalem, which was like the Cathedral,
or Mother Church, where all Sacrifices and Oblations were offered, and where
all Males were bound three times a year personally to pay their devotions:
Their Synagogues (many whereof they had almost in every place, Acts 15.21.
not unlike our Parochial Churches) where the Scriptures were read and
expounded, and the people taught their duty. Moses of old time has in every
City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day. De
vit. Mos. lib. 3. p. 685.
And then they had their Proseuchae ((...), as Philo sometimes calls them) or
Oratories, which were like Chapels of Ease to the Temple and the Synagogues,
whither the people were wont to come solemnly to offer up their Prayers to
Heaven. They were built (as Adv. Massal. Haeres. LXXX. p. 450.
Epiphanius informs us) (...), without the City, in the open Air and uncovered,
(...), being large spacious places, after the manner of Fora, In qua te quaero
Proseucha? Juvenal. Satyr. 3. v. 296. Proseucha] locus Judaeorum, ubi orant.
Vet. Schol. ibid.
or Marketplaces, and these they called Proseucha's. And that the Jews and
Samaritans had such places of Devotion, he proves from this very place at
Philippi, where S. Paul preached. For they had them not in Judaea only, but
even at Rome it self, where Tiberius (as De Legate. ad Caium, p. 1014.
Philo tells Caius the Emperor) suffered the Jews to inhabit the Transtiberin
Region, and undisturbedly to live according to the Rites of their Institutions,
(...), and also to have their Proseucha's, and to meet in them, especially upon
their holy Sabbaths, that they might be familiarly instructed in the Laws and
Religion of their Country. Such they had also in other places, especially
where they had not, or were not suffered to have Synagogues for their public
worship. But to return.

4. AS they were going to this Oratory, they were often followed by a
Pythonesse, a Maidservant, acted by a spirit of Divination, who openly cried
out, That these men were the servants of the most high God, who came to show
the way of Salvation to the World. So easily can Heaven extort a Testimony from
the mouth of Hell. But S. Paul, to show how little he needed Satan to be his
witness, commanded the Demon to come out, which immediately left her. The evil
Spirit thus thrown out of possession, presently raised a storm against the
Apostles; for the Masters of the Damsel, who used by her Diabolical arts to
raise great advantages to themselves, being sensible that now their gainful
Trade was spoiled, resolved to be revenged on them that had spoiled it.
Accordingly they laid hold upon them, and dragged them before the Seat of
Judicature, insinuating to the Governors, that these men were Jews, and sought
to introduce different customs and ways of worship, contrary to the Laws of the
Roman Empire. The Magistrates and People were soon agreed, the one to give
Sentence, the other to set upon the Execution. In fine, they were stripped,
beaten, and then commanded to be thrown into Prison; and the Jailer charged to
keep them with all possible care and strictness. Who to make sure of his
charge, thrust them into the Inner-Dungeon, and made their feet fast in the
Stocks. But a good man can turn a Prison into a Chapel, and make a den of
Thieves to be an house of Prayer. Our feet cannot be bound so fast to the
Earth, but that still our hearts may mount up to Heaven. At midnight the
Apostles were overheard by their fellow prisoners, praying, and singing Hymns
to God. But after the still voice came the Tempest. An Earthquake suddenly
shook the foundations of the Prison, the Doors flew open, Milites si amiserint
custodias, ipsi in periculum deducuntur. l. 12. ff. de custod. and exhib. reor.
Tit. 3.
and their Chains fell off. The Jailer awaking with this amazing accident,
concluded with himself, that the Prisoners were fled, and to prevent the
Sentence of public Justice, was going to lay violent hands upon himself, which
S. Paul espying, called out to him to hold his hand, and told him they were all
there: Who thereupon came in to them with a greater Earthquake in his own
Conscience, and falling down before them, asked them, What he should do to be
saved? They told him there was no other way of Salvation for him or his, than
an hearty and sincere embracing of the Faith of Christ. What a happy change
does Christianity make in the minds of men! How plain does it smooth the
roughest tempers, and instill the sweetest principles of civility and good
nature! He who but a little before had tyrannized over the Apostles with the
most merciless and cruel usage, began now to treat them with all the arts of
kindness and charity, bringing them out of the Dungeon, and washing their
stripes and wounds, and being more fully instructed in the principles of
Christianity, was together with his whole Family, immediately baptized by them.
Early in the morning the Magistrates sent Officers privately to release them:
Which the Apostles refused, telling them, That they were not only innocent
persons, but Romans; that they had been illegally condemned and beaten, that
therefore their delivery should be as public, as the injury, and an open
vindication of their innocence, and that they themselves, Ista laus primum est
majorum nostrorum, Quirites, qui lenitate legum vestram libertatem munitam esse
voluerunt. Quamobrem inviolatum corpus omnium civium Romanorum integrum
libertatis defendo servari oportere. Porcia Lex virgas ab omnium civium Romans
Corpore amovit. C. Gracchus legem tulit, ne de capite civium Romans injussu
vestro judicaretur. Cicer. Orat. pro C. Rabir. p. 314. Tom. 2.
that had sent them thither, should fetch them thence; for the Roman Government
was very tender of the lives and liberties of its own subjects, those
especially that were free Denizens of Rome, every injury offered to a Roman
being looked upon as an affront against the Majesty of the whole People of
Rome. Such a one might not be beaten; but to be scourged, or bound, without
being first legally heard and tried, was not only against the Roman, but the
Laws of all Nations: L. 7. ff. de injuriis. lib. 49. Tit. 10.
and the more public any injury was, the greater was its aggravation, and the
Laws required a more strict and solemn reparation. S. Paul who was a Roman, and
very well understood the Laws and privileges of Rome, insisted upon this, to
the great startling and affrighting of the Magistrates, who sensible of their
error, came to the Prison, and entreated them to depart. Whereupon going to
Lydia's house, and having saluted and encouraged the Brethren, they departed
from that place.

5. LEAVING Philippi, they came next to Thessalonica, the Metropolis of
Macedonia; where Paul, according to his custom, presently went to the Jewish
Synagogue, for three Sabbath days, reasoning and disputing with them, proving
from the predictions of the Old Testament, that the Messiah was to suffer, and
to rise again, and that the blessed Jesus was this Messiah. Great numbers,
especially of religious Proselytes, were converted by his preaching: while like
the Sun that melts wax, but hardens clay, it wrought a quite contrary effect in
the unbelieving Jews, who presently set themselves to blow up the City into a
tumult and an uproar, and missing S. Paul (who had withdrawn himself) they fell
foul upon Jason, in whose house he lodged; representing to the Magistrates,
that they were enemies to Caesar, and sought to undermine the peace and
prosperity of the Roman Empire. At night Paul and Silas were conducted by the
Brethren to Beraea. Where going to the Synagogue, they found the People of a
more noble and generous, a more pliable and ingenuous temper, ready to
entertain the Christian Doctrine, but yet not willing to take it merely upon
the Apostles word, till they had first compared his preaching with what the
Scriptures say of the Messiah and his Doctrine. And the success was answerable,
in those great numbers that came over to them. But the Jewish malice pursued
them still, for hearing at Thessalonica, what entertainment they had found in
this place, they presently came down, to exasperate and stir up the People. To
avoid which, S. Paul leaving Silas and Timothy behind him, thought good to
withdraw himself from that place.

6. FROM Beroea he went to Athens, Acts 17.15.
one of the most renowned Cities in the World, excelling all others (says an
Ancient C. Nep. in vit. Attic. c. 3. p. 267.
Historian) in Antiquity, Humanity, and Learning. Indeed it was the great seat
of Arts and Learning, and as Orat. pro Flac. Tom. 2.
Cicero will have it, the Fountain whence Civility, Learning, Religion, Arts
and Laws were derived into all other Nations. So universally flocked to by all
that had but the least kindness for the Muses, or good Manners, that he who had
not seen Athens, (...).

Lysipp. Comic. apud Dicaearch. de vit. Groee (...) Steph. edit. cap. 3. p. 18.


was accounted a Block; he who having seen it, was not in love with it, a dull
stupid Ass; and he who after he had seen it, could be willing to leave it, fit
for nothing but to be a Pack-Horse. Here among the several Sects of
Philosophers, he had more particular contests with the Stoics and Epicureans,
who beyond all the rest seemed enemies to Christianity. The Epicureans, because
they found their pleasant and jovial humor, and their loose and exorbitant
course of life, so much checked and controlled by the strict and severe
precepts of Christ, and that Christianity so plainly and positively asserted a
Divine providence, that governs the World, and that will adjudge to men
suitable rewards and punishments in another World. The Stoics on the other
hand, though pretending to principles of great and uncommon rigor and
severity, and such as had nearest affinity to the doctrines of the Christian
Religion, yet found themselves aggrieved with it: That meek and humble temper
of mind, that modesty and self-denial, which the Gospel so earnestly recommends
to us, and so strictly requires of us, being so directly contrary to the
immoderate pride and ambition of that Sect, Tantum sapienti sua, quantum Deo
omnis aetas patet. Est aliquid, quo sapiens antecedat Deum: ille naturae
beneficio non timet, suo sapiens. Ecce res magna, babere imbecillitatem
hominis, securitatem Dei. Senec Epist. 53. p. 131. Solebat Sextius dicere,
Jovem plus non posse, quam bonum virum. Plura Jupiter habet, quae praestet
hominibus. sed inter duos bonos non est melior, qui locupletior. Jupiter quo
antecedit virum bonum? diutius bonus est* Sapiens nihilo se minoris aestimat,
quod virtutes ejus spatio breviore clauduntur. Id. Epist. 73. p. 203.
who beyond all proportions of reason were not ashamed to make their wise man
equal to, and in some things to exceed God himself.

7. WHILE S. Paul staid at Athens in expectation of Silas and Timothy to come
to him, he went up and down to take a more curious view and survey of the City;
which he found miserably overgrown with Superstition and Idolatry. As indeed
Athens was noted by all their own Writers for far greater numbers of Deities
and Idols than all Greece besides. (...). Pausen. lib. 1. p. 42. (...). Id.

(...). Hesych. in voc. (...). p. 438.

-- (...). Nonn. Dionys. lib. 38. p. 542.


They were (...), as Geograph. lib. 10. page 325.
Strabo notes: Not more fond of strangers and novelties in other things, than
forward to comply with novelties in Religion, ready to entertain any foreign
Deities and Rites of worship; no Divinity that was elsewhere adored, coming
amiss to them. Whence Athens is by Himer. Orat. in Epicur. ap. Phot. God.
CCXLIII. col. 1086.
one of their own Orators styled (...), the great Sum and Center of Piety and
Religion: And he there aggravates the impiety of Epicurus, in speaking
unworthily and irreverently of the Gods, from the place where he did it; at
Athens, a place so pious, so devoted to them. Indeed herein justly commendable,
that they could not brook the least dishonorable reflection upon any Deity, and
therefore Philostr. de vit. Apollon. lib. 6. cap. 2. p. 262. and ex eo, Suid.
in voc. (...).
Apollonius Tyanaeus tells Timasion, that the safest way was to speak well of
all the Gods, and especially at Athens, where Altars were dedicated even to
Unknown Gods. And so S. Paul here found it, for among the several Shrines and
places of Worship and Devotion, he took more particular notice of one Altar
inscribed To the Unknown God. The entire Inscription, whereof the Apostle
quotes only part of the last words, is thought to have been this.

Oecumen. Schol. in Act. 17. page 137.


TO the Gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa, to the strange and UNKNOWN GOD. Saint
Com. in Tit. cap. 1. ad Paul. and Eustoch. p. 248. Tom. 9.
Hierom represents it in the same manner, only makes it Gods in the plural
number, which because, says he, Saint Paul needed not, he only cited it in the
singular. Which surely he affirms without any just ground and warrant: though
it cannot be denied, but that Heathen Writers make frequent mention of the
Altars of Unknown Gods, that were at Athens, as there want not others who speak
of some erected there to an unknown God. This Notion the Athenians might
probably borrow from the Hebrews, who had the Name of God in great secrecy and
veneration. This being one of the Titles given him by the Prophet (...) a
hidden God, Isai. 45.15.
or a God that hides himself. Sure I am that Paraen. ad Graec. p. 37.
Justin Martyr tells us, that one of the principal names given to God by some
of the Heathens, was (...) one altogether hidden. (...), Plutarch. lib. de
Isid. and Osir. p. 354.
Hence the Egyptians probably derived their great God Ammon, or more truly
Amun, which signifies occult, or hidden. Accordingly in this passage of S. Paul
the Syriac Interpreter renders it, the Altar (...), -- dedita sacris Incerti
Judaea Dei. Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 2. incertum Mosis numen. Tribol. Poll. in vit.
Claud. c. 2. p. 800.
of the hidden God. The Jews were infinitely superstitious in concealing the
Name of God, not thinking it lawful ordinarily to pronounce it. Judaei mente
sola, unumque numen intelligunt; summum illud and aeternum, neque mutabile,
neque interiturum. Tacit. Histor. lib. 5. c. 5. p. 535.
This made the Gentiles, strangers at best both to the Language and Religion of
the Jews, at a great loss by what Name to call him, only stiling him in general
an uncertain, unspeakable, invisible Deity; whence Phil. de legate. ad Cai. p.
1041.
Caligula in his ranting Oration to the Jews, told them, that wretches as they
were, though they refused to own him, whom all others had confessed to be a
Deity, yet they could worship (...), their own nameless God. And hence the
Gentiles derived their custom of keeping secret the name of their Gods; Thus
Quaest. Romans p. 279. vid. Serve. ad illud Virgil Georgic. lib. 1. Dii patrii
indigites, etc.
Plutarch tells us of the Tutelar Deity of Rome, that it was not lawful to name
it, or so much as to enquire what Sex it was of, whether God or Goddess; and
that for once revealing it, Valerius Soranus, though Tribune of the People,
came to an untimely end, and was crucified, the vilest and most dishonorable
kind of death. Whereof among other reasons he assigns this, that by concealing
the Author of their public safety, (...), not he only, but all the other Gods
might have due honor and worship paid to them. Hence in their public
adorations, after the Invocation of particular Deities, they were wont to add
some more general and comprehensive form, as when Cicero had been making his
address to most of their particular Gods, he concludes with a In Verr. Accus.
7. p. 223. Post specialem invocationem. transit ad generalitatem, ne quod numen
praetereas, more Pontificum, per quos ritu veteri in omnibus sacris, post
speciales Deos, quos ad ipsum sacrum, quod fiebat, necesse erat invocari,
generaliter omnia numina invocabantur. Serve. in illud Virgil. Georgic. lib. 1.
Diique Dea que omnes.
Caeteros item Deos, Deasque omnes imploro atque obtestor. Usually the form
was, DII DEAEQUE OMNES. The reason whereof was this, that not being assured
many times what that peculiar Deity was, that was proper to their purpose, or
what numbers of Gods there were in the World, they would not affront or offend
any, by seeming to neglect and pass them by. And this Homil. 38. in Act. p. 705.
Chrysostom thinks to have been particularly designed in the erection of this
Athenian Altar, (...), they were afraid left there might be some other Deity
(besides those whom they particularly worshipped) as yet unknown to them,
though honored and adored elsewhere, and therefore (...), for the more
security, they dedicated an Altar to the unknown God. As for the particular
occasion of erecting these Altars at Athens (omitting that of Pans appearing to
Philippides, mentioned by Oecumenius) the most probable seems to be this. When
a great Plague raged at Laert. lib. 1. in vit. Epimen. p. 78.
Athens, and several means had been attempted for the removal of it, they were
advised by Epimenides the Philosopher, to build an Altar, and dedicate it
(...), to the proper and peculiar Deity, to whom it did appertain, be he what
he would. A course which proving successful, no doubt gave occasion to them by
way of gratitude to erect more shrines to this unknown God. And accordingly
Laertius who lived long after S. Paul's time, tells us that there were such
nameless Altars (he means such as were not inscribed to any particular Deity)
in and about Athens in his days, as Monuments of that eminent deliverance.

7. BUT whatever the particular cause might be, hence it was that S. Paul took
occasion, to discourse of the true, but to them unknown God. For the
Philosophers had before treated him with a great deal of scorn and derision,
asking what that idle and prating fellow had to say to them? Others looking
upon him as a propagator of new and strange Gods, because he preached to them
Jesus and Anastasis or the Resurrection, which they looked upon as two upstart
Deities, lately come into the World. Hereupon they brought him to the place,
where stood the famous Senate House of the Areopagites, and according to the
Athenian humor, which altogether delighted in curious novelties, running up
and down the Forum, and places of public concourse to see any strange
accident, or hear any new report (a Vice which their own great (...), Demosth.
Philip. 4. page 53.
Orator long since taxed them with) they asked him, what that new and strange
Doctrine was, which he preached to them? Whereupon, in a neat and elegant
discourse he began to tell them, he had observed how much they were overrun
with superstition, that their zeal for Religion was indeed generous and
commendable, but which miserably over shot its due measures and proportions;
that he had taken notice of an Altar among them Inscribed, To the unknown God,
and therefore in compassion to their blind and misguided zeal, he would declare
unto them the Deity which they ignorantly worshipped; and that this was no
other, than the great God, the Creator of all things, the Supreme Governor and
Ruler of the World, who was incapable of being confined within any Temple or
humane Fabric: That no Image could be made as a proper Instrument to represent
him; that he needed no Gifts or Sacrifices, being himself the Fountain, from
whence Life, Breath, and all other blessings were derived to particular Beings:
That from one common original he had made the whole Race of Mankind, and had
wisely fixed and determined the times and bounds of their habitation: And all
to this end, that Men might be the stronglier obliged to seek after him, and
sincerely to serve and worship him. A duty which they might easily attain to
(though otherwise sunk into the deepest degeneracy, and overspread with the
grossest darkness) he every where affording such palpable evidences of his own
being and providence, that he seemed to stand near, and touch us; It being
entirely from him, that we derive our life, (...). Schol. ibid.
motion, and subsistence. A thing acknowledged even by their own Poet, that We
also are his Offspring. If therefore God was our Creator, it was highly
unreasonable, to think that we could make any Image or Representation of Him:
That it was too long already, that the Divine patience had born with the
manners of Men, and suffered them to go on in their blind Idolatries, that now
he expected a general repentance and reformation from the World, especially
having by the publishing of his Gospel put out of all dispute the case of a
future judgment, and particularly appointed the Holy Jesus to be the Person
that should sentence and judge the World: By whose Resurrection he had given
sufficient evidence and assurance of it. No sooner had he mentioned the
Resurrection, but some of the Philosophers (no doubt Epicureans, who were wont
to laugh at the notion of a future state) mocked and derided him, others more
gravely answered, that they would hear him again concerning this matter. But
his discourse however scorned and slighted, did not wholly want its desired
effect, and that upon some of the greatest quality and rank among them. In the
number of whom was Dionysius one of the grave Senators and Judges of the
Areopagus, and Damaris, whom the Ancients Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. lib. 4. c. 7.
p. 67. T. 4.
not improbably make his Wife.

8. THIS Dionysius was bred at Athens, in all the learned Arts and Sciences; at
five and twenty Years of Age, he is said to have traveled into Egypt, to
perfect himself in the study of Astrology, for which that Nation had the credit
and renown. Vid. inter alios Suid. in voc. (...).
Here beholding the miraculous Eclipse that was at the time of our Savior's
Passion, he concluded that some great accident must needs be coming upon the
World. Returning to Athens, he became one of the Senators of the Areopagus,
disputed with S. Paul, and was by him converted from his Errors and Idolatry;
and being thoroughly instructed, was by him (as the Dionys. Corinth. Episc ap
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 74. lib. 4. c. 22. p. 144.
Ancients inform us) made the first Bishop of Athens. As for Martyrium S.
Dionys. per S. Metaphr. ap. Sur. ad diem 9. October. Epist. Hisduin. Abb. and
Henom. Rhem. item Passio ejus, aliaque ibid. Niceph. lib. 2. c. 20. p. 167.
those that tell us, that he went afterward into France by the direction of
Clemens of Rome, planted Christianity at, and became Bishop of Paris, of his
suffering Martyrdom there under Domitian, his carrying his Head for the space
of two Miles in his Hand, after it had been cut off, and the rest of his
Miracles done before, and after his Death, I have as little leisure to enquire
into them, as I have faith to believe them. Indeed the foundation of all is
justly denied, viz. that ever he was there, a thing never heard of till the
times of Charles the Great, though since that, Volumes have been written of
this controversy both heretofore, and of later times, among which J. Sirmondus
the Jesuit, and Monsieur Launoy, one of the learned Doctors of the Sorbon, have
unanswerably proved the Athenian and Parisian Dionysius to be distinct Persons.
For the Books that go under his name, M. Daille has sufficiently evinced them
to be of a date many Hundred Years younger than S. Denis, though I doubt not
but they may claim a greater Antiquity, than what he allows them. But whoever
was their Author, I am sure Suidas has over-stretched the praise of them beyond
all proportion, when he gives them this character, Vbi supr.
(...), that whoever considers the elegancy of his discourses, and the
profoundness of his notions and speculations, must needs conclude that they are
not the issue of any humane understanding, but of some Divine and Immaterial
Power. But to return to our Apostle.

SECT. IV. Of S. Paul's Acts at Corinth and Ephesus.
S. Paul' s arrival at Corinth. The opposition made by the Jews. The success of
his Preaching upon others. His first Epistle to the Thessalonians, when
written. His Arraignment before Gallio. The second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, and the design of it. S. Paul 's voyage to Jerusalem. His coming
to Ephesus. Disciples baptized into John' s Baptism. S. Paul' s preaching at
Ephesus, and the Miracles wrought by him. Ephesus noted for the study of
Magic. Jews eminently versed in Charms and Enchantments. The Original of the
Mystery, whence pretended to have been derived. The ill attempt of the Sons of
Sceva to dispossess Demons in the name of Christ. S. Paul' s doctrine greatly
successful upon this sort of men. Books of Magic forbidden by the Roman Laws.
S. Paul' s Epistle to the Galatians, why, and when written. Diana' s Temple at
Ephesus, and its great stateliness and magnificence. The mutiny against S. Paul
raised by Demetrius, and his party. S. Paul' s first Epistle to the
Corinthians, upon what occasion written. His Epistle to Titus. Apollonius
Tyanaeus, whether at Ephesus at the same time with S. Paul. His Miracles
pretended to be done in that City.

1. AFTER his departure from Athens, he went to Corinth, the Metropolis of
Greece, Acts 18.1.
and the residence of the Proconsul of Achaia: where he found Aquila and
Priscilla lately come from Italy, banished out of Rome by the Decree of
Claudius: And they being of the same trade and profession, wherein he had been
educated in his youth, he wrought together with them, lest he should be
unnecessarily burdensome unto any, which for the same reason he did in some
other places. Hither, after some time, Silas and Timothy came to him. In the
Synagogue he frequently disputed with the Jews and Proselytes, reasoning and
proving, that Jesus was the true Messiah. They, according to the nature of the
men, made head and opposed him, and what they could not conquer by argument and
force of reason, they endeavored to carry by noise and clamor, mixed with
blasphemies and revilings, the last refuges of an impotent and baffled cause.
Whereat to testify his resentment, he shook his Garments, and told them, since
he saw them resolved to pull down vengeance and destruction upon their own
heads, he for his part was guiltless and innocent, and would henceforth address
himself unto the Gentiles. Accordingly he left them, and went into the house of
Justus, a religious Proselyte, where by his preaching and the many miracles
which he wrought, he converted great Numbers to the Faith. Amongst which were
Crispus, the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue, Gaius, and Stephanus, who together
with their Families embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel, and were baptized into
the Christian Faith. But the constant returns of malice and ingratitude are
enough to tire the largest charity, and cool the most generous resolution:
therefore that the Apostle might not be discouraged by the restless attempts
and machinations of his enemies, our Lord appeared to him in a Vision, told him
that notwithstanding the bad success he had hitherto met with, there was a
great Harvest to be gathered in that place, that he should not be afraid of his
enemies, but go on to preach confidently and securely, for that he himself
would stand by him and preserve him.

2. ABOUT this time, as is most probable, he wrote his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Silas and Timothy being lately returned from thence, and having
done the message for which he had sent them thither. The main design of the
Epistle, is to confirm them in the belief of the Christian Religion, and that
they would persevere in it, notwithstanding all the afflictions and
persecutions, which he had told them would ensue upon their profession of the
Gospel, and to instruct them in the main duties of a Christian and Religious
life. While the Apostle was thus employed, the malice of the Jews was no less
at work against him, and universally combining together, they brought him
before Gallio the Proconsul of the Province, elder Brother to the famous
Seneca: Before him they accused the Apostle as an Innovator in Religion, that
sought to introduce a new way of worship, contrary to what was established by
the Jewish Law, and permitted by the Roman Powers. The Apostle was ready to
have pleaded his own cause, but the Proconsul told them, that had it been a
matter of right or wrong, that had fallen under the cognizance of the Civil
Judicature, it had been very fit and reasonable that he should have heard and
determined the case, but since the controversy was only concerning the
punctilio's and niceties of their Religion, it was very improper for him to be
a Judge in such matters. And when they still clamoured about it, he threw out
their Indictment, and commanded his Officers to drive them out of Court.
Whereupon some of the Townsmen seized upon Sosthenes, one of the Rulers of the
Jewish Consistory, a man active and busy in this Insurrection, and beat him
even before the Court of Judicature, the Proconsul not at all concerning
himself about it. A year and an half Saint Paul continued in this place, and
before his departure thence, wrote his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, to
supply the want of his coming to them, which in his former he had resolved on,
and for which, in a manner, he had engaged his promise. In this therefore he
endeavors again to confirm their minds in the truth of the Gospel, and that
they would not be shaken with those troubles which the wicked unbelieving Jews
would not cease to create them; a lost and undone race of men, and whom the
Divine vengeance was ready finally to overtake. And because some passages in
his former Letter, relating to this destruction, had been mis-understood, as if
this day of the Lord were just then at hand, he rectifies those mistakes, and
shows what must precede our Lord's coming unto Judgment.

3. S. PAUL having thus fully planted and cultivated the Church at Corinth,
resolved now for Syria. Acts 18.18.
And taking along with him Aquila and Priscilla, at Cenchrea, the Port and
Harbor of Corinth, Aquila (for of him it is certainly to be understood) shaved
his head, in performance of a Nazarite-Vow he had formerly made, the time
whereof was now run out. In his passage into Syria he came to Ephesus, where he
preached a while in the Synagogue of the Jews. And though desired to stay with
them, yet having resolved to be at Jerusalem at the Passover (probably that he
might have the fitter opportunity to meet his friends, and preach the Gospel to
those vast numbers that usually flocked to that great solemnity) he promised,
that in his return he would come again to them. Sailing thence, he landed at
Caesarea, and thence went up to Jerusalem, where having visited the Church, and
kept the Feast, he went down to Antioch. Here having staid some time, he
traversed the Countries of Galatia, and Phrygia, confirming, as he went, the
new-converted Christians, and so came to Ephesus, Acts 19.1.
where finding certain Christian Disciples, he enquired of them, whether, since
their conversion, they had received the miraculous gifts and powers of the Holy
Ghost. They told him, that the Doctrine which they had received had nothing in
it of that nature, nor had they ever heard that any such extraordinary Spirit
had of late been bestowed upon the Church. Hereupon he further enquired, unto
what they had been baptized (the Christian Baptism being administered in the
name of the Holy Ghost?) They answered, they had received no more than John's
Baptism; which though it obliged men to repentance, yet did it explicitly speak
nothing of the Holy Ghost, or its gifts and powers. To this the Apostle
replied, That though John's Baptism did openly oblige to nothing but
Repentance, yet that it did implicitly acknowledge the whole Doctrine
concerning Christ and the Holy Ghost. Whereto they assenting, were solemnly
initiated by Christian Baptism, and the Apostle laying his hands upon them,
they immediately received the Holy Ghost, in the gift of Tongues, Prophecy, and
other miraculous powers conferred upon them.

4. AFTER this he entered into the Jewish Synagogues, where for the first three
months he contended and disputed with the Jews, endeavoring with great
earnestness and resolution to convince them of the truth of those things that
concerned the Christian Religion. But when instead of success, he met with
nothing but refractoriness and infidelity, he left the Synagogue, and taking
those with him whom he had converted, instructed them, and others that resorted
to him, in the School of one Tyrannus, a place where Scholars were wont to be
educated and instructed. In this manner he continued for two years together: In
which time the Jews and Proselytes of the whole Proconsular Asia had
opportunity of having the Gospel preached to them. And because Miracles are the
clearest evidence of a Divine commission, and the most immediate Credentials of
Heaven, those which do nearliest affect our senses, and consequently have the
strongest influence upon our minds, therefore God was pleased to ratify the
doctrine which S. Paul delivered by great and miraculous operations; and those
of somewhat a more peculiar and extraordinary nature. Insomuch that he did not
only heal those that came to him, but if Napkins or Handkerchiefs were but
touched by him, and applied unto the sick, their diseases immediately vanished,
and the Demons and evil Spirits departed out of those that were possessed by
them.

5. EPHESUS, (...). Suid in voc. (...). vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1 p. 305,
306.
above all other places in the World, was noted of old for the study of Magic,
and all secret and hidden Arts, whence the (...) so often spoken of by the
Ancients, which were certain obscure and mystical Spells and Charms, by which
they endeavored to heal Diseases, and drive away evil Spirits, and do things
beyond the reach and apprehensions of common people. Besides other professors
of this black Art, there were at this time at Ephesus certain Jews, who dealt
in the arts of Exorcism and Incantation; a craft and mystery which Antiq. Jud.
lib. 8. cap. 2. p. 257.
Josephus affirms to have been derived from Solomon; who, he tells us, did not
only find it out, but composed forms of Exorcism and Enchantment, whereby to
cure diseases, and expel Demons, so as they should never return again; and
adds, (...), That this Art was still in force among the Jews: Instances
whereof, he tells us, he himself had seen, having beheld one E^^azar a Jew, in
the presence of Vespasian, his Sons, and the great Officers of his Army, curing
Daemoniacks, by holding a ring to their nose, under whose Seal was hid the root
of a certain Plant, prescribed by Solomon, at the scent whereof the Demon
presently took leave and was gone, the Patient falling to the ground, while the
Exorcist, by mentioning Solomon, and reciting some Charms made by him, stood
over him, and charged the evil Spirit never to return. And to let them see that
he was really gone, he commanded the Demon as he went out to overturn a cup
full of water, which he had caused to be set in the room before them. In the
number of these Conjurers now at Ephesus, there were the seven Sons of Sceva,
one of the chief heads of the Families of the Priests, who seeing what great
things were done by calling over Daemoniacks the name of Christ, attempted
themselves to do the like, Conjuring the evil Spirit in the name of that Jesus,
whom Paul preached, to depart. But the stubborn Demon would not obey the
warrant, telling them, he knew who Jesus and Paul were, but did not understand
what authority they had to use his name. And not content with this, forced the
Daemoniack violently to fall upon them, to tear their clothes, and wound their
bodies, scarce suffering them to escape with the safety of their lives. An
accident that begot great terror in the minds of men, and became the occasion
of converting many to the Faith, who came to the Apostle, and confessed the
former course and manner of their lives. Several also, who had traded in
curious Arts, and the mysterious methods of Spells and Charms, freely brought
their Books of Magic Rites (whose price, had they been to be sold, according
to the rates which men who dealt in those cursed mysteries put upon them, Act.
19.19. (...) Graeorum valuit Drachmam Articam, adeoque nostri 7 d. ob. Ac
proinde (...) myriades quinque nummi nostri summam conficiunt 1562 l. 10 s.
would have amounted to the value of above One thousand Five hundred pounds)
and openly burnt them before the people, themselves adjudging them to those
flames, to which they were condemned by the Laws of the Empire. For so we find
the Paul. IC. Sentent. lib. 5. Sent. 21. Sect. 4. Tit. 23. ad leg. Cornel. de
Sicar. and Venefic. vid. leg. 4. ff. famil. hercisc. Sect. 1. lib. 10. T. 2.
and l. 12. C. Theod. de Malef. and Mathem. lib. 9. Tit. 16.
Roman Laws prohibiting any to keep Books of Magic Arts, and that where any
such were found, their Goods should be forfeited, the Books publicly burned,
the persons banished, and if of a meaner rank, beheaded. These Books the
penitent converts did of their own accord sacrifice to the fire, not tempted to
spare them either by their former love to them, or the present price and value
of them. With so mighty an efficacy did the Gospel prevail over the minds of
men.

6. ABOUT this time it was that the Apostle writ his Epistle to the Galatians.
For he had heard, that since his departure, corrupt opinions had got in amongst
them about the necessary observation of the legal Rites, and that several
Impostors were crept into that Church, who knew no better way to undermine the
Doctrine he had planted there, than by vilifying his person, slighting him as
an Apostle only at the second hand, not to be compared with Peter, James and
John, who had familiarly conversed with Christ in the days of his flesh, and
been immediately deputed by him. In this Epistle therefore he reproves them
with some necessary smartness and severity, that they had been so soon led out
of that right way, wherein he had set them, and had so easily suffered
themselves to be imposed upon by the crafty artifices of seducers. He
vindicates the honor of his Apostolate, and the immediate receiving his
Commission from Christ, wherein he shows, that he came not behind the very best
of those Apostles. He largely refutes those Judaical opinions, that had tainted
and infected them, and in the conclusion instructs them in the rules and duties
of an holy life. While the Apostle thus staid at Ephesus, he resolved with
himself to pass through Macedonia and Achaia, thence to Jerusalem, and so to
Rome. But for the present altered his resolution, and continued still at
Ephesus.

7. DURING his stay in this place, an accident happened, that involved him in
great trouble and danger. Ephesus above all the Cities of the East was renowned
for the famous Temple of Diana, one of the stateliest Temples of the World. It
was (as H. Nature. lib. 36. c. 14. p. 716.
Pliny tells us) the very wonder of magnificence, built at the common charges
of all Asia properly so called, 220 Years (elsewhere Lib. 16. c. 40. p. 336.
(...) -- (...). -- (...). Callym. in Dian. Hymn. 2. p. 23. -- (...). Dionys.
Perieg. v. 829.
he says 400) in building, which we are to understand of its successive
rebuildings and reparations, being often wasted and destroyed. It was 425 Foot
long, 220 broad, supported by 127 Pillars 60 Foot high; for its antiquity it
was in some degree before the times of Bacchus, equal to the Reign of the
Amazons (by whom it is generally said to have been first built) as the Tacit.
Annal. lib. 3. c. 61. p. 117.
Ephesian Ambassadors told Tiberius, till by degrees it grew up into that
greatness and splendour, that it was generally reckoned one of the seven wonders
of the World. But that which gave the greatest fame and reputation to it, was
an Image of Diana kept there, made of no very costly materials, but which the
crafty Priests persuaded the People was beyond all humane artifice or
contrivement, and that it was immediately formed by Jupiter, and dropped down
from Heaven, having first killed, or banished the Artists that made it (as
Suid. in voc. (...).
Suidas informs us) that the cheat might not be discovered, by which means they
drew not Ephesus only, but the whole World into a mighty veneration of it.
Besides there were within this Temple multitudes of Silver Cabinets, or
Chappelets, little Shrines, made in fashion of the Temple, wherein was placed
the Image of Diana. For the making of these holy shrines, great numbers of
Silversmiths were employed and maintained, among whom one Demetrius was a
Leading-man, who foreseeing that if the Christian Religion still got ground,
their gainful Trade would soon come to nothing, presently called together the
Men of his Profession, especially those whom he himself set on work, told them,
that now their welfare and livelihood were concerned, and that the fortunes of
their Wives and Children lay at stake, that it was plain that this Paul had
perverted City and Country, and persuaded the People that the Images, which
they made and worshipped, were no real Gods; by which means their Trade was not
only like to fall to the ground, but also the honor and magnificence of the
great Goddess Diana, whom not Asia only, but the whole World did worship and
adore. Enraged with this discourse, they cried out with one voice, that Great
was Diana of the Ephesians. The whole City was presently in an uproar, and
seizing upon two of S. Paul's Companions, hurried them into the Theater,
probably with a design to have cast them to the wild Beasts. S. Paul hearing of
their danger, would have ventured himself among them, had not the Christians,
nay, some even of the Gentile Priests, Governors of the popular Games and
Sports, earnestly dissuaded him from it; well knowing that the People were
resolved, if they could meet with him, to throw him to the wild Beasts, that
were kept there for the disport and pleasure of the People. And this doubtless
he means, when elsewhere he tells us, that he fought with Beasts at Ephesus,
probably intending what the People designed, though he did not actually suffer;
though the brutish rage, the savage and inhumane manners of this People did
sufficiently deserve that the censure and character should be fixed upon
themselves.

8. GREAT was the confusion of the Multitude, the major-part not knowing the
reason of the Concourse. In which distraction Alexander a Jewish Convert being
thrust forward by the Jews, to be questioned and examined about this matter, he
would accordingly have made his Apology to the People, intending no doubt to
clear himself by casting the whole blame upon S. Paul; This being very probably
that Alexander the Copper-smith, 2 Timothy 4.14.
of whom our Apostle elsewhere complains, That he did him much evil, 1 Timothy
1.20.
and greatly withstood his words, and whom he delivered over unto Satan for his
Apostasy, for blaspheming Christ, and reproaching Christianity. But the
Multitude perceiving him to be a Jew, and thereby suspecting him to be one of
S. Paul's Associates, began to raise an outcry for near two Hours together,
wherein nothing could be heard, but Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The noise
being a little over, the Recorder, a discreet and prudent Man, came out and
calmly told them, That it was sufficiently known to all the World, what a
mighty honor and veneration the City of Ephesus had for the great Goddess
Diana, and the famous Image which fell from Heaven, that therefore there needed
not this stir to vindicate and assert it: That they had seized Persons, who
were not guilty either of Sacrilege, or Blasphemy toward their Goddess; that
if Demetrius and his Company had any just charge against them, the Courts were
sitting, and they might prefer their Indictment: or if the Controversy were
about any other matter, it might be referred to such a proper Judicature, as
the Law appoints for the determination of such cases: That therefore they
should do well to be quiet, having done more already than they could answer, if
called in question, (as it is like they would) there being no cause sufficient
to justify that days riotous Assembly. With which prudent discourse, he
appeased and dismissed the Multitude.

9. IT was about this time that S. Paul heard of some disturbance in the Church
at Corinth, hatched and fomented by a pack of false heretical Teachers, crept
in among them, who endeavored to draw them into Parties and Factions, by
persuading one Party to be for Peter, another for Paul, a third for Apollos, as
if the main of Religion consisted in being of this or that Denomination, or in
a warm active zeal to decry and oppose whoever is not of our narrow Sect. It Is
a very weak and slender claim, when a Man holds his Religion by no better a
title, than that he has joined himself to this Man's Church, or that Man's
Congregation, and is zealously earnest to maintain and promote it, to be
childishly and passionately clamorous for one Man's mode and way of
administration, or for some particular humor or opinion, as if Religion lay in
nice and curious disputes, or in separating from our Brethren, and not rather
in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. By this means Schisms and
Factions broke into the Corinthian Church, whereby many wild and extravagant
Opinions, and some of them such as undermined the fundamental Articles of
Christianity, were planted, and had taken root there. As the envious Man never
fishes more successfully than in troubled Waters. To cure these Distempers S.
Paul (who had received an Account of all this by Letters which Apollos, and
some others had brought to him from the Church of Corinth) writes his first
Epistle to them. Wherein he smartly reproves them for their Schisms and
Parties, conjures them to peace and unity, corrects those gross corruptions
that were introduced among them, and particularly resolves those many cases and
controversies, wherein they had requested his advice and counsel. Shortly after
Apollos designing to go for Crete, by him and Zenas S. Paul sends his Epistle
to Titus, whom he had made Bishop of that Island, and had left there for the
propagating of the Gospel. Herein he fully instructs him in the execution of
his Office, how to carry himself, and what directions he should give to others,
to all particular ranks and relations of men, especially those who were to be
advanced to places of Office and Authority in the Church.

10. A LITTLE before S. Paul's departure from Ephesus, we may not improbably
suppose, that Apollonius Tyancus, the famous Philosopher and Magician of the
Heathen World (a Man remarkable for the strictness of his manners, and his
sober and regular course of life, but especially for the great Miracles said to
have been done by him; whom therefore the Heathens generally set up as the
great Corrival of our Savior; though some of his own pary, and particularly
Eusebius. lib. 4. contra Hicrocl. p. 530. ad calc. Demonstr. Evang.
Euphratus the Philosopher, who lived with him at the same time at Rome,
accused him for doing his strange feats by Magic) came to Ephesus. The enemy
of Mankind, probably designing to obstruct the propagation of Christianity, by
setting up one who by the Arts of Magic might, at least in the Vogue and
estimation of the People, equal, or eclipse the Miracles of S. Paul. Certain it
is, if we compare times and actions set down by the Philostr. de vit. Apollon.
Tyan. lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 159. and c. 12. p. 194. conser. lib. 5.
Writer of his Life, we shall find that he came hither about the beginning of
Nero's Reign, and he particularly sets down the strange things that were done
by him, especially his clearing the City of a grievous Plague, for which the
People of Ephesus had him in such veneration, Ibid. lib. 4. c. 3. p. 164. vid.
Eusebius. in Hierocl. lib. 4. ap. Philostr. p. 457.
that they erected a Statue to him as to a particular Deity, and did divine
honor to it. But whether this was before S. Paul's going thence, I will not
take upon me to determine; it seems most probable to have been done afterward.

SECT. V. S. Paul's Acts, from his departure from Ephesus, till his Arraignment
before Felix.
S. Paul 's journey into Macedonia. His preaching as far as Illyricum, and
return into Greece. His second Epistle to the Corinthians, and what the design
of it. His first Epistle to Timothy. His Epistle to the Romans whence written,
and with what design. S. Paul' s preaching at Troas, and raising Eutychus. His
summoning the Asian Bishops to Myletus, and pathetical discourse to them. His
stay at Caesarea with Philip the Deacon. The Churches passionate dissuading him
from going to Jerusalem. His coming to Jerusalem, and compliance with the
indifferent Rites of the Mosaic Law, and why. The tumults raised against him
by the Jews, and his rescue by the Roman Captain. His asserting his Roman
freedom. His carriage before the Sanhedrim. The difference between the
Pharisees and Sadducees about him. The Jews conspiracy against his life
discovered. His being sent unto Caesarea.

1. IT was not long after the tumult at Ephesus, when S. Paul having called the
Church together, and constituted Timothy Bishop of that place, took his leave,
Acts 20.1.
and departed by Troas for Macedonia. And at this time it was, that, as he
himself tells us, he preached the Gospel round about unto Illyricum, since
called Sclavonia, some parts of Macedonia bordering on that Province. From
Macedonia he returned back unto Greece, where he abode three months, and met
with Titus, lately come with great contributions from the Church at Corinth. By
whose example he stirred up the liberality of the Macedonians, who very freely,
and somewhat beyond their ability contributed to the poor Christians at
Jerusalem. From Titus he had an account of the present state of the Church at
Corinth; and by him at his return, together with S. Luke, he sent his second
Epistle to them. Wherein he endeavors to set right what his former Epistle had
not yet effected, to vindicate his Apostleship from that contempt and scorn,
and himself from those slanders and aspersions, which the seducers, who had
found themselves lasht by his first Epistle, had cast upon him, together with
some other particular cases relating to them. Much about the same time he writ
his first Epistle to Timothy, whom he had left at Ephesus, wherein at large he
counsels him, how to carry himself in the discharge of that great place and
authority in the Church, which he had committed to him; instructs him in the
particular qualifications of those whom he should make choice of, to be Bishops
and Ministers in the Church. How to order the Deaconesses, and to instruct
Servants, warning him withal of that pestilent generation of heretics and
seducers, that would arise in the Church. During his three months stay in
Greece, he went to Corinth, whence he wrote his famous Epistle to the Romans,
which he sent by Phoebe, a Deaconess of the Church of Cenchrea, nigh Corinth:
wherein his main design is fully to state and determine the great controversy
between the Jews and Gentiles, about the obligation of the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Jewish Law, and those main and material Doctrines of Christianity, which
did depend upon it, such as of Christian liberty, the use of indifferent
things, etc. And which is the main end of all Religion, instructs them in, and
presses them to the duties of an holy and good life, such as the Christian
Doctrine does naturally tend to oblige men to.

2. S. PAUL being now resolved for Syria, to convey the contributions to the
Brethren at Jerusalem, was a while diverted from that resolution, by a design
he was told of which the Jews had to kill and rob him by the way. Whereupon he
went back into Macedonia, and so came to Philippi, and thence went to Troas,
where having staid a week, on the Lord's Day the Church met together to receive
the holy Sacrament. Here S. Paul preached to them, and continued his discourse
till midnight, the longer probably, being the next day to depart from them.
The length of his discourse, and the time of the night had caused some of his
Auditors to be overtaken with sleep and drowziness, among whom a young man
called Eutychus being fast asleep, fell down from the third story, and was
taken up dead, but whom S. Paul presently restored to life and health. How
indefatigable was the industry of our Apostle! how close did he tread in his
Masters steps, who went about doing good! He compassed Sea and Land, preached
and wrought miracles wherever he came. In every place like a wise
Master Builder, he either laid a foundation, or raised the superstructure. He
was instant in season and out of season, and spared not his pains, either night
or day, that he might do good to the Souls of men. The night being thus spent
in holy exercises, S. Paul in the morning took his leave, and went on foot to
Assos, a Seaport Town, whither he had sent his company by Sea. Thence they set
sail to Mytilene; from thence to Samos, and having staid some little time at
Trogyllium, the next day came to Myletus, not so much as putting in at Ephesus,
because the Apostle was resolved, if possible, to be at Jerusalem at the Feast
of Pentecost.

3. AT Myletus he sent to Ephesus, Acts 20.17.
to summon the Bishops and Governors of the Church, who being come, he put
them in mind with what uprightness and integrity, with what affection and
humility, with how great trouble and danger, with how much faithfulness to
their Souls he had been conversant among them, and had preached the Gospol to
them, ever since his first coming into those parts: That he had not failed to
acquaint them both publicly and privately with whatever might be useful and
profitable to them, urging both upon Jews and Gentiles repentance and
reformation of life, and an hearty entertainment of the Faith of Christ: That
now he was resolved to go to Jerusalem, where he did not know what particular
sufferings would befall him, more than this, That it had been foretold him in
every place by those who were endued with the Prophetical gifts of the Holy
Ghost, that afflictions and imprisonment would attend him there: But that he
was not troubled at this, no nor unwilling to lay down his life, so he might
but successfully preach the Gospel, and faithfully serve his Lord in that place
and station wherein he had set him: That he knew that henceforth they should
see his face no more, but that this was his encouragement and satisfaction,
that they themselves could bear him witness, that he had not by concealing from
them any parts of the Christian Doctrine, betrayed their Souls: That as for
themselves, whom God had made Bishops and Pastors of his Church, they should be
careful to feed, guide and direct those Christians under their inspection, and
be infinitely tender of the good of Souls, for whose redemption Christ laid
down his own life: That all the care they could use was no more than necessary,
it being certain, that after his departure, Heretical Teachers would break in
among them, and endanger the ruin of men's Souls; nay, that even among
themselves, there would some arise, who by subtle and crafty methods, by
corrupt and pernicious Doctrines would gain Proselytes to their party, and
thereby make Rents and Schisms in the Church: That therefore they should watch,
remembering with what tears and sorrow, he had for three years together warned
them of these things: That now he recommended them to the Divine care and
goodness, and to the rules and instructions of the Gospel, which if adhered to,
would certainly dispose and perfect them for that state of happiness, which God
had prepared for good men in Heaven. In short, that he had all a-long dealt
faithfully and uprightly with them, they might know from hence, that in all his
preaching he had no crafty or covetous designs upon any man's Estate or Riches,
having (as themselves could witness) industriously labored with his own hands,
and by his own work maintained both himself and his company: Herein leaving
them an example, what pains they ought to take to support the weak, and relieve
the poor, rather than to be themselves chargeable unto others; according to
that incomparable saying of our Savior (which surely S. Paul had received from
some of those that had conversed with him in the days of his flesh) It is more
blessed to give, than to receive. This Concio ad Clerum, or Visitation-Sermon
being ended, the Apostle kneeled down, and concluded all with Prayer. Which
done, they all melted into tears, and with the greatest expressions of sorrow
attended him to the Ship, though that which made the deepest impression upon
their minds was, that he had told them, That they should see his face no more.

4. DEPARTING from Myletus, Acts 20.1.
they arrived at Coos, thence came to Rhodes, thence to Patara, thence to Tire;
where meeting with some Christians, he was advised by those among them, who had
the gift of Prophecy, that he should not go up to Jerusalem: with them he staid
a week, and then going all together to the shore, he kneeled down and prayed
with them, and having mutually embraced one another, he went on board, and came
to Ptolemais, where only saluting the Brethren, they came next day unto
Caesarea. Here they lodged in the house of Philip the Evangelist, one of the
seven Deacons that were at first set apart by the Apostles, who had four
Virgin-daughters, all endued with the gift of prophecy. During their stay in
this place, Agabus a Christian Prophet came down hither from Judaea, who taking
Paul's girdle, bound with it his own hands and feet, telling them, that by this
external Symbol the Holy Ghost did signify and declare, that S. Paul should be
thus served by the Jews at Jerusalem, and be by them delivered over into the
hands of the Gentiles. Whereupon they all passionately besought him, that he
would divert his course to some other place. The Apostle asked them, what they
meant, by these compassionate disswasives to add more affliction to his sorrow;
that he was willing and resolved not only to be imprisoned, but, if need were
to die at Jerusalem for the sake of Christ and his Religion. Finding his
resolution fixed and immovable, they importuned him no further, but left the
event to the Divine will and pleasure, All things being in readiness, they set
forwards on their journey, and being come to Jerusalem, were kindly and
joyfully entertained by the Christians there.

5. THE next day after their arrival, Acts 21.18.
S. Paul and his company went to the house of S. James the Apostle, where the
rest of the Bishops and Governors of the Church were met together; after
mutual salutations, he gave them a particular account with what success God had
blessed him in propagating Christianity among the Gentiles, for which they all
heartily blessed God, but withal told him, that he was now come to a place,
where there were many thousands of Jewish converts, who all retained a mighty
zeal and veneration for the Law of Moses, and who had been informed of him,
that he taught the Jews, whom he had converted, in every place, to renounce
Circumcision, and the Ceremonies of the Law: That as soon as the multitude
heard of his arrival, they would come together to see how he behaved himself in
this matter; and therefore to prevent so much disturbance, it was advisable,
that there being four men there at that time, who were to accomplish a Vow
(probably not the Nazarite-vow, but some other, which they had made for
deliverance from sickness, or some other eminent danger and distress; for so De
Bell. Jud. lib. 2. c. 15.
Josephus tells us, they were wont to do in such cases, and before they came to
offer the accustomed Sacrifices, to abstain for some time from Wine, and to
shave their heads) he would join himself to them, perform the usual Rites and
Ceremonies with them, and provide such Sacrifices for them, as the Law required
in that case, and that in discharge of their Vow, they might shave their heads.
Whereby it would appear, that the reports which were spread concerning him were
false and groundless, and that he himself did still observe the Rites and
Orders of the Mosaical Institution: That as for the Gentile converts they
required no such observances at their hands, nor expected any thing more from
them in these indifferent matters, than what had been before determined by the
Apostolical Synod in that place. S. Paul (who in such things was willing to
become all things to all men, that he might gain the more) consented to the
counsel which they gave him, and taking the persons along with him to the
Temple, told the Priests, that the time of a Vow which they had made being now
run out, and having purified themselves, as the nature of the case required,
they were come to make their offerings according to the Law.

6. THE seven days wherein those Sacrifices were to be offered being now almost
ended, some Jews that were come from Asia (where, probably, they had opposed S.
Paul) now finding him in the Temple, began to raise a tumult and uproar, and
laying hold of him, called out to the rest of the Jews for their assistance:
Telling them, that this was the fellow, that every where vented. Doctrines
derogatory to the prerogative of the Jewish Nation, destructive to the
Institutions of the Law, and to the purity of that place, which he had
profaned by bringing in uncircumcised Greeks into it: Positively concluding,
that because they had seen Trophimus a Gentile convert of Ephesus with him in
the City, therefore he had brought him also into the Temple. So apt is malice
to make any premises, from whence it may infer its own conclusion. Hereupon the
whole City was presently in an uproar, and seizing upon him, they dragged him
out of the Temple, the doors being presently shut against him. Nor had they
failed there to put a period to all his troubles, had not Claudius Lysias,
Commander of the Roman Garrison in the Tower of Antonia, come in with some
Soldiers to his rescue and deliverance, and supposing him to be a more than an
ordinary Malefactor, commanded a double chain to be put upon him, though as yet
altogether ignorant, either who he, or what his crime was, and wherein he could
receive little satisfaction from the clamorous multitude, who called for
nothing but his death, following the cry with such crowds and numbers, that the
Soldiers were forced to take him into their arms, to secure him from the
present rage and violence of the people. As they were going up into the Castle,
S. Paul asked the Governor, whether he might have the liberty to speak to him,
who finding him to speak Greek enquired of him, whether he was not that
Egyptian, which a few Years before had raised a Sedition in Judaea, and headed
a party of Four Thousand debauched and profligate wretches. The Apostle
replied, that he was a Jew of Tarsus, a Freeman of a rich and honorable City,
and therefore begged of him, that he might have leave to speak to the People.
Which the Captain readily granted, and standing near the Door of the Castle,
and making signs that they would hold their peace, he began to address himself
to them in the Hebrew Language: which when they heard, they became a little
more calm and quiet, while he discoursed to them to this effect.

7. HE gave them an account of himself from his Birth, Acts 22.1.
of his education in his youth, of the mighty zeal which he had for the Rites
and Customs of their Religion, and with what a passionate earnestness he
persecuted and put to death all the Christians that he met with, whereof the
High Priest and the Sanhedrim could be sufficient witnesses. He next gave them
an entire and punctual relation of the way and manner of his conversion, and
how that he had received an immediate command from God himself to depart
Jerusalem, and preach unto the Gentiles. At this word the patience of the Jews
could hold no longer, but they unanimously cried out, to have him put to death,
it not being fit that such a Villain should live upon the Earth. And the more
to express their fury, they threw off their Clothes, and cast dust into the
Air, as if they immediately designed to stone him. To avoid which, the Captain
of the Guard commanded him to be brought within the Castle, and that he should
be examined by whipping, till he confessed the reason of so much rage against
him. Caedebatur virgis in medio foro Messanae Civis Romanus, cum interca nullus
gemitus, nulla vox alii istius miseri audiebatur, nisi haec, Civis Romanus sum.
Hac se commemoratione Civitatis omnia verbera depulsurum arbitrabatur. -- O
nomen dulce libertatis! O jus eximium nostrae civitatis! O lex Porcia, legesque
Semproniae! Cicer. in Verr. lib. 7. Tom. 2. p* 218. Facinus est vincire Civem
Romanum, scelus, verberare. Id. ib. p. 220. vid. supra Sect. III. Number. 4.
While the Lictor was binding him in order to it, he asked the Centurion that
stood by, whether they could justify the scourging a Citizen of Rome, and that
before any sentence legally passed upon him. This the Centurion presently
intimated to the Governor of the Castle, bidding him have a care what he did,
for the Prisoner was a Roman. Whereat the Governor himself came, and asked
him, whether he was a free Denizon of Rome? and being told that he was, he
replied, that it was a great privilege, a privilege which he himself had
purchased at a considerable rate. To whom S. Paul answered, that it was his
Birthright, and the privilege of the place where he was born and bred.
Hereupon they gave over their design of whipping him, the Commander himself
being a little startled, that he had bound and chained a Denizon of Rome.

8. THE next Day the Governor commanded his Chains to be knocked off, and that
he might thoroughly satisfy himself in the matter, commanded the Sanhedrim to
meet, and brought down Paul before them: Acts 23.1.
where being set before the Council, he told them, that in all passages of his
life he had been careful to act according to the severest rules and conscience
of his duty. Men and Brethren, (...). M. Anton. (...). lib. 7. Sect. 28. p. 63.

Justum and tenacem propositi Virum,
Non Civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida: neque Auster
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus.
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidura ferient ruinae.
Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 3 p. 154.


I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day. Behold here the
great security of a good man, and what invisible supports innocence affords
under greatest danger. With how generous a confidence does virtue and honesty
guard the breast of a good man! as indeed nothing else can lay a firm basis and
foundation for satisfaction and tranquillity, when any misery or calamity does
overtake us. Religion and a good conscience beget peace and a Heaven in the
Man's bosom beyond the power of the little accidents of this World to ruffle
and discompose. Whence Sapiens ille est plenus gaudio, hilaris, and placidus,
inconcussus, cum diis ex pari vivit. per dies noctesque par and aequalis animi
tenor erecti and placentis sibi est. -- Talis est sapientis animus, qualis
mundi status super Lunam, semper illic serenum est ^ nunquam sine gaudio est.
Gaudium hoc non n^scitur, nisi ex virtutum conscientia. Senec. Epist. 59. p.
152.
Seneca compares the mind of a wise and a good man to the state of the upper
Region, which is always serene and calm. The High Priest Ananias being offended
at the holy and ingenuous freedom of our Apostle, as if by asserting his own
innocence, he had reproached the justice of their Tribunal, commanded those
that stood next him, to strike him in the Face; whereto the Apostle tartly
replied, That GOD would smite him, Hypocrite as he was, who under a pretense of
doing Justice had illegally commanded him to be punished, before the Law
condemned him for a Malefactor. Whereupon they that stood by asked him, how he
durst thus affront so sacred and venerable a Person as Gods High Priest? He
calmly returned, That he did not know [or own] Ananias to be an High Priest [of
God's appointment.] However being a Person in Authority, Haec Pauli verba
Ananias and Apparitores sic accipiebant, quasi excusaret Paulus quod sibi in
istis malis constituto non satis in mentem venisset, quicum sibi res esset.
Verum latentior sensus suberat. non esse eum sacerdotem, aut principem Senatus,
qui eas dignitates precio comparasset. Didicerat enim hoc a Gamaliele Paulus;
Judicem qui honoris consequendi causa pecunias dederit, revera neque judicem
esse, neque honorandum, sed asini habendum loco, ut est in Titulo Talmudica de
Synedrio. Grot. in loc.
it was not lawful to revile him, God himself having commanded, that no man
should speak evil of the Ruler of the People. The Apostle, who as he never laid
aside the innocence of the Dove, so knew how, when occasion was, to make use of
the wisdom of the Serpent, perceiving the Council to consist partly of
Sadducees, and partly of Pharisees, openly told them, that he was a Pharisee,
and the Son of a Pharisee, and that the main thing he was questioned for, was
his belief of a future Resurrection. This quickly divided the Council, the
Pharisees being zealous Patrons of that Article, and the Sadducees as stiffly
denying, that there is either Angel (that is, of a spiritual and immortal
nature, really subsisting of it self, for otherwise they cannot be supposed to
have utterly denied all sorts of Angels, seeing they owned the Pentateuch,
wherein there is frequent mention of them) or Spirit, or that humane Souls do
exist in a separate state, and consequently that there is no Resurrection.
Presently the Doctors of the Law, who were Pharisees, stood up to acquit him,
affirming he had done nothing amiss, that it was possible he had received some
intimation from Heaven by an Angel, or the revelation of the H. Spirit, and if
so, then in opposing his Doctrine, they might fight against God himself.

9. GREAT were the dissentions in the Council about this matter, in so much
that the Governor fearing S. Paul would be torn in pieces, commanded the
Soldiers to take him from the Bar, and return him back into the Castle. That
night to comfort him after all his frights, and fears, God was pleased to
appear to him in a vision, encouraging him to constancy and resolution,
assuring him that as he had born witness to his cause at Jerusalem, so in
despite of all his enemies he should live to bear his testimony even at Rome it
self. The next Morning the Jews, who could as well cease to be, as to be
mischievous and malicious, finding that these dilatory proceedings were not
like to do the work, resolved upon a quicker dispatch. To which end above Forty
of them entered into a wicked confederacy, which they ratified by Oath and
Execration, never to eat or drink till they had killed him: and having
acquitted the Sanhedrim with their design, they entreated them to importune the
Governor, that he might again the next day be brought down before them, under
pretense of a more strict trial of his case, and that they themselves would lie
in ambush by the way, and not fail to dispatch him, But that Divine providence
that peculiarly superintends the safety of good men, disappoints the devices of
the crafty. The design was discovered to S. Paul by a Nephew of his, and by him
imparted to the Governor, who immediately commanded two Parties of Foot and
Horse, to be ready by Nine of the Clock that Night, and provision to be made
for S. Paul's carriage to Foelix the Roman Governor of that Province: To whom
also he wrote, signifying whom he had sent, how the Jews had used him, and that
his enemies also should appear before him to manage the charge and accusation.
Accordingly he was by Night conducted to Antipatris, and afterward to
Caesarea, where the Letters being delivered to Foelix, the Apostle was
presented to him: and finding that he belonged to the Province of Citicia, he
told him, that as soon as his Accusers were arrived he should have an hearing,
commanding him in the mean time to be secured in the place called Herod's Hall.

SECT. VI. Of S. Paul, from his first Trial before Foelix, till his coming to
Rome.
S. Paul impleaded before Foelix by Tertullus the Jewish Advocate. His charge
of Sedition, Heresy, and Profanation of the Temple. S. Paul 's reply to the
several parts of the charge. His second Hearing before Foelix and Drusilla. His
smart and impartial Reasonings. Foelix his great injustice and oppression: His
Luxury and Intemperance, Bribery and Covetousness. S. Paul 's Arraignment
before Festus, Foelix his Successor, at Caesarea. His Appeal to Caesar. The
nature and manner of those Appeals. He is again brought before Festus and
Agrippa. His vindication of himself, and the goodness of his cause. His being
acquitted by his Judges of any Capital crime. His Voyage to Rome. The trouble
and danger of it. Their Shipwreck, and being cast upon the Island Melita. Their
courteous entertainment by the Barbarians, and their different censure of S.
Paul. The civil usage of the Governor, and his Conversion to Christianity. S.
Paul met and conducted by Christians to Rome.

1. NOT many days after down comes Ananias the High Priest, Acts 24.1.
with some others of the Sanhedrim to Caesarea, accompanied with Tertullus
their Advocate, who in a short but neat speech, set off with all the flattering
and insinuative arts of Eloquence, began to implead our Apostle, charging him
with Sedition, Heresy, and the Profanation of the Temple: That they would
have saved him the trouble of this Hearing, by judging him according to their
own Law, had not Lysias the Commander violently taken him from them, and sent
both him and them down thither. To all which the Jews that were with him gave
in their Vote and Testimony. S. Paul having leave from Foelix to defend
himself, and having told him, how much he was satisfied that he was to plead
before one, who for so many years had been Governor of that Nation, distinctly
answered to the several parts of the Charge.

2. AND first for Sedition, he point blank denied it, affirming that they found
him behaving himself quietly and peaceably in the Temple, not so much as
disputing there, nor stirring up the people either in the Synagogues, or any
other place of the City. And though this was plausibly pretended by them, yet
were they never able to make it good. As for the charge of Heresy, that he was
a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes, he ingenuously acknowledged, that
after the way which they counted Heresy, so he worshipped God, the same way in
substance wherein all the Patriarchs of the Jewish Nation had worshipped God
before him, taking nothing into his Creed, but what the Authentic writings of
the Jews themselves did own and justify: That he firmly believed, what the
better of themselves were ready to grant, another Life, and a future
Resurrection: In he hope and expectation whereof he was careful to live
unblameable, and conscientiously to do his duty both to God and men. As for the
third part of the Charge, his Profaning of the Temple, he shows how little
foundation there was for it, that the design of his coming to Jerusalem was to
bring charitable contributions to his distressed Brethren, that he was indeed
in the Temple, but not as some Asiatick Jews falsely suggested, either with
tumult or with multitude, but only purifying himself according to the rites and
customs of the Mosaic Law: And that if any would affirm the contrary, they
should come now into open Court, and make it good. Nay, that he appealed to
those of the Sanhedrim that were there present, whether he had not been
acquitted by their own great Council at Jerusalem, where nothing of moment had
been laid to his charge, except by them of the Sadducean party, who quarrelled
with him only for asserting the Doctrine of the Resurrection. Foelix having
thus heard both parties argue, refused to make any final determination in the
case, till he had more fully advised about it, and spoken with Lysias,
Commander of the Garrison, who was best able to give an account of the Sedition
and the Tumult; commanding in the mean time that S. Paul should be under guard,
but yet in so free a custody, that none of his friends should be hindered from
visiting him, or performing any office of kindness and friendship to him.

3. IT was not long after this before his Wife Drusilla (a Jewess, Daughter of
the elder Herod, and whom Tacitus, I fear by a mistake for his former Wife
Drusilla, Daughter to Juba King of Mauritania, makes Niece to Anthony and
Cleopatra) came to him to Caesarea. Who being present, he sent for S. Paul to
appear before them, and gave him leave to discourse concerning the doctrine of
Christianity. In his discourse he took occasion particularly to insist upon the
great obligation, which the Laws of Christ lay upon men to Justice and
Righteousness toward one another, to Sobriety and Chastity both toward
themselves and others, withal urging that severe and impartial account, that
must be given in the Judgment of the other World, wherein men shall be
arraigned for all the actions of their past life, and be eternally punished or
rewarded according to their works. A discourse wisely adapted by the Apostle to
Foelix his state and temper. But corrosives are very uneasy to a guilty mind:
Men naturally hate that which brings their sins to their remembrance, and
sharpens the sling of a violated conscience. The Prince was so netled with the
Apostles reasonings, that he fell a trembling, and caused the Apostle to break
off abruptly, telling him, he would hear the rest at some other season. And
good reason there was that Foelix his conscience should be sensibly alarmed
with these reflections, being a man notoriously infamous for rapine and
violence. Histor. lib. 5. c. 9. p. 538. vid. Annal. lib. 12. c. 54. p. 234.
Tacitus tells us of him, that he made his will the Law of his Government,
practicing all manner of cruelty and injustice. And then for incontinency, he
was given over to luxury and debauchery, for the compassing whereof he scrupled
not to violate all Laws both of God and Man. Whereof this very Wise Drusilla
was a famous Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. lib. 20. c. 5. p. 693.
instance. For being married by her Brother to Azis King of the Emisenes,
Foelix, who had heard of her incomparable beauty, by the help of Simon the
Magician, a Jew of Cyprus, ravished her from her Husbands bed, and in defiance
of all law and right, kept her for his own Wife. To these qualities he had
added bribery and covetousness, and therefore frequently sent for S. Paul to
discourse with him, expecting that he should have given him a considerable sum
for his release; and the rather probably, because he had heard that S. Paul had
lately brought up great sums of money to Jerusalem. But finding no offers
made, either by the Apostle or his friends, he kept him prisoner for two years
together, so long as himself continued Procurator of that Nation, when being
displaced by Nero, he left S. Paul still in Prison, on purpose to gratify the
Jews, and engage them to speak better of him after his departure from them.

4. TO him succeeded Portius Festus in the Procuratorship of the Province, Acts
25.1.
at whose first coming to Jerusalem, the High Priest and Sanhedrim presently
began to prefer to him an Indictment against S. Paul, desiring, that in order
to his Trial, he might be sent for up from Caesarea, designing under this
pretense that some Assassinates should lie in the way to murder him. Festus
told them, that he himself was going shortly for Caesarea, and that if they had
any thing against S. Paul, they should come down thither and accuse him.
Accordingly being come to Caesarea, and sitting in open Judicature, the Jews
began to renew the Charge which they had heretofore brought against S. Paul: Of
all which he cleared himself, they not being able to make any proof against
him. However Festus being willing to oblige the Jews in the entrance upon his
Government, asked him, whether he would go up and be tried before him at
Jerusalem? The Apostle well understanding the consequences of that proposal,
told him that he was a Roman, and therefore ought to be judged by their Laws,
that he stood now at Caesar's own Judgment Seat (as indeed what was done by the
Emperor's Procurator in any Province, the L. 1. ff. de Offic. Procur. Caesar.
lib. 1. Tit. 19
Law reckoned as done by the Emperor himself) and though he should submit to
the Jewish Tribunal, yet he himself saw, that they had nothing which they could
prove against him; that if he had done any thing which really deserved capital
punishment, he was willing to undergo it; but if not, he ought not to be
delivered over to his enemies, who were beforehand resolved to take away his
life. However as the safest course, he solemnly made his appeal to the Roman
Emperor, who should judge between them. Whereupon Festus advising with the
Jewish Sanhedrim, received his appeal, and told him he should go to Caesar.
This way of appealing was frequent amongst the Romans, introduced to defend and
secure the lives and fortunes of the populacy from the unjust encroachments,
and overrigorous severities of the Magistrates, whereby it was lawful in cases
of oppression to appeal to the People for redress and rescue, a thing more than
once and again settled by the Sanction of the Valerian Laws. These Leg. 1.
Sect. 4. ff. de appellat. lib. 49. Tit. 1.
appeals were wont to be made in writing, by Appellatory Libels given in,
wherein was contained an account of the Appellant, the person against whom, and
from whose Sentence he did appeal. But where the case was done in open Court,
Leg. 2. and 3. ibid.
it was enough for the Criminal verbally to declare, that he did appeal: In
great and weighty cases appeals were made to the Prince himself, and that not
only at Rome, but in the Provinces of the Empire, all Proconsuls and Governors
of Provinces being strictly Ibid. Leg. 25. and l. 7. ff. ad Leg. Jul. de vi
public. lib. 48. Tit. 6.
forbidden to execute, scourge, bind, or put any badge of servility upon a
Citizen, or any that had the privilege of a Citizen of Rome, who had made his
appeal, or any ways to hinder him from going thither, to obtain justice at the
hands of the Emperor, who had as much regard to the liberty of his Subjects
(says the Law it self) as they could have of their good will and obedience to
him. And this was exactly S. Paul's case, who knowing that he should have no
fair and equitable dealing at the hands of the Governor, when once he came to
be swayed by the Jews, his sworn and inveterate enemies, appealed from him to
the Emperor, the reason why Festus durst not deny his demand, it being a
privilege so often, so plainly settled and confirmed by the Roman Laws.

5. SOME time after King Agrippa, who succeeded Herod in the Tetrarchate of
Galilee, and his Sister Bernice came to Caesarea, to make a visit to the
new-come Governor. To him Festus gave an account of S. Paul, and the great
stir and trouble that had been made about him, and how for his safety and
vindication he had immediately appealed to Caesar. Agrippa was very desirous to
see and hear him, and accordingly the next day the King and his Sister
accompanied with Festus the Governor, and other persons of Quality, came into
the Court with a pompous and magnificent retinue, where the Prisoner was
brought forth before him. Festus having acquainted the King and the Assembly,
how much he had been solicited by the Jews both at Caesarea and Jerusalem,
concerning the Prisoner at the Bar, that as a notorious Malefactor he might be
put to death, but that having found him guilty of no capital crime, and the
Prisoner himself having appealed to Caesar, he was resolved to send him to
Rome, but yet was willing to have his case again discussed before Agrippa, that
so he might be furnished with some material instructions to send along with
him, since it was very absurd to send a Prisoner, without signifying what
crimes were charged upon him.

6. HEREUPON Agrippa told the Apostle, he had liberty to make his own defense.
Acts 26.1.
To whom, after silence made, he particularly addressed his speech; he tells
him in the first place what a happiness he had, that he was to plead before one
so exactly versed in all the rites and customs, the questions and the
controversies of the Jewish Law, that the Jews themselves knew what had been
the course and manner of his life, how he had been educated under the
Institutions of the Pharisees, the strictest Sect of the whole Jewish Religion,
and had been particularly disquieted and arraigned for what had been the
constant belief of all their Fathers, what was sufficiently credible in it
self, and plainly enough revealed in the Scripture, the Resurrection of the
dead. He next gave him an account with what a bitter and implacable zeal he had
formerly persecuted Christianity, told him the whole story and method of his
conversion, and that in compliance with a particular Vision from Heaven, he had
preached repentance and reformation of life first to the Jews, and then after
to the Gentiles: That it was for no other things than these that the Jews
apprehended him in the Temple, and designed to murder him; but being rescued
and upheld by a Divine power, he continued in this testimony to this day,
asserting nothing but what was perfectly agreeable to Moses and the Prophets,
who had plainly foretold that the Messiah should both be put to death, and rise
again, and by his doctrine enlighten both the Jewish and the Gentile World.
While he was thus discoursing, Festus openly cried out, that he talked like a
madman, that his overmuch study had put him besides himself. The Apostle
calmly replied, he was far from being transported with idle and distracted
humors, that he spoke nothing but what was most true and real in it self, and
what very well became that grave sober Auditory. And then again addressing
himself to Agrippa, told him, that these things having been open and public,
he could not but be acquainted with them, that he was confident that he
believed the Prophets, and must needs therefore know that those Prophecies were
fulfilled in Christ. Hereat Agrippa replied, That he had in some degree
persuaded him to embrace the Christian Faith. To which the Apostle returned,
that he heartily prayed, that not only he, but the whole Auditory were, not
only in some measure, but altogether, though not Prisoners, yet as much
Christians as he himself was. This done, the King and the Governor, and the
rest of the Council withdrew awhile, to confer privately about this matter.
And finding by the accusations brought against him, that he was not guilty by
the Roman Laws of any capital offense, no nor of any that deserved so much as
imprisonment, Agrippa told Festus, that he might have been released, if he had
not appealed unto Caesar. For the Appeal being once made, the Judge had then no
power either to absolve or condemn, the cause being entirely reserved to the
cognizance of that Superior, to whom the Criminal had appealed.

7. IT was now finally resolved that S. Paul should be sent to Rome: Acts 27.1.
in order whereunto he was, with some other Prisoners of remarque, committed to
the charge of Julius, Commander of a Company belonging to the Legion of
Augustus; accompanied in this Voyage by S. Luke, Aristarchus, Trophimus, and
some others. In September, Ann. Chr. LVI. or as others, LVII. they went on
board a Ship of Adramyttium, and sailed to Sidon, where the Captain civilly
gave the Apostle leave to go a-shoar to visit his Friends, and refresh himself:
Hence to Cyprus, till they came to the Fair-Havens, a place near Myra, a City
of Lysia. Here, Winter growing on, and S. Paul foreseeing it would be a
dangerous Voyage, persuaded them to put in, and winter. But the Captain
preferring the judgment of the Master of the Ship, and especially because of
the incommodiousness of the Harbor, resolved, if possible, to reach Phoenice,
a Port of Crete, and to winter there. But it was not long before they found
themselves disappointed of their hopes: For the calm southerly Gale that blew
before, suddenly changed into a stormy and blustering North-East Wind, which so
bore down all before it, that they were forced to let the Ship drive at the
pleasure of the Wind; but as much as might be, to prevent splitting, or running
a ground, they threw out a great part of their Lading, and the Tackle of the
Ship. Fourteen Days they remained in this desperate and uncomfortable
condition, neither Sun nor Stars appearing for a great part of the time; the
Apostle putting them in mind how ill advised they were in not taking his
counsel: Howbeit they should be of good cheer, for that that God whom he served
and worshipped, had the last Night purposely sent an Angel from Heaven, to let
him know, that notwithstanding the present danger they were in, yet that he
should be brought safe before Nero; that they should be shipwrack'd indeed, and
cast upon an Island, but that for his sake God had spared all in the Ship, not
one whereof should miscarry, and that he did not doubt, but that it would
accordingly come to pass. On the Fourteenth Night upon sounding they found
themselves nigh some Coast; and therefore to avoid Rocks, thought good to come
to an Anchor, till the Morning might give them better information. In the mean
time the Seamen (who best understood the danger) were preparing to get into
the Skiff, to save themselves: which S. Paul espying, told the Captain, that
unless they all staid in the Ship, none could be safe: whereupon the Soldiers
cut the Ropes, and let the Skiff fall off into the Sea. Between this and
Daybreak the Apostle advised them to eat and refresh themselves, having all
this time kept no ordinary and regular Meals, assuring them they should all
escape. Himself first taking Bread, and having blessed God for it before them
all, the rest followed his example, and cheerfully fell to their Meat: which
done, they lightened the Ship of what remained, and endeavored to put into a
Creek, which they discovered not far off. But falling into a place where two
Seas met, the forepart of the Ship ran a-ground, while the hinder-part was
beaten in pieces with the violence of the Waves. Awakened with the danger they
were in, the Soldiers cried out to kill the Prisoners, to prevent their
escape: which the Captain, desirous to save S. Paul, and probably in confidence
of what he had told them, refused to do; commanding, that every one should
shift for himself: the issue was, that part by swimming, part on planks, part
on pieces of the broken Ship, they all, to the number of two hundred threescore
and sixteen (the whole number in the Ship) got safe to shore.

8. THE Island upon which they were cast was Melita (now Malta) situate in the
Libyan Sea between Syracuse and Africa. Acts 28.1.
Here they found civility among Barbarians, and the plain acknowledgments of a
Divine justice written among the naked and untutored notions of Men's minds. The
People treated them with great humanity, entertaining them with all necessary
accommodations; but while S. Paul was throwing sticks upon the Fire, a Viper
dislodged by the heat, came out of the Wood, and fastened on his Hand. This the
People no sooner espied, but presently concluded, that surely he was some
notorious Murderer, whom though the Divine vengeance had suffered to escape the
Hue-and-Cry of the Sea, yet had it only reserved him for a more public and
solemn execution. But when they saw him shake it off into the Fire, and not
presently swell, and drop down, they changed their opinions, and concluded him
to be some God. So easily are light and credulous minds transported from one
extreme to another. Not far off lived Publius, a Man of great Estate and
Authority, and (as we may probably guess from an Inscription found there, and
set down by Grotius, wherein the (...) is reckoned amongst the Roman Offices)
Governor of the Island, Annot. in loc.
by him they were courteously entertained three Days at his own charge, and his
Father lying at that time sick of a Fever and a Dysentery, S. Paul went in,
and having prayed, and laid his hands upon him, healed him; as he did also many
of the Inhabitants, who by this Miracle were encouraged to bring their diseased
to him: whereby great honors were heaped upon him, and both he and his company
furnished with provisions necessary for the rest of their Voyage. Nay Publius
himself is said by Bar. ad An. LVIII. n. 173. vid. Adon. martyr. ad xii. Kal.
Feb. Martyr. Romans ad diem 21. Jan. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23. p. 143.
some to have been hereby converted to the Faith, and by S. Paul to have been
constituted Bishop of the Island, and that this was he that succeeded S. Denis
the Areopagite in the Sea of Athens, and was afterward crowned with Martyrdom.

9. AFTER three Months stay in this Island, they went a-board the Castor and
Pollux, a Ship of Alexandria, bound for Italy. At Syracuse they put in, and
staid three Days; thence failed to Rhegium, and so to Puteoli, where they
landed, and finding some Christians there, staid a Week with them, and then set
forward in their Journey to Rome. The Christians at Rome having heard of their
arrival, several of them came part of the way to meet them, some as far as the
Three Taverns, a place thirty three Miles from Rome, others as far as Appii
Forum, fifty one Miles distant thence. Great was their mutual salutation, and
the encouragement which the Apostle received by it, glad no doubt to see that
Christians found so much liberty at Rome. By them he was conducted in a kind of
triumph into the City, where when they were arrived, the rest of the Prisoners
were delivered over to the Captain of the Guard, and by him disposed in the
common Gaol, while S. Paul (probably at Julius his request and recommendation)
was permitted to stay in a private House, only with a Soldier to secure and
guard him.

SECT. VII. S. Paul's Acts; from his coming to Rome, till his Martyrdom.
S. Paul 's summoning the chief of the Jews at Rome, and his discourse to them.
Their refractoriness and infidelity. His first hearing before Nero. The success
of his Preaching. Poppaea Sabina Nero 's Concubine one of his Converts. Tacitus
his character of her. Onesimus converted by S. Paul at Rome, and sent back with
an Epistle to Philemon his Master. The great obligation which Christianity lays
upon Servants to diligence and fidelity in their duty. The rigorous and
arbitrary power of Masters over Servants by the Roman Laws. This mitigated by
the Laws of the Gospel. S. Paul 's Epistle to the Philippians, upon what
occasion sent. His Epistle to the Ephesians, and another to the Colossians. His
second Epistle to Timothy written (probably) at his first being at Rome. The
Epistle to the Hebrews by whom written; and in what Language. The aim and
design of it. S. Paul 's Preaching the Gospel in the West, and in what parts of
it. His return to Rome, when. His imprisonment under Nero, and why. His being
beheaded. Milk instead of blood said to flow from his body. Different Accounts
of the time of his suffering. His burial where, and the great Church erected to
his memory.

1. THE first thing S. Paul did after he came to Rome, was to summon the Heads
of the Jewish Consistory there, whom he acquainted with the cause and manner of
his coming, that though he had been guilty of no violation of the Law of their
Religion, yet had he been delivered by the Jews into the hands of the Roman
Governors, who would have acquitted him once and again as innocent of any
capital offense, but by the perverseness of the Jews he was forced, not with an
intention to charge his own Nation (already sufficiently odious to the Romans)
but only to vindicate and clear himself, to make his Appeal to Caesar; that
being come, he had sent for them, to let them know, that it was for his
constant asserting the Resurrection, the hope of all true Israelites, that he
was bound with that Chain which they saw upon him. The Jews replied, that they
had received no advice concerning him, nor had any of the Nation that came from
Judaea, brought any Charge against him: only for the Religion which he had
espoused, they desired to be a little better informed about it, it being every
where decried both by Jew and Gentile. Accordingly upon a day appointed he
discoursed to them from morning to night concerning the Religion and Doctrine
of the Holy Jesus, proving from the promises and predictions of the Old
Testament, that he was the true Messiah. His discourse succeeded not with all
alike, some being convinced, others persisted in their infidelity: And as they
were departing in some discontent at each other, the Apostle told them, it was
now too plain, God had accomplished upon them the Prophetical curse, of being
left to their own wilful hardness and impenitency, to be blind at noonday, and
to run themselves against all means and methods into irrecoverable ruin: That
since the case was thus with them, they must expect, that henceforth he should
turn his Preaching to the Gentiles, who would be most ready to entertain, what
they had so scornfully rejected, the glad tidings of the Gospel.

2. IT was not, probably, long after this, that he was brought to his first
hearing before the Emperor, where those friends, whom he most expected should
stand by him, plainly deserted him, afraid it seems of appearing in so ticklish
a cause before so unreasonable a Judge, who governed himself by no other
measures, than the brutish and extravagant pleasure of his lust or humor. But
God stood by him, and encouraged him; as indeed Divine consolations are many
times then nearest to us, when humane assistances are farthest from us. 1 Timothy
4.16.
This cowardice of theirs the Apostle had a charity large enough to cover,
heartily praying, that it might not be brought in against them in the Accounts
of the great Day. Two Years he dwelt at Rome in an House which he hired for his
own use, wherein he constantly employed himself in preaching and writing for
the good of the Church. He preached daily, without interruption, to all that
came to him, and with good success, yea, even upon some of the better rank and
quality, and those belonging to the Court it self. Among which the Roman Ad
diem XVII. Maii p. 308.
Martyrologie reckons Torpes, an Officer of prime note in Nero's Palace, and
afterward a Martyr for the Faith; and Chrysostom (if Ad An. 59. n. 9. vid.
Chrysostom. adv. vituper. vit. monast. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 361. Tom. iv.
Baronius cite him right) tells us of Nero's Cupbearer, and one of his
Concubines, supposed by some to have been Poppaea Sabina, of whom Annal. l. 13.
c. 45. p. 263.
Tacitus gives this character, that she wanted nothing to render her one of the
most accomplished Ladies in the World, but a chaste and a virtuous mind: And I
know not how far it may seem to countenance her conversion, at least
inclination to a better Religion than that of Paganism, that Antiq. Jud. lib.
20. cap. 7. p. 697. De vit. sua, p. 999.
Josephus styles her a pious Woman, and tells us that she effectually solicited
the cause of the Jews with her Husband Nero; and what favors Josephus himself
received from her at Rome, he relates in his own life.

3. AMONGST others of our Apostle's Converts at Rome was Onesimus, who had
formerly been servant to Philemon, a person of eminency in Colosse; but had run
away from his Master, and taken things of some value with him. Having rambled
as far as Rome, he was now converted by S. Paul, and by him returned with
recommendatory Letters to Philemon his Master, to beg his pardon, and that he
might be received into favor, being now of a much better temper, more faithful
and diligent, and useful to his Master than he had been before: As indeed
Christianity where it is heartily entertained, makes men good in all relations,
no Laws being so wisely contrived for the peace and happiness of the World, as
the Laws of the Gospel, as may appear by this particular case of servants; what
admirable rules, what severe Laws does it lay upon them for the discharge of
their duties! it commands them to honor their Masters as their Superiors, and
to take heed of making their authority light and cheap by familiar and
contemptible thoughts and carriages, to obey them in all honest and lawful
things, and that not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of
heart as unto God; that they be faithful to the trust committed to them, and
manage their Masters interest with as much care and conscience as if it were
their own; that they entertain their reproofs, counsels, corrections with all
silence and sobriety, not returning any rude surly answers; and this carriage
to be observed, not only to Masters of a mild and gentle, but of a cross and
peevish disposition, that whatever they do, they do it heartily, not as to men
only, but to the Lord; knowing that of the Lord they shall receive the reward
of the inheritance, for that they serve the Lord Christ. Imbued with these
excellent principles, Onesimus is again returned unto his Master; for Christian
Religion, though it improve men's tempers, does not cancel their relations, it
teaches them to abide in their callings, and not to despise their Masters,
because they are Brethren, but rather do them service, because they are
faithful. And being thus improved S. Paul the more confidently begged his
pardon. And indeed had not Philemon been a Christian, and by the principles of
his Religion both disposed and obliged to mildness and mercy, there had been
great reason why S. Paul should be thus importunate with him for Onesimus his
pardon, the case of servants in those days being very hard, for all Masters
were looked upon as having an unlimited power over their Servants, and that not
only by the L. 1. and 2. ff. de his, qui sui vel alieni juris sunt, lib. 1.
Tit. 6. vid. Instit. lib. 1. Tit. 8.
Roman, but by the Laws of all Nations, whereby without asking the Magistrate's
leave, or any public and formal trial, they might adjudge and condemn them to
what work or punishment they pleased, even to the taking away of life it self.
But the severity and exorbitancy of this power was afterward somewhat curbed
by the Laws of succeeding Emperors, especially after the Empire submitted it
self to Christianity, which makes better provision for persons in that capacity
and relation, and in case of unjust and over-rigorous usage, enables them to
appeal to a more righteous and impartial Tribunal, where Master and Servant
shall both stand upon even ground, where he that does wrong shall receive for
the wrong which he has done; and there is no respect of persons.

4. THE Christians at Philippi having heard of S. Paul's imprisonment at Rome,
and not knowing what straits he might be reduced to, raised a contribution for
him, and sent it by Epaphroditus their Bishop, who was now come to Rome, where
he shortly after fell dangerously sick: But being recovered, and upon the point
to return, by him S. Paul sent his Epistle to the Philippians, wherein he gives
them some account of the state of affairs at Rome, gratefully acknowledges
their kindness to him, and warns them of those dangerous opinions, which the
Judaizing Teachers began to vent among them. The Apostle had heretofore for
some Years lived at Ephesus, and perfectly understood the state and condition
of that place; and therefore now by Tychicus writes his Epistle to the
Ephesians, endeavoring to countermine the principles and practices both of
Jews and Gentiles, to confirm them in the belief and obedience of the Christian
doctrine, to represent the infinite riches of the Divine goodness in admitting
the Gentile-World to the unsearchable Treasures of Christianity, especially
pressing them to express the life and spirit of it in the general duties of
Religion, and in the duties of their particular relations. Much about the same
time, or a little after, he wrote his Epistle to the Colossians, where he had
never been, and sent it by Epaphras, who for some time had been his
fellow-prisoner at Rome. The design of it is for the greatest part the same
with that to the Ephesians; to settle and confirm them in the faith of the
Gospel, against the errors both of Judaism, and the superstitious observances
of the Heathen World, some whereof had taken root amongst them.

5. IT is not improbable but that about this, or rather some considerable time
before, S. Paul wrote his second Epistle to Timothy. I know Eusebius, and the
Ancients, and most Moderns after them, will have it written a little before his
Martyrdom, induced thereunto by that passage in it, that he was then ready to
be offered, and that the time of his departure was at hand. But surely it is
most reasonable to think, that it was written at his first being at Rome, and
that at his first coming thither, presently after his Trial before Nero.
Accordingly the passage before mentioned may import no more, than that he was
in imminent danger of his life, and had received the sentence of death in
himself, not hoping to escape out of the paws of Nero: But that God had
delivered him out of the mouth of the Lion, i. e. the great danger he was in at
his coming thither: Which exactly agrees to his case at his first being at
Rome, but cannot be reconciled with his last coming thither; together with many
more circumstances in this Epistle, which render it next door to certain. In it
he appoints Timothy shortly to come to him, who accordingly came, whose name is
joined together with his in the front of several Epistles, to the Philippians,
Colossians, and to Philemon. The only thing that can be levelled against this
is, that in this Epistle to Timothy, he tells him, that he had sent Tychicus to
Ephesus, by whom it is plain that the Epistles to the Ephesians and Philippians
were dispatched, and that therefore this to Timothy must be written after them.
But I see no inconvenience to affirm, that Tychicus might come to Rome
presently after S. Paul's arrival there, be by him immediately sent back to
Ephesus upon some emergent affair of that Church; and after his return to Rome
be sent with those two Epistles. The design of the Epistle was to excite the
holy man to a mighty zeal and diligence, care and fidelity in his office, and
to antidote the People against those poisonous principles that in those parts
especially began to debauch the minds of men.

6. AS for the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is very uncertain when, or whence, and
(for some Ages doubted) by whom 'twas written. Lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
Eusebius tells us, 'twas not received by many, because rejected by the Church
of Rome, as none of S. Paul's genuine Epistles. Apud. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 25. p.
227.
Origin affirms the style and phrase of it to be more fine and elegant, and to
contain in it a richer vein of purer Greek, than is usually found in S. Paul's
Epistles; as every one that is able to judge of a style, must needs confess:
That the sentences indeed are grave and weighty, and such as breath the Spirit
and Majesty of an Apostle: That therefore 'twas his judgment, that the matter
contained in it had been dictated by some Apostle, but that it had been put
into phrase, form, and order by some other person that did attend upon him:
That if any Church owned it for S. Paul's, they were not to be condemned, it
not being without reason by the Ancients ascribed to him; though God only knew
who was the true Author of it. He further tells us, that report had handed it
down to his time, that it had been composed partly by Clemens of Rome, partly
by Luke the Evangelist. De Pudic. c. 20. p. 582. Vid. Clem. Alex. in lib.
Hypot. apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 14. p 215.
Tertullian adds, that it was writ by Barnabas. What seems most likely in such
variety of opinions is, that S. Paul originally wrote it in Hebrew, it being to
be sent to the Jews his Countrymen, and by some other person, probably S. Luke,
or Clemens Romanus translated into Greek: Especially since both Eusebius. lib. 3.
c. 38. p. 110.
Eusebius and Hier. de Script. Eccl. in Clem.
S. Hierom observed of old such a great affinity both in style and sense
between this and Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians, as thence positively to
conclude him to be the Translator of it. 'Twas written, as we may conjecture, a
little after he was restored to his liberty, and probably while he was yet in
some parts of Italy, Cap. 13.24.
whence he dates his salutations. The main design of it is to magnify Christ
and the Religion of the Gospel, above Moses and the Jewish Economy and
Ministration, that by this means he might the better establish and confirm the
Convert- Jews in the firm belief and profession of Christianity,
notwithstanding those sufferings and persecutions that came upon them,
endeavoring throughout to arm and fortify them against Apostasy from that
noble and excellent Religion, wherein they had so happily engaged themselves.
And great need there was for the Apostle severely to urge them to it, heavy
persecutions both from Jews and Gentiles pressing in upon them on every side,
besides those trains of specious and plausible insinuations that were laid to
reduce them to their Ancient Institutions. Hence the Apostle calls Apostasy
the sin which did so easily beset them, Heb. 12.1.
to which there were such frequent temptations, and into which they were so
prone to be betrayed in those suffering times. And the more to deter them from
it, he once and again sets before them the dreadful state and condition of
Apostates, those who having been once enlightened, and baptized into the
Christian Faith, Cap. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. C. 10. v. 26, 27, 28, 29.
tasted the promises of the Gospel, and been made partakers of the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost, those powers which in the world to come, or this new
state of things were to be conferred upon the Church, if after all this these
men fall away, and renounce Christianity, it is very hard, and even impossible
to renew them again unto repentance. For by this means they trod under foot;
and crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, profaned
the blood of the Covenant, and did despite to the Spirit of Grace. So that to
sin thus wilfully after they had received the knowledge of the truth, there
could remain for them no more sacrifice for sins, nothing but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which should devour these
adversaries. And a fearful thing it was in such circumstances to fall into the
hands of the living God, who had particularly said of this sort of sinners,
that if any man drew back; his soul should have no pleasure in him. Hence it
is, that every where in this Epistle he mixes exhortations to this purpose,
that they would give earnest heed to the things which they had heard, lest at
any time they should let them slip, that they would hold fast the confidence,
and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, and beware lest by an evil
heart of unbelief they departed from the living God; that they would labor to
enter into his rest, lest any man fall after the example of unbelief; that
leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, they would go on to
perfection, showing diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, not
being slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit
the promises; that they would hold fast the profession of the faith without
wavering, not forsaking the assembling of themselves together (as the manner of
some was) nor cast away their confidence, which had great recompense of reward;
that they had need of patience, that after they had done the will of God, they
might receive the promise; that they would not be of them who drew back unto
perdition, but of them that believed to the saving of the Soul; that being
encompassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, who with the most
unconquerable constancy and resolution had all holden on in the way to Heaven,
they would lay aside every weight, and the sin which did so easily beset them,
and run with patience the race that was set before them, especially looking
unto Jesus the author and finisher of their faith, who endured the cross, and
despised the shame, that therefore they should consider him that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest they should be wearied and faint
in their minds, for that they had not yet resisted unto blood, striving against
sin; looking diligently lest any man should fail of the grace of God, lest any
root of bitterness springing up should trouble them, and thereby many be
defiled. By all which, and much more that might be observed to this purpose, it
is evident, what our Apostles great design was in this excellent Epistle.

7. OUR Apostle being now after two Years custody perfectly restored to
liberty, remembered that he was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and had therefore a
larger Diocese than Rome, and accordingly prepared himself for a greater
Circuit, though which way he directed his course, is not absolutely certain. By
some he is said to have returned back into Greece, and the parts of Asia, upon
no other ground that I know of, than a few intimations in some of his Epistles
that he intended to do so. By others he is thought to have preached both in the
Eastern and Western parts, which is not inconsistent with the time he had after
his departure from Rome. But of the latter we have better evidence. Sure I am
an Author beyond all exception, S. Paul's contemporary and Fellow Laborer, I
mean (...). Ep. ad Corinth. p. 8.
Clemens, in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians expressly tells us, that
being a Preacher both in the East and West, he taught righteousness to the
whole world, and went to the utmost bounds of the West. Which makes me the more
wonder at the confidence of L. Cappell. Append. ad Hist. App. p. 33.
One (otherwise a Man of great parts and learning) who so peremptorily denies
that ever our Apostle preached in the West, merely because there are no
Monuments left in Primitive Antiquity of any particular Churches there founded
by him. As if all the particular passages of his life, done at so vast a
distance must needs have been recorded, or those records have come down to us,
when it is so notoriously known, that almost all the Writings and Monuments of
those first Ages of Christianity are long since perished: or as if we were not
sufficiently assured of the thing in general, though not of what particularly
he did there. Probable it is, that he went into Spain, a thing which himself
tells us he had formerly once and again resolved on. Certain it is that the
Epiphan. Haeres. 27. p. 51. Chrysostom. de Laud. Paul. p. 536. T. 5. Cyrill.
Catech. 17. p. 457. Theod. in 2 Timothy 4.16. and in Psalm. 116. id. de cur. Grac.
Affect. Sermon. 9. p. 125.
Ancients do generally assert it, Romans 15.24-28.
without seeming in the least to doubt of it. Theodoret and others tell us,
that he preached not only in Spain, but that he went to other Nations, and
brought the Gospel into the Isles of the Sea, by which he undoubtedly means
Britain, and therefore elsewhere reckons the Gauls and Britains among the
Nations, Venant. Fortun. de vit. Martin. lib. 3. non procul a sin.
which the Apostles, and particularly the Tent-maker persuaded to embrace the
Law of Christ. Nor is he the only Man that has said it, Sophron. Sermon. de
natali. App. Transit and Oceanum, vel qua facit insula portum, Quasque
Britannus habet terras atque ultima Thulc.
others having given in their testimony and suffrage in this case.

8. TO what other parts of the World S. Paul preached the Gospel, we find no
certain footsteps in Antiquity, nor any further mention of him, till his
return to Rome, which probably was about the Eighth or Ninth Year of Nero's
Reign. Here he met with Peter, and was together with him thrown into Prison, no
doubt in the general Persecution raised against the Christians, under the
pretense that they had fired the City. Besides the general, we may reasonably
suppose there were particular causes of his Imprisonment Some of the Ancients
make him engaged with Peter in procuring the fall of Simon Magus, and that that
derived the Emperor's fury and rage upon him. Adv. vis. Monast. vituperat. lib.
1. c. 4. p. 361. Tom. 4.
S. Chrysostom gives us this account; that having converted one of Nero's
Concubines, a Woman of whom he was infinitely fond, and reduced her to a life
of great strictness and chastity, so that now she wholly refused to comply with
his wanton and impure embraces; the Emperor stormed hereat, calling the Apostle
a Villain and Impostor, a wretched perverter and debaucher of others, giving
order that he should be cast into Prison, and when he still persisted to
persuade the Lady to continue her chaste and pious resolutions, commanding him
to be put to death.

9. HOW long he remained in Prison is not certainly known; at last his
Execution was resolved on; what his preparatory treatment was, whether scourged
as Malefactors were wont to be in order to their death, we find not. As a Roman
Citizen by the Valerian and the Porcian Law he was exempted from it: Though by
the Law of the XII. Tables notorious Malefactors, condemned by the Centuriate
Assemblies, were first to be scourged, and then put to death: ad An. 69. n. 8.
and Baronius tells us that in the Church of S. Mary beyond the Bridge in Rome,
the Pillars are yet extant, to which both Peter and Paul are said to have been
bound and scourged. As he was led to Execution, he is said to have converted
three of the Soldiers that were sent to conduct and guard him, who within few
days after by the Emperors command became Martyrs for the Faith. Being come to
the place, which was the Aquae Salviae, three Miles from Rome, after some
solemn preparation, he cheerfully gave his Neck to the fatal stroke. As a Roman
he might not be put upon the Cross, too infamous a Death for any but the worst
of Slaves and Malefactors, and therefore was beheaded, accounted a more noble
kind of Death among the Romans, fit for Persons of better Quality, and more
ingenuous Education: And from this Instrument of his Execution the custom, no
doubt, first arose, that in all Pictures and Images of this Apostle, he is
constantly represented with a Sword in his right hand. Tradition reports
(justified herein by the suffrage of many of the Ambr. de not. Petr. and Paul.
Sermon. 68. p. 294. T. 3.
Fathers) that when he was beheaded, a Liquor more like Milk than Blood flowed
from his Veins, and spirted upon the Clothes of his Executioner; Chrysostom. Sermon.
in Petr. and Paul. Tom. 6. p. 267.
and had I lift or leisure for such things, I might entertain the Reader with
the little glosses that are made upon it. S. Chrysostom adds, that it became a
means of converting his Executioner, and many more to the Faith; and that the
Apostle suffered in the sixty eighth Year of his Age. Some question there is
whether he suffered at the same time with Peter; many of the Dion. Corinth. ap.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 25. p. 68. Ambr. ib. Sermon. 66. p. 291. Max. Taur. Hom. 5. de
Petr. and Paul. p. 231.
Ancients positively affirm, that both suffered on the same day, and Year: but
Prudent. Peristeph. in Pass. Petr. and Paul. Hymn. 12. p. 518. Arat. Act. App.
lib. 2. in fin p. 700. Aug. de Sanct. Sermon. 28. Tom. 10. col. 1225. Greg.
Turon. de glor. Martyr. lib. 1. c. 29. p. 35.
others though allowing the same Day; tell us that S. Paul suffered not till
the Year after; nay some interpose the distance of several Years. A Manuscript
(...). Apud. P. Jun. not. in Clem. Ep. ad Cor. ad p. 8. forsan. ex S. Metaphr.
qui totidem verbis eadem habet ap Sur. ad 29. Jun. n. 23. p. 357.
writer of the Lives and Travels of Peter and Paul, brought amongst other
venerable Monuments of Antiquity out of Greece, will have Paul to have suffered
no less than five Years after Peter, which he justifies by the authority of no
less than Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus. But what credit is to be given to this
nameless Author, I see not, and therefore lay no weight upon it, nor think it
fit to be put into the balance with the testimonies of the Ancients. Certainly
if he suffered not at the very same time with Peter, it could not be long
after, not above a Year at most. The best is, which of them soever started
first, they both came at last to the same end of the race, to those Palms and
Crowns, which are reserved for all good Men in Heaven, but most eminently for
the Martyrs of the Christian Faith.

10. HE was buried in the Via Ostiensis, about two Miles from Rome, over whose
Grave about the Year CCCXVIII. Damas. Pontif. in vit. Sylvest. 1. vid. Onuphr.
de 7. Vrb. Basil. p. 87.
Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope Sylvester, built a stately
Church, within a Farm which Lucina a noble Christian Matron of Rome had long
before settled upon that Church. He adorned it with an hundred of the best
Marble columns, and beautified it with the most exquisit workmanship; the many
rich gifts and endowments which he bestowed upon it being particularly set down
in the Life of Sylvester. This Church as too narrow and little for the honor
of so great an Apostle, Valentinian, or rather Theodosius the Emperor (the one
but finishing what the other began) by a Apud. Bar. ad An. 386. p. 527. ex Cod.
Vatic.
Rescript directed to Sallustius Prefect of the City, caused to be taken down,
and a larger and more noble Church to be built in the room of it: Further
beautified (as appears from an ancient Ibid. in Addend. ad Tom, 4. p. 12.
Inscription) by Placidia the Empress, at the persuasion of Leo, Bishop of
Rome. What other additions of Wealth, Honor, or stateliness it has received
since, concerns not me to enquire.

SECT. VIII. The Description of his Person and Temper, together with an Account
of his Writings.
The Person of S. Paul described. His infirm constitution. His natural
endowments. His ingenuous Education, and admirable skill in humane Learning and
Sciences. The Divine temper of his mind. His singular humility and
condescension. His temperance and sobriety, and contempt of the World. Whether
he lived a married or a single life. His great kindness and compassion. His
charity to men's Bodies and Souls. His mighty Zeal for Religion. His admirable
industry and diligence in his Office. His unconquerable Patience: The many
great troubles he underwent. His constancy and fidelity in the profession of
Christianity. His Writings. His style and way of Writing, what. S. Hierom 's
bold censure of it. The perplexedness and obscurity of his Discourses, whence.
The account given of it by the Ancients. The Order of his Epistles, what.
Placed not according to the time when, but the dignity of Persons or Places to
which they were written. The Subscriptions at the end of them, of wat value.
The writings fathered upon S. Paul. His Gospel. A third Epistle to the
Corinthians. The Epistle to the Laodiceans. His Apocalypse. His Acts. The
Epistles between him and Seneca.

1. THOUGH we have drawn S. Paul at large, in the account we have given of his
Life, yet may it be of use, to represent him in little, in a brief account of
his Person, Parts, and those Graces and Virtues, for which he was more
peculiarly eminent and remarkable. For his Person, we find it thus Niceph. H.
Eccl. lib. 2. c. 37. p. 196.
described. He was low and little of stature, and somewhat stooping, his
complexion fair, his countenance grave, his head small, his eyes carrying a
kind of beauty and sweetness in them, his eyebrows a little hanging over, his
nose long, but gracefully bending, his beard thick, and like the hair on his
head, mixed with gray hairs. Somewhat of this description may be learnt from
Philopatr. Tom. 2. p. 999.
Lucian, when in the person of Trypho, one of S. Paul's disciples, he calls him
by way of derision, the high-nosed bald-pated Galilean, that was caught up
through the Air unto the third Heaven, where he learnt great and excellent
things. That he was very low, himself plainly intimates, 2 Cor. 10.10.
when he tells us, they were wont to say of him, that his bodily presence was
weak, and his speech contemptible; in which respect he is styled by Sermon. in
Petr. and Paul. p. 265 Tom. 6.
Chrysostom, (...), a man three cubits [or a little more than four foot] high,
and yet tall enough to reach Heaven. He seems to have enjoyed no very firm and
athletick constitution, being often subject to distempers; Com. in Gal. 4. p.
182. Tom. 9
S. Hierom particularly reports, that he was frequently afflicted with the
headache, and that this was thought by many to have been the thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, and that probably he intended
some such thing by the temptation in his flesh, which he elsewhere speaks of:
Gal. 4.14.
Which however it may in general signify those afflictions that came upon him,
yet does it primarily denote those diseases and infirmities that he was
obnoxious to.

2. BUT how mean soever the Cabinet was, there was a treasure within more
precious and valuable, as will appear, if we survey the accomplishments of his
mind. For as to his natural abilities and endowments, he seems to have had a
clear and solid judgment, quick invention, a prompt and ready memory; all which
were abundantly improved by Art, and the advantages of a more liberal
Education. The Schools of Tarsus had sharpened his discursive faculty by Logic,
and the Arts of reasoning, instructed him in the Institutions of Philosophy,
and enriched him with the furniture of all kinds of humane Learning. This gave
him great advantage above others, and ever raised him to a mighty reputation
for Parts and Learning; insomuch that In 1 ad Cor. c. 1. Hom. 3. p. 349.
S. Chrysostom tells us of a dispute between a Christian and a Heathen, wherein
the Christian endeavored to prove against the Gentile, that S. Paul was more
Learned and Eloquent than Plato himself. How well he was versed, not only in
the Law of Moses, and the writings of the Prophets, but even in Classick and
Foreign writers, he has left us sufficient ground to conclude, from those
excellent sayings, which here and there he quotes out of Heathen Authors. Which
as at once it shows, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. p. 299.
that it is not unlawful to bring the spoils of Egypt into the service of the
Sanctuary, and to make use of the advantages of Foreign studies and humane
literature to Divine and excellent purposes, so does it argue his being greatly
conversant in the paths of humane Learning, which upon every occasion he could
so readily command. Indeed he seemed to have been furnished out on purpose to
be the Doctor of the Gentiles, to contend with, and confute the grave and the
wise, the acute and the subtle, the sage and the learned of the Heathen World,
and to wound them (as Julian's word was) with arrows drawn out of their own
Quiver. Though we do not find, that in his disputes with the Gentiles he made
much use of Learning and Philosophy; it being more agreeable to the designs of
the Gospel, to confound the wisdom and learning of the World by the plain
doctrine of the Gross.

3. THESE were great accomplishments, and yet but a shadow to that Divine
temper of mind that was in him, which discovered it self through the whole
course and method of his life. He was humble to the lowest step of abasure and
condescension, none ever thinking better of others, or more meanly of himself.
And though when he had to deal with envious and malicious adversaries, who by
vilifying his person, sought to obstruct his Ministry, he knew how to magnify
his office, and to let them know, that the was no whit inferior to the very
chiefest Apostles; yet out of this case he constantly declared to all the
World, that he looked upon himself as an Abortive, and an untimely Birth, as
the least of the Apostles, not meet to be called an Apostle; and as if this
were not enough, he makes a word on purpose to express his humility, stiling
himself (...), less than the least of all Saints, yea, the very chief of
sinners. How freely, and that at every turn does he confess what he was before
his conversion, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious both to God and Men?
Though honored with peculiar Acts of the highest grace and favor, taken up to
an immediate converse with God in Heaven, yet did not this swell him with a
supercilious loftiness over the rest of his brethren: Entrusted he was with
great power and authority in the Church, but never affected dominion over men's
Faith, nor any other place, than to be an helper of their joy, nor ever made
use of his power, but to the edification, not destruction of any. How
studiously did he decline all honors and commendations that were heaped upon
him? When some in the church of Corinth cried him up beyond all measures, and
under the patronage of his name began to set up for a party, he severely
rebuked them, told them, that it was Christ, not he, that was crucified for
them, that they had not been baptized into his name, which he was so far from,
that he did not remember that he had baptized above three or four of them, and
was heartily glad he had baptized no more, left a foundation might have been
laid for that suspicion; that this Paul, whom they so much extolled, was no
more than a minister of Christ, whom our Lord had appointed to plant and build
up his Church.

4. GREAT was his temperance and sobriety, so far from going beyond the bounds
of regularity, that he abridged himself of the conveniences of lawful and
necessary accommodations; frequent his hungrings and thirstings, not
constrained only, but voluntary; it is probably thought that he very rarely
drank any Wine; certain, that by abstinence and mortification he kept under and
subdued his body, reducing the extravagancy of the sensual appetites to a
perfect subjection to the laws of Reason. By this means he easily got above the
World, and its charms and frowns, had his mind continually conversant in
Heaven, his thoughts were fixed there, his desires always ascending thither,
what he taught others, he practiced himself, his conversation was in Heaven,
and his desires were to depart, and to be with Christ; this World did neither
arrest his affections, nor disturb his fears, he was not taken with its
applause, nor frighted with its threatenings; he studied not to please men, nor
valued the censures and judgments which they passed upon him; he was not greedy
of a great estate, or titles of honor, or rich presents from men, not seeking
theirs, but them; food and raiment was his bill of fare, and more than this he
never cared for; accounting, that the less he was clogged with these things,
the lighter he should march to Heaven, especially traveling through a World
overrun with troubles and persecutions. Upon this account it is probable he
kept himself always within a single life, though there want not some of the
Ancients who expressly reckon him in the number of the married Apostles, as
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p. 448.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph. in Bibl. Pp. Gr. L. T. 1. p.
23. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 30.
Ignatius, and some others. It Is true that passage is not to be found in the
genuine Epistle of Ignatius, but yet is extant in all those that are owned and
published by the Church of Rome, though they have not been wanting to banish it
out of the World, having expunged S. Paul's name out of some ancient
Manuscripts, as the learned Bishop Vsser. Not. in Ignat. Epist. ad Philadelph.
vid. James his corrupt. of the Faith. Part. II. page 57.
Usher has to their shame sufficiently discovered to the World. But for the
main of the question we can readily grant it, the Scripture seeming most to
favor it, that though he asserted his power and liberty to marry as well as
the rest, yet that he lived always a single life.

5. HIS kindness and charity was truly admirable, he had a compassionate
tenderness for the poor, and a quick sense of the wants of others: To what
Church soever he came, it was one of his first cares, to make provision for the
poor, and to stir up the bounty of the rich and the wealthy, nay, himself
worked often with his own hands, not only to maintain himself, but to help and
relieve them. But infinitely greater was his charity to the Souls of men,
fearing no dangers, refusing no labors, going through good and evil report,
that he might gain men over to the knowledge of the truth, reduce them out of
the crooked paths of vice and idolatry, and set them in the right way to
eternal life. Nay, so insatiable his thirst after the good of Souls, that he
affirms, that rather than his Countrymen the Jews should miscarry by not
believing and entertaining the Gospel, he could be content, nay wished, that
himself might be accursed from Christ for their sake, i. e. that he might be
anathematized and cut off from the Church of Christ, and not only lose the
honor of the Apostolate, but be reckoned in the number of the abject and
execrable persons, such as those are who are separated from the communion of
the Church. An instance of so large and passionate a charity, that lest it
might not find room in men's belief, he ushered it in with this solemn appeal
and attestation, that he said the truth in Christ, and lied not, his conscience
bearing him witness in the Holy Ghost. And as he was infinitely solicitous to
gain men over to the best Religion in the World, so was he not less careful to
keep them from being seduced from it, ready to suspect every thing that might
corrupt their minds from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. 11.2.
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, as he told the Church of
Corinth: (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 23. in 2. ad Corinth, p. 899.
An affection of all others the most active and vigilant, and which is wont to
inspire men with the most passionate care and concernment for the good of
those, for whom we have the highest measures of love and kindness. Nor was his
charity to men greater than his zeal for God, endeavoring with all his might
to promote the honor of his Master. Indeed zeal seems to have had a deep
foundation in the natural forwardness of his temper. How exceedingly zealous
was he, while in the Jews Religion, of the Traditions of his Fathers, how
earnest to vindicate and assert the Divinity of the Mosaic dispensation, and
to persecute all of a contrary way, even to rage and madness. And when
afterward turned into a right chanel, it ran with as swift a current; carrying
him out against all opposition to ruin the kingdom and the powers of darkness,
to beat down idolatry, and to plant the World with right apprehensions of God,
and the true notions of Religion. When at Athens he saw them so much overgrown
with the grossest superstition and idolatry, giving the honor that was alone
due to God to Statues and Images, his zeal began to ferment, and to boil up
into Paroxysms of indignation, and he could not but let them know the
resentments of his mind, and how much herein they dishonored God, the great
Parent and Maker of the World.

6. THIS zeal must needs put him upon a mighty diligence and industry in the
execution of his office, warning, reproving, entreating, persuading, preaching
in season, and out of season, by night, and by day, by Sea and Land; no pains
too much to be taken, no dangers too great to be overcome. For five and thirty
years after his Conversion, he seldom staid long in one place, from Jerusalem,
through Arabia, Asia, Greece, round about to Illyricum, to Rome, and even to
the utmost bounds of the Western-world, fully preaching the Gospel of Christ:
Running (says S. Hierom) from Ocean to Ocean, like the Sun in the Heavens, of
which it is said, His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit
unto the ends of it; sooner wanting ground to tread on, than a desire to
propagate the Faith of Christ. Lib. 3. c. 1. p. 223.
Nicephorus compares him to a Bird in the Air, that in a few years flew round
the World: Isidore the (...) Lib. 3. Epist. 176. ad Isid. Diac. p. 285.
Pelusiot to a winged husbandman, that flew from place to place to cultivate
the World with the most excellent rules and institutions of life. And while the
other Apostles did as 'twere choose this or that particular Province, as the
main sphere of their ministry, S. Paul over ran the whole World to its utmost
bounds and corners, planting all places where he came with the Divine doctrines
of the Gospel. Nor in this course was he tired out with the dangers and
difficulties that he met with, the troubles and oppositions that were raised
against him. All which did but reflect the greater luster upon his patience,
whereof indeed (as Epist. ad Cor. p. 8.
Clement observes) he became (...), a most eminent pattern and exemplar,
enduring the biggest troubles and persecutions with a patience triumphant and
unconquerable. As will easily appear, if we take but a survey of what trials
and sufferings he underwent, some part whereof are briefly summed up by
himself: 2 Cor. 11.23. and sequ.
In labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths
often; thrice beaten with rods, once stoned, thrice suffered shipwreck, a night
and a day in the deep: In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils
in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils among
false Brethren; in weariness, in painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst; in fastings often, in cold and nakedness: And besides these things that
were without, that which daily came upon him, the care of all the Churches. An
account, though very great, yet far short of what he endured, and wherein, as
(...). Chrysostom. Homil. 25. in 2 ad Cor. p. 921.
Chrysostom observes, he does (...), modestly keep himself within his measures;
for had he taken the liberty fully to have enlarged himself, he might have
filled hundreds of Martyrologies with his sufferings. A thousand times was his
life at stake, in every suffering he was a Martyr, and what fell but in parcels
upon others, came all upon him, while they skirmished only with single parties,
he had the whole Army of sufferings to contend with. All which he generously
underwent with a Soul as calm and serene as the morning-Sun, no spite or rage,
no fury or storms could ruffle and discompose his spirit: Nay, those
sufferings, which would have broken the back of an ordinary patience, did but
make him rise up with the greater eagerness and resolution for the doing of his
duty.

7. HIS patience will yet further appear from the consideration of another, the
last of those virtues we shall take notice of in him, his constancy and
fidelity in the discharge of his place, and in the profession of Religion.
Could the powers and policies of Men and Devils, spite and oppositions,
torments and threatenings have been able to baffle him out of that Religion
wherein he had engaged himself, he must have sunk under them, and left his
station. But his Soul was steeled with a courage and resolution that was
impenetrable, and which no temptation either from hopes or fears could make any
more impression upon, than an arrow can, that is shot against a wall of marble.
He wanted not solicitation on either hand, both from Jews and Gentiles, and
questionless might in some degree have made his own terms, would he have been
false to his trust, and have quitted that way, that was then everywhere spoken
against. But alas! these things weighed little with our Apostle, who counted
not his life to be dear unto him, so that he might finish his course with joy,
and the ministry which he had received of the Lord Jesus. And therefore when
under the sentence of death in his own apprehension, could triumphingly say, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith: and
so indeed he did, kept it inviolably, undauntedly to the last minute of his
life. The sum is, He was a man, in whom the Divine life did eminently manifest
and display it self; he lived piously and devoutly, soberly and temperately,
justly and righteously, careful always to keep a conscience void of offense
both toward God and Man. This he tells us was his support under suffering,
this the foundation of his confidence toward God, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and his firm hopes of happiness in another World; This is our rejoicing, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had
our conversation in the World.

8. IT is not the least instance of his care and fidelity in his office, that
he did not only preach and plant Christianity in all places whither he came,
but what he could not personally do, he supplied by writing. XIV Epistles he
left upon record, by which he was not only instrumental in propagating
Christian Religion at first, but has been useful to the World ever since in all
Ages of the Church. We have all along in the History of his Life taken
particular notice of them in their due place and order: We shall here only make
some general observations and remarks upon them, and that as to the style and
way wherein they are written, their Order, and the Subscriptions that are added
to them. For the Apostle's style and manner of writing it is plain and simple,
and though not set off with the elaborate artifices, and affected additionals
of humane eloquence, yet grave and majestical, and that by the confession of
his very enemies, 2 Cor. 10.10.
his Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful. Nor are there wanting in them
some strains of Rhetoric, which sufficiently testify his ability that way,
had he made it any part of his study and design. Indeed Ad Algas. Quaest. 11.
p. 169. T. 2. Quaest. 11. ad Hedib. p. 151. ibid. in Ephesians. 3. Tom. 9. p. 216.
com. in Gal. 3. p. 170. ibid.
S. Hierom is sometimes too rude and bold in his censures of S. Paul's style
and character. He tells us, that being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, and admirably
skilled in the Language of his Nation, he was greatly defective in the Greek
Tongue, (though a late great Salmas de Hellenist. Part. 1. Quaest. 6.
Critic is of another mind, affirming him to have been as well, or better
skilled in Greek, than in Hebrew, or in Syriack) wherein he could not
sufficiently express his conceptions in a way becoming the majesty of his sense
and the matter he delivered, nor transmit the elegancy of his Native Tongue
into another Language: that hence he became obscure and intricate in his
expressions, guilty many times of solecisms, and scarce tolerable syntax, and
that therefore 'twas not his humility, but the truth of the thing that made him
say, that he came not with the excellency of speech, but in the power of God. A
censure from any other than S. Hierom that would have been justly wondered at;
but we know the liberty that he takes to censure any, though the reverence due
to so great an Apostle might, one would think, have challenged a more modest
censure at his hands. However Apol. adv. Jovin. T. 2. p. 106.
elsewhere he cries him up as a great Master of composition, that as often as he
heard him, he seemed to hear not words, but thunder, that in all his citations
he made use of the most prudent artifices, using simple words, and which seemed
to carry nothing but plainness along with them, but which way soever a Man
turned, breathed force and thunder: He seems entangled in his cause, but
catches all that comes near him; turns his back, as if intending to fly, when
it is only that he may overcome.

9. SAINT Peter long since observed, that in Paul's Epistles there were (...),
some things hard to be understood: 2 Pet. 3.16.
which surely is not altogether owing to the profoundness of his sense, and the
mysteriousness of the subject that he treats of, but in some degree to his
manner of expression; his frequent Hebraisms, (common to him with all the Holy
Writers of the New Testament) his peculiar forms and ways of speech, his often
inserting Jewish Opinions, and yet but tacitly touching them, his using some
words in a new and uncommon sense; but above all, his frequent and abrupt
transitions, suddenly starting aside from one thing to another, whereby his
Reader is left at a loss, not knowing which way to follow him, not a little
contributing to the perplexed obscurity of his discourses. Adv. Haer. lib. 3.
c. 7. p. 248
Irenaeus took notice of old, that S. Paul makes frequent use of these
Hyperbata, by reason of the swiftness of his arguings, and the great fervor
and impetus that was in him, leaving many times the designed frame and texture
of his discourse, not bringing in what should have immediately connected the
sense and order, till some distance after: which indeed to Men of a more nice
and delicate temper, and who will not give themselves leave patiently to trace
out his reasonings, must needs create some obscurity. Origin and S. Hierom
sometimes observe, that besides this he uses many of his Native phrases of the
Cilician dialect, which being in a great measure foreign and exotic to the
ordinary Greek, introduces a kind of strangeness into his discourse, and
renders it less intelligible. Haeres. 64. p. 239.
Epiphanius tells us, that by these methods he acted like a skilful Archer,
hitting the mark, before his adversaries were aware of it; by words misplaced
making the frame of his discourse seem obscure and entangled, while in it self
it was not only most true, but elaborate, and not difficult to be understood;
that to careless and trifling Readers it might sometimes seem dissonant and
incoherent, but to them that are diligent, and will take their reason along
with them, it would appear full of truth, and to be disposed with great care
and order.

10. AS for the order of these Epistles, we have already given a particular
account of the times when, and the places whence they were written. That which
is here considerable, is the Order according to which they are disposed in the
sacred Ganon. Certain it is that they are not placed according to the just
order of time, wherein they were written, the two Epistles to the Thessalonians
being on all hands agreed to have been first written, though set almost last in
order. Most probable therefore it is, that they were placed according to the
dignity of those to whom they were sent: the reason, why those to whole
Churches have the precedence of those to particular persons: and among those to
Churches, that to the Romans had the first place and rank assigned to it,
because of the majesty of the Imperial City, and the eminency and honorable
respect which that Church derived thence: and whether the same reason do not
hold in others, though I will not positively assert, yet I think none will
over-confidently deny. The last enquiry concerns the subscriptions added to the
end of these Epistles; which, were they authentic, would determine some doubts
concerning the time and place of their writing. But alas, they are of no just
value and authority, not the same in all Copies, different in the Syriack and
Arabic Versions, nay wholly wanting in some ancient Greek Copies of the New
Testament; and were doubtless at first added at best upon probable conjectures.
When at any time they truly represent the place whence, or the Person by whom
the Epistle was sent, it is not that they are to be relied upon in it, but
because the thing is either intimated or expressed in the body of the Epistle.
I shall add no more but this observation, that S. Paul was wont to subscribe
every Epistle with his own hand, 2 Thessalonians. 3.17.
which is my token in every Epistle; so I write. Which was done (says Ambr. in
lec. T. 5. p. 397.
one of the Ancients) to prevent impostures, that his Epistles might not be
interpolated and corrupted, and that if any vented Epistles under his name, the
cheat might be discovered by the Apostles own hand not being to them: and this
brings me to the last consideration that shall conclude this Chapter.

11. THAT there were some even in the most early Ages of Christianity, who took
upon them (for what ends I stand not now to enquire) to write Books, and
publish them under the name of some Apostle, is notoriously known to any,
though but never so little conversant in Church-Antiquities. Herein S. Paul had
his part and share, several supposititious Writings being fathered and thrust
upon him. We find a Gospel ascribed by some of the Ancients to him, which
surely arose from no other cause, than that in some of his Epistles he makes
mention of my Gospel. Which as De Script. Eccl. in Luc.
S. Hierom observes, can be meant of no other than the Gospel of S. Luke, his
constant Attendant, and from whom he chiefly derived his intelligence. If he
wrote another Epistle to the Corinthians, precedent to those two extant at this
Day, as he seems to imply in a passage in his first Epistle. 1 Cor. 5.9.
I have wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to keep company, etc. a passage not
conveniently appliable to any part either in that or the other Epistle, Ver. 11.
nay a Verse or two after the first Epistle is directly opposed to it; all that
can be said in the case is, that it long since perished, the Divine providence
not seeing it necessary to be preserved for the service of the Church. Frequent
mention there is also of an Epistle of his to the Laodiceans, grounded upon a
mistaken passage in the Epistle to the Colossians: Col. 4.16.
but besides that the Apostle does not there speak of an Epistle written to the
Laodiceans, but of one from them, Adv. Marc. l. 5. c. 11. p. 476 ib. c. 17. p.
481.
Tertullian tells us, that by the Epistle to the Laodiceans is meant that to
the Ephesians, and that Marcion the Heretic was the first that changed the
title, and therefore in his enumeration of S. Paul's Epistles he omits that to
the Ephesians, for no other reason doubtless but that according to Marcion's
opinion he had reckoned it up under the title of that to the Laodiceans. Which
yet is more clear, if we consider that Haeres. 42. adv. Marcion. p. 142.
Epiphanius citing a place quoted by Marcion out of the Epistle to the
Laodiceans, it is in the very same words found in that to the Ephesians at this
Day. However such an Epistle is still extant, forged no doubt before S.
Hierom's time, De Script. Eccl. in Paulo.
who tells us, that it was read by some, but yet exploded and rejected by all.
Besides these there was his Epiph. Haeres. 38 p. 124. August. in Joan. Tract.
98. col. 488.
Revelation, called also (...) or his Ascension, grounded on his ecstasie or
rapture into Heaven, first forged by the Cainian Heretics, and in great use
and estimation among the Gnostics. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 19. p. 735.
Sozomen tells us, that this Apocalypse was owned by none of the Ancients,
though much commended by some Monks in his time: and he further adds, that in
the time of the Emperor Theodosius, it was said to have been found in an
underground Chest of Marble in S. Paul's house at Tarsus, and that by a
particular revelation. A story which upon enquiry he found to be as false, as
the Book it self was forged and spurious. The Acts of S. Paul are mentioned
both by Orig. (...). l. 1. c. 2. fol. 114 p. 2.
Origin and Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 3 p. 72.
Eusebius, but not as Writings of approved and unquestionable credit and
authority. The Epistles that are said to have passed between S. Paul and
Seneca, how early soever they started in the Church, yet the falsehood and
fabulousness of them is now too notoriously known, to need any further account
or description of them.

SECT. IX. The principal Controversies that exercised the Church in his time.
Simon Magus the Father of Heretics. The wretched principles and practices of
him and his followers. Their asserting Angel-worship; and how countermin'd by
S. Paul. Their holding it lawful to sacrifice to Idols, and abjure the Faith in
times of persecution, discovered and opposed by S. Paul. Their maintaining an
universal license to sin. Their manners and opinions herein described by S.
Paul in his Epistles. The great controversy of those times about the
obligation of the Law of Moses upon the Gentile Converts. The Original of it,
whence. The mighty veneration which the Jews had for the Law of Moses. The true
state of the Controversy, what. The Determination made in it by the Apostolic
Synod at Jerusalem. Meats offered to Idols, what. Abstinence from Blood, why
enjoined of old. Things strangled, why forbidden. Fornication commonly
practiced and accounted lawful among the Gentiles. The hire of the Harlot,
what. How dedicated to their Deities among the Heathens. The main passages in
S. Paul 's Epistles concerning Justification and Salvation showed to have
respect to this Controversy. What meant by Law, and what by Faith in S. Paul
's Epistles. The Persons whom he has to deal with in this Controversy, who.
The Jew 's strange doting upon Circumcision. The way and manner of the Apostles
Reasoning in this Controversy considered. His chief Arguments showed
immediately to respect the case of the Jewish and Gentile Converts. No other
controversy in those times, which his discourses could refer to. Two
Consectaries from this Discourse. I. That works of Evangelical Obedience are
not opposed to Faith in Justification. What meant by works of Evangelical
Obedience. This method of Justification excludes boasting, and entirely gives
the glory to God. II. That the doctrines of S. Paul and S. James about
Justification are fairly consistent with each other. These two Apostles showed
to pursue the same design. S. James his excellent Reasonings to that purpose.

1. THOUGH our Lord and his Apostles delivered the Christian Religion,
especially as to the main and essential parts of it, in words as plain as words
could express it, yet were there men of perverse and corrupt minds, and
reprobate concerning the Faith, who from different causes, some ignorantly or
wilfully mistaking the doctrines of Christianity, others to serve ill purposes
and designs, began to introduce errors and unsound opinions into the Church,
and to debauch the minds of men from the simplicity of the Gospel, hereby
disquieting the thoughts, and alienating the affections of men, and disturbing
the peace and order of the Church. The first Ringleader of this Heretical crew
was Simon Magus, who not being able to attain his ends of the Apostles, by
getting a power to confer miraculous gifts, whereby he designed to greaten and
enrich himself, resolved to be revenged of them, scattering the most poisonous
tares among the good wheat that they had sown, bringing in the most pernicious
principles, and as the natural consequent of that, patronizing the most
debauched villainous practices, and this under a pretense of still being
Christians. To enumerate the several Dogmata and damnable Heresies, first
broached by Simon, and then vented and propagated by his disciples and
followers, who though passing under different Titles, yet all centred at last
in the name of Gnostics, (a term which we shall sometimes use for convenience,
though it took not place till after S. Paul's time) were as endless, as it is
alien to my purpose. I shall only take notice of a few of more signal remark,
and such as S. Paul in his Epistles does eminently reflect upon.

2. AMONGST the opinions and principles of Simon and his followers this was
Iren. l. 1. c. 20. Epi^. Haer. 21. Tert. de Praescr. Har. c. 33. p. 214, and c.
46. p. 219. Aug. de Here Is. Haer. XXXIX. Col. 2.18.
one, That God did not create the World, that it was made by Angels, that
Divine honors were due to them, and they to be adored as subordinate mediators
between God and us. This our Apostle saw growing up apace, and struck betimes
at the root, in that early caution he gave to the Colossians, to let no man
beguile them in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into
those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind; and
not holding the-head, i. e. hereby disclaiming Christ, the head of the Church.
But notwithstanding this warning, this error still continued and spread it self
in those parts for several Ages, till expressly condemned by the Can. 35.
Laodicean Council. Nay, Theod. comment, in Col. 2.
Theodoret tells us, that in his time there were still Oratories erected to the
Archangel Michael in those places, wherein they were wont to meet and pray to
Angels. Another Gnostick principle was, Orig. adv. Cells. lib. 6. p. 282. Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 7. p. 120.
that men might freely and indifferently eat what had been offered in sacrifice
to Idols, yea, sacrifice to the Idol it self, it being lawful confidently to
abjure the Faith in time of persecution. The first part whereof S. Paul does
largely and frequently discuss up and down his Epistles; the latter, wherein
the sting and poison was more immediately couched, was craftily adapted to
those times of suffering, and greedily swallowed by many, hereby drawn into
Apostasy. Against this our Apostle antidotes the Christians, especially the
Jewish Converts, among whom the Gnostics had mixed themselves, that they would
not suffer themselves to be drawn aside by an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God: Heb. 3.12.
That notwithstanding sufferings and persecutions they would hold fast the
profession of the Faith without wavering, not forsaking the assembling of
themselves together, Heb. 10.23, 25, 31, 38.
as the manner of some is (the Gnostick Heretics) remembering how severely God
has threatened Apostates, that if any man draw back, his Soul shall have no
pleasure in him, and what a fearful thing it is thus to fall into the hands of
the living God.

3. BUT besides this, Simon and his followers made the gate yet wider,
maintaining an universal license to sin, Iren. adv. Haer. lib. 1. c. 20 p. 116.
that men were free to do whatever they had a mind to, that to press the
observance of good works was a bondage inconsistent with the liberty of the
Gospel; that so men did but believe in him, and his dear Helen, they had no
reason to regard Law or Prophets, but might do what they pleased, they should
be saved by his grace, and not according to good works. Irenaeus adds (what a
man would easily have inferred, had he never been told it) that they lived in
all lust and filthiness; as indeed whoever will take the pains to peruse the
account that is given of them, will find that they wallowed in the most
horrible and unheard of bestialities. These persons S. Paul does as
particularly describe, as if he had named them, having once and again with
tears warned the Philippians of them, that they were enemies of the Cross of
Christ, Phil. 3.17, 18.
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in
their shame, Romans 16.17, 18.
who mind earthly things. And elsewhere to the same effect, that they would
mark them that caused divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
they had learned, and avoid them; for they that were such, served not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly, by good words and fair speeches deceiving
the hearts of the simple. This I doubt not he had in his eye, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, etc.
when he gave those Caveats to the Ephesians, that fornication, and all
uncleanness, and inordinate desires should not be once named amongst them, as
became Saints, nor filthiness, nor unclean talking; being assured by the
Christian doctrine, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, etc. could be
saved: that therefore they should let no man deceive them with vain words;
these being the very things for which the wrath of God came upon the children
of disobedience, and accordingly it concerned them not to be partakers with
them. Plainly intimating, that this impure Gnostick-crue (whose doctrines and
practices he does here no less truly than lively represent) had begun by crafty
and insinuative arts to screw it self into the Church of Ephesus, cheating the
people with subtle and flattering insinuations, probably persuading them that
these things were but indifferent, and a part of that Christian liberty,
wherein the Gospel had instated them. By these and such like principles and
practices (many whereof might be reckoned up) they corrupted the Faith of
Christians, distracted the peace of the Church, stained and defiled the honor
and purity of the best Religion in the World.

4. BUT the greatest and most famous Controversy that of all others in those
times exercised the Christian Church, was concerning the obligation that
Christians were under to observe the Law of Moses as necessary to their
Justification and Salvation. Which because a matter of so much importance, and
which takes up so great a part of S. Paul's Epistles, and the clearing whereof
will reflect a great light upon them, we shall consider more at large: In order
whereunto three things especially are to be enquired after, the true state of
the Controversy, what the Apostles determined in this matter, and what respect
the most material passages in S. Paul's Epistles about Justification and
Salvation bear to this Controversy. First we shall enquire into the true state
and nature of the Controversy; and for this we are to know, that when
Christianity was published to the World, it mainly prevailed among the Jews,
they being generally the first Converts to the Faith. But having been brought
up in a mighty reverence and veneration for the Mosaic Institutions, and
looking upon that Economy as immediately contrived by God himself, delivered
by Angels, settled by their great Master Moses, received with the most solemn
and sensible appearances of Divine power and majesty, ratified by miracles, and
entertained by all their forefathers as the peculiar prerogative of that Nation
for so many Ages and Generations, they could not easily be brought off from it,
or behold the Gospel but with an evil eye, as an enemy that came to supplant
and undermine this ancient and excellent Institution. Nay, those of them that
were prevailed upon by the convictive power and evidence of the Gospel, to
embrace the Christian Religion, yet could not get over the prejudice of
education, but must still continue their observance of those legal rites and
customs, wherein they had been brought up. And not content with this, they
began magisterially to impose them upon others, even all the Gentile Converts,
as that without which they could never be accepted by God in this, or rewarded
by him in another World. This controversy was first started at Antioch, a
place not more remarkable for its own greatness, than the vast numbers of Jews
that dwelt there, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 21. p. 973.
enjoying great immunities granted them by the Kings of Syria. For after that
Antiochus Epiphanes had destroyed Jerusalem, and laid waste the Temple, the
Jews generally flocked hither, where they were courteously entertained by his
successors, the spoils of the Temple restored to them for the enriching and
adorning of their Synagogue, and they made equally with the Greeks freemen of
that City. By which means their numbers increased daily, partly by the resort
of others from Judaea, partly by a numerous conversion of Proselytes, whom they
gained over to their Religion. Accordingly Christianity at its first setting
out found a very successful entertainment in this place. And hither it was that
some of the Jewish Converts being come down from Jerusalem, Acts 15.1.
taught the Christians, that unless they observed Circumcision, and the whole
Law of Moses, they could not be saved. Paul and Barnabas then at Antioch,
observing the ill influence that this had upon the minds of men (disturbing
many at present, and causing the Apostasy of some afterward) began vigorously
to oppose this growing error; but not able to conjure down this Spirit, that
had been raised up, they were dispatched by the Church at Antioch to consult
the Apostles and Governors at Jerusalem about this matter: Whither being come,
they found the quarrel espoused among others by some Converts of the Sect of
the Pharisees (of all others the most zealous assertors of the Mosaic rites)
stiffly maintaining, that besides the Gospel or the Christian Religion, it was
necessary for all Converts, whether Jews or Gentiles, to keep to Circumcision,
and the Law of Moses. So that the state of the controversy between the
Orthodox, and these Judaizing Christians was plainly this, Whether Circumcision
and the observation of the Mosaic Law, or, only the belief and practice of
Christianity be necessary to Salvation? The latter part of the question was
maintained by the Apostles, the former asserted by the Judaizing Zelots, making
the Law of Moses equally necessary with the Law of Christ; and no doubt
pretending that whatever these men might preach at Antioch, yet the Apostles
were of another mind; whose sentence and resolution it was therefore thought
necessary should be immediately known.

5. WE are then next to consider what determination the Apostolic Synod at
Jerusalem made of this matter. For a Council of the Apostles and Rulers being
immediately convened, and the question by Paul and Barnabas brought before
them, the case was canvassed and debated on all hands, and at last it was
resolved upon by their unanimous sentence and suffrage, that the Gentile
Converts were under no obligation to the Jewish Law, that God had abundantly
declared his acceptance of them, though strangers to the Mosaical Economy,
that they were sufficiently secured of their happiness and salvation by the
grace of the Gospel, wherein they might be justified and saved without
Circumcision or legal Ceremonies, a yoke from which Christ had now set us free.
But because the Apostles did not think it prudent in these circumstances, too
much to stir the exasperated humor of the Jews (lest by straining the string
too high at first, they should endanger their revolting from the Faith)
therefore they thought of some indulgence in the case, S. James then Bishop of
Jerusalem, and probably President of the Council, propounding this expedient,
that for the present the Gentile Converts should so far only comply with the
humor of the Jews, as to abstain from meats offered to Idols, from blood, from
things strangled, and from fornication. Let us a little more distinctly survey
the ingredients of this imposition. Meats offered to Idols, or as S. James in
his discourse styles them (...), the pollution of Idols, the word (...)
properly denoting the meats that were polluted by being consecrated to the
Idol. Thus we read of (...) (as the LXX render it) polluted bread upon God's
Altar, i. e. such probably as had been before offered to Idols. Mat. 1.7.
So that these meats offered to the Idols were parts of those Sacrifices which
the Heathens offered to their Gods, of the remaining portions whereof they
usually made a Feast in the Idol-Temple, inviting their friends thither, and
sometimes their Christian friends to come along with them. This God had
particularly forbidden the Jews by the Law of Moses, Exodus 34.14, 15.
Thou shall worship no other God: lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land, and go a whoring after their Gods, and do sacrifice
unto their Gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice. And the not
observing this prohibition cost the Jews dear, Number. 25.2.-4.
when invited by the Moabites to the Sacrifices of their Gods, they did eat
with them, and bowed down to their Gods. Sometimes these remaining portions
were sold for common use in the Shambles, and bought by Christians. Both which
gave great offense to the zealous Jews, who looked upon it as a participation
in the Idolatries of the Heathen: Of both which our Apostle discourses
elsewhere at large, pressing Christians to abstain from Idolatry, both as to
the Idol-feasts, and the remainders of the Sacrifice: From the former as more
immediately unlawful, from the latter, the Sacrificial meats sold in the
Shambles, as giving offense to weak and undiscerning Christians. For though in
it self an Idol was nothing in the world, and consequently no honor could be
done it by eating what was offered to it, yet was it more prudent and
reasonable to abstain, partly because flesh-meats have no peculiar excellency
in them to commend us to God; partly because all men were not alike instructed
in the knowledge of their liberty, their minds easily puzzled, and their
consciences entangled, the Gentiles by this means hardened in their idolatrous
practices, weak brethren offended; besides, though these things were in their
own nature indifferent, and in a man's own power to do, or to let alone, yet was
it not convenient to make our liberty a snare to others, and to venture upon
what was lawful, when it was plainly unedifying and inexpedient. From blood:
This God forbad of old, and that some time before the giving of the Law by
Moses, that they should not eat the flesh with the blood, Genesis 9.4.
which was the life thereof. The mystery of which prohibition was, to instruct
men in the duties of mercy and tenderness even to brute beasts, but (as appears
from what follows after) primarily designed by God as a solemn fence and bar
against murder, and the effusion of humane blood. A Law afterward renewed
upon the Jews, and inserted into the body of the Mosaic precepts. From things
strangled: that is, that they should abstain from eating of those Beasts that
died without letting blood, where the blood was not thoroughly drained from
them; a prohibition grounded upon the reason of the former, and indeed was
greatly abominable to the Jews, Lev. 17.10, 11 12, etc.
being so expressly forbidden in their Law. But it was not more offensive to the
Jews, than acceptable to the Athen. Deipnos. lib 2. c. 24. p. 65. ubi vid.
Casaub. in loc.
Gentiles, who were wont with great art and care to strangle living Creatures,
that they might stew or dress them with their blood in them, as a point of
curious and exquisite delicacy. This and the foregoing prohibition, abstinence
from blood, died not with the Apostles, nor were buried with other Jewish
rites, but were inviolably observed for several Ages in the Christian Church,
as we have Prim. Christ. Part. 3. c. 1. p. 230.
elsewhere observed from the Writers of those times, Lastly, From Fornication:
This was a thing commonly practiced in the Heathen World, who generally beheld
simple Fornication as no Vid. Cicer. pro Coelio Orat. 34. p. 503. Tom. 2.
Terent Adelph. Ac. 1. Sc. 2 p. 166. (...)
(...), etc. Philem. Comic. in Delph. ab. Athen. lib. 13. c. 3. p. 569. Vid.
Leg. Artic. l. 6. Tit. 5 p. 41. and Petit. Comment p. 474.
sin, and that it was lawful for persons, not engaged in wedlock, to make use
of women that exposed themselves. A custom justly offensive to the Jews, and
therefore to cure two evils at once, the Apostles here solemnly declare against
it. Not that they thought it a thing indifferent, as the rest of the prohibited
rites were, for it is forbidded by the natural Law (as contrary to that
chastness and modesty, that order and comeliness which God has planted in the
minds of men) but they joined it in the same Class with them, because the
Gentiles looked upon it as a thing lawful and indifferent. It had been expressly
forbidden by the Mosaic Law, Deuteronomy. 23.17.
There shall be no Whore of the daughters of Israel; and because the Heathens
had generally thrown down this fence and bar set by the Law of nature, it was
here again repaired by the first planters of Christianity, as by S. Paul
elsewhere, Ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus; 1 Thessalonians.
4.2, 3, 4, 5.
for this is the will of God, even your Sanctification, that you should abstain
from fornication: That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel
in sanctification and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God. Though after all I must confess my self inclinable
to embrace Heinsius his ingenious conjecture, that by (...), fornication, we
are here to understand (...), the harlots hire, or the (...), the offering
which those persons were wont to make. For among the Gentiles nothing was more
usual, than for the common women, that prostituted themselves to lewd embraces
(those especially that attended at the Temples of Venus) to dedicate some part
of their gain, and present it to the Gods. Orat. adv. Gent. page 27. Tom. 1.
Athanasius has a passage very express to this purpose. (...). The women of old
were wont to fit in the Idol-Temples of Phoenicia, and to dedicate the gain
which they got by the prostitution of their bodies as a kind of first fruits to
the Deities of the place; supposing that by fornication they should pacify
their Goddess, and by this means render her favorable and propitious to them.
Where it is plain he uses (...), or fornication, in this very sense, for that
gain or reward of it, which they consecrated to their Gods. Some such thing
Solomon had in his eye, Prove. 7.14.
when he brings in the Harlot thus courting the young man, I have
peace offerings with me, this day have I paid my Vows. These presents were
either made in specie, the very money thus unrighteously gotten, or in
Sacrifices bought with it, and offered at the Temple, the remainders whereof
were taken and sold among the ordinary sacrificial portions. This as it holds
the nearest correspondence with the rest of the rites here forbidden, so could
it not choose but be a mighty scandal to the Jews, it being so particularly
prohibited in their Law, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
Thou shall not bring the hire of an Whore into the house of the Lord thy God
for any Vow, for it is an abomination to the Lord.

6. THESE prohibitions here laid upon the Gentiles, were by the Apostles
intended only for a temporary compliance with the Jewish Converts, till they
could by degrees be brought off from their stiffness and obstinacy, and then
the reason of the thing ceasing, the obligation to it must needs cease and
fail. Nay, we may observe that even while the Apostolical decree lasted in its
greatest force and power, in those places where there were few or no Jewish
Converts, the Apostle did not stick to give leave, that except in case of
scandal, any kind of meats, even the portions of the Idol-sacrifices might be
indifferently bought and taken by Christians as well as Heathens. These were
all which in order to the satisfaction of the Jews, and for the present peace
of the Church the Apostles thought necessary to require of the Converted
Gentiles, but that for all the rest they were perfectly free from legal
observances, obliged only to the commands of Christianity. So that the
Apostolical decision that was made of this matter was this, That (besides the
temporary observation of those few indifferent rites before mentioned) the
belief and practice of the Christian Religion was perfectly sufficient to
Salvation, without Circumcision, and the observation of the Mosaic Law. This
Synodical determination allayed the controversy for a while, being joyfully
received by the Gentile-Christians. But alas, the Jewish zeal began again to
ferment and spread it self, they could not with any patience endure to see
their beloved Moses deserted, and those venerable Institutions trodden down,
and therefore labored to keep up their credit, and still to assert them as
necessary to Salvation. Than which nothing created S. Paul greater trouble at
every turn, being forced to contend against these Judaizing teachers almost in
every Church where he came, as appears by that great part that they bear in all
his Epistles, especially that to the Romans, and Galatians, where this leaven
had most diffused it self, whom the better to undeceive, he discourses at large
of the nature and institution, the end and design, the antiquating and
abolishing of that Mosaic Covenant, which these men laid so much stress and
weight upon.

7. HENCE then we pass to the third thing considerable for the clearing of this
matter, which is to show, that the main passages in S. Paul's Epistles,
concerning Justification and Salvation, have an immediate reference to this
controversy. But before we enter upon that, something must necessarily be
premised for the explicating some terms and phrases frequently used by our
Apostle in this question, these two especially, what he means by Law, and what
by Faith. By Law then it is plain he usually understands the Jewish Law, which
was a complex body of Laws, containing Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial precepts,
each of which had its use and office as a great instrument of duty: The
Judicial Laws being peculiar Statutes accommodated to the state of the Jew's
Commonwealth, as all civil constitutions, restrained men from the external acts
of sin: The Ceremonial Laws came somewhat nearer, and besides their Typical
relation to the Evangelical state, by external and symbolical representments
signified and exhibited that spiritual impurity, from which men were to
abstain: The Moral Laws, founded in the natural notions of men's minds
concerning good and evil, directly urged men to duty, and prohibited their
prevarications. These three made up the entire Code and Pandects of the Jewish
Statutes; all which our Apostle comprehends under the general notion of the
Law, and not the moral Law singly and separately considered, in which sense it
never appears that the Jews expected justification and salvation by it, nay
rather, that they looked for it merely from the observance of the ritual and
ceremonial Law: so that the moral Law is no further considered by him in this
question, than as it made up a part of the Mosaical constitution, of that
National and Political Covenant, which God made with the Jews at Mount Sinai.
Hence the Apostle all along in his discourses constantly opposes the Law and
the Gospel, and the observation of the one to the belief and practice of the
other, which surely he would not have done, had he simply intended the moral
Law, it being more expressly incorporated into the Gospel, than ever it was into
the Law of Moses. And that the Apostle does thus oppose the Law and Gospel,
might be made evident from the continued series of his discourses; but a few
places shall suffice. Romans 3.27.
By what Law (says the Apostle) is boasting excluded? by the Law of works: i.
e. by the Mosaic Law, in whose peculiar privileges and prerogatives the Jews
did strangely flatter and pride themselves? Nay, but by the Law of Faith: i. e.
by the Gospel, or the Evangelical way of God's dealing with us. Gal. 2.15, 16.
And elsewhere giving an account of this very controversy between the Jewish
and Gentile Converts, he first opposes their Persons, Jews by nature, and
sinners of the Gentiles, and then infers, that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, by those legal observances, whereby the Jews expected to be
justified, but by the faith of Christ, by a hearty belief of, and compliance
with that way, which Christ has introduced, for by the works of the Law, by
legal obedience, no flesh, neither Jew, nor Gentile, shall now be justified.
Fain would I learn, Gal. 3.2-5.
whether you received the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? that is, whether you became partakers of the miraculous powers of the
Holy Ghost, while you continued under the legal dispensation, or since you
embraced the Gospel, and the faith of Christ: and speaking afterward of the
state of the Jews before the revelation of the Gospel, says he, before faith
came, we were kept under the Law, V. 23.
i. e. before the Gospel came, we were kept under the Discipline of the legal
Economy, shut up unto the faith, reserved for the discovery of the Evangelical
dispensation, which should afterward [in its due time] be revealed to the
World. This in the following Chapter he discourses more at large. Gal. 4.21.
and seq.
Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, i. e. Ye Jews that so fondly dote
upon the legal state, Do ye not hear the Law? i. e. Understand what your own
Law does so clearly intimate? and then goes on to unriddle what was wrapped up in
the famous Allegory of Abraham's two Sons by his two Wives. The one, Ishmael,
born of Hagar, the Bondwoman, who denoted the Jewish Covenant made at Mount
Sinai, which according to the representation of her condition was a servile
state: The other Isaac, born of Sarah, the Freewoman, was the Son of the
promise, denoting Jerusalem that is above, and is free, the mother of us all;
i. e. The state and covenant of the Gospel, whereby all Christians, as the
spiritual children of Abraham, are set free from the bondage of the Mosaic
dispensation. By all which it is evident, that by Law and the works of the Law,
in this controversy, the Apostle understands the Law of Moses, and that
obedience which the legal dispensation required at their hands.

8. WE are secondly to enquire, what the Apostle means by Faith; and he
commonly uses it two ways. 1. More generally for the Gospel, or that
Evangelical way of justification and salvation, which Christ has brought in, in
opposition to Circumcision, and the observation of those Rites, by which the
Jews expected to be justified: and this is plain from the preceding opposition,
where Faith, as denoting the Gospel, is frequently opposed to the Law of Moses.
2. Faith is taken more particularly for a practical belief, or such an assent
to the Evangelical revelation as produces a sincere obedience to the Laws of
it, and indeed as concerned in this matter is usually taken not for this or
that single virtue, but for the entire condition of the New Covenant, as
comprehending all that duty that it requires of us: than which nothing can be
more plain and evident; In Christ Jesus, Gal. 5.6.
i. e. under the Gospel, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; it is all one to Justification whether a Man be circumcised or
no; What then? but Faith, which works by love; Gal. 6.15.
which afterward he explains thus, In Christ Jesus neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, a renewed and
divine temper of mind, and a new course and state of life. And lest all this
should not be thought plain enough, 1 Cor. 7.19.
he elsewhere tells us, that circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing; but the keeping the Commandments of God. From which places there needs
no skill to infer, that that Faith whereby we are justified, contains in it a
new disposition and state both of heart and life, and an observation of the
Laws of Christ; in which respect the Apostle does in the very same Verse
expound believing, Romans 10.16.
by obeying of the Gospel. Such he assures us was that very Faith by which
Abraham was justified, who against all probabilities of reason believed in
God's promise, he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong, etc. that is, he so firmly believed what God had promised, that he gave
him the glory of his truth and faithfulness, his infinite power and ability to
do all things. And how did he that? by acting suitably in a way of entire
resignation, and sincere obedience to the divine will and pleasure: so the
Apostle elsewhere more expressly, Heb. 11.8.
by Faith he obeyed, and went out, not knowing whither he went. Romans 4.22.
This Faith (he tells us) was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, that is,
God by virtue of the New Covenant made in Christ was graciously pleased to look
upon this obedience (though in it self imperfect) as that for which he
accounted him, and would deal with him as a just and a righteous Man. And upon
this account we find Abraham's faith opposed to a perfect and unsinning
obedience, Romans 4.2, 3, etc.
for thus the Apostle tells us, that Abraham was justified by faith, in
opposition to his being justified by such an absolute and complete obedience,
as might have enabled him to challenge the reward by the strict Laws of
Justice: whereas now his being pardoned and accepted by God in the way of a
mean and imperfect obedience, it could not claim impunity, much less a reward,
but must be entirely owing to the Divine grace and favor.

9. HAVING thus cleared our way, by restoring these words to their genuine and
native sense, we come to show, how the Apostle in his discourses does all along
refer to the Original controversy between the Jewish and Gentile-Converts,
whether Justification was by the observation of the Mosaic Law, or by the
belief and practice of the Gospel: and this will appear, if we consider the
persons that he has to deal with, the way and manner of his arguing, and that
there was then no other controversy on foot, to which these passages could
refer. The Persons whom he had to deal with, were chiefly of two sorts, pure
Jews, and Jewish Converts. Pure Jews were those that kept themselves wholly to
the Legal Economy, and expected to be justified and saved in no other way,
than the observation of the Law of Moses. Indeed they laid a more peculiar
stress upon Circumcision, because this having been added as the Seal of that
Covenant which God made with Abraham, and the discriminating badge whereby they
were to be distinguished from all other Nations, they looked upon it as having
a special efficacy in it to recommend them to the Divine acceptance.
Accordingly we find in their Writings that they make this the main Basis and
Foundation of their hope and confidence toward God. For they tell us, that the
Precept of Circumcision is greater than all the rest, and equivalent to the
whole Law, that the reason why God hears the Prayers of the Israelites, (...)
but not (...) of the Gentiles or Christians, is (...) for the virtue and merit
of Circumcision; yea that so great is the power and efficacy of the Law of
Circumcision, that no man that is circumcised shall go to Cad. Hakkem. ap.
Buxtorf. F. praef. ad Syn. Jud.
Hell. Nay, according to the idle and trifling humor of these Synag. Jud. c.
4. p. 87.
Men, they fetch down Abraham from the Seat of the Blessed, and place him as
Porter at the Gates of Hell, upon no other errand than to keep circumcised
Persons from entering into that miserable place. However nothing is more
evident, than that Circumcision was the Fort and Sanctuary wherein they
ordinarily placed their security, and accordingly we find S. Paul frequently
disputing against Circumcision, as virtually comprizing, in their notion, the
keeping of the whole Jewish Law. Besides, to these literal impositions of the
Law of Moses, the Pharisees had added many vain Traditions and several
superstitious usages of their own contrivance, in the observance whereof the
People placed not a little confidence, as to that righteousness upon which they
hoped to stand clear with Heaven. Against all these our Apostle argues, and
sometimes by arguments peculiar to them alone. Jewish Converts were those, who
having embraced the Christian Religion, did yet out of a veneration to their
ancient Rites, make the observance of them equally necessary with the belief
and practice of Christianity both to themselves and others. These last were the
Persons, who as they first started the controversy, so were those against whom
the Apostle mainly opposed himself, endeavoring to dismount their pretenses,
and to beat down their Opinions level with the ground.

10. THIS will yet further appear from the way and manner of the Apostles
arguing, which plainly respects this controversy, and will be best seen in
some particular instances of his reasonings. And first, he argues, that this
way of justification urged by Jews and Jewish Converts was inconsistent with
the goodness of God, and his universal kindness to Mankind, being so narrow and
limited, that it excluded the far greatest part of the World. Thus in the three
first Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans having proved at large that the
whole World, both Jew and Gentile were under a state of guilt, and consequently
liable to the Divine sentence and condemnation, he comes next to enquire by
what means they may be delivered from this state of vengeance, and shows that
it could not be by legal observances, Romans 3.20, 21, etc.
but that now there was a way of righteousness or justification declared by
Christ in the Gospel (intimated also in the Old Testament) extending to all,
both Jews and Gentiles, whereby God with respect to the satisfaction and
expiation of Christ is ready freely to pardon and justify all penitent
believers: That therefore there was a way revealed in the Gospel, whereby a man
might be justified, without being beholden to the rites of the Jewish Law,
otherwise it would argue that God had very little care of the greatest part of
men. Is he God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the
Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the Circumcision by
Faith, and the uncircumcision through Faith, Jew and Gentile in the same
Evangelical way. The force of which argument lies in this, That that cannot be
necessary to our Justification, which excludes the greatest part of Mankind
from all possibility of being justified (and this justification by the Mosaic
Law plainly does) a thing by no means consistent with God's universal love and
kindness to his Creatures. Hence the Apostle magnifies the grace of the Gospel,
that it has broken down the partition wall, and made way for all Nations to
come in, that now there is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Gal. 3.28.
Barbarian nor Scythian, no difference in this respect, but all one in Christ
Jesus, Col. 3.11.
all equally admitted to terms of pardon and justification, Act. 10.35.
in every Nation he that fears God, and works righteousness being accepted
with him.

11. SECONDLY, He argues, that this Jewish way of Justification could not be
indispensibly necessary, in that it had not been the constant way whereby good
men in all Ages had been justified and accepted with Heaven. This he eminently
proves from the instance of Abraham, whom the Scripture sets forth as the
Father of the faithful, and the great Exemplar of that way, wherein all his
spiritual seed, all true Believers were to be justified. Now of him it is
evident, that he was justified and accepted with God upon his practical belief
of God's power and promise, before ever Circumcision, and much more before the
rest of the Mosaic Institution was in being. Comes this blessedness then upon
the Circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? For we say that Faith
was reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness. Romans 4.9, 10, 11, etc.
How was it then reckoned, when he was in Circumcision, or in uncircumcision?
Not in Circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And he received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had being yet
uncircumcised, etc. The meaning whereof is plainly this, That pardon of sin
cannot be entailed upon the way of the Mosaic Law, it being evident, that
Abraham was justified and approved of God, before he was Circumcised, which was
only added as a seal of the Covenant between God and him, and a testimony of
that acceptance with God, which he had obtained before. And this way of God's
dealing with Abraham, and in him with all his spiritual children, the legal
Institution could not make void, it being impossible that that dispensation
which came so long after should disannul the Covenant which God had made with
Abraham and his spiritual seed CCCCXXX. Gal. 3.17.
Years before. Upon this account, Romans 4.11, 12.
as the Apostle observes, the Scripture sets forth Abraham as the great type
and pattern of Justification, as the Father of all them that believe, though
they be not Circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also, and
the father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the Circumcision only, Gal.
3.7, 8, 9.
but also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father Abraham, which he had
being yet uncircumcised. They therefore that are of Faith, the same are the
children of Abraham: And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel (this Evangelical way of
justifying) unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed, So then
they which be of Faith, who believe and obey, as Abraham did, shall be blessed,
pardoned and saved, with faithful Abraham. It might further be demonstrated
that this has ever been God's method of dealing with Mankind, our Apostle in
the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, proving all along by particular instances,
that it was by such a Faith as this, without any relation to the Law of Moses,
that good men were justified and accepted with God in all Ages of the World.

12. THIRDLY, He argues against this Jewish way of Justification from the
deficiency and imperfection of the Mosaic Economy, not able to justify and
save sinners. Deficient, as not able to assist those that were under it with
sufficient aids to perform what it required of them, Romans 8.3, 4.
This the Law could not do, for that it was weak through the flesh, till God
sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, to enable us, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. And indeed could the Law have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the Law: Gal. 3.21.
But alas! the Scripture having concluded all Mankind, Jew and Gentile, under
sin, and consequently incapable of being justified upon terms of perfect and
entire obedience, there is now no other way but this, That the promise by the
Faith of Christ be given to all them that believe, i. e. this Evangelical
method of justifying sincere believers. Besides, the Jewish Economy was
deficient in pardoning sin, and procuring the grace and favor of God, it could
only awaken the knowledge of sin, not remove the guilt of it: It was not
possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin; all the
sacrifices of the Mosaic Law were no further available for the pardon of sin,
Heb. 10.4.
than merely as they were founded in, and had respect to that great sacrifice
and expiation, which was to be made for the sins of Mankind by the death of the
Son of God. Ibid. v. 11, 12.
The Priests, though they daily ministered, and oftentimes offered the same
sacrifices, yet could they never take away sins: No, that was reserved for a
better and a higher sacrifice, even that of our Lord himself, who after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God,
having completed that, which the repeated sacrifices of the Law could never
effect. So that all Men being under guilt, and no justification, where there
was no remission, the Jewish Economy being in it self unable to pardon, was
incapable to justify. This S. Paul elsewhere declared in an open Assembly
before Jews and Gentiles; Be it known unto you, Act. 13.38, 39.
men and brethren, that through this man [Christ Jesus] is preached unto you
forgiveness of sins: And by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

13. FOURTHLY, He proves that Justification by the Mosaic Law could not stand
with the death of Christ, the necessity of whose death and sufferings it did
plainly evacuate and take away. For if righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain: Gal. 2.21.
If the Mosaical performances be still necessary to our Justification, then
certainly it was to very little purpose, and altogether unbecoming the wisdom
and goodness of God, to send his own Son into the World, to do so much for us,
and to suffer such exquisite pains and tortures. Nay, he tells them, that while
they persisted in this fond obstinate opinion, all that Christ had done and
suffered could be of no advantage to them. Stand fast in the liberty, Gal. 5.1,
2, 3, 4.
wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not again entangled in the yoke of
bondage, the bondage and servitude of the Mosaic rites; Behold I Paul solemnly
say unto you, That if you be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: For
I testify again to every man that is Circumcised, that he is a debtor to do
the whole Law; Christ is become of none effect to you; whosoever of you are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. The sum of which argument is,
That whoever lay the stress of their Justification upon Circumcision, and the
observances of the Law, do thereby declare themselves to be under an obligation
of perfect obedience to all that the Law requires of them, and accordingly
supersede the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death, and disclaim all right and
title to the grace and favor of the Gospel. For since Christ's death is
abundantly sufficient to attain its ends, whoever takes in another, plainly
renounces that, and rests upon that of his own choosing. By these ways of
reasoning it is evident what the Apostle drives at in all his discourses about
this matter. More might have been observed, had I not thought, that these are
sufficient to render his design, especially to the unprejudiced and impartial,
obvious and plain enough.

14. LASTLY, That S. Paul's discourses about Justification and Salvation do
immediately refer to the controversy between the Orthodox and Judaizing
Christians, appears hence, that there was no other controversy then on foot,
but concerning the way of Justification, whether it was by the observation of
the Law of Moses, or only of the Gospel and the Law of Christ. For we must
needs suppose, that the Apostle wrote with a primary respect to the present
state of things, and so as they whom he had to deal with, might, and could not
but understand him: Which yet would have been impossible for them to have done,
had he intended them for the controversies which have since been bandied with
so much zeal and fierceness, and to give countenance to those many nice and
subtle propositions, those curious and elaborate schemes which some Men in
these later Ages have drawn of these matters.

15. FROM the whole discourse two Consectaries especially plainly follow. I,
Consect. That works of Evangelical obedience are not opposed to Faith in
Justification. By works of Evangelical obedience, I mean such Christian duties,
as are the fruits, not of our own power and strength, but God's Spirit, done by
the assistance of his grace. And that these are not opposed to Faith, is
undeniably evident, in that (as we observed before) Faith as including the new
nature, and the keeping God's commands, is made the usual condition of
Justification. Nor can it be otherwise, when other graces and virtues of the
Christian life are made the terms of pardon and acceptance with Heaven, and of
our title to the merits of Christ's death, and the great promise of eternal
life. Thus Repentance, which is not so much a single Act, Acts 2.38.
as a complex body of Christian duties, Repent and be baptized in the Name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost;
Acts 3.17.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. So Charity and
forgiveness of others, Mark 11.25, 26.
Forgive, if ye have ought against any, that your Father also which is in
Heaven may forgive you your trespasses: For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
Matthew. 6.14, 15.
your heavenly Father also will forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive yours. Sometimes Evangelical
obedience in general; Acts 10.34, 35.
God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears him, and
works righteousness is accepted with him. If we walk in the light, 1 John 1.7.
as God is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. What privilege then has Faith
above other graces in this matter? are we justified by Faith? We are pardoned
and accepted with God upon our repentance, charity, and other acts of
Evangelical obedience. Is Faith opposed to the works of the Mosaic Law in
Justification? so are works of Evangelical obedience; Circumcision is nothing,
1 Cor. 7.19.
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God.
Does Faith give glory to God, and set the crown upon his head? Works of
Evangelical obedience are equally the effects of Divine grace, both preventing
and assisting of us, and indeed are not so much our works, as his: So that the
glory of all must needs be entirely resolved into the grace of God, nor can any
man in such circumstances with the least pretense of reason lay claim to merit,
or boast of his own atchievments. Hence the Apostle magnifies the Evangelical
method of Justification above that of the Law, that it wholly excludes all
proud reflections upon our selves; Where is boasting then? Romans 3.27.
it is excluded. By what Law? of works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. The
Mosaical Economy softered men up in proud and high thoughts of themselves,
they looked upon themselves as a peculiar People, honored above all other
Nations of the World, the seed of Abraham, invested with mighty privileges,
etc. whereas the Gospel proceeding upon other principles, takes away all
foundations of pride, by acknowledging our acceptance with God, and the power
whereby we are enabled to make good the terms and conditions of it, to be the
mere result of the Divine grace and mercy, and that the whole scheme of our
Salvation, as it was the contrivance of the Divine wisdom, so is the purchase
of the merit and satisfaction of our crucified Savior. Nor is Faith it self
less than other graces an act of Evangelical obedience, and if separated from
them, is of no moment or value in the accounts of Heaven: 1 Cor. 13.2.
Though I have all Faith, and have no Charity, I am nothing. All Faith, be it
of what kind soever. To this may be added, that no tolerable account can be
given, why that which is on all hands granted to be the condition of our
Salvation (such is Evangelical obedience) should not be the condition of our
Justification: And at the great Day Christians shall be acquitted or condemned
according as in this World they have fulfilled or neglected the conditions of
the Gospel: The decretory sentence of absolution that shall then be passed upon
good men, shall be nothing but a public and solemn declaration of that private
sentence of Justification that was passed upon them in this World; so that upon
the same terms that they are justified now, they shall be justified and
acquitted then, and upon the same terms that they shall then be judged and
acquitted, they are justified now, viz. an hearty belief, and a sincere
obedience to the Gospel. From all which, I hope, it is evident, that when S.
Paul denies men to be justified by the works of the Law; by works he either
means works done before conversion, and by the strength of Men's natural powers,
such as enabled them to pride and boast themselves, and lay claim to merit, or
(which most-what includes the other) the works of the Mosaic Law. And indeed
though the controversies on foot in those times did not plainly determine his
reasonings that way, yet the considerations which we have now suggested;
sufficiently show that they could not be meant of any other sense.

16. CONSECT. II. That the doctrines of S. Paul and S. James about
Justification are fairly consistent with each other. For seeing S. Paul's
design in excluding works from Justification, was only to deny the works of the
Jewish Law, or those that were meritorious, as being wrought by our own
strength, and in asserting that in opposition to such works we are justified by
Faith, he meant no more than that either we are justified in an Evangelical
way, or more particularly by Faith intended a practical-belief, including
Evangelical obedience: And seeing on the other hand S. James in affirming that
we are justified by Works, and not by Faith only; by works, means no more than
Evangelical obedience, in opposition to a naked and an empty Faith; these two
are so far from quarrelling, that they mutually embrace each other, and both in
the main pursue the same design. And indeed if any disagreement seem between
them, it is most reasonable that S. Paul should be expounded by S. James, not
only because his propositions are so express and positive, and not justly
liable to ambiguity, but because he wrote some competent time after the other,
and consequently as he perfectly understood his meaning, so he was capable to
countermine those ill principles, which some men had built upon S. Paul's
assertions. For it is evident from several passages in S. Paul's Epistles, that
even then many began to mistake his doctrine, and from his assertions about
Justification by Faith, and not by works, to infer propositions that might
serve the purposes of a bad life; They slanderously reported him to say, that
we might do evil, that good might come; Romans 3.8.
that we might continue in sin, that the grace of the Gospel might the more
abound: Romans 6.1.
They thought that so long as they did but believe the Gospel in the naked
notion and speculation of it, it was enough to recommend them to the favor of
God, and to serve all the purposes of Justification and Salvation, however they
shaped and steered their lives. Against these men it is beyond all question
plain, that S. James levels his Epistle, to batter down the growing doctrines
of Libertinism and Profaneness, to show the insufficiency of a naked Faith,
and an empty profession of Religion, Vid. Chap. 2. v. 14, 15, and seqq.
that it is not enough to recommend us to the Divine acceptance, and to justify
us in the sight of Heaven, barely to believe the Gospel, unless we really obey
and practice it; that a Faith destitute of this Evangelical obedience is
fruitless and unprofitable to Salvation; that it is by these works that Faith
must appear to be vital and sincere; that not only Rahab, but Abraham the
Father of the faithful, was justified not by a bare belief of God's promise,
but an hearty obedience to God's command, in the ready offer of his Son,
whereby it appears that his Faith and Obedience did cooperate and conspire
together, to render him capable of God's favor and approbation, and that
herein the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, That Abraham believed God, and
it was imputed to him for righteousness, (whence by the way nothing can be
clearer, than that both these Apostles intend the same thing by Faith in the
case of Abraham's Justification, and its being imputed to him for
righteousness, viz. a practical belief and obedience to the commands of God)
that it follows hence, that Faith is not of it self sufficient to justify and
make us acceptable to God, unless a proportionable Obedience be joined with it;
without which Faith serves no more to these ends and purposes, than a Body
destitute of the Soul to animate and enliven it, is capable to exercise the
functions and offices of the natural life. His meaning in short being nothing
else, than that good works, or Evangelical obedience is, according to the
Divine appointment, the condition of the Gospel Covenant, without which it is in
vain for any to hope for that pardon which Christ has purchased, and the
favor of God, which is necessary to Eternal Life.

The End of S. Paul 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. ANDREW.
St. ANDREW.
He was fastened to a Cross since distinguished by his name by ye Proconsul at
Patrae a City of Achaia, from which he preached several days to ye
Spectators. S. Hierom. Baron. Nov: 29.

St. Andrew's Crucifixion.
Matthew. 23.34. Behold I send unto you prophets and wise men, and scribes, and
some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scurge in
your synagogues, and persecute them from Cyty to City.



The Sacred History sparing in the Acts of the succeeding Apostles, and why. S.
Andrew 's Birthplace, Kindred, and way of Life. John the Baptist 's Ministry
and Discipline. S. Andrew educated under his Institution. His coming to Christ,
and Call to be a Disciple. His Election to the Apostolate. The Province
assigned for his Ministry. In what places he chiefly preached. His barbarous
usage at Sinope. His planting Christianity at Byzantium, and ordaining Stachys
Bishop there. His travels in Greece, and preaching at Patrae in Achaia. His
Arraignment before the Proconsul, and resolute defense of the Christian
Religion. The Proconsul 's displeasure against him, whence. An account of his
Martyrdom. His preparatory Sufferings, and Crucifixion. On what kind of Cross
he suffered. The Miracles reported to be done by his Body. Its translation to
Constantinople. The great Encomium given of him by one of the Ancients.

1. THE Sacred Story, which has hitherto been very large and copious in
describing the Acts of the two first Apostles, is henceforward very sparing in
its accounts, giving us only now and then a few oblique and accidental remarks
concerning the rest, and some of them no further mentioned, than the mere
recording of their Names. For what reasons it pleased the Divine wisdom and
providence, that no more of their Acts should be consigned to Writing by the
Penmen of the Holy story, is to us unknown. Probably, it might be thought
convenient, that no more account should be given of the first plantations of
Christianity in the World, than what concerned Judaea, and the
Neighbour-countries, at least the most eminent places of the Roman Empire, that
so the truth of the Prophetical Predictions might appear, which had foretold,
that the Law of the Messiah should come forth from Sion, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Besides, that a particular relation of the Acts of so many
Apostles, done in so many several Countries, might have swelled the Holy
Volumes into too great a bulk, and rendered them less serviceable and
accommodate to the ordinary use of Christians. Among the Apostles that succeed
we first take notice of S. Andrew. He was born at Bethsaida, a City of Galilee,
standing upon the banks of the Lake of Gennesareth, Son to John or Jonas a
Fisherman of that Town; Brother he was to Simon Peter, but whether Elder or
Younger, the Ancients do not clearly decide, though the major part intimate him
to have been the younger Brother, there being only the single authority of
Epiphanius on the other side, as we have formerly noted. He was brought up to
his Father's Trade, whereat he labored, till our Lord called him from catching
Fish, to be a Fisher of men, for which he was fitted by some preparatory
Institutions, even before his coming unto Christ.

2. JOHN the Baptist was lately risen in the Jewish Church, a Person whom for
the efficacy and impartiality of his Doctrine, and the extraordinary strictness
and austerities of his Life, the Jews generally had in great veneration. He
trained up his Proselytes under the Discipline of Repentance, and by urging
upon them a severe change and reformation of life, prepared them to entertain
the Doctrine of the Messiah, whose approach, he told them, was now near at
hand, representing to them the greatness of his Person, and the importance of
the design that he was come upon. Beside the multitudes that promiscuously
flocked to the Baptists discourses, he had according to the manner of the
Jewish Masters some peculiar and select Disciples, who more constantly attended
upon his Lectures, and for the most part waited upon his Person. In the number
of these was our Apostle, who was then with him about Jordan, when our Savior,
who some time since had been baptized, came that way: upon whose appraoch the
Baptist told them, that this was the Messiah, the great Person whom he had so
often spoken of, to usher in whose appearing his whole Ministry was but
subservient, that this was the Lamb of God, the true Sacrifice that was to
expiate the sins of Mankind. Upon this testimony Andrew and another Disciple
(probably S. John) follow our Savior to the place of his abode. (...). Menaea
Graecor. (...). sub lit. (...).
Upon which account he is generally by the Fathers and ancient Writers styled
(...), or the first called Disciple; though in a strict sense he was not so;
for though he was the first of the Disciples that came to Christ, yet was he
not called till afterward. After some converse with him, Andrew goes to
acquaint his Brother Simon, and both together came to Christ. Long they stayed
not with him, but returned to their own home, and to the exercise of their
calling, wherein they were employed, when somewhat more than a Year after our
Lord passing through Galilee, found them fishing upon the Sea of Tiberias,
where he fully satisfied them of the Greatness and Divinity of his Person by
the convictive evidence of that miraculous draught of Fishes, which they took
at his command. And now he told them he had other work for them to do, that
they should no longer deal in Fish, but with Men, whom they should catch with
the efficacy and influence of that Doctrine, that he was come to deliver to the
World; commanding them to follow him, as his immediate Disciples and
Attendants, who accordingly left all and followed him. Shortly after S. Andrew
together with the rest was called to the Office and Honor of the Apostolate,
made choice of to be one of those that were to be Christ's immediate
Vicegerents for planting and propagating the Christian Church. Little else is
particularly recorded of him in the Sacred story, being comprehended in the
general account of the rest of the Apostles.

3. AFTER our Lord's Ascension into Heaven, and that the Holy Ghost had in its
miraculous powers been plentifully shed upon the Apostles, to fit them for the
great errand they were to go upon, to root out profaneness and idolatry, and
to subdue the World to the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is generally affirmed by
the Ancients, that the Apostles agreed among themselves (by lot, say Socr. H.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 19. p. 50.
some) probably not without the special guidance and direction of the Holy
Ghost, what parts of the World they should severally take. In this division S.
Andrew had Scythia, and the Neighboring Conntries primarily allotted him for
his Orig. in Genesis l. 3. ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1. p. 71. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c.
39. p. 199.
Province. First then he traveled through Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia,
and instructed them in the Faith of Christ, passing all along the Euxine Sea
(formerly called Strab. Geogr. l. 7. p. 206.
Axenus, from the barbarous and inhospitable temper of the People thereabouts,
who were wont to sacrifice strangers, and of their skulls to make Cups to drink
in at their Feasts and Banquets) and so into the solitudes of Scythia. An
ancient Commentar. de S. Andr. Apost. and (...), extat Graec. in Menaeis
Graecor. (...). sub lit. (...).
Author (though whence deriving his intelligence I know not) gives us a more
particular account of his travels and transactions in these parts. He tells us,
that he first came to Amynsus, where being entertained by a Jew, he went into
the Synagogue; discoursed to them concerning Christ, and from the prophecies of
the Old Testament proved him to be the Messiah, and the Savior of the World.
Having here converted and baptized many, ordered their public Meeting, and
ordained them Priests, he went next to Trapezus, a maritime City upon the
Euxine Sea, whence after many other places he came to Nice, where he staid two
Years, Preaching and working Miracles with great success: thence to Nicomedia,
and so to Chalcedon, whence sailing through the Propontis he came by the Euxine
Sea to Heraclea, and from thence to Amastris: in all which places he met with
great difficulties and discouragements, but overcame all with an invincible
patience and resolution. He next came to Sinope, a City situate upon the same
Sea, a place famous both for the birth and burial of the great King
Mithridates; here, as my Author reports from the Ancients ((...)) he met with
his Brother Peter, with whom he staid a considerable time at this place: as a
Monument whereof he tells us, that the Chairs made of white stone wherein they
were wont to sit while they taught the People, were still extant, and commonly
the wed in his time. The Inhabitants of this City were most Jews, who partly
through zeal for their Religion, partly through the barbarousness of their
manners, were quickly exasperated against the Apostle, and contriving together
attempted to burn the House, wherein he sojourned: however they treated him
with all the instances of savage cruelty, throwing him to the ground, stamping
upon him with their Feet, pulling and dragging him from place to place, some
beating him with Clubs, others pelting him with stones, and some the better to
satisfy their revenge, biting off his Flesh with their Teeth; till
apprehending they had fully dispatched him, they cast him out of the City. But
he miraculously recovered, and publicly returned into the City, whereby and by
some other Miracles, which he wrought amongst them, he reduced many to a better
mind, converting them to the Faith. Departing hence, he went again to Amynsus,
and then to Trapezus, thence to Neocaesarea; and to Samosata (the birthplace
of the witty but impious Lucian) where having baffled the acute and wise
Philosophers, he purposed to return to Jerusalem. Whence after some time he
betook himself to his former Provinces, traveling to the Country of the
Abasgi, where at Sebastople, situate upon the Eastern shore of the Euxine Sea,
between the influx of the Rivers Phasis and Apsarus, he successfully Preached
the Gospel to the Inhabitants of that City. Hence he removed into the Country
of the Zecchi, and the Bosphorani, part of the Asiatick Scythia or Sarmatia,
but finding the Inhabitants very barbarous and intractable, he staid not long
among them, only at Cherson, or Chersonesus, a great and populous City within
the Bosphorus, he continued some time, instructing and confirming them in the
Faith. Hence taking Ship he sailed cross the Sea to Sinope, to encourage and
confirm the Churches which he had lately planted in those parts, and here he
ordained Philologus, formerly one of S. Paul's Disciples, Bishop of that City.

4. HENCE he came to Byzantium (since called Constantinople) where he
instructed them in the knowledge of the Christian Religion, founded a Church
for Divine worship, and ordained Stachys (whom S. Paul calls his beloved
Stachys) first Bishop of that place. Ad An. 44. N. 31. vid. ad An. 314. n. 94,
95, etc.
Baronius indeed is unwilling to believe this, desirous to engross the honor
of it to S. Peter, whom he will have to have been the first Planter of
Christianity in these parts. But besides that Baronius his authority is very
slight and insignificant in this case (as we have before noted in S. Peter's
Life) this matter is expressly asserted not only by Nicephorus H. Eccl. l. 2. c.
39. l. 5. c. 6. p. 540.
Callistus, but by another (...). Niceph. E. P. in Chronogr. a Scal. edit. p.
309. vid. etiam Maen. Graec. ubi supr.
Nicephorus Patriarch of Constantinople, and who therefore may be presumed
knowing in his Predecessors in that See. Banished out of the City by him, who
at that time usurped the Government, he fled to Argyropolis, a place near at
hand, where he preached the Gospel for two Years together with good success,
converting great Numbers to the Faith. After this he traveled over Thrace,
Macedonia, Thessaly, Achaia: Orat. 25. p. 438.
Nazianzen adds Epyrus, in all which places for many Years he preached and
propagated Christianity, and confirmed the Doctrine that he taught with great
signs and miracles: at last he came to Patrae a City of Achaia, where he gave
his last and great testimony to it, I mean, laid down his own Life to ratify
and ensure it, in describing whose Martyrdom, we shall for the main follow the
account that is given us in the Acts of his Extant apud Sur. ad diem 30.
November. p. 653.
Passion, pretended to have been written by the Presbyters and Deacons of
Achaia, present at his Martyrdom; which, though I dare not with some assert to
be the genuine work of those persons, yet can it not be denied to be of
considerable antiquity, being mentioned by De Haeres. c. 89.
Philastrius, who flourished Ann. 380. and were no doubt written long before
his time. The sum of it is this.

5. AEGEAS Proconsul of Achaia, came at this time to Patrae, where observing
that multitudes were fallen off from Paganism, and had embraced Christianity,
he endeavored by all arts both of favor and cruelty to reduce the people to
their old Idolatries. To him the Apostle resolutely makes his address, calmly
puts him in mind, that he being but a judge of men should own and revere him,
who was the supreme and impartial Judge of all, that he should give him that
Divine honor that was due to him, and leave off the impieties of his false
Heathen-worship. The Proconsul derided him as an Innovator in Religion, a
propagator of that superstition, whose Author the Jews had infamously put to
death upon a Cross. Hereat the Apostle took occasion to discourse to him of the
infinite love and kindness of our Lord, who came into the World to purchase the
Salvation of mankind, and for that end did not disdain to die upon the Cross.
To whom the Proconsul answered, that he might persuade them so, that would
believe him; for his part, if he did not comply with him in doing sacrifice to
the Gods, he would cause him to suffer upon that Cross, which he had so much
extolled and magnified. S. Andrew replied, That he did sacrifice every day to
God, the only true and omnipotent Being, not with fumes and bloody offerings,
but in the sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb of God. The issue was, the Apostle
was committed to prison, whereat the people were so enraged, that it had broken
out into a mutiny, had not the Apostle restrained them, persuading them to
imitate the mildness and patience of our meek humble Savior, and not to hinder
him from that crown of Martyrdom that now waited for him.

6. THE next day he was again brought before the Proconsul, who persuaded him
that he would not foolishly destroy himself, but live and enjoy with him the
pleasures of this life. The Apostle told him, that he should have with him
eternal joys, if renouncing his execrable idolatries, he would heartily
entertain Christianity, which he had hitherto so successfully preached amongst
them. That, answered the Proconsul, is the very reason, why I am so earnest
with you to sacrifice to the Gods, that those whom you have every where
seduced, may by your example be brought to return back to that ancient
Religion, which they have forsaken: Otherwise I Will cause you with exquisite
tortures to be crucified. The Apostle replied, That now he saw it was in vain
any longer to deal with him, a person incapable of sober counsels, and hardened
in his own blindness and folly; that as for himself, he might do his worst, and
if he had one torment greater than another, he might heap that upon him: The
greater constancy he showed in his sufferings for Christ, the more acceptable
he should be to his Lord and Master. Aegeas could now hold no longer, but
passed the sentence of death upon him; and Lib. 2. c. 39. p. 200. vid. Menaea
Grac. ad diem 30. November. ubi eadem habent.
Nicephorus gives us some more particular account of the Proconsul's
displeasure and rage against him, which was, that amongst others he had
converted his wife Maximilla, and his brother Stratocles to the Christian
Faith, having cured them of desperate distempers that had seized upon them.

7. THE Proconsul first commanded him to be scourged, seven Lictors
successively whipping his naked body; and seeing his invincible patience and
constancy, commanded him to be crucified, but not to be fastened to the Cross
with Nails, but Cords, that so his death might be more lingering and tedious. As
he was led to execution, to which he went with a cheerful and composed mind,
the people cried out, Bern. Sermon. 2. de S. Andr. p. 327.
that he was an innocent and good man, and unjustly condemned to die. Being
come within sight of the Cross, he saluted it with this kind of address, That
he had long desired and expected this happy hour, that the Cross had been
consecrated by the body of Christ hanging on it, and adorned with his members
as with so many inestimable Jewels, that he came joyful and triumphing to it,
that it might receive him as a disciple and follower of him, who once hung upon
it, and be the means to carry him safe unto his Master, having been the
instrument upon which his Master had redeemed him. Having prayed, and exhorted
the people to constancy and perseverance in that Religion which he had
delivered to them, he was fastened to the Cross, whereon he hung two days,
teaching and instructing the people all the time, and when great importunities
in the mean while were used to the Proconsul to spare his life, he earnestly
begged of our Lord, that he might at this time depart and seal the truth of his
Religion with his blood. God heard his prayer, and he immediately expired on
the last of November, though in what year no certain account can be recovered.

8. THERE seems to have been something peculiar in that Cross that was the
instrument of his Martyrdom, commonly affirmed to have been a Cross decussate,
two pieces of Timber crossing each other in the middle, in the form of the
letter X, hence usually known by the name of S. Andrew's Cross; though there
want not Chrysostom. in S. Andr. Sermon. 133. p. 120. Hippol. Comment. MS. Gr. ap.
Bar. Not. in Martyr. ad 30. November.
those, who affirm him to have been crucified upon an Olive Tree. His body
being taken down and embalmed, was decently and honorably interred by
Maximilla, a Lady of great quality and estate, and whom Nicephorus, I know not
upon what ground, makes wife to the Proconsul. As for that report of De Glor.
Martyr. lib. 1. c. 31. page 37.
Gregory Bishop of Tours, that on the Anniversary day of his Martyrdom, there
was wont to flow from S. Andrew's Tomb a most fragrant and precious Oil, which
according to its quantity denoted the scarceness or plenty of the following
year; and that the sick being anointed with this Oil, were restored to their
former health, I leave to the Readers discretion, to believe what he please of
it. For my part, if any ground of truth in the story, I believe it no more,
than that it was an exhalation and sweating forth at some times of those rich
costly perfumes and ointments, wherewith his Body was embalmed after his
crucifixion. Though I must confess this conjecture to be impossible, if it be
true what my Author adds, that some years the Oil burst out in such plenty,
that the stream arose to the middle of the Church. His Body was afterward, by
Constantine the Hieron. adv. Vigil. p. 122. T. 2.
Great, solemnly removed to Constantinople, and buried in the great Church,
which he had built to the honor of the Apostles: Which being taken down some
hundred years after by Procop. de aedif. Justin. lib. 1.
Justinian the Emperor, in order to its reparation, the Body was found in a
wooden-Coffin, and again reposed in its proper place.

9. I SHALL conclude the History of this Apostle with that Encomiastick
Character, which one of the Hefyeb. Presb. Hierosolym. apud Phot. Cod. CCLXIX.
Col. 1488.
Ancients gives of him. S. Andrew was the firstborn of the Apostolic Quire,
the main and prime pillar of the Church, a rock before the rock ((...)) the
foundation of that foundation, the first fruits of the beginning, a caller of
others before he was called himself; he preached that Gospel that was not yet
believed or entertained, revealed and made known that life to his brother,
which he had not yet perfectly learned himself. So great treasures did that one
question bring him, Master where dwell thou? which he soon perceived by the
answer given him, and which he deeply pondered in his mind, Come and see. How
art thou become a Prophet? whence thus Divinely skilful? what is it that thou
thus soundest in Peter's ears? [ We have found him, etc.] why do thou attempt
to compass him, whom thou can not comprehend? how can he be found, who is
Omnipresent? But he knew well what he said: We have found him, whom Adam lost,
whom Eve injured, whom the clouds of sin have hidden from us, and whom our
transgressions had hitherto made a stranger to us, etc. So that of all our
Lord's Apostles S. Andrew had thus far the honor to be the first Preacher of
the Gospel.

The End of S. Andrew 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JAMES the Great.
St. James Major
He being the Son of Zebedee was at the Command of Herod beheaded at
Jerusalem. Act. 122.

St. James the Great his Martyrdom.
Act. 12.1, 2. About that time Herod the King streched forth his hands to vex
certain of the Church. And he killed James the brother of John with ye sword.



S. James, why surnamed the Great. His Country and Kindred. His alliance to
Christ. His Trade and way of Life. Our Lord brought up to a Manual Trade. The
quick repartee of a Christian Schoolmaster to Libanius. His being called to be
a Disciple, and great readiness to follow Christ. His election to the
Apostolic Office, and peculiar favors from Christ. Why our Lord chose some
few of the Apostles to be witnesses of the more private passages of his life.
The imposition of a new name at his election to the Apostleship. He and his
Brother styled Boanerges, and why. The zeal and activity of their temper. Their
ambition to sit on Christ 's right and left hand in his Kingdom, and confident
promise of suffering. This ill resented by the rest. Our Lord's discourse
concerning the nature of the Evangelical state. Where he preached after Christ
's Ascension. The story of his going into Spain exploded. Herod Agrippa in
favor with the Roman Emperors. The character of his temper. His zeal for the
Law of Moses. His condemning S. James to death. The sudden conversion of his
Accuser, as he was led to Martyrdom. Their being beheaded. The Divine Justice
that pursued Herod. His grandeur and arrogance at Caesarea. His miserable
death. The story of the Translation of S. James his Corpse to Compostella in
Spain, and the Miracles said to be done there.

1. SAINT James surnamed the Great, either because of his Age, being much elder
than the other, or for some peculiar honors and favors which our Lord
conferred upon him, was by Country a Galilean, born, probably, either at
Capernaum, or Bethsaida, being one of Simon Peter's Partners in the Trade of
Fishing. He was the Son of Zebdai, or Zebedee, (and probably the same whom the
Jews mention in their Talmud, (...) Rabbi James, Mark 1.20.
or Jacob the Son of Zebedee) a Fisherman, and the many servants which he kept
for that employment (a circumstance not taken notice of in any other) speak him
a man of some more considerable note in that Trade and way of life; H. Eccl.
lib. 2. c. 3. p 135.
(...), as Nicephorus notes. His Mother's name was Mary, surnamed Salome,
called first Taviphilja, says an ancient Arabic Apud Kirsten. de vit. Quat.
Evangel. p. 47.
writer, the Daughter, as is most probable, not Wife of Cleopas, Sister to Mary
the Mother of our Lord; not her own Sister properly so called (the Blessed
Virgin being in all likelihood an only Daughter) but Cousin-german, John 19.25.
styled her Sister, according to the mode and custom of the Jews, who were wont
to call all such near relations by the names of Brothers and Sisters; and in
this respect he had the honor of a near relation to our Lord himself. His
education was in the Trade of Fishing; no employment is base, that is honest and
industrious, nor can it be thought mean and dishonorable to him, when it is
remembered, that our Lord himself, the Son of God, stooped so low, as not only
to become the [reputed] Son of a Carpenter, but during the retirements of his
private life, to work himself at his Father's Trade, not devoting himself
merely to contemplations, nor withdrawing from all useful society with the
World, and hiding himself in the solitudes of an Anchoret, but busying himself
in an active course of life, working at the Trade of a Carpenter, Mark 6.3.
and particularly (as one of the (...). J. Mart. dial. cum Tryph. p. 316.
Ancients tells us) making Ploughs and Yokes. Matthew. 13.55.
And this the sacred History does not only plainly intimate, but it is
generally asserted by the Ancient writers of the (...). Bas. Constit. Monast.
c. 4. p. 764. Tom. 2. vid. Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 4.
Church: A thing so notorious, that the Heathens used to object it as a
reproach to Christianity. Thence that smart and acute Theod. H. Eccl. l. 3. c.
18. p. 105.
repartee which a Christian Schoolmaster made to Libanius the famous Orator at
Antioch, when upon Julian's expedition into Persia (where he was killed) he
asked in scorn, what the Carpenters Son was now a doing. The Christian replied
with salt enough, That the great Artificer of the World, whom he scoffingly
called the Carpenter's Son, was making a Coffin for his Master Julian; the news
of whose death was brought soon after. But this only by the way.

2. S. JAMES applied himself to his Father's Trade, not discouraged with the
meanness, not sinking under the difficulties of it; and, as usually the
blessings of Heaven meet men in the way of an honest and industrious diligence,
it was in the exercise of this calling, when our Savior passing by the Sea of
Galilee, saw him and his brother in the Ship, and called them to be his
Disciples. A Divine power went along with the word, which they no sooner heard,
but cheerfully complied with it, immediately leaving all to follow him. They
did not stay to dispute his commands, to argue the probability of his promise,
solicitously to enquire into the minute consequences of the undertaking, what
troubles and hazards might attend this new employment, but readily delivered up
themselves to whatever services he should appoint them. And the cheerfulness of
their obedience is yet further considerable, that they left their aged Father
in the Ship behind them. Luke 9.59-61.
For elsewhere we find others excusing themselves from an immediate attendance
upon Christ, upon pretense that they must go bury their Father, or take their
leave of their kindred at home. No such slight and trivial pretenses could stop
the resolution of our Apostles, who broke through these considerations, and
quitted their present interests and relations. Say not it was unnaturally done
of them to desert their Father, an aged person, and in some measure unable to
help himself. For, besides that they left servants with him to attend him, it
is not cruelty to our Earthly, but obedience to our Heavenly Father, to leave
the one, that we may comply with the call and summons of the other. It was the
triumph of Abraham's Faith, when God called him to leave his kindred and his
Father's house, to go out, and sojourn in a foreign Country, not knowing
whither he went. Nor can we doubt but that Zebedee himself would have gone
along with them, had not his Age given him a Supersedeas from such an active
and ambulatory course of life. But though they left him at this time, it is very
reasonable to suppose, that they took care to instruct him in the doctrine of
the Messiah, and to acquaint him with the glad tidings of Salvation, especially
since we find their Mother Salome so hearty a friend to, so constant a follower
of our Savior: Zachar. Chrysopol. Comm. in Concord. Evang. p. 111.
But this (if we may believe the account which one gives of it) was after her
Husbands decease, who probably lived not long after, dying before the time of
our Savior's Passion.

3. IT was not long after this, that he was called from the station of an
ordinary Disciple, to the Apostolical Office, and not only so, but honored
with some peculiar acts of favor beyond most of the Apostles, being one of the
three, whom our Lord usually made choice of to admit to the more intimate
transactions of his life, from which the others were excluded. Thus with Peter
and his Brother John he was taken to the miraculous raising of Jairus his
Daughter; admitted to Christ's glorious transfiguration upon the Mount, and the
discourses that there passed between him and the two great Ministers of Heaven;
taken along with him into the Garden, to be a Spectator of those bitter
Agonies, which the Holy Jesus was to undergo as the preparatory sufferings to
his Passion. What were the reasons of our Lord's admitting these three Apostles
to these more special acts of favor than the rest, is not easy to determine:
though surely our Lord, who governed all his actions by Principles of the
highest prudence and reason, did it for wise and proper ends; whether it was
that he designed these three to be more solemn and peculiar witnesses of some
particular passages of his life, than the other Apostles, or that they would be
more eminently useful and serviceable in some parts of the Apostolic Office,
or that hereby he would the better prepare and encourage them against
suffering, as intending them for some more eminent kinds of Martyrdom or
suffering, than the rest were to undergo.

4. NOR was it the least instance of that particular honor which our Lord
conferred upon these three Apostles, that at his calling them to the Apostolate
he gave them the addition of a new Name and Title. A thing not unusual of old,
for God to impose a new Name upon Persons, when designing them for some great
and peculiar services and employments; thus he did to Abraham and Jacob. Nay,
the thing was customary among the Gentiles, as had we no other instances, might
appear from those which the Scripture gives us, of Pharaoh's giving a new name
to Joseph, when advancing him to be Viceroy of Egypt, Nebuchadnezzar to
Daniel, etc. Thus did our Lord in the Election of these three Apostles, Mark
3.16, 17. Hieron. Comm. in Marc. c. 3. p. 92. T. 9. Gaudent. Brix. Tract. 1. de
Lect. Evang. seu, in ordine, 8.
Simon he surnamed Peter, James the Son of Zebedee, and John his Brother he
surnamed Boanerges, which is, the Sons of Thunder. What our Lord particularly
intended in this Title, is easier to conjecture, than certainly to determine;
some think it was given them upon the account of their being present in the
Mount, when a voice came out of the Cloud, Matthew. 17.5.
and said, This is my beloved Son, etc. The like whereto when the People heard
at another time, John 12.29.
they cried out, that it Thundered. But besides that this account is in it self
very slender and inconsiderable, if so, then the title must equally have
belonged to Peter, who was then present with them. Filios Zebedaei Boanerges,
hoc est. filios tonitrui vocat, siquidem divina eorum praedicatio magnum
quendam and illustrem senitum per terrarum Orbem. datura erat. Vict. Antioch.
comment. in Marc. cap. 2.
Others think it was upon the account of their loud, bold and resolute
preaching Christianity to the World, fearing no threatenings, daunted with no
oppositions, but going on to thunder in the Ears of the secure sleepy World,
rouzing and awakening the consciences of Men with the earnestness and vehemence
of their Preaching, as Thunder, which is called God's Voice, powerfully shakes
the natural World, and breaks in pieces the Cedars of Lebanon: Or, if it relate
to the Doctrines they delivered, it may signify their teaching the great
mysteries and speculations of the Gospel in a profounder strain than the rest;
(...), Comment. in Marc. 3. p. 205.
as Theophylact notes; which how true it might be of our S. James, the
Scripture is wholly silent; but was certainly verified of his Brother John,
whose Gospel is so full of the more sublime notions and mysteries of the
Gospel, concerning Christ's Deity, Heb. 12.26.
eternal pre-existence, etc. that he is generally affirmed by the Ancients,
Hagg. 2.7. ubi (...) tremere faciam. (...) Filii commotionis seu magna
concussionis.
not so much to speak, as thunder. Probably the expression may denote no more,
than that in general they were to be prime and eminent Ministers in this new
scene and state of things, the introducing of the Gospel or Evangelical
dispensation, being called a Voice shaking the Heavens and the Earth, and so is
exactly correspondent to the native importance of the Word, signifying an
Earthquake, or a vehement commotion that makes a noise like to Thunder.

5. HOWEVER it was, our Lord, I doubt not, herein had respect to the furious
and resolute disposition of those two Brothers, who seem to have been of a more
fierce and fiery temper than the rest of the Apostles: whereof we have this
memorable instance. Our Lord being resolved upon his Journey to Jerusalem, sent
some of his Disciples as Harbingers to prepare his way, who coming to a Village
of Samaria, were uncivilly rejected, and refused entertainment; probably,
because of that old and inveterate quarrel that was between the Samaritans and
the Jews, and more especially at this time, because that our Savior seemed to
slight Mount Gerizim (where was their staple and solemn place of worship) by
passing it by, to go worship at Jerusalem; the reason in all likelihood why
they denied him those common courtesies and conveniences due to all Travelers.
This piece of rudeness and inhumanity was presently so deeply resented by S.
James, and his Brother, that they came to their Master to know, whether as
Elias did of old, Luke 9.54.
they might not pray down Fire from Heaven to consume these barbarous and
inhospitable People. So apt are Men for every trifle to call upon Heaven, to
Minister to the extravagances of their own impotent and unreasonable passions.
But our Lord rebukes their zeal, tells them they quite mistook the case, that
this was not the frame and temper of his Disciples and Followers, the nature
and design of that Evangelical dispensation, that he was come to set on foot in
the World, which was a more pure and perfect, a more mild and gentle
Institution, than what was under the Old Testament in the times of Moses and
Elias, the Son of Man being come not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

6. THE Holy Jesus not long after set forwards in his Journey to Jerusalem in
order to his crucifixion, and the better to prepare the minds of his Apostles
for his death and departure from them, he told them what he was to suffer, and
yet that after all he should rise again. They, whose minds were yet big with
expectations of a temporal power and monarchy, understood not well the meaning
of his discourses to them. However S. James and his Brother supposing the
Resurrection that he spoke of, would be the time, when his Power and Greatness
would commence, Matthew. 20.20.
prompted their Mother Salome to put up a Petition for them. She, presuming
probably on her relation to Christ, and knowing that our Savior had promised
his Apostles, that when he was come into his Kingdom, they should sit upon
twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; and that he had already
honored her two Sons with an intimate familiarity, after leave modestly asked
for her address, begged of him, that when he took possession of his Kingdom,
her two Sons James and John might have the principal places of honor and
dignity next his own Person, the one sitting on his right hand, and the other
on his left, as the Heads of Judah and Joseph had the first places among the
Rulers of the Tribes in the Jewish Nation. Our Lord directing his discourse to
the two Apostles, at whose suggestion he knew their Mother had made this
address, told them, they quite mistook the nature of his Kingdom, which
consisted not in external grandeur and sovereignty, but in an inward life and
power, wherein the highest place would be to take the greatest pains, and to
undergo the heaviest troubles and sufferings; that they should do well to
consider, whether they were able to endure, what he was to undergo, to drink of
that bitter Cup which he was to drink of, and to go through that Baptism,
wherein he was shortly to be baptized in his own blood. Our Apostles were not
yet cured of their ambitious humor, but either not understanding the force of
our Savior's reasonings, or too confidently presuming upon their own strength,
answered, that they could do all this. But he, the goodness of whose nature
ever made him put the best and most candid interpretation upon men's words and
actions, yea even those of his greatest enemies, did not take the advantage of
their hasty and inconsiderate reply, to treat them with sharp and quick
reproofs, but mildly owning their forwardness to suffer, told them, that as for
sufferings, they should indeed suffer as well as he (and so we accordingly find
they did, S. James after all dying a violent death, S. John enduring great
miseries and torments, and might we believe Chrysostom and Theophylact,
Martyrdom it self, though others nearer to those times assure us, he died a
natural death) but for any peculiar honor or dignity he would not by an
absolute and peremptory favor of his own dispose it any otherwise, than
according to those rules and instructions which he had received of his Father.
The rest of the Apostles were offended with this ambitious request of the Sons
of Zebedee; but our Lord to calm their passions, discoursed to them of the
nature of the Evangelick state, that it was not here, as in the Kingdoms and
seigniories of this World, where the great ones receive homage and fealty from
those that are under them, but that in his service humility was the way to
honor, that who ever took most pains, and did most good, would be the greatest
Person, pre-eminence being here to be measured by industry and diligence, and a
ready condescension to the meanest offices that might be subservient to the
Souls of Men, and that this was no more than what he sufficiently taught them
by his own Example, being come into the World, not to be served himself with
any pompous circumstances of state and splendour, but to serve others, and to
lay down his life for the redemption of Mankind. With which discourse the storm
blew over, and their exorbitant passions began on all hands to be allayed and
pacified.

7. WHAT became of S. James after our Savior's Ascension, we have no certain
account either from Sacred, or Ecclesiastic stories. Apud Hieron. de Script.
Eccles. in Jacob.
Sophronius tells us, that he preached to the dispersed Jews, which surely he
means of that dispersion that was made of the Jewish Converts after the death
of Stephen. The Spanish writers generally contend, that having preached the
Gospel up and down Judaea and Samaria, after the death of Stephen he came to
these Western parts, and particularly into Spain (some add Britain and
Pseudo-Dextr. Chronic. Vincent. Bellovic. Spec. Historial. l. 8. c. 7.
Ireland) where he planted Christianity, and appointed some select Disciples to
perfect what he had begun, and then returned back to Jerusalem. Of this there
are no footsteps in any Ancient Writers, earlier than the middle Ages of the
Church, when it is mentioned by De vit. and obii. SS. utriusque Test. c. 72.
Isidore, the Breviary of Brev. Tol. Instit. S. Isidori.
Toledo, an Arabic Book of Apud Marian. de adv. Jac. in Hispan. c. 7. p. 11.
sed ex fide aliorum.
Anastasius, Patriarch of Antioch, concerning the Passions of the Martyrs, and
some others after them. Nay, In Not. ad Martyrol. ad 25. Jul p. 452. vid. Orat.
Roder. Archiep. Tol. in Not. G. Loays. ad decret. Gund. Tom. 4. Council. p. 548,
549.
Baronius himself, though endeavoring to render the account as smooth and
plausible as he could, and to remove what objections lay against it; yet after
all confesses, he did it only to show, that the thing was not impossible, nor
to be accounted such a monstrous and extravagant Fable, Ad Ann. DCCCXVI. Number.
69, 70. Tom. 9.
as some men made it to be, as indeed elsewhere he plainly and peremptorily
both denies and disproves it. He could not but see, that the shortness of this
Apostle's Life, the Apostles continuing all in one entire body at Jerusalem,
even after the dispersing of the other Christians, probably not going out of
the bounds of Judaea for many years after our Lord's Ascension, could not
comport with so tedious and difficult a voyage, and the time which he must
necessarily spend in those parts: And therefore it is safest to confine his
ministry to Judaea, and the parts thereabouts, and to seek for him at
Jerusalem, where we are sure to find him.

8. HEROD Agrippa, son of Aristobulus, and Grandchild of Herod the Great (under
whom Christ was born) had been in great favor with the late Emperor Caligula,
but much more with his successor Claudius, who confirmed his predecessors
grant, with the addition of Judaea, Samaria, and Abylene, the remaining
portions of his Grandfathers dominions. Claudius being settled in the Empire,
over comes Herod from Rome to take possession, and to manage the affairs of his
new acquired Kingdom. A Prince noble and generous, prudent and politic,
thoroughly versed in all the arts of Courtship, able to oblige enemies, and to
mollify or decline the displeasure of the Emperor, (witness his subtle and
cunning insinuations to Caligula, when he commanded the Jews to account him a
Vid Epist. ejus ad Caium Imp. ap. Phil. de Legate. ad Caium, p. 1031. and seqq.
God) he was one that knew, let the wind blow which way it would, how to gain
the point he aimed at; of a courteous and affable demeanor, but withal (...)
Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. lib. 19. c. 7. p. 677.
(...), a mighty zealot for the Jewish Religion, and a most acurate observer of
the Mosaic Law, keeping himself free from all legal impurities, and suffering
no day to pass over his head, in which he himself was not present at sacrifice.
Being desirous in the entrance upon his sovereignty to insinuate himself into
the favor of the populacy, and led no less by his own zealous inclination, he
saw no better way, than to fall heavy upon the Christians, a sort of men, whom
he knew the Jews infinitely hated, as a novel and an upstart Sect, whose
Religion proclaimed open defiance to the Mosaic Institutions. Hereupon he
began to raise a persecution, but alas, the commonalty were too mean a
sacrifice to fall as the only victim to his zeal and popular designs, he must
have a fatter and more honorable sacrifice. It was not long before S. James
his stirring and active temper, his bold reproving of the Jews, and vigorous
contending for the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion, rendered him
a fit object for his turn. Him he commands to be apprehended, cast into prison,
and sentence of death to be passed upon him. As he was led forth to the place
of Clem. Alex. Hypotyp. lib. 7. apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 9. p. 46.
Martyrdom, the Soldier or Officer that had guarded him to the Tribunal, or
rather his Accuser (and so Suid. in voc. (...).
Suidas expressly tells us it was) having been convinced by that mighty courage
and constancy which S. James showed at the time of his trial, repented of what
he had done, came and fell down at the Apostle's feet, and heartily begged
pardon for what he said against him. The holy man, after a little surprise at
the thing, raised him up, embraced and kissed him, Peace (said he) my son,
peace be to thee, and the pardon of thy faults. Whereupon before them all he
publicly professed himself to be a Christian, and so both were beheaded at the
same time. Thus fell S. James, the Apostolic Proto-Martyr, the first of that
number that gained the Crown, cheerfully taking that cup, which he had long
since told his Lord he was most ready to drink of.

9. BUT the Divine vengeance, that never sleeps, suffered not the death of this
innocent and righteous man to pass long unrevenged; of which, though S. Luke
gives us but a short account, yet Antiquit. Jud. lib. 19. cap. 7. p. 679.
Josephus, who might himself remember it, being a youth at that time of seven
or eight years of age, sets down the story with its particular circumstances,
agreeing almost exactly with the Sacred Historian. Shortly after S. James his
Martyrdom, Herod removed to Caesarea, being resolved to make war upon the
neighboring Tyrians and Sidonians: While he was here, he proclaimed solemn
sights and Festival entertainments to be held in honor of Caesar, to which
there flocked a great confluence of all the Nobility thereabouts. Early in the
morning on the second day he came with great state into the Theater, to make an
Oration to the people, being clothed in a Robe all over curiously wrought with
silver, which encountering with the beams of the rising Sun, reflected such a
luster upon the eyes of the people (who make sensible appearances the only true
measures of greatness) as begot an equal wonder and veneration in them, crying
out (prompted no doubt by flatterers, who began the cry) that it was some Deity
which they beheld, and that he who spoke to them must be something above the
ordinary standard of humanity. This impious applause Herod received without any
token of dislike, or sense of that injury that was hereby done to the supreme
Being of the World. But a sudden accident changed the scene, Hunc Josephi locum
laudans Eusebius, totam bubonis mentionem praetermittit, ejusque loco (...)
substituit: mente quidem pia, at mala fide.
and turned the Comic part into a black fatal Tragedy. Looking up, he espied
an Owl sitting upon a rope over his head (as probably also he did an Angel,
for so S. Luke mentions it) which he presently beheld as the fatal messenger of
his death, as heretofore it had been of his prosperity and success. An
incurable melancholy immediately seized upon his mind, as exquisite torments
did upon his bowels, caused without question by those Worms S. Luke speaks of,
which immediately fed and preyed upon him. Behold, said he, turning to those
about him, the Deity you admired, and your selves evidently convinced of
flattery and falsehood; (...). Joseph ib.
see me here by the Laws of Fate condemned to die, whom just now you styled
immortal. Being removed into the Palace, his pains still increased upon him,
and though the people mourned and wept, fasted and prayed for his life and
health, yet his acute torments got the upper hand, and after five days put a
period to his life. But to return to S. James.

10. BEING put to death, his Body is said to have taken a second voyage into
Spain, where we are with confidence enough told it rests at this day. Indeed I
meet with a very formal account of its translation thither, written (says the
Publisher) above DC years since, by a Monk of the Abbey of La-Fleury in Comment.
de Translat. S. Jacob. Apost. ap. Joan. a Bosc. Biblioth. Floriaec. Part. 2. p.
183, etc.
France: The sum whereof is this: The Apostles at Jerusalem designing
Ctesiphon for Spain, ordained him Bishop, and others being joined to his
assistance, they took the Body of S. James, and went on board a Ship without
Oars, without a Pilot, or any to steer and conduct their voyage, trusting only
to the merits of that Apostle, whose remains they carried along with them. In
seven days they arrived at a Port in Spain, where landing, the Corpse was
suddenly taken from them, and with great appearances of an extraordinary light
from Heaven, conveyed they knew not whither, to the place of its interment. The
men you may imagine were exceedingly troubled, that so great a treasure should
be ravished from them; but upon their prayers and tears they were conducted by
an Angel to the place where the Apostle was buried, twelve miles from the Sea.
Here they addressed themselves to a rich Noble Matron, called Luparia, who had
a great Estate in those parts, but a severe Idolatress, begging of her, that
they might have leave to entomb the bones of the holy Apostle within her
jurisdiction. She entertained them with contempt and scorn, with curses and
execrations, bidding them go and ask leave of the King of the Country. They did
so, but were by him treated with all the instances of rage and fury, and
pursued by him, till himself perished in the attempt. They returned back to
their Gallaecian Matron, whom by many miracles, and especially the destroying a
Dragon that miserably infested those parts, they at last made Convert to the
Faith, who thereupon commanded her Images to be broken, the Altars to be
demolished, and her own Idol-Temple, being cleansed and purged, to be dedicated
to the honor of S. James, by which means Christianity mightily prevailed, and
triumphed over Idolatry in all those Countries. This is the sum of the
Account, call it Romance or History, which I do not desire to impose any
further upon the Readers faith, than he shall find himself disposed to believe
it. I add no more, than that his Body was afterward translated from Iria
Flavia (the place of its first repose) to Compostella: Though a Learned Is.
Voss. Observat. in Pomp. Mel. lib. 3. c. ^. p. 231.
person will have it to have been but one and the same place, and that after
the story of S. James had gotten some footing in the belief of men, it began to
be called ad Jacobum Apostolum, thence in aftertimes Giacomo Postolo, which
was at last jumbled into Compostella; where it were to tire both the Reader and
my self, to tell him with what solemn veneration, and incredible miracles
reported to be done here, this Apostle's relics are worshipped at this day:
Whence Ad Ann. 816. Number. 72.
Baronius calls it the great storehouse of Miracles lying open to the whole
World, and wisely confesses it one of the best arguments to prove, that his
Body was translated thither. And I should not scruple to be of his mind, could
I be assured that such Miracles were truly done there.

The End of the Life of S. James the Great.
THE LIFE OF S. JOHN.
S. JOHN Evangelist.
Having lived to a great age, he died at Ephesus 68 years after our Lords
Passion, and was Buried near that City. Baron.

St. John put into a Cauldron of boiling oil.
Joh. 21.21, 22. Peter says, Lord, what shall this man do? Jesus says unto
him, if I will that he carry till I come, what is that to thee?

1 Pet. 4.12. Think it not strange concerning ye fiery trial that is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened to you.



His kindred and relations; whether eminent for Nobility. The peculiar favors
conferred upon him by our Savior. His lying in our Lord's Bosom. His attending
at the crucifixion. Our Lord's committing the Blessed Virgin to his care. The
great intimacy between Him and Peter. How long he resided at Jerusalem. Asia
his Apostolical Province. His planting Christianity there, and in other parts
of theEast. His being sent prisoner to Rome, and being put into a Caldron of
boiling Oil by the command of Domitian. His banishment into Patmos.
Transportation, what kind of punishment. Capitis Diminutio what. His writing
the Apocalypse there. The tradition of his hand wherewith he wrote it, being
still kept there. His return to Ephesus, and governing the affairs of that
Province. His great Age, and Death. The fancy of his being still alive, whence
derived by the Ancients. The Tradition of his going alive into his Grave, and
sleeping there. Several counterfeits pretending themselves to be S. John. His
Celibacy; whether he was ever married. His humility. His admirable love and
charity, and hearty recommending it to the last. His charity to men's Souls. His
endangering himself to reclaim a debauched young man. His singular vigilance
against Heretics and Seducers. His public disowning Cerinthus his company.
Cerinthus, who, and what his principles. The Heresy of Ebion, what.
Nicolaitans, who; whence their Original. An account of Nicolas the Deacon's
separating from his Wife. The vile principles and practices of his pretended
followers. S. John 's writings. His Revelation. Dionysius Alexandrinus his
judgment concerning it, and its Author. Asserted and proved to be S. John 's.
The ground of doubting, what. His Gospel when and where written. The solemn
preparation, and causes moving him to undertake it. The subject of it sublime
and mysterious. Admired and cited by Heathen Philosophers. Its Translation into
Hebrew. His first Epistle, and the design of it. His two other Epistles to whom
written, and why not admitted of old. His style and way of writing considered.
The great Encomium given of his writings by the ancient Fathers.

1. SAINT John was a Galilean, the son of Zebedee and Salome, younger Brother
to S. James, together with whom he was brought up in the Trade of Fishing.
Propter generis nobilitatem notus erat Pontifici, and Judaeorum insidias non
timebat, in tantum ut Petrum introduceret in Atrium, and staret solus
Apostolorum ante crucem, matremque salvatoris in sua reciperet. Hieron.
Epitaph. Marcell. p. 119. T. 1.
S. Hierom makes him remarkable upon the account of his Nobility, whereby he
became acquainted with the High Priest, and resolutely ventured himself amongst
the Jews at our Savior's Trial, prevailed to introduce Peter into the Hall,
was the only Apostle that attended our Lord at his Crucifixion, and afterward
durst own his Mother, and keep her at his own house. But the nobility of his
Family, and especially that it should be such as to procure him so much respect
from persons of the highest rank and quality, seems not reconcilable with the
meanness of his Father's Trade, and the privacy of his fortunes. And for his
acquaintance with the High Priest, I should rather put it upon some other
account, especially if it be true what H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 28. p. 104. vid lib.
2 c. 3. p. 135. ubi hereditatem hanc Caiphae venditam fuisse dicit.
Nicephorus relates, That he had lately sold his Estate left by his Father in
Galilee to Annas the High Priest, and had therewith purchased a fair house at
Jerusalem, about Mount Sion, whence he became acquainted with him. Before his
coming to Christ, he seems for some time to have been Disciple to John the
Baptist, being probably that other disciple that was with Andrew, when they
left the Baptist to follow our Savior, so particularly does he relate all
circumstances of that transaction, though modestly, as in other parts of his
Gospel, concealing his own name. He was at the same time with his Brother
called by our Lord both to the Discipleship and Apostolate, by far the youngest
of all the Apostles, as the Ancients generally affirm, and his great Age seems
to evince, living near LXX years after our Savior's suffering.

2. THERE is not much said concerning him in the Sacred story, more than what
is recorded of him in conjunction with his Brother James, which we have already
remarked in his life. He was peculiarly dear to his Lord and Master, being the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, that is, treated with more freedom and familiarity
than the rest. And indeed he was not only one of the Three, whom our Savior
made partakers of the private passages of his life, but had some instances of a
more particular kindness and favor conferred upon him. Witness his lying in
our Savior's bosom at the Paschal Supper, it being the custom of those times
to lie along at meals upon Couches, so that the second lay with his head in the
bosom of him that was before him; this honorable place was not given to any of
the Aged, but reserved for our Apostle: Nay, when Peter was desirous to know,
which of them our Savior meant, when he told them that one of them should
betray him, and durst not himself propound the question, he made use of S. John
(whose familiarity with him might best warrant such an enquiry) to ask our
Lord; who thereupon made them understand, 'twas Judas whom he designed by the
Traitor. This favor our Apostle endeavored in some measure to answer by
returns of particular kindness and constancy to our Savior, staying with him,
when the rest deserted him. Indeed upon our Lord's first apprehension he fled
after the other Apostles, it not being without some probabilities of reason,
that the Ancients conceive him to have been that young man that followed after
Christ, Mark 14.51.
having a linen cloth cast about his naked body, whom when the Officers laid
hold upon, he left the linen cloth, and fled naked from them. This in all
likelihood was that garment that he had cast about him at Supper (for they had
peculiar Vestments for that purpose) and being extremely affected with the
Treason, and our Lord's approaching Passion, had forgot to put on his other
garments, but followed him into the Garden in the same habit wherewith he arose
from the Table, it being then night, and so less liable to be taken notice of
either by himself or others. But though he fled at present to avoid that sudden
violence that was offered to him, yet he soon recovered himself, and returned
back to seek his Master, confidently entered into the Highpriests Hall, and
followed our Lord through the several passages of his Trial, and at last waited
upon him (and for any thing we know, was the only Apostle that did so) at his
Execution, owning him, as well as being owned by him, in the midst of arms and
guards, and in the thickest crowds of his most inveterate enemies. Here it was
that our Lord by his last Will and Testament made upon the Cross, appointed him
Guardian of his own Mother, the Blessed Virgin; When he saw his Mother, Joh.
19.26, 27.
and the Disciple standing by whom he loved, he said unto his Mother, Woman,
behold thy Son, see, here is one that shall supply my place, and be to thee
instead of a Son, to love and honor thee, to provide and take care for thee:
and to the Disciple he said, Behold thy Mother; Her, whom thou shall henceforth
deal with, treat and observe with that duty and honorable regard, which the
relation of an indulgent Mother challenges from a pious and obedient Son:
whereupon he took her into his own House, her Husband Joseph being some time
since dead, and made her a principal part of his charge and care. And certainly
the Holy Jesus could not have given a more honorable testimony of his
particular respect and kindness to S. John, than to commit his own Mother, whom
of all earthly Relations he held most dear and valuable, to his trust and care,
and to substitute him to supply that duty which he himself paid her while he
was here below.

3. AT the first news of our Lord's return from the dead, he, accompanied with
Peter, presently hasted to the Sepulcher. Indeed there seems to have been a
mutual intimacy between these two Apostles more than the rest. 'Twas to Peter
that S. John gave the notice of Christ's appearing, when he came to them at the
Sea of Tiberias in the habit of a stranger; and it was for John that Peter was
so solicitously inquisitive to know what should become of him. After Christ's
Ascension, we find these two going up to the Temple at the Hour of Prayer, and
miraculously healing the poor impotent Cripple; both Preaching to the People,
and both apprehended together by the Priests and Sadducees, and thrown into
Prison, and the next Day brought forth to plead their cause before the
Sanhedrim. These were the two chosen by the Apostles to send down to Samaria,
to settle and confirm the Plantations which Philip had made in those Parts,
where they confounded and baffled Simon the Magician, and set him in an hopeful
way to repentance. To these S. Paul addressed himself, as those that seemed to
be Pillars among the rest, who accordingly gave him the right hand of
fellowship; and confirmed his mission to the Gentiles.

4. IN the division of Provinces which the Apostles made among themselves,
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1. p. 71.
Asia fell to his share, though he did not presently enter upon his charge,
otherwise we must needs have heard of him in the account which S. Luke gives of
S. Paul's several Journies into, and residence in those parts. Probable
therefore it is, that he dwelt still in his own House at Jerusalem, at least
till the death of the Blessed Virgin (and this is plainly asserted by H. Eccl.
lib. 2. c. 42. p. 206.
Nicephorus from the account of those Historians that were before him) whose
death (says In Chron. ap. Bar. ad An. 48. N. 4.
Eusebius) happened Ann. Chr. XLVIII. about Fifteen Years after our Lord's
Ascension. Some time (probably Years) after her death he took his Journey into
Asia, and industriously applied himself to the propagating Christianity,
Preaching where the Gospel had not yet taken place, and confirming it where it
was already planted. Many Churches of note and eminency were of his foundation,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, and others; but his
chief place of residence was at Ephesus, where S. Paul had many Years before
settled a Church, and constituted Timothy Bishop of it. Nor can we suppose that
he confined his Ministry merely to Asia Minor, but that he Preached in other
Parts of the East; probably in Parthia, his first Epistle being anciently
entitled to them; and the Litter. Jesuit. Ann. 1555.
Jesuits in the relation of their success in those Parts, assure us that the
Bassorae (a People of India) constantly affirm from a Tradition received from
their Ancestors, that S. John Planted the Christian Faith there.

5. HAVING spent many Years in this employment, he was at length accused to
Domitian, who had begun a Persecution against the Christians, as an eminent
assertor of Atheism and impiety, and a public subverter of the Religion of the
Empire. By his command the Proconsul of Asia sent him bound to Percurre
Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adbuc Cathedrae Apostolorum, etc. babes
Romam, etc. ubi Apostolus Joannes posteaquam in Oleum igneum demersus, nihil
passus est, in Insulam relegatur. Tertull. de Praescript. Haeret. c. 36. p. 215.
Rome, where his treatment was, what might be expected from so bloody and
barbarous a Prince; he was cast into a Cauldron of boiling Oil, or rather Oil
set on Fire. But that Divine Providence that secured the three Hebrew Captives
in the flames of a burning Furnace, brought this holy Man safe out of this, one
would have thought, unavoidable destruction. An instance of so signal
preservation, as had been enough to persuade a considering Man, that there must
be a Divinity in that Religion that had such mighty and solemn attestations.
But Miracles themselves will not convince him, that is fallen under an hard
heart, and an injudicious mind. The cruel Emperor was not satisfied with this,
but presently orders him to be banished and transported into an Island. This
was accounted a kind of capital punishment, (...), says (...). p. 444.
Pachymer, speaking of this very instance, where (...) is not to be understood
as extending to life, but loss of privilege. Therefore this punishment in the
Instit. lib. 1. Tit. 16. sect. 2. l. 2. and 4. ff. de Poen. lib. 48. Tit. 19.
L. 3. ad Leg. Jul. Pecul. ib. Tit. 13. vid. L. 6. and 7. de Interd. and Rel.
ib. Tit. 22.
Roman Laws is called Capitis diminutio (and it was the second sort of it)
because the Person thus banished was disfranchised, and the City thereby lost
an head. It succeeded in the room of that ancient punishment, Aqua and igni
inter dicere, to interdict a Person the use of Fire and Water, the two great
and necessary conveniences of Man's life, whereby was tacitly implied, that he
must for his own defense betake himself into banishment; it being unlawful for
any to accommodate him with Lodging or Diet, or any thing necessary to the
support of life. This banishing into Islands was properly called Deportatio,
and was the worst and severest kind of exile, whereby the criminal forfeited
his Estate, and being bound and put on Shipboard was by public Officers
transported into some certain Island (which none but the Emperor himself might
assign) there to be confined to perpetual banishment. The place of our S.
John's banishment was not Ephesus, as Argum. Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 1032.
Chrysostom by a great mistake makes it, but Patmos, a disconsolate Island in
the Archipelago, where he remained several Years, instructing the Inhabitants
in the Faith of Christ. Here it was about the latter end of Domitian's Reign,
(as Irenaeus tells Adv. Haeres. lib. 5. c. 30. p. 485.
us) that he wrote his Apocalypse or Book of Revelations, wherein by frequent
Visions and Prophetical representments, he had a clear Scheme and Prospect of
the state and condition of Christianity in the future Periods and Ages of the
Church. Which certainly was not the least instance of that kindness and favor
which our Lord particularly showed to this Apostle; and it seemed very suitable
at this time, that the goodness of God should overpower the malice of Men, and
that he should be entertained with the more immediate converses of Heaven, who
was now cut off from all ordinary conversation and society with Men. In a
Monastery of Caloires, or Greek Monks in this Island, they show a dead Man's
hand at this Bellon. Observat. lib. 2. c. 11. p. 205.
day, the Nails of whose Fingers grow again as often as they are paired; which
the Turks will have to be the hand of one of their Prophets, while the Greeks
constantly affirm it to have been the hand of S. John, wherewith he wrote the
Revelations; and, probably, both true alike.

6. DOMITIAN, whose prodigious wickednesses had rendered him infamous and
burdensome to the World, being taken out of the way, Cocceius Nerva succeeded
in the Empire, a prudent Man, and of a milder and more sober temper. He
rescinded the odious Acts of his Predecessor, and by public Edict recalled
those from banishment, whom the fury of Domitian had sent thither. S. John
taking the advantage of this general Indulgence, left Patmos, Oros. lib. 7. c.
11 p. 303. fac. 2.
and returned into Asia, his ancient charge, but chiefly fixed his Seat at
Ephesus, the care and presidency whereof ( Timothy their Bishop having been
lately martyred by the People for persuading them against their Heathen-Feasts
and Sports, especially one called (...), wherein was a mixture of debauchery
and Martyr. Timoth. apud Phot. Cod. 254. Col. 1401.1404.
idolatry) he took upon him, and by the assistance of seven Bishops governed
that large spacious Diocese; Lib. 2. c. 42. p. 206.
Nicephorus adds, that he not only managed the affairs of the Church, ordered
and disposed the Clergy, but erected Churches, which surely must be meant of
Oratories, and little places for their solemn conventions, building Churches in
the modern notion, not being consistent with the poverty and persecution of
Christians in those early times. Here at the request of the Bishops of Asia he
wrote his Gospel (they are Authors of no credit and value, that make it written
during his confinement in the Isle of Patmos) with very solemn preparation,
whereof more when we come to consider the Writings which he left behind him.

7. HE lived till the time of Trajan, about the beginning of whose Reign he
departed this Life, very Aged, about the Ninety-eighth or Ninety-ninth Year of
his Life, as is generally thought. (...). Chrysostom. Sermon. de S. Joan. Ap. p.
505. T. 6.
Chrysostom is very positive, that he was an Hundred years old when he wrote
his Gospel, and that he lived full Twenty years after. The same is affirmed by
Synops. de Vit. and mort. App. Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 147.
Dorotheus, that he lived CXX. Years: which to me seems altogether improbable,
seeing by this account he must be Fifty Years of Age when called to be an
Apostle, a thing directly contrary to the whole consent and testimony of
Antiquity, which makes him very young at the time of his calling to the
Apostolic Office. He died (says the Apud Kirsten. de Vit. Quat. Evang. p. 52.
Arabian) in the expectation of his blessedness, by which he means his quiet
and peaceable departure, in opposition to a violent and bloody death. Indeed
Theophylact, and others before him conceive him to have died a Martyr, upon no
other ground, than what our Savior told him and his Brother, that they should
drink of the Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism wherewith he was baptized,
which Hom. 66. in Matthew. c. 20. p. 575.
Chrysostom strictly understands of Martyrdom and a bloody death. It was indeed
literally verified of his Brother James; and for him, though, as Comm. in
Matthew. 20. p. 59. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom observes, he was not put to death, yet may he be truly styled a
Martyr, his being put into a Vessel of boiling Oil, his many Years banishment,
and other sufferings in the cause of Christ, justly challenging that honorable
title, though he did not actually lay down his life for the testimony of the
Gospel, it being not want of good will either in him or his enemies, but the
Divine Providence immediately overruling the powers of Nature, that kept the
malice of his enemies from its full execution.

8. OTHERS on the contrary are so far from admitting him to die a Martyr, that
they question, nay, peremptorily deny that he ever died at all. The first
Assertor, and that but obliquely, that I find of this opinion, was Hippolytus
Bishop of Porto, and Scholar to Clemens of Alexandria, who ranks him in the
same capacity with Enoch and Elias; for speaking of the twofold coming of
Christ, he tells De Consumm. Mund. and Antichr. in Auctuar. Bibl. Pp. Gr. Lat.
T. 2. p. 351.
us, that his first coming in the flesh had John the Baptist for its
forerunner, and his second to Judgment shall have Enoch, Elias, and S. John.
Apud. Phot. Cod. CCXXIX Col. 797.
Ephrem Patriarch of Antioch is more express, he tells us, there are three
Persons, answerable to the three dispensations of the word, yet in the body,
Enoch, Elias, and S. John, Enoch before the Law, Elias under the Law, and S.
John under the Gospel; concerning which last, that he never died, he confirms
both from Scripture and Tradition, and quotes S. Cyrill (I suppose he means him
of Alexandria) as of the same opinion. The whole foundation upon which this
Error is built, was that discourse that passed between our Lord and Peter
concerning this Apostle: For Christ having told Peter what was to be his own
fate, John 21.21, 22, 23.
Peter enquires what should become of S. John, knowing him to be the Disciple
whom Jesus loved? Our Lord rebukes his curiosity, by asking him, what that
concerned him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? This
the Apostles misunderstood, and a report presently went out amongst them, That
that Disciple should not die: Though S. John, who himself records the passage,
inserts a caution, That Jesus did not say, he should not die, but only what if
I will that he tarry till I come? Which doubtless our Lord meant of his coming
(so often mentioned in the New Testament) in Judgment upon the Jews, at the
final overthrow of Jerusalem, which S. John outlived many years; and which our
Lord particularly intended when elsewhere he told them, Matthew. 16.28.
Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of
death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.

9. FROM the same Original sprang the report, that he only lay sleeping in his
Grave. The story was current in S. Augustines days, from whom we receive this
account, though possibly the Reader will smile at the conceit. He tells Tract
124. in Joan. Col. 569. Tom. 9.
us, 'twas commonly reported and believed that S. John was not dead, but that
he rested like a Man asleep in his Grave at Ephesus, as plainly appeared from
the Dust sensibly boiling and bubling up, which they accounted to be nothing
else but the continual motion of his breath. This report S. Augustine seems
inclinable to believe, having received it, as he tells us, from very credible
hands. He further adds out of some Apocryphal Writings, what was generally
known and reported, that when S. John, then in health, had caused his Grave to
be dug and prepared, he laid himself down in it as in a Bed, and as they
thought, only fell asleep. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 42. p. 208.
Nicephorus relates the story more at large, from whom (if it may be any
pleasure to entertain the Reader with these things) we shall give this account.
S. John foreseeing his Translation into Heaven, took the Presbyters and
Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, and several of the Faithful, along with him
out of the City, carried them unto a Cemetery near at hand, whither he himself
was wont to retire to Prayer, and very earnestly recommended the state of the
Churches to God in Prayer. Which being done, he commanded a Grave to be
immediately dug, and having instructed them in the more recondite mysteries of
Theology, the most excellent Precepts of a good Life, concerning Faith, Hope,
and especially Charity, confirmed them in the practice of Religion, commended
them to the care and blessing of our Savior, and solemnly taking his leave of
them, he signed himself with the sign of the Cross, and before them all went
down into the Grave; strictly charging them, to put on the Gravestone, and to
make it fast, and the next day to come and open it, and take a view of it. They
did so, and having opened the Sepulcher, found nothing there but the
Grave-clothes which he had left behind him. To all which let me add, while my
hand is in these things, what Apud Phot. ubi supr p. 800.
Ephrem relates, that from this Grave, wherein he rested so short a time, a
kind of Sacred Oil or Unguent was wont to be gathered. Gregory of De Glor.
Martyr. lib. 1. cap. 30. page 36.
Tours says 'twas Manna, which even in his time like flour was cast up from the
Sepulcher, and was carried up and down the World for the curing of diseases.
This report of our Apostles being yet alive, some men made use of to wild and
fantastic purposes. Annot. in Joan. c. 21.
Beza tells us of an Impostor in his time (whom Postellus, who vainly boasted
that he had the Soul of Adam, was wont to call his Brother) who publicly
professed himself to be our S. John, and was afterward burnt at Tholose in
France. Nor was this any more than what was done in the more early Ages of
Christianity. For In vit. Martin. c. 25. p. 213.
Sulpitius Severus giving us an account of a young Spaniard that first
professed himself to be Elias, and then Christ himself; adds, That there was
one at the same time in the East, who gave out himself to be S. John. So fast
will Error, like circles in the water, multiply it self, and one mistaken place
of Scripture give countenance to an hundred stories, that shall be built upon
it. I have no more to add, but what we meet with in the Apud Kirsten. de vit.
Quat. Evan. gel. p. 52.
Arabic writer of his life, (though it little agrees with the preceding
passages) who reports, that there were none present at his burial but his
disciple Phogsir (probably Proghor, or Prochorus, one of the seven Deacons, and
generally said to have been S. John's companion and assistent) whom he strictly
charged never to discover his Sepulcher to any; it may be for the same reason
for which it is thought God concealed the Body of Moses, to prevent the
Idolatrous worshipping of his Relics: And accordingly the Turks, who conceit
him to be buried in the confines of Lydia, pay great honor and veneration to
his Tomb.

10. S. JOHN seems always to have led a single life, and so the Epiph. Haeres.
78. p. 440. Hieron. adv. Jovin. lib. 1. p. 35. T. 2.
Ancients tell us, nay, S. Ambrose positively Ambr. Comm. in 2 Cor. 11. T. 5.
affirms, that all the Apostles were married, except S. John and S. Paul. There
want not indeed some, and especially the middle Writers of the Bed. Praef. in
Joan. Rupert. Tuit. Comm. in Joan. lib. 2. in fin. Cyr. in Joan. cap. 2. and
alii.
Church, who will have our Apostle to have been married, and that it was his
marriage which our Lord was at in Cana of Galilee, invited thither upon the
account of his consanguinity and alliance: But that being convinced by the
Miracle of the Water turned into Wine, he immediately quitted his conjugal
relation, and became one of our Lord's Disciples. But this, as Baronius himself
confesses, is trifling, and the issue of fabulous invention, a thing wholly
unknown to the Fathers and best Writers of the Church, and which not only has
no just authority to support it, but arguments enough to beat it down. As for
his natural temper, he seems (as we have observed in his Brother's Life) to
have been of a more eager and resolute disposition, easily apt to be inflamed
and provoked, which his reduced Age brought to a more staid and a calmer
temper. He was polished by no study or arts of Learning, but what was wanting
in that, was abundantly made up in the excellent temper and constitution of his
mind, and that furniture of Divine graces, which he was adorned withal. His
humility was admirable, studiously concealing his own worth and honor, in all
his Epistles (as Demonstr. Evangel. lib. 3. p. 120.
Eusebius long since observed) he never puts down the honorable Titles of
Apostle or Evangelist, but only styles himself, and that too but sometimes,
Presbyter, or Elder, alluding probably to his Age, as much as Office; in his
Gospel, when he speaks of the Disciple whom Jesus loved, he constantly conceals
his own name, leaving the Reader to conjecture who was meant. Love and Charity
he practiced himself, and affectionately pressed upon others, our Lord's great
love to him seems to have inspired his Soul with a bigger and more generous
charity than the rest: It Is the great vein that runs through his Writings, and
especially his Epistles, where he urges it as the great and peculiar Law of
Christianity, and without which all other pretenses to Christian Religion are
vain and frivolous, useless and insignificant. And this was his constant
practice to his dying day. When Age and Weakness grew upon him at Hieron. Comm.
in c. 6. ad. Galat. Tom. 9. p. 200.
Ephesus, that he was no longer able to Preach to them, he used at every
public Meeting to be led to the Church, and say no more to them, than, Little
children, love one another. And when his Auditors wearied with the constant
repetition of the same thing, asked him why he always spoke the same, he
answered, Because it was the command of our Lord, and that if they did nothing
else, this alone was enough.

11. BUT the largest measures of his Charity he expressed in the mighty care
that he showed to the Souls of men, unweariedly spending himself in the service
of the Gospel, traveling from East to West to leaven the World with the
Principles of that holy Religion which he was sent to propagate, patiently
enduring all torments, breaking through all difficulties and discouragements,
shunning no dangers, that he might do good to Souls, redeem Men's minds from
error and idolatry, and reduce them from the snares of a debauched and a
vicious life. Witness one famous Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 23 p. 92.
instance. In his visitation of the Churches, near to Ephesus, he made choice
of a young man, whom with a special charge for his instruction and education he
committed to the Bishop of that place. The spiritual man undertook the charge,
instructed his Pupil, and baptized him: And then thinking he might a little
remit the reins of discipline, the youth made an ill use of his liberty, and
was quickly debauched by bad companions, making himself Captain to a company of
Highway men, the most loose, cruel, and profligate wretches of the Country. S.
John at his return understanding this, and sharply reproving the negligence and
unfaithfulness of his Tutor, resolved to find him out: And without any
consideration of what danger he entered upon, in venturing himself upon Persons
of desperate fortunes, and forfeited consciences, he went to the Mountains,
where their usual haunt was; and being here taken by the Sentinel, he desired
to be brought before their Commander, who no sooner espied him coming toward
him, but immediately fled. The aged Apostle followed after, but not able to
overtake him, passionately entreated him to stay, promising him to undertake
with God for his peace and pardon. He did so, and both melted into tears, and
the Apostle having prayed with, and for him, returned him a true Penitent and
Convert to the Church. This story we have elsewhere related more at large out
of Eusebius, as he does from Clemens Alexandrinus, Prim. Christ. Part. 3. chapter
2. p. 248.
since which that Tract it self of Orat. (...). in Auctuar. Biblioth. Pp. Gr.
L. a Fr. Combef. edit. An. 1672. Part. 1. p. 185. n. 42.
Clemens is made public to the World.

12. NOR was it the least instance of his care of the Church, and charity to
the Souls of men, that he was so infinitely vigilant against Heretics and
Seducers, countermining their artifices, antidoting against the poison of their
errors, and shunning all communion and conversation with their persons. Iren.
adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. p. 233. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 28. p. 100. Epiph. Haeres. 30.
p. 69.
Going along with some of his friends at Ephesus to the Bath (whither he used
frequently to resort, and the ruins whereof of Porphyry not far from the place
where stood the famous Temple of Diana, as a late Th. Smith. Epist. de VII.
Asiae Eccles. p. 159.
eyewitness informs us, are still showed at this day) he enquired of the
servant that waited there, who was within; the servant told him, Cerinthus (
Epiphanius says it was Ebion, and it is not improbable that they might be both
there;) which the Apostle no sooner understood, but in great abhorrency he
turned back, Let Us be gone my brethren (said he) and make haste from this
place, lest the Bath wherein there is such an Heretic as Cerinthus, the great
enemy of the truth, fall upon our heads. This account Irenaeus delivers from
Polycarp, S. John's own Scholar and Disciple. This Cerinthus was a Man of loose
and pernicious principles, endeavoring to corrupt Christianity with many
damnable Epiphan. Haeres. 28. p. 53. Caius apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 28. p. 100.
Errors. To make himself more considerable, he struck in with the Jewish
Converts, and made a bustle in that great controversy at Jerusalem, about
Circumcision and the observation of the Law of Moses. But his usual haunt was
Asia, where amongst other things he openly denied Christ's Resurrection,
affirmed the World to have been made by Angels, broaching unheard of Dogmata,
and pretending them to have been communicated to him by Angels, venting
Revelations composed by himself, as a great Apostle, affirming that after the
Resurrection the Reign of Christ would commence here upon Earth, and that Men
living again at Jerusalem, should for the space of a Thousand Years enjoy all
manner of sensual pleasures and delights: hoping by this fools Paradise that he
should tempt Men of loose and brutish minds over to his party. Much of the same
stamp was Eusebius. ib. p. 99.
Ebion (though in some principles differing from him, as error agrees with it
self as little as with truth) who held that the Holy Jesus was a mere, and a
mean man, begotten by Joseph of Mary his Wife, and that the observance of the
Mosaic Rites and Laws was necessary to Salvation: And because they saw S. Paul
stand so full in their way, they reproached him as an Apostate from his
Religion, and rejected his Epistles, owning none but S. Matthew's Gospel in
Hebrew, having little or no value for the rest; the Sabbath and Jewish Rites
they observed with the Jews, and on the Lord's day celebrated the memory of our
Lord's Resurrection, according to the custom and practice of the Christians.

13. BESIDES these, there was another sort of Heretics that infested the
Church in S. John's time, the Nicolaitans, mentioned by him in his Revelation,
and whose doctrine our Lord is with a particular Emphasis there said to hate;
Rev. 2.15.
indeed a most wretched and brutish Sect, generally supposed to derive their
original from Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, whom we read of in the Acts,
whereof Clemens of Alexandria gives this probable Stromat. lib. 3. p. 436.
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 29. p. 101.
account. This Nicolas having a beautiful Wife, and being reproved by the
Apostles for being jealous of her, to show how far he was from it, brought her
forth, and gave any that would leave to marry her, affirming this to be
suitable to that saying, (...), That we ought to abuse the flesh. This speech,
he tells us, was ascribed to S. Matthias, who taught, That we must fight with
the flesh and abuse it, and not allowing it any thing for pleasure, increase
the Soul by faith and knowledge. These words and actions of his, his disciples
and followers misunderstanding, and perverting things to the worst sense
imaginable, began to let loose the reins, and henceforwards to give themselves
over to the greatest filthiness, the most shameless and impudent uncleanness,
throwing down all enclosures, making the most promiscuous mixtures lawful, and
pleasure the ultimate end and happiness of Man. Such were their principles,
such their practices; whereas Nicolas, their pretended Patron and Founder, was
(says Clemens) a sober and a temperate Man, never making use of any but his own
Wife, by whom he had one Son, and several Daughters, who all lived in perpetual
Virginity.

14. THE last instance that we shall remark of our Apostles care for the good
of the Church, is the Writings which he left to Posterity. Whereof the first in
time, though placed last, is his Apocalypse or Book of Revelations, written
while confined in Patmos. It was of old not only rejected by Heretics, but
controverted by many of the Fathers themselves. Dionysius Bishop of Apud.
Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 7. c. 25. p. 272, etc.
Alexandria has a very large discourse concerning it; he tells us, that many
plainly disowned this Book, not only for the matter, but the Author of it, as
being neither Apostle, no nor any Holy or Ecclesiastical Person; that Cerinthus
prefixed S. John's name to it, to give the more plausible title to his Dream of
Christ's Reign upon Earth, and that sensual and carnal state that should attend
it: that for his part he durst not reject it, looking upon it as containing
wise and admirable mysteries, though he could not fathom and comprehend them,
that he did not measure them by his own line, nor condemn, but rather admire
what he could not understand; that he owned the Author to have been an holy,
and divinely-inspired Person, but could not believe it to be S. John the
Apostle and Evangelist, neither style, matter, nor method agreeing with his
other Writings; that in this he frequently names himself, which he never does
in any other; that there were several John's at that time, and two buried at
Ephesus, the Apostle, and another, one of the Disciples that dwelt in Asia, but
which the Author of this Book, he leaves uncertain. But though doubted of by
some, it was entertained by the far greater part of the Ancients as the genuine
work of our S. John. Nor could the setting down his Name be any reasonable
exception, for whatever he might do in his other Writings, especially his
Gospel, where it was less necessary, Historical matters depending not so much
upon his authority, yet it was otherwise in Prophetic Revelations, where the
Person of the Revealer adds great weight and moment, the reason why some of the
Prophets under the Old Testament did so frequently set down their own Names.
The diversity of the style is of no considerable value in this case, it being
no wonder, if in arguments so vastly different the same Person did not always
observe the same tenor and way of writing; whereof there want not instances in
some others of the Apostolic Order. The truth is, all circumstances concur to
entitle our Apostle to be the Author of it, his name frequently expressed, its
being written in the Island of Patmos (a circumstance not competible to any but
S. John) his stiling himself their Brother and Companion in Tribulation, and in
the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, his writing particular Epistles to
the seven Churches of Asia, all planted, or at least cultivated by him, the
doctrine in it suitable to the Apostolic spirit and temper, evidently bearing
witness in this case. That which seems to have given ground to doubt concerning
both its Author and authority, was its being long before it was usually joined
with the other Books of the holy Canon: for containing in it some passages
directly levelled at Rome, the Seat of the Roman Empire, others which might be
thought to symbolize with some Jewish dreams and figments, it might possibly
seem fit to the prudence of those Times for a while to suppress it. Nor is the
conjecture of a learned Grot. Annot. in Cap. 1. Joan.
Man to be despised, who thinks that it might be entrusted in the keeping of
John the Presbyter, Scholar to our Apostle, whence probably the report might
arise, that he, who was only the Keeper, was the Author of it.

15. HIS Gospel succeeds, written (say Doroth. de vit. App. in B. Pp. T. 3. p.
147.
some) in Patmos, and published at Ephesus, but as Iren. adv. haeres. lib. 3.
c. 1. Hieron. praef. in Math. Tom. 9. and de Script. Eccl. in Joan.
Irenaeus, and others more truly, written by him after his return to Ephesus;
composed at the earnest entreaty and solicitation of the Asian Bishops, and
Ambassadors from several Churches, in order whereunto he first caused them to
proclaim a general Fast, to seek the blessing of Heaven on so great and solemn
an undertaking, which being done, he set about it. And if we may believe the
report of Gregory Bishop of De glor. Martyr. lib. 1. cap. 30 page 37.
Tours, he tells us, that upon a Hill near Ephesus there was a Proseucha, or
uncovered Oratory, whither our Apostle used often to retire for Prayer and
Contemplation, and where he obtained of God, that it might not Rain in that
Place, till he had finished his Gospel. Nay he adds, that even in his time, no
shower or storm ever came upon it. Two causes especially contributed to the
writing of it; the one, that he might obviate the early heresies of those
times, especially of Ebion, Cerinthus, and the rest of that crew, who began
openly to deny Christ's Divinity, and that he had any existence before his
Incarnation; the reason why our Evangelist is so express and copious in that
subject. Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 24. p. 95.
The other was, that he might supply those passages of the Evangelical History,
which the rest of the Sacred Writers had omitted. Collecting therefore the
other three Evangelists, he first set to his Seal, ratifying the truth of them
with his approbation and consent, and then added his own Gospel to the rest,
principally insisting upon the Acts of Christ from the first commencing of his
Ministry to the Death of John the Baptist, wherein the others are most
defective, giving scarce any account of the first Year of our Savior's
Ministry, which therefore he made up in very large and particular Narrations.
He largely records (as Nazianzen (...). Naz. Carm. 41. p. 102.
observes) our Savior's discourses, but takes little notice of his Miracles,
probably because so fully and particularly related by the rest. The subject of
his writing is very sublime and mysterious, mainly designing to prove Christ's
Divinity, eternal pre-existence, creating of the World, etc. Upon which account
Comm. in Ezech. c. 47.
Theodoret styles his Gospel (...), a Theology which humane understandings can
never fully penetrate and find out. Thence generally by the Ancients, he is
resembled to an Eagle Nemo, audeo dicere, tanta sublimitate sapientiae
majestatem dei vidit, and nobis proprio sermon reseravit. Transcendit nubes,
transcendit virtutes coelorum, transeendit angelos, and verbum in principio
reperit, and apud deum vidit. Ambr. praef. Comm. in Luc. Tom. 5. p. 5.
, soaring aloft within the Clouds, whither the weak eye of Man was unable to
follow him; hence peculiarly honored with the Title of The Divine, as if due
to none but him, at least to him in a more eminent and extraordinary manner.
Nay the very Gentile-Philosophers themselves could not but admire his Writings:
Witness (...). Amel. apud Eusebius. praeparat. Evang. lib. 11. p. 540. vid.
Theodor. de Cur. Graec. Affect. Sermon. 2. p. 33.
Amelius the famous Platonist, and Regent of Porphyries School at Alexandria;
who quoting a passage out of the beginning of S. John's Gospel, swear by
Jupiter, that this Barbarian (so the proud Greeks counted and called all that
differed from them) had hit upon the right notion, when he affirmed, that the
Word that made all things was in the beginning, and in place of prime dignity
and authority with God, and was that God that created all things, in whom every
thing that was made had according to its nature its life and being; that he was
incarnate, and clothed with a body, wherein he manifested the glory and
magnificence of his nature; that after his death, he returned to the
repossession of Divinity, and became the same God, which he was before his
assuming a body, and taking the humane nature and flesh upon him. I have no
more to observe, but that his Gospel was afterward translated into Epiph. adv.
Ebion. Haeres. XXX. p. 60.
Hebrew, and kept by the Jews, (...), among their secret Archives and Records
in their Treasury at Tiberias; where a Copy of it was found by one Joseph a
Jew, afterward converted, and whom Constantine the Great advanced to the
honor of a Count of the Empire, Ibid. page 61.
who breaking open the Treasury, though he missed of money, found (...), Books
beyond all Treasure, S. Matthew, and S. John's Gospels, and the Acts of the
Apostles in Hebrew, the reading whereof greatly contributed toward his
Conversion.

16. BESIDES these, our Apostle wrote three Epistles; the first whereof is
Catholic, calculated for all times and places, containing most excellent rules
for the conduct of the Christian life, pressing to holiness and purity of
manners, and not to rest in a naked and empty profession of Religion, not to be
led away with the crafty insinuations of Seducers, antidoting Men against the
poison of the Gnostick-principles and practices, to whom it is not to be
doubted, but that the Apostle had a more particular respect in this Epistle.
According to his wonted modesty he conceals his name, it being of more
concernment with wise Men, what it is that is said, than who it is that says
it. And this Epistle Eusebius tells Lib. 7. c. 25. p. 276.
us, was universally received, and never questioned by any; anciently, as
appears by Quaest. Evang. lib. 2. c. 39. Col. 353. vid. Possid. Indic. Oper.
August.
S. Augustine, inscribed to the Parthians, though for what reason I am yet to
learn, unless (as we hinted before) it was, because he himself had heretofore
Preached in those Parts of the World. The other two Epistles are but short, and
directed to particular Persons, the one a Lady of honorable Quality, the other
the charitable and hospitable Gaius, so kind a friend, so courteous an
entertainer of all indigent Christians. Eusebius. ut supr. etc. 26. Hieron. de
script. Eccl. in Joan.
These Epistles indeed were not of old admitted into the Canon, nor are owned
by the Church in Syria at this Day, ascribed by many to the younger John,
Disciple to our Apostle. But there is no just cause to question who was their
Father, seeing both the Doctrine, phrase, and design of them do sufficiently
challenge our Apostle for their Author. These are all the Books, wherein it
pleased the Holy Spirit to make use of S. John for its Penman and Secretary,
in the composure whereof though his style and character be not florid and
elegant, yet is it grave and simple, short and perspicuous. Dionysius of
Alexandria tells us, that in his Gospel and first Epistle his phrase is more
neat and elegant, there being an accuracy in the contexture both of words and
matter, that runs through all the reasonings of his discourses; but that in the
Apocalypse the style is nothing so pure and clear, being frequently mixed with
more barbarous and improper phrases. Indeed his Greek generally abounds with
Syriasms, his discourses many times abrupt, set off with frequent antitheses,
connected with copulatives, passages often repeated, things at first more
obscurely propounded, and which he is forced to enlighten with subsequent
explications, words peculiar to himself, and phrases used in an uncommon sense.
All which concur to render his way of Writing less grateful, possibly, to the
Masters of eloquence, and an elaborate curiosity. Comm. in cap. 12. Zachar. p.
178. Tom. 6.
S. Hierom observes, that in citing places out of the Old Testament, he more
immediately translates from the Hebrew Original, studying to render things word
for word; for being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, admirably skilled in the Language
of his Country, it probably made him less exact in his Greek composures,
wherein he had very little advantage, besides what was immediately communicated
from above. But whatever was wanting in the politeness of his style, was
abundantly made up in the zeal of his temper, and the excellency and sublimity
of his matter; he truly answered his Name, Boanerges, spoke and writ like a Son
of Thunder. Whence it is that his Writings, but especially his Gospel, have
such great and honorable things spoken of them by the Ancients. The
Evangelical writings (says Homil. 16. p. 502. Tom. 1.
S. Basil) transcend the other parts of the Holy Volumes; in other parts God
speaks to us by Servants, the Prophets; but in the Gospels our Lord himself
speaks to us, (...), but among all the Evangelical Preachers, none like S. John
the Son of Thunder for the sublimeness of his speech, and the height of his
discourses beyond any Man's capacity duly to reach and comprehend. S. John as a
true Son of Thunder (says Haeres. 73. adv. Semiar. p. 363.
Epiphanius) (...), by a certain greatness of speech peculiar to himself, does
as it were out of the Clouds and the dark recesses of wisdom acquaint us with
Divine Doctrines concerning the Son of God. To which let me add, what S. Cyril
of Comm. in Joan. p. 8.
Alexandria among other things says concerning him, that whoever looks (...),
to the sublimity of his incomprehensible notions, the acumen and sharpness of
his reason, and the quick inferences of his discourses constantly succeeding
and following upon one another, must needs confess, that his Gospel perfectly
exceeds all admiration.

The End of S. John 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. PHILIP.
St Philip
After he had converted all Scythia he was at Hierapolis a City of Asia first
crucified and then stoned to death. Baron. May. 10.

St. Philip's Martyrdom.
Act. 5.30. Whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree.

Matthew. 10.24, 25. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above
his Lord. It is enough for the disciple, that he be as his master, and the
servant as his Lord.



Galilee generally despised by the Jews, and why. The honor which our Lord put
upon it. S. Andrew 's birthplace. His being first called to be a Disciple, and
the manner of it. An account of his ready obedience to Christ 's call. What the
Evangelists relate concerning him considered. The discourse between our Lord
and him concerning the knowledge of the Father. His preaching the Gospel in the
Upper Asia, and the happy effects of his Ministry. His coming to Hierapolis in
Phrygia, and successful confutation of their Idolatries. The rage and fury of
the Magistrates against him. His Martyrdom, Crucifixion, and Burial. His
married condition. The confounding him with Philip the Deacon. The Gospel
forged by the Gnostics under his Name.

1. OF all parts of Palestine Galilee seems to have passed under the greatest
character of ignominy and reproach. The Country it self, because bordering upon
the Idolatrous uncircumcised Nations, called Galilee of the Gentiles; the
people generally beheld as more rude and boisterous, more unpolished and
barbarous than the rest, not remarkable either for Civility or Religion. John
4.45.
The Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at
Jerusalem at the Feast, for they also went up unto the Feast; as if it had been
a wonder, and a matter of very strange remark, to see so much devotion in them
as to attend the solemnity of the Passover. Indeed both Jew and Gentile
conspired in this, that they thought they could not fix a greater title of
reproach upon our Savior and his followers, than that of Galilean. John 1.46.
Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? a City in this Province, John 7.52.
said Nathanael concerning Christ. Search and look (say the Pharisees) for out
of Galilee arises no Prophet; as if nothing but briars and thorns could grow
in that soil. But there needs no more to confute this ill-natured opinion, than
that our Lord not only made choice of it as the seat of his ordinary residence
and retreat, but that hence he chose those excellent persons, whom he made his
Apostles, the great instruments to convert the World. Some of these we have
already given an account of, and more are yet behind.

2. OF this number was S. Philip, born at Bethsaida, a Town near the Sea of
Tiberias, the City of Andrew and Peter. Of his Parents and way of life the
History of the Gospel takes no notice, though probably he was a Fisherman, the
Trade general of that place. He had the (...), the honor of being first called
to the Discipleship, which thus came to pass. Our Lord soon after his return
from the wilderness having met with Andrew and his brother Peter, after some
short discourse parted from them: And the very next day, John 1.44.
as he was passing through Galilee, he found Philip, whom he presently
commanded to follow him, the constant form which he used in making choice of
his Disciples, and those that did inseparably attend upon him. So that the
(...), or prerogative of being first called, evidently belongs to Philip, he
being the first fruits of our Lord's Disciples. For though Andrew and Peter
were the first that came to, and conversed with Christ, yet did they
immediately return to their Trade again, and were not called to the
Discipleship till above a whole year after, when John was cast into prison.
Stromat. lib. 3. p. 436.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, that it was Philip, to whom our Lord said (when
he would have excused himself at present, that he must go bury his Father) Let
the dead bury their dead, but follow thou me. But besides that he gives no
account, whence he derived this intelligence, it is plainly inconsistent with
the time of our Apostle's call, who was called to be a Disciple a long time
before that speech and passage of our Savior. It may seem justly strange that
Philip should at first sight so readily comply with our Lord's command, and
turn himself over into his service, having not yet seen any miracle, that might
evince his Messiah-ship, and Divine Commission, nor probably so much as heard
any tidings of his appearance; and especially being a Galilean, and so of a
more rustic and unyielding temper. But it cannot be doubted but that he was
admirably versed in the writings of Moses and the Prophets. Apud Sur. ad diem
1. Maii Tom. 4.
Metaphrastes assures us (though how he came to know it otherwise than by
conjecture, I cannot imagine) that from his childhood he had excellent
education, that he frequently read over Moses his Books, and considered the
Prophecies that related to our Savior: And was no question awakened with the
general expectations that were then on foot among the Jews (the date of the
Prophetic Scriptures concerning the time of Christ's coming being now run out)
that the Messiah would immediately appear. Add to this, that the Divine grace
did more immediately accompany the command of Christ, to incline and dispose
him to believe, that this person was that very Messiah that was to come.

3. NO sooner had Religion taken possession of his mind, but like an active
principle it began to ferment, and diffuse it self. Away he goes, and finds
Nathanael, a person of note and eminency, acquaints him with the tidings of the
newfound Messiah, and conducts him to him. So forward is a good man to draw
and direct others in the same way to happiness with himself. After his call to
the Apostleship much is not recorded of him in the Holy story: 'Twas to him
that our Savior propounded the question, What they should do for so much bread
in the wilderness, John 6.5.
as would feed so vast a multitude, to which he answered, That so much was not
easily to be had; not considering, that to feed two or twenty thousand are
equally easy to Almighty Power, when pleased to exert it self. John 12.22.
'Twas to him that the Gentile Proselytes that came up to the Passover
addressed themselves, when desirous to see our Savior, a person of whom they
had heard so loud a fame. 'Twas with him that our Lord had that discourse
concerning himself a little before the last Paschal Supper. The holy and
compassionate Jesus had been fortifying their minds with fit considerations
against his departure from them, had told them, that he was going to prepare
room for them in the Mansions of the Blessed, that he himself was the way, the
truth, John 14.8.
and the life, and that no man could come to the Father but by him, and that
knowing him, they both knew and had seen the Father. Philip not duly
understanding the force of our Savior's reasonings, begged of him, that he
would show them the Father, and then this would abundantly convince and
satisfy them. We can hardly suppose he should have such gross conceptions of
the Deity, as to imagine the Father vested with a corporeal and visible nature;
but Christ having told them that they had seen him, and he knowing that God of
old was wont frequently to appear in a visible shape, he only desired that he
would manifest himself to them by some such appearance. Our Lord gently
reproved his ignorance, that after so long attendance upon his instructions, he
should not know, that he was the Image of his Father, the express characters of
his infinite wisdom, power and goodness appearing in him, that he said and did
nothing but by his Father's appointment, which if they did not believe, his
miracles were a sufficient evidence: That therefore such demands were
unnecessary and impertinent, and that it argued great weakness after more than
three years education under his discipline and Institution to be so unskilful
in those matters. God expects improvement according to men's opportunities, to
be old and ignorant in the School of Christ, deserves both reproach and
punishment, it is the character of very bad persons, that they are ever
learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
but never come to the knowledge of the truth.

4. IN the distribution of the several Regions of the World made by the
Apostles, though no mention be made by Origin or Eusebius, what part fell to
our Apostle, yet we are told by S. Metaphr. Comm. de S. Philip. apud Sur. ad 1.
Maii. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 39. p. 200.
others, that the Upper Asia was his Province (the reason doubtless why he is
said by many to have preached and planted Christianity in Scythia) where he
applied himself with an indefatigable diligence and industry to recover men out
of the snare of the Devil, to the embracing and acknowledgment of the truth. By
the constancy of his preaching, and the efficacy of his Miracles he gained
numerous Converts, whom he baptized into the Christian Faith, at once curing
both Souls and Bodies, their Souls of Error and Idolatry, their Bodies of
infirmities and distempers, healing diseases, dispossessing Demons, settling
Churches, and appointing them Guides and Ministers of Religion.

5. HAVING for many years successfully managed his Apostolical Office in all
those parts, he came in the last periods of his life to Hierapolis in Phrygia,
Metaphr. and Niceph. ibid.
a City rich and populous, but answering its name in its Idolatrous Devotions.
Amongst the many vain and trifling Deities, to whom they paid religious
adoration, was a Serpent or Dragon (in memory no doubt of that infamous Act of
Jupiter, who in the shape of a Dragon insinuated himself into the embraces of
Proserpina, his own Daughter begot of Ceres, and whom these Phrygians chiefly
worshipped, as Admonit. ad Gent. p. 11.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, so little reason had Ad Ann. 54. n. 3.
Baronius to say that they worshipped no such God) of a more prodigious bigness
than the rest, which they worshipped with great and solemn veneration. S.
Philip was troubled to see the people so wretchedly enslaved to error, and
therefore continually solicited Heaven, till by prayer and calling upon the
name of Christ, he had procured the death, or at least vanishing of this famed
and beloved Serpent: Which done, he told them, how unbecoming it was to give
Divine honors to such odious creatures, that God alone was to be worshipped as
the great Parent of the World, who had made man at first after his own glorious
Image, and when fallen from that innocent and happy state, had sent his own Son
into the World to redeem him, who died, and rose from the dead, and shall come
again at the last day, to raise men out of their Graves, and to sentence and
reward them according to their works. The success was, that the people were
ashamed of their fond Idolatry, and many broke loose from their chains of
darkness, and ran over to Christianity. Whereupon the great enemy of mankind
betook himself to his old methods, cruelty and persecution. The Magistrates of
the City seize the Apostle, and having put him into prison, caused him to be
severely whipped and scourged. This preparatory cruelty passed, he was led to
execution, and being bound, was hanged up by the neck against a pillar, though
others tell us, that he was crucified. We are further told, that at his
execution the Earth began suddenly to quake, and the ground whereon the people
stood, to sink under them, which when they apprehended and bewailed as an
evident act of Divine vengeance pursuing them for their sins, it as suddenly
stopped, and went no further. The Apostle being dead, his body was taken down by
S. Bartholomew, his fellow-sufferer, though not finally executed, and Mariamne,
S. Philip's Sister, who is said to have been the constant companion of his
travels, and decently buried, after which having confirmed the people in the
Faith of Christ, they departed from them.

6. THAT S. Philip was married, is generally affirmed by the Ancients; Stromat.
lib. 3. p. 448.
Clemens of Alexandria reckons him one of the married Apostles, and that he had
Daughters, whom he disposed in marriage: Ap. Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 31. p.
102. vid. Doroth. Synops. de vit. and mort. App. B. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus tell us, that Philip, one of the Twelve Apostles,
died at Hierapolis, with two of his Daughters, who persevered in their
Virginity, and that he had a third which died at Ephesus. The truth is, the not
careful distinguishing between Philip the Deacon (who lived at Caesarea, and of
whose four Virgin-daughters we read in the History of the Apostles Acts) and
our Apostle, has bred some confusion among the Ancients in this matter. Acts
21.8, 9.
But the account concerning them is greatly different; for as they differed in
their Persons and Offices, the one a Deacon, the other an Apostle, so also in
the number of their Children, four Daughters being ascribed to the one, while
three only are attributed to the other. He was one of the Apostles who left no
Sacred writings behind him, the greater part of the Apostles (as Lib. 3. cap.
24. p. 94.
Eusebius observes) having little leisure to write Books, being employed in
ministeries more immediately useful and subservient to the happiness of
mankind: Though Adv. Gnost. Haeres. 26. p. 46
Epiphanius tells us, that the Gnostics were wont to produce a Gospel forged
under S. Philip's name, which they abused to the patronage of their horrible
principles, and more brutish practices.

The End of S. Philip 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. BARTHOLOMEW
S BARTHOLOMEW
He was flayed alive by the command of a Barbarous King. Place this to the
Collect for St. Bartholomews day.

St. Bartholomew's Martyrdom.
Romans 8.36, 37. For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted
as sheep for the slaughter. But in all these things we are more then
Conquerours.



The-silence concerning this Apostle in the History of the Gospel. That he is
the same with Nathanael, proved by many probable arguments. His title of
Bar-Tholmai, whence. The School of the Tholmaeans. An objection against his
being Nathanael answered. His descent and way of life. His first coming to
Christ, and converse with him. In what parts of the World he planted the
Christian Faith. His preaching in India, and leaving S. Matthew 's Gospel
there. His return to Hierapolis, and deliverance there from Crucifixion. His
removal to Albanopolis in Armenia, and suffering Martyrdom there for the Faith
of Christ. His being first flead alive, and then crucified. The fabulous Gospel
attributed to him.

1. THAT S. Bartholomew was one of the Twelve Apostles, the Evangelical History
is most express and clear, though it seems to take no further notice of him,
than the bare mention of his name. Which doubtless gave the first occasion to
many, both anciently and of later time, not without reason to suppose, that he
lies concealed under some other name, and that this can be no other than
Nathanael, one of the first Disciples that came to Christ. Accordingly we may
observe, that as S. John never mentions Bartholomew in the number of the
Apostles, so the other Evangelists never take notice of Nathanael, probably
because the same person under two several names: And as in John, Philip and
Nathanael are joined together in their coming to Christ, so in the rest of the
Evangelists Philip and Bartholomew are constantly put together without the
least variation; for no other reason, I conceive, than because as they were
jointly called to the Discipleship, so they are jointly referred in the
Apostolic Catalogue; as afterward we find them joint companions in the
writings of the Church. But that which renders the thing most specious and
probable is, that we find Nathanael particularly reckoned up with the other
Apostles, to whom our Lord appeared at the Sea of Tiberias after his
Resurrection, where there were together Simon Peter, and Thomas, and Nathanael
of Cana in Galilee, John 21.1, 2.
and the two sons of Zebedee, and two other of his Disciples, who probably were
Andrew and Philip. That by Disciples is here meant Apostles, is evident, partly
from the names of those that are reckoned up, Ib. v. 14.
partly because it is said, that this was the third time that Jesus appeared to
his Disciples, it being plain that the two foregoing appearances were made to
none but the Apostles.

2. HAD he been no more than an ordinary Disciple, I think no tolerable reason
can be given, why in filling up the vacancy made by the death of Judas, he
being so eminently qualified for the place, should not have been propounded as
well as either Barsabas or Matthias, but that he was one of the Twelve already.
Nor indeed is it reasonable to suppose, that Bartholomew should be his proper
name, any more than Bar-Jona the proper name of Peter, importing no more than
his relative capacity, either as a Son, or a Scholar. As a Son, it notes no
more than his being (...) the son of Tholmai, a name not uncommon amongst the
Jews, it being customary among them for the son thus to derive his name, so
Bar-Jona, Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, etc. and to be usually called rather by
this relative, than his own proper name, thus Joseph was called Barsabas, thus
Barnabas constantly so styled, though his right name was Joses. Or else it may
relate to him as a Disciple of some particular Sect and Institution among the
Jews, it being a custom for Scholars out of a great reverence for their
Masters, or first Institutors of that way, to adopt their names, as Ben-Ezra,
Ben-Uziel, etc. And this will be much more evident, if the observation which
Bolduc. de Eccles. post. Leg. c. 7. p. 45. vid. de Eccl. ante Leg. lib. 2. c. 8.
one makes be true (which yet I will not contend for) that as several Sects in
the Jewish Church denominated themselves from some famous person of that
Nation, the Essenes from Enosh, the Sadducees from Sadock, so there were others
that called themselves Tholmaeans, from Thalmai, Scholar to Heber the ancient
Master of the Hebrews, who was of the race or institution of the Enakim, who
flourished in Debir and Hebron, with whom Abraham was confederate, that is,
joined himself to their society. And of this Order and Institution, he tells
us, Nathanael seems to have been, hence called Bartholomew, the Son or Scholar
of the Tholmaeans; hence said to be an Israelite indeed, that is, one of the
ancient race of the Schools and Societies of Israel. This, if so, would give us
an account of his skill and ability in the Jewish Law, wherein he is generally
supposed to have been a Doctor or Teacher. But which soever of these two
accounts of his denomination shall find most favor with the Reader, either of
them will serve my purpose, and reconcile the difference that seems to be
between S. John and the other Evangelists about his name, the one stiling him
by his proper name, the other by his relative and paternal title. To all this,
if necessary, I might add the consent of Learned men, who have given in their
suffrages in this matter, that it is but the same person under several Rupert.
Tuit. Comm. in Joan. 1. Jansen. Concord. c. 17. Onuphr. in Fast. Salmer. Tract.
18. Tom. 4. Montac. Orig. Sacr. Part. 2. p. 18. Dr. H. Annot. in Joh. 1.
aliique.
names. But hints of this may suffice. These arguments, I confess, are not so
forcible and convictive as to command assent, but with all their circumstances
considered, are sufficient to incline and sway any man's belief. The great and
indeed only reason brought against it, is what Tract. VII. in Joan. Col. 68.
Tom. 9. and in Psalm. LXV. Col. 671. Tom. 8.
S. Augustine objected of old, that it is not probable that our Lord would
choose Nathanael, a Doctor of the Law, to be one of his Apostles, as designing
to confound the wisdom of the World by the preaching of the Idiot and the
unlearned. But this is no reason to him that considers, that this objection
equally lies against S. Philip, for whose skill in the Law and Prophets there
is as much evidence in the History of the Gospel, as for Nathanael's; and much
stronglier against S. Paul, than whom (besides his abilities in all humane
Learning) there were few greater Masters in the Jewish Law.

3. THIS difficulty being cleared, we proceed to a more particular account of
our Apostle. By some he is thought to have been a Syrian, of a noble extract,
and to have derived his pedigree from the Ptolomies of Egypt, upon no other
ground, I believe, than the mere analogy and sound of the name. It Is plain,
that he, as the rest of the Apostles, was a Galilean, and of Nathanael we know
it is particularly said, that he was of Cana in Galilee. The Scripture takes no
notice of his Trade or way of life, though some circumstances might seem to
intimate that he was a Fisherman, which Theodoret affirms of the Apostles in
general, and another particularly reports of our Apostle. At his first coming
to Christ (supposing him still the same with Nathanael) he was conducted by
Philip, who told him that now they had found the long-look'd for Messiah, so
often foretold by Moses and the Prophets, John 1.45.
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph: And when he objected that the Messiah
could not be born at Nazareth, Philip bids him come and satisfy himself. At
his first approach our Lord entertains him with this honorable character, that
he was an Israelite indeed, a man of true simplicity and integrity; as indeed
his simplicity particularly appears in this, that when told of Jesus, he did
not object against the meanness of his Original, the low condition of his
Parents, the narrowness of their fortunes, but only against the place of his
birth, which could not be Nazareth, the Prophets having peremptorily foretold,
that the Messiah should be born at Bethlehem. By this therefore he appeared to
be a true Israelite, one that waited for redemption in Israel, which from the
date of the Scripture-predictions he was assured did now draw nigh. Surprised
he was at our Lord's salutation, wondering how he should know him so well at
first sight, whose face he had never seen before. But he was answered, that he
had seen him while he was yet under the Figtree, before Philip called him.
Convinced with this instance of our Lord's Divinity, he presently made this
confession, That now he was sure, that Jesus was the promised Messiah, the Son
of God, whom he had appointed to be the King and Governor of his Church. Our
Savior told him, that if upon this inducement he could believe him to be the
Messiah, he should have far greater arguments to confirm his faith, yea, that
ere long he should behold the Heavens opened to receive him thither, and the
Angels visibly appearing to wait and attend upon him.

4. CONCERNING our Apostles travels up and down the World to propagate the
Christian Faith, we shall present the Reader with a brief account, though we
cannot warrant the exact order of them. That he went as far as India, is owned
by all, which surely is meant of the hither India, or the part of it lying next
to Asia; H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 19. p. 50.
Socrates tells us, 'twas the India bordering upon Aethiopia, meaning no doubt
the Asian Aethiopia (whereof we shall speak in the life of S. Thomas) Apud
Hier. de Script. Eccl. in Barthol.
Sophronius calls it the Fortunate India, and tells us, that here he left
behind him S. Matthew's Gospel, whereof H. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 10. p. 175.
Eusebius gives a more particular relation: That when Pantaenus, a man famous
for his skill in Philosophy, and especially the Institutions of the Stoics,
but much more for his hearty affection to Christianity, in a devout and zealous
imitation of the Apostles, was inflamed with a desire to propagate the
Christian Religion unto the Eastern Countries, he came as far as India it self.
Here amongst some that yet retained the knowledge of Christ, he found S.
Matthew's Gospel, written in Hebrew, left here (as the tradition was) by S.
Bartholomew, one of the twelve Apostles, when he preached the Gospel to these
Nations.

5. AFTER his labors in these parts of the World, he returned to the more
Western and Northern parts of Asia. At Hieropolis in Phrygia we find him in
company with S. Philip, instructing that place in the principles of
Christianity, and convincing them of the folly of their blind Idolatries. Here
by the enraged Magistrates he was at the same time with Philip designed for
Martyrdom; in order whereunto he was fastened upon the Cross, with an intent to
dispatch him; but upon a sudden conviction that the Divine Justice would
revenge their death, he was taken down again and dismissed. Hence probably he
went into Lycaonia, the people whereof Sermon in SS. XII. App. p. 269 T. 6^
Chrysostom assures us, he instructed and trained up in the Christian
discipline. His last remove was to Albanople in Armenia the Sophron. ap.
Hieron. in Barth.
Great (the same no doubt which Lib. 2. c. 39. p. 201. vid. Metaphr. ad Aug. 24.
Nicephorus calls Urbanople, a City of Cilicia) a place miserably overgrown
with Idolatry; from which while he sought to reclaim the people, he was by the
Governor of the place commanded to be crucified, which he cheerfully
underwent, comforting and confirming the Convert Gentiles to the last minute of
his life. Hippol. de App. ap. Bar. in Not. ad Martyr. ad Aug. 25. Isid. de SS.
utriusque T. c. 77.
Some add, that he was crucified with his head downwards, others that he was
flead, and his skin first taken off, which might consist well enough with his
Crucifixion, excoriation being a punishment in use, not only in Egypt, but
amongst the Persians, next neighbors to these Armenians (as Am. Mar. lib. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus assures us, and In vit. Artaxerx. p. 1019.
Plutarch records a particular instance of Mesabates the Persian Eunuch first
flead alive, Vid. Greg. Turon. de glor. Martyr. lib. 1. c. 34. p. 46.
and then crucified) from whom they might easily borrow this piece of barbarous
and inhumane cruelty. As for the several stages to which his Body removed after
his death, first to Daras, a City in the borders of Persia, then to Liparis,
one of the Aeolian Islands, thence to Beneventum in Italy, and last of all to
Rome, they that are fond of those things, and have better leisure, may enquire.
Heretics persecuted his memory after his death, no less than Heathens did his
person while alive, by forging and fathering a fabulous Gospel upon his name,
which, together with others of like stamp, Decret. Part. 1. Distinct. 15. c. 3.
Sect. Caterum.
Gelasius Bishop of Rome justly branded as Apocryphal, altogether unworthy the
name and patronage of an Apostle.

The End of S. Bartholomew 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MATTHEW.
S. MATTHEW.
S. Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist, preached the Gospel in Aethiopia and was
there slain with an Halbert Bed et Borea Sept 21

St. Matthew his Martyrdom.
1 Pet. 3.14 If ye suffer for righteousness sake happy are ye, and be not
afraid of their terror, neither be ye troubled:



His Birthplace and Kindred. His Trade, the Office of a Publican. The great
dignity of this Office among the Romans. The honors done to Vespasian 's
Father for the faithful discharge of it. This Office infamous among the Greeks,
but especially the Jews. What things concurred to render it odious and grievous
to them. Their bitter abhorrency of this sort of men. S. Matthew 's employment
wherein it particularly consisted. The Publican's Ticket what. S. Matthew 's
call, and his ready obedience. His inviting our Lord to Dinner. The Pharisees
cavil, and our Savior's answer. His Preaching in Judaea. His travels into
Parthia, Aethiopia, etc. to propagate Christianity. The success of his
Ministry. His Death. His singular contempt of the World. Censured herein by
Julian and Porphyry. His exemplary temperance and sobriety. His humility and
modesty. Unreasonable to reproach Penitents with the vices of their former
Life. His Gospel when and why written. Composed by him in Hebrew. The general
consent of Antiquity herein. Its translation into Greek, when and by whom. The
Hebrew Copy by whom owned and interpolated. Those now extant not the same with
those mentioned in Antiquity.

1. SAINT Matthew, called also Levi, was, though a Roman Officer, an Hebrew of
the Hebrews, (both his Names speaking him purely of Jewish extract and
Original) and probably a Galilean, and whom I should have concluded born at, or
near Capernaum, but that the Arabic Apud Kirsten. Vit. 4. Evangel. p. 22.
Writer of his life tells us, he was born at Nazareth, a City in the Tribe of
Zebulun, famous for the habitation of Joseph and Mary, but especially the
education and residence of our Blessed Savior, who though born at Bethlehem,
was both conceived and bred up here, where he lived the whole time of his
private life, whence he derived the Title of Jesus of Nazareth. S. Matthew was
the Son of Alpheus and Mary, Sister or Kinswoman to the Blessed Virgin; in the
same Arabic Author his Father is called Ducu, and his Mother Karutias, both
originally descended of the Tribe of Issachar, nothing being more common among
the Jews, than for the same Person to have several names, these latter probably
expressed in Arabic according to their Jewish signification. His Trade or way
of life was that of a Publican or Toll-gatherer to the Romans (which probably
had been his Father's Trade, his Name denoting a Broker or Money-changer) an
Office of bad report amongst the Jews. Indeed among the Romans it was accounted
a place of power and credit, and honorable reputation, not ordinarily
conferred upon any but Roman Knights; insomuch that T. Fl. Sabinus, Father to
the Emperor Vespasian, was the Publican of the Asian Provinces, an Office which
he discharged so much to the content and satisfaction of the People, that they
erected Statues to him with his Inscription, (...) Sueton. in vit. Vespas. cap.
1. p. 722.
, To him that has well managed the Publican-Office. These Officers being sent
into the Provinces to gather the Tributes, were wont to employ the Natives
under them, as Persons best skilled in the affairs and customs of their own
Country. Two things especially concurred to render this Office odious to the
Jews. First, that the Persons that managed it were usually covetous, and great
Exactors; for having themselves farmed the Customs of the Romans, they must
gripe and scrape by all methods of Extortion, that they might be able both to
pay their Rent, and to raise gain and advantage to themselves: which doubtless
Zachaeus, the Chief of these Farmers, was sensible of, Luke 19.8.
when after his Conversion, he offered fourfold restitution to any Man, (...).

(...). Xeno Comic. apud Dicaearch. de vit. Graeciae. cap. 4. p. 29.

(...). Muson. apud Stob Sermon. 2 de Malit. p. 31. (...). Suid. in voc. (...).


from whom he had taken any thing by fraud and evil arts. And upon this account
they became infamous, even among the Gentiles themselves, who commonly speak of
them as Cheats, and Thieves, and public Robbers, and worse members of a
community, more voracious and destructive in a City, than wild Beasts in the
Forest. The other thing that made the Jews so much detest them was, that this
Tribute was not only a grievance to their Purses, but an affront to the liberty
and freedom of their Nation; for they looked upon themselves as a Freeborn
People, and that they had been immediatlely invested in this privilege by God
himself, and accordingly beheld this as a daily and standing instance of their
slavery, which of all other things they could least endure, and which therefore
betrayed them into so many unfortunate Rebellions against the Romans. Add to
this, that these Publicans were not only obliged by the necessity of their
Trade to have frequent dealing and converse with the Gentiles (which the Jews
held unlawful and abominable) but that being Jews themselves they rigorously
exacted these things of their Brethren, and thereby seemed to conspire with the
Romans to entail perpetual slavery upon their own Nation. For though De
pudicit. c. 7. p. 561.
Tertullian thought that none but Gentiles were employed in this fordid office,
yet the contrary is too evident to need any argument to prove it.

2. BY these means Publicans became so universally abhorred by the Jewish
Nation, that it was accounted unlawful to do them any office of common kindness
and courtesy, nay they held it no sin to cousen and overreach a Publican, and
that with the solemnity of an Oath; they might not eat or drink, walk or travel
with them; they were looked upon as common Thieves and Robbers, and Money
received of them might not be put to the rest of a Man's Estate, it being
presumed to have been gained by rapine and violence; they were not admitted as
Persons fit to give testimony and evidence in any cause: so infamous were they,
as not only to be banished all communion in the matters of Divine Worship, but
to be shunned in all affairs of civil society and commerce, as the Pests of
their Country, Persons of an infectious converse, of as vile a Class as
Heathens themselves. (...) Matthew. 18.17.
Hence the common Proverb among them, Take not a Wife out of that Family,
wherein there is a Publican, for they are all Publicans, that is, Thieves,
Robbers, and wicked sinners. To this Proverbial usage our Lord alludes, when
speaking of a contumacious sinner, whom neither private reproofs, nor the
public censures and admonitions of the Church can prevail upon, Let him be
unto thee (says he) as an Heathen and a Publican; as elsewhere Publicans and
sinners are yoked together, as Persons of equal esteem and reputation. Of this
Trade and Office was our S. Matthew, and it seems more particularly to have
consisted in gathering the Customs of Commodities that came by the Sea of
Galilee, and the Tribute which Passengers were to pay that went by Water; a
thing frequently mentioned in the Jewish writings, where we are also told of
the (...) or Ticket, consisting of two greater Letters written in Paper, or
some such matter, Vid. Buxtorf. Lex in voc. (...)
called (...) the Ticket or signature of the Publicans, which the Passenger had
with him to certify them on the other side the Water, that he had already paid
the Toll or Custom: upon which account the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew
published by Munster, renders Publican by (...) the Lord of the Passage. For
this purpose they kept their Office or Custom-house by the Seaside, that they
might be always near at hand; and here it was (as S. Mark intimates) that
Matthew had his Toll-both, where He sat at the Receipt of Custom.

3. OUR Lord having lately cured a famous Paralytick, retired out of Capernaum
to walk by the Seaside, Matthew. 9.9. Mark 2.13, 14 Luke 5.27, 28, 29.
where he taught the People that flocked after him. Here he espied Matthew
sitting in his Custom-office, whom he called to come and follow Him. The Man
was rich, had a wealthy and a gainful Trade, a wise and prudent Person (no
fools being put into that Office) and understood no doubt what it would cost
him to comply with this new employment, that he must exchange Wealth for
Poverty, a Custom-house for a Prison, gainful Masters for a naked and despised
Savior. But he overlooked all these considerations, left all his Interests and
Relations, to become our Lord's Disciple, and to embrace (...) (as Homil. 11.
in 1. ad Corinth. p. 419.
Chrysostom observes) a more spiritual way of commerce and traffic. We cannot
suppose that he was before wholly unacquainted without Savior's Person or
Doctrine, especially living at Capernaum, the place of Christ's usual
residence, where his Sermons and Miracles were so frequent, by which he could
not but in some measure be prepared to receive the impressions, which our
Savior's call now made upon him. And to show that he was not discontented at
his change, nor apprehended himself a loser by this bargain, he entertained our
Lord and his Disciples at a great Dinner in his House, whither he invited his
Friends, especially those of his own Profession, piously hoping that they also
might be caught by our Savior's converse and company. The Pharisees, whose Eye
was constantly evil, where another Man's was good, and who would either find or
make occasions to snarle at him, began to suggest to his Disciples, that it was
unbecoming so pure and holy a Person as their Master pretended himself to be,
thus familiarly to converse with the worst of men, Publicans and sinners,
Persons infamous to a Proverb. But he presently replied upon them, that they
were the sick that needed the Physician, not the sound and healthy, that his
company was most suitable, where the necessities of Souls did most require it,
that God himself preferred acts of Mercy and Charity, especially in reclaiming
sinners, and doing good to Souls, infinitely before all ritual observances, and
the nice rules of Persons conversing with one another, and that the main design
of his coming into the World was not to bring the righteous, or those who like
themselves proudly conceited themselves to be so, and in a vain Opinion of
their own strictness loftily scorned all Mankind besides, but sinners, modest,
humble, self-convinced offenders, to repentance, and to reduce them to a better
state and course of life.

4. AFTER his election to the Apostolate, he continued with the rest till our
Lord's Ascension, and then for the first eight Years at least Preached up and
down Judaea. After which being to betake himself to the Conversion of the
Gentile-world, he was entreated by the Convert Jews to commit to Writing the
History of our Savior's Life and Actions, and to leave it among them as the
standing Record of what he had Preached to them; which he did accordingly, and
so composed his Gospel, whereof more in due place. Little certainty can be had
what Travels he underwent for the advancement of the Christian Faith, so
irrecoverably is truth lost in a crowd of Legendary stories. Socr. l. 1. c. 19
p. 50.
Aethiopia is generally assigned as the Province of his Apostolical Ministry.
Apud Sur. ad diem 21. September. Vol. 3. p. 217.
Metaphrastes tells us, that he went first into Parthia, and having
successfully planted Christianity in those Parts, thence traveled into
Aethiopia, that is, the Asiatick Aethiopia, lying near to India: here by
Preaching and Miracles he mightily triumphed over error and Idolatry, convinced
and converted Multitudes, ordained spiritual Guides and Pastors to confirm and
build them up, and bring over others to the Faith, and then finished his own
course. As for what is related by H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 41. p. 203.
Nicephorus of his going into the Country of the Cannibals, constituting Plato,
one of his followers, Bishop of Myrmena, of Christ's appearing to him in the
form of a beautiful Youth, and giving him a Wand, which he pitching into the
ground, immediately it grew up into a Tree, of his strange converting the
Prince of that Country, of his numerous Miracles, peaceable Death, and
sumptuous Funerals, with abundance more of the same stamp and coin, they are
justly to be reckoned amongst those fabulous reports, that have no Pillar nor
ground either of truth or probability to support them. Most probable it is
(what an Ancient Inde triumphantem fert India Bartholomaeum: Matthaeum eximium
Naddaber alta virum. Ven. Fortun. de Senate. Cur. Cael. Poem. lib. 7. p. 817.
Writer affirms) that he suffered Martyrdom at Naddaber a City in Aethiopia,
but by what kind of Death, is altogether uncertain. Whether this Naddaber be
the same with Beschberi, where the Arabic Vbi supr. p. 30.
Writer of his Life affirms him to have suffered Martyrdom, let others enquire:
he also adds, Ibid. p. 31.
that he was buried Arthaganetu Caesarea, but where that is, is to me unknown.
Synops. de vit. and mort. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus makes him honorably buried at Hierapolis in Parthia, one of the
first places to which he Preached the Gospel.

5. HE was a great instance of the power of Religion, how much a Man may be
brought off to a better temper. If we reflect upon his circumstances while yet
a stranger to Christ, we shall find that the World had very great advantages
upon him. He was become a Master of a plentiful Estate, engaged in a rich and a
gainful Trade, supported by the power and favor of the Romans, prompted by
covetous inclinations, and these confirmed by long habits and customs. And yet
notwithstanding all this, no sooner did Christ call, but without the least
scruple or dissatisfaction, he flung up all at once, and not only renounced (as
S. Basil Reg. fusius disput. Interrog. VIII. page 545. Tom. 2.
observes) his gainful incomes, but ran an immediate hazard of the displeasure
of his Masters that employed him, for quitting their service, and leaving his
accounts entangled and confused behind him. Had our Savior been a mighty
Prince, it had been no wonder, that he should run over to his service: but when
he appeared under all the circumstances of meanness and disgrace, when he
seemed to promise his followers nothing but misery and suffering in this life,
and to propound no other rewards but the invisible encouragements of another
World, his change in this case was the more strange and admirable. Indeed so
admirable, that Porphyry and Ap. Hierom. in Matthew. 9. p. 26 Tom. 9.
Julian (two subtle and acute adversaries of the Christian Religion) hence took
occasion to charge him either with falsehood, or with folly; either that he gave
not a true account of the thing; or, that it was very weakly done of him, so
hastily to follow any one that called him. But the Holy Jesus was no common
Person, in all his commands there was somewhat more than ordinary. Indeed S.
Hierom conceives that besides the Divinity that manifested it self in his
Miracles, there was a Divine brightness and a kind of Majesty in our Savior's
looks, that at first sight was attractive enough to draw Persons after him.
However his miraculous powers, that reflected a luster from every quarter, and
the efficacy of his Doctrine accompanied with the grace of God, made way for
the summons that were sent our Apostle, and enabled him to conquer all
oppositions that stood in the way to hinder him.

6. HIS contempt of the World further appeared in his exemplary temperance and
abstemiousness from all the delights and pleasures, yea the ordinary
conveniences and accommodations of it; so far from indulging his appetite with
nice and delicate curiosities, that he refused to gratify it with lawful and
ordinary provisions, eating no flesh, his usual Diet being nothing but Herbs,
Roots, Seeds and Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 148.
Berries. But what appeared most remarkable in him, and which though the least
virtue in it self, is the greatest in a wise Man's esteem and value, was his
humility, Caeteri Evangelistae in conjunctione nominum, primum ponunt
Matthaeum, and postea Thomam: iste vero and post Thomam se ponit, and
publicanum appellat; ut ubi abundavit iniquitas, superabundet and gratia.
Hieron. Comm. in Matthew. c. 10. p. 29. T. 9.
mean and modest in his own conceit, in honor preferring others before
himself. Whereas the other Evangelists in describing the Apostles by pairs,
constantly place him before Thomas, he modestly places him before himself. The
rest of the Evangelists openly mention the honor of his Apostleship, but speak
of his former sordid, dishonest, and disgraceful course of life, only under the
name of Levi, while he himself sets it down, with all its circumstances, under
his own proper and common name. Which as at once it commends his own candor and
ingenuity, so it administers to us this not unuseful consideration. That the
greatest sinners are not excluded the lines of Divine grace; nor can any,
Caeteri Evangelistae nec Publicani nomen ascribunt: ne antiquae conversationis
recordantes, sugillare Evangelistam viderentur. Hieron. ibid. Bava Metsia fol.
58.2.
if penitent, have just reason to despair, when Publicans and sinners are taken
in. And as S. Matthew himself does freely and impartially record his own vile
and dishonorable course of life, so the two other Evangelists, though setting
down the story, take notice of him only under another name; to teach us to
treat a penitent Brother with all modesty and tenderness. If a man repent (say
the Jews) (...) Let no man say to him, remember thy former works; which they
explain not only concerning Israelites, but even strangers and Proselytes. It
being against the rules of civility, as well as the Laws of Religion, when a
Man has repented, to upbraid and reproach him with the errors and follies of
his past life.

7. THE last thing that calls for any remarks in the life of this Apostle is
his Gospel, written at the entreaty of the Jewish Converts, and as Epiphanius
tells Haeres. 51. p. 185.
us, at the command of the Apostles, while he was yet in Palestine, about Eight
Years after the death of Christ: though H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 45. p. 213.
Nicephorus will have it to be written Fifteen Years after our Lord's
Ascension, and Adv. Haer. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 229.
Irenaeus yet much wider, who seems to imply that it was written while Peter
and Paul Preached at Rome, which was not till near Thirty Years after. But most
plain it is, that it must be written before the dispersion of the Apostles,
seeing S. Bartholomew (as we have noted in his Life) took it along with him
into India, and left it there. He wrote it in Hebrew, as primarily designing it
for the use of his Countrymen, and strange it is, that any should question its
being originally written in that Language, Papias ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39. p.
113. Iren. l. 3. c. 1. p. 229. Origin. Exposit. in Matthew. l 5. ap. Eusebius. lib.
6. c. 25. p. 226. Athan. Synops. S. Script. p. 493. Cyril. Hierosolym. Catech.
14. p. 341. Epiphan. Haeres. 29. p. 59. Haer. 51. p. 185. Chrysostom. Homil. 1.
in Matthew. p. 4. Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in Matthew. Praes. in 4. Evang. ad Dam.
Tom 3. p. 30. and alibi saepe. August. de Consens. Evang. lib. 1. c. 2. col.
372. Doroth. Synops. de vit. App. p. 148. Anast. Sinait. Hexaem. lib. 8. Arabs
quidam in vit. MS. Matthaei apud Kirsten. de vit. Quat. Evangel. n. 10. p. 29.
Paraphr. Syrus ad calc. Evangel. S. Matthew. Ita Arabs, and versio Persic.
Praefat. ad id. Evangel.
when the thing is so universally and uncontroulably asserted by all Antiquity,
not one that I know of, after the strictest enquiry I could make, dissenting in
this matter, and who certainly had far greater opportunities of being satisfied
in these things, than we can have at so great a distance. It was no doubt soon
after translated into Greek, though by whom S. Hierom professes he could not
tell; Praef. Comment. in Matthew. page 2.
Theophylact says it was reported to have been done by S. John, but Synops. S.
Script. p. 493.
Athanasius more expressly attributes the Translation to S. James the less. The
best is, it matters not much whether it was translated by an Apostle, or some
Disciple, so long as the Apostles approved the Version, and that the Church has
ever received the Greek Copy for Authentic, and reposed it in the Sacred Canon.

8. AFTER the Greek Translation was entertained, the Hebrew Copy was chiefly
owned and used by the Epiph. Haeres. 29. p. 59.
Nazaraei, a middle Sect of Men between Jews and Christians; with the
Christians they believed in Christ, and embraced his Religion, with the Jews
they adhered to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaic Law, and hence this
Gospel came to be styled the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and the Gospel of
the Nazarenes. By them it was by degrees interpolated, several Passages of the
Evangelical History, which they had heard either from the Apostles, or those
who had familiarly conversed with them, being inserted, which the ancient
Fathers frequently refer to in their Writings; as by the Epiph. Haeres. 40. p.
64. id. Haer. 27. p. 54.
Ebionites it was mutilated, and many things cut off, for the same reason for
which the followers of Cerinthus, though making use of the greatest part of it,
rejected the rest, because it made so much against them. This Hebrew Copy
(though whether exactly the same as it was written by S. Matthew, I will not
say) was found among other Books in the Treasury of the Jews at Epish ib.
Haeres. XXX. p. 61. vid. p. 60.
Tiberias, by Joseph a Jew, and after his Conversion a Man of great honor and
esteem in the time of Constantine; and another De Script. Eccl. in Matthew.
S. Hierom assures us was kept in the Library at Caesarea in his time, and
another by the Nazarenes at Beraea, from whom he had the liberty to transcribe
it, and which he afterward translated both into Greek and Latin, with this
particular observation, than in quoting the Texts of the Old Testament, the
Evangelist immediately follows the Hebrew, without taking notice of the
Translation of the Septuagint. A Copy also of this Gospel was Ann. CCCCLXXXV
dug up and found in the Grave of Barnabas in Cyprus, transcribed wih his own
Theodor. Lect. Collectan. lib. 2. non long ab init. p. 184.
hand. But these Copies are long since perished, and for those that have been
since published to the World, both by Tile and Munster, were there no other
argument, they too openly betray themselves by their barbarous and improper
style, not to be the genuine issue of that less corrupt and better Age.

THE LIFE OF S. THOMAS.
St. Thomas.
By the command of an Indian King he was thrust through with lanees. Baron.
Martyrolog. Dec. 21

St. Thomas his Martyrdom.
Joh. 11.16. Thomas which is called Didimus said unto his fellow-desciples, Let
us also go, that we may die with him.



The custom of the Jews to have both an Hebrew and a Roman name. S. Thomas his
name the same in Syriack and Greek. His Country and Trade. His call to the
Apostleship. His great affection to our Savior. Christ's discourse with him
concerning the way to Eternal life. His obstinate refusal to believe our Lord's
Resurrection, and the unreasonableness of his Infidelity. Our Lord's convincing
him by sensible demonstrations. S. Thomas his deputing Thaddaeus to Abgarus of
Edessa. His Travels into Parthia, Media, Persia, etc. Aethiopia, what, and
where situate. His coming into India, and the success of his Preaching there.
An account of his Acts in India from the relation of the Portugals at their
first coming thither. His converting the King of Malipur. The manner of his
Martyrdom by the Brachmans. The Miracles said to be done at his Tomb. His Bones
dug up by the Portugals. A Cross, and several Brass Tables with Inscriptions
found there. An account of the Indian or S. Thomas-Christians, their Number,
State, Rites, and way of life.

1. IT was customary with the Jews, when traveling into foreign Countries, or
familiarly conversing with the Greeks and Romans, to assume to themselves a
Greek or a Latin name, of great affinity, and sometimes of the very same
signification with that of their own Country. Thus our Lord was called Christ,
answering to his Hebrew title Mashiach, or the Anointed; Simon styled Peter
according to that of Cephas, which our Lord put upon him: Tabitha called
Dorcas, both signifying a Goat: Thus our S. Thomas according to the Syriack
importance of his name, had the title of Didymus, which signifies a Twin.
Thomas which is called Didymus. Accordingly the Syriack Version renders it,
Thauma, which is called (...) Thamae, that is, a Twin: The not understanding
whereof imposed upon Nonnus the Greek Paraphrast, who makes him (...), to have
had two distinct names, -- (...),
(...). Nonn. Panop. in Joan. c. 11.
--
it being but the same name expressed in different Languages. The History of
the Gospel takes no particular notice either of the Country or Kindred of this
Apostle. That he was a Jew is certain, and in all probability a Galilean: He
was born (if we may believe Apud Sur. ad diem 21. December. n. 2.
Symeon Metaphrastes) of very mean Parents, who brought him up to the trade of
Fishing, but withal took care to give him a more useful education, instructing
him in the knowledge of the Scriptures, whereby he learnt wisely to govern his
life and manners. He was together with the rest called to the Apostleship, and
not long after gave an eminent instance of his hearty willingness to undergo
the saddest fate that might attend them. For when the rest of the Apostles
dissuaded our Savior from going into Judaea (whither he was now resolved for
the raising his dear Lazarus lately dead) lest the Jews should stone him, as
but a little before they had attempted it, S. Thomas desires them not to hinder
Christ's journey thither, though it might cost their lives, Let us also go that
we may die with him, John 11.16.
probably concluding, that instead of raising Lazarus from the dead, they
themselves should be sent with him to their own Graves. So that he made up in
pious affections, what he seemed to want in the quickness and acumen of his
understanding, not readily apprehending some of our Lord's discourses, nor
over-forward to believe more than himself had seen. When the holy Jesus a
little before his fatal sufferings had been speaking to them of the joys of
Heaven, and had told them that he was going to prepare, that they might follow
him, that they knew both the place whither he was going, John 14.5.
and the way thither: Our Apostle replied, that they knew not whither he went,
and much less the way that led to it. To which our Lord returns this short but
satisfactory answer, That he was the true living way, the person whom the
Father had sent into the World to show men the paths of Eternal life, and that
they could not miss of Heaven, if they did but keep to that way, which he had
prescribed and chalked out before them.

2. OUR Lord being dead, it is evident how much the Apostles were distracted
between hopes and fears concerning his Resurrection, not yet fully satisfied
about it: Which engaged him the sooner to hasten his appearance, that by the
sensible manifestations of himself he might put the case beyond all
possibilities of dispute. John 20.19.
The very day whereon he arose he came into the house where they were, while
for fear of the Jews the doors were yet fast shut about them, and gave them
sufficient assurance that he was really risen from the dead. At this meeting S.
Thomas was absent, having probably never recovered their company, since their
last dispersion in the Garden, when every ones fears prompted him to consult
his own safety. At his return they told him that their Lord had appeared to
them; but he obstinately refused to give credit to what they said, or to
believe that it was he, presuming it rather a phantasm or mere apparition,
unless he might see the very prints of the Nails, and feel the Wounds in his
hands and sides. A strange piece of infidelity! Was this any more than what
Moses and the Prophets had long since foretold? had not our Lord frequently
told them in plain terms that he must rise again the third day? could he
question the possibility of it, who had so often seen him do the greatest
miracles? was it reasonable to reject the testimony of so many eyewitnesses,
ten to one against himself, and of whose fidelity he was assured? or could he
think that either themselves should be deceived, or that they would jest and
trifle with him in so solemn and serious a matter? A stubbornness that might
have betrayed him into an eternal infidelity. But our compassionate Savior
would not take the advantage of the man's refractory unbelief, but on that day
sevennight again came to them, as they were solemnly met at their devotions,
and calling to Thomas, bad him look upon his hands, put his fingers into the
prints of the Nails, and thrust his hand into the hole of his side, and
satisfy his faith by a demonstration from sense. The man was quickly convinced
of his error and obstinacy, confessing that he now acknowledged him to be his
very Lord and Master, a God omnipotent, that was thus able to rescue himself
from the powers of death. Our Lord replied no more, than that it was well he
believed his own senses, but that it was a more noble and commendable act of
Faith to acquiesce in a rational evidence, and to entertain the doctrines and
relations of the Gospel upon such testimonies and assurances of the truth of
things, as will satisfy a wise and sober man, though he did not see them with
his own eyes.

3. THE Blessed Jesus being gone to Heaven, and having eminently given gifts
and miraculous powers to the Apostles, S. Thomas moved thereto by some Divine
intimation, is Eusebius. lib. 1. c. 13. p. 32. and lib. 2. c. 1. p. 39.
said to have dispatched Thaddaeus, one of the Seventy Disciples to Abgarus
Toparch of Edessa, (between whom and our Savior the letters commonly said to
have passed are still extant in Eusebius) whom he first cured of an inveterate
distemper, and after converted him and his subjects to the Faith. The
Apostolical Province assigned to S. Thomas (as Lib. 3. in Genesis ap. Eusebius. lib.
3. c. 1. p. 71. Socr. lib. 1. c. 19. Clem. Recognit. lib. 9. p. 101. fac. 2.
Origin tells us) was Parthia, after which Ap. Hier. de Script. in Thoma.
Theod. de Leg. Sermon 9.
Sophronius and others inform us, that he preached the Gospel to the Medes,
Persians, Carmans, Hyrcani, Bactrians, and the neighbor Nations. In Persia,
one of the Auth. Oper. Imperf. in Matthew. ap. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. p. 776.
Ancients (upon what ground I know not) acquaints us, that he met with the Magi
or Wise men, who came that long journey from the East to bring presents to our
newborn Savior, whom he baptized, and took along with him as his companions
and assistants in the propagation of the Gospel. Hence he preached in and
passed through Chrysostom. Sermon. in XII. App. T. 6. p. 269.
Aethiopia, that is, (that we may a little clear this by the way) the Asian
Aethiopia, conterminous to, if not the same with Chaldaea, whence Hist. lib. 5.
c. 2. p. 534.
Tacitus does not only make the Jews descendents from the Aethiopians, as whose
Ancestors came from Ur of the Chaldeans; but Hesych. in voc. (...).
Hesychius makes the inhabitants of Zagrus, a mountain beyond Tygris, (...), a
people of the Aethiopians; this is the (...) mentioned by Benjamin the Jew in
his Itin. D. Benj. Tud. p. 98.
Itinerary, the land of Cush or Aethiopia, the inhabitants whereof are styled
by Lib 7. c. 69, 70, p. 408.
Herodotus, (...), the oriental Aethiopians, by way of distinction from those
(...), who lived South of Egypt, and were under the same military Prefecture
with the Arabians, under the command of Arsames, as the other were joined with
the Indians, and in the same place are called (...), the Asian Aethiopians.
Having traveled through these Countries, he at last came to India. We are told
by H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40. p. 201.
Nicephorus, that he was at first unwilling to venture himself into those
Countries, fearing he should find their manners as rude and intractable as
their faces were black and deformed, till encouraged by a Vision, that assured
him of the Divine Presence to assist him. He traveled a great way into those
Eastern Nations, as far as the Island Taprobane, since called Sumatra, and the
Country of the Prachmans, preaching every where with all the arts of gentleness
and mild S. Metaphr. ad 21. December. n. 8, 9.
perswasives, not flying out into tart invectives, and furious heats against
their idolatrous practices, but calmly instructing them in the principles of
Christianity, by degrees persuading them to renounce their follies, knowing
that confirmed habits must be cured by patience and long forbearing, by slow
and gentle methods; and by these means he wrought upon the people, and brought
them over from the grossest errors and superstition to the hearty belief and
entertainment of Religion.

4. IN want of better evidence from Antiquity, it may not be amiss to enquire,
what account the Portugals in their first discoveries of these Countries,
received of these matters, partly from ancient Monuments and Writings, partly
from constant and uncontrolled Traditions, which the Christians whom they found
in those parts, preserved amongst them. They tell Mass. Histor. Indic. lib. 2.
p. 85.
us, that S. Thomas came first to Socotora, an Island in the Arabian Sea,
thence to Cranganor, where having converted many, he traveled futher into the
East, and having successfully preached the Gospel, returned back into the
Kingdom of Cormandel, where at Malipur, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, not far
from the influx of Ganges into the Gulf of Bengala, he began to erect a place
for Divine worship, till prohibited by the Priests, and Sagamo, Prince of that
Country. But upon the conviction of several miracles the work went on, and the
Sagamo himself embraced the Christian Faith, whose example was soon followed by
great numbers of his friends and subjects. The Brachmans, who plainly perceived
that this would certainly spoil their Trade, and in time extirpate the Religion
of their Country, thought it high time to put a stop to this growing Novelism,
and resolved in Council, that some way or other the Apostle must be put to
death. There was a Tomb not far from the City, whither the Apostle was wont to
retire to his solitudes and private devotions; hither the Brachmans and their
armed followers pursue the Apostle, and while he was intent at prayer, they
first load him with darts and stones, till one of them coming nearer, ran him
through with a Lance. His Body was taken up by his Disciples, and buried in the
Church which he had lately built, and which was afterward improved into a
fabric of great stateliness and magnificence. Gregory of De glor. Martyr. lib.
1. cap. 32. p. 41.
Tours relates many miracles done upon the annual solemnities of his Martyrdom,
and one standing miracle, an account whereof, he tells us, he received from one
Theodorus, who had himself been in that place, viz. that in the Temple where
the Apostle was buried there hung a Lamp before his Tomb, which burnt
perpetually, without Oil or any Fuel to feed and nourish it, the light whereof
was never diminished, nor by wind or any other accident could be extinguished.
But whether Travelers might not herein be imposed upon by the crafty artifices
of the Priests, or those who did attend the Church; or if true, whether it
might not be performed by art, I leave to others to enquire. Some will have his
Body to have been afterward translated to Edessa, a City in Mesopotamia, but
the Christians in the East constantly affirm it to have remained in the place
of his Martyrdom, where (if we may believe Mass. ib. lib. 8. p. 363.
relations) it was after dug up with great cost and care at the command of Don
Emmanuel Frea, Governor of the Coast of Cormandel, and together with it was
found the Bones of the Sagamo, whom he had converted to the Faith.

5. WHILE Don Alfonso Sousa, one of the first Vice Roys in India under John the
Third, King of Portugal, resided in these Parts, Osor. de reb. Emman. lib. 3.
p. 120.
certain Brass Tables were brought to him, whose ancient Inscriptions could
scarce be read, till at last by the help of a Jew, an excellent Antiquary, they
were found to contain nothing but a donation made to S. Thomas, whereby the
King, who then reigned, granted to him a piece of ground for the building of a
Church. They tell us also of a famous Cross found in S. Thomas his Chapel at
Malipur, wherein was an unintelligible Inscription, which by a Learned Bramin
(whom they compelled to read and expound it) gave an account to this effect,
That Thomas a Divine person was sent into those Countries by the Son of God in
the time of King Sagamo, to instruct them in the knowledge of the true God,
that he built a Church, and performed admirable Miracles, but at last while
upon his Knees at Prayer was by a Brachman thrust through with a Spear; and
that that Cross stained with his blood had been left as a memorial of these
matters. An interpretation that was afterward confirmed by another grave and
learned Bramin, who expounded the Inscription to the very same effect. The
judicious Reader will measure his belief of these things by the credit of the
Reporters, and the rational probability of the things themselves, which for my
part as I cannot certainly affirm to be true, so I will not utterly conclude
them to be false.

6. FROM these first plantations of Christianity in the Eastern India's by our
Apostle, there is said to have been a continued series and succession of
Christians (hence called S. Thomas-Christians) in those Parts unto this day.
The Portugals at their first arrival here found them in great numbers in
several places, no less, as some tell us, than fifteen or sixteen thousand
Families. They are very poor, and their Churches generally mean and sordid,
wherein they had no Images of Saints, nor any representations but that of the
Cross; Osor. ibid. p. 119. and seq. Mass. lib. 2. p. 88. Joseph. Ind. Navig.
inter Relat. Nov. Orb. c. 133, 134 p. 204. vid. M. Paul Ven. lib. 3. c. 17.
ibid. p. 394.
they are governed in Spirituals by an High Priest (whom some make an Armenian
Patriarch, of the Sect of Nestorius, but in truth is no other than the
Patriarch of Muzal, the remainder, as is probable, of the ancient Selencia, and
by some, though erroneously, styled Babylon) residing Northward in the
Mountains, who, together with twelve Cardinals, two Patriarchs, and several
Bishops, disposes of all affairs referring to Religion; and to him all the
Christians of the East yield subjection. They promiscuously admit all to the
Holy Communion, which they receive under both kinds of Bread and Wine, though
instead of Wine, which their Country affords not, making use of the juice of
Raisons, steeped one Night in Water, and then pressed forth. Children, unless
in case of sickness, are not baptized till the Fortieth day. At the death of
Friends, their kindred and relations keep an Eight-days feast in memory of the
departed. Every Lord's day they have their public Assemblies for Prayer and
Preaching, their devotions being managed with great reverence and solemnity.
Their Bible, at least the New Testament, is in the Syriack Language, to the
study whereof the Preachers earnestly exhort the People. They observe the times
of Advent and Lent, the Festivals of our Lord, and many of the Saints, those
especially that relate to S. Thomas, the Dominica in Albis, or Sunday after
Easter, in memory of the famous confession which S. Thomas on that day made of
Christ, after he had been sensibly cured of his unbelief; another on the first
of July, celebrated not only by Christians, but by Moors and Pagans, the People
who come to his Sepulcher on Pilgrimage carrying away a little of the red Earth
of the place where he was interred, which they keep as an inestimable treasure,
and conceit it sovereign against Diseases. They have a kind of Monasteries of
the Religious, who live in great abstinence and chastity. Their Priests are
shaven in fashion of a Cross, have leave to marry once, but denied a second
time: No marriages to be dissolved but by Death. These rites and customs they
solemnly pretend to have derived from the very time of S. Thomas, and with the
greatest care and diligence do observe them at this Day.

The End of S. Thomas 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JAMES the Less.
S. JAMES Minor.
This Apostle being a Kinsman of our Lord and having Sat first Bishop of
Jerusalem, was cost down from the top of the Temple and after killed with a
Fullers club Barou May 10

The Martyrdom of St. James ye less.
Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee.



S. James the Less proved to be the same with him that was Bishop of Jerusalem.
His Kindred and Relations. The Son of Joseph by a former Wife. The Brethren of
our Lord, who. His Country what. Our Lord's appearance to him after his
Resurrection. Invested in the Sea of Jerusalem by whom and why. His authority
in the Synod at Jerusalem. His great diligence and fidelity in his Ministry.
The conspiracy of his Enemies to take away his Life. His Discourse with the
Scribes and Pharisees about the Messiah. His Martyrdom, and the manner of it.
His Burial where. His Death resented by the Jews. His strictness in Religion.
His Priesthood whence. His singular delight in Prayer, and efficacy in it. His
great love and charity to Men. His admirable Humility. His Temperance according
to the rules of the Nazarite-Order. The Love and respect of the People toward
him. His Death an inlet to the destruction of the Jewish Nation. His Epistle
when written. What the design and purpose of it. The Proto-evangelium ascribed
to him.

1. BEFORE we can enter upon the Life of this Apostle, some difficulty must be
cleared, relating to his Person. Doubted it has been by some, whether this was
the same with that S. James that was Bishop of Jerusalem, three of this Name
being presented to us, S. James the Great, this S. James the Less (both
Apostles) and a third surnamed the Just, distinct (say they) from the former
and Bishop of Jerusalem. But this (however pretending to some little
countenance from antiquity) is a very great mistake, and built upon a sandy
bottom. For besides that the Scripture mentions no more than two of this Name,
and both Apostles, nothing can be plainer, than that that S. James the Apostle,
whom S. Paul calls our Lord's Brother, and reckons with Peter and John one of
the Pillars of the Church, was the same that presided among the Apostles (no
doubt by virtue of his place, it being his Episcopal Chair) and determined in
the Synod at Jerusalem. Nor do either Clemens (...). Clem. Al. Hypotyp. lib. 7.
ap. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 38.
Alexandrinus or Eusebius out of him mention any more than two, S. James put to
death by Herod, and S. James the Just, Bishop of Jerusalem, whom they expressly
affirm to be the same with him whom S. Paul calls the Brother of our Lord. Once
indeed H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 31.
Eusebius makes our S. James one of the Seventy, though Lib 2. cap. 1. p. 38.
elsewhere quoting a place of Clemens of Alexandria, he numbers him with the
Chief of the Apostles, and expressly distinguishes him from the Seventy
Disciples. Nay S. Comment. in Isai. cap. 17. p. 60. T. 5.
Hierom, though when representing the Opinion of others he styles him the
Thirteenth Apostle, yet Adv. Helvid. T. 2. p. 10.
elsewhere when speaking his own sense, sufficiently proves that there were but
two, James the Son of Zebedee, and the other the Son of Alphaeus, the one
surnamed the Greater, the other the Less. Besides that the main support of the
other Opinion is built upon the authority of Clemens his Recognitions, a Book
in doubtful cases of no esteem and value.

2. THIS doubt being removed, we proceed to the History of his Life. He was the
Son (as we may probably conjecture) of Joseph (afterward Husband to the
Blessed Virgin) and his first Wife, whom S. Comment. in Math. 12. p. 38. T. 9.
Hierom from Tradition styles Escha, Hippolytus Bishop of Porto calls Salome;
and further adds, Ap. Niceph. lib. 2. c. 3. p. 135
that she was the Daughter of Aggi, Brother to Zacharias, Father to John the
Baptist. Hence reputed our Lord's Brother, in the same sense that he was
reputed the Son of Joseph. Indeed we find several spoken of in the History of
the Gospel, who were Christ's Brethren; but in what sense, was controverted of
old. S. Hierom, Chrysostom, and some others will have them so called, because
the Sons of Mary, Cousin-german, or according to the custom of the Hebrew
Language, Sister to the Virgin Mary. But H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 38.
Eusebius, Contr. Corinth. Haeres. XXVIII. p. 55. Contr. Naz. Haeres. XXIX. p.
56. and contr. Antidicomar. Haeres lxxviii. p. 438, 439. Greg. Nyssen. de
Resurrect. Christ. Orat. II. p. 844. Tom. 2. Math. 13.55, 56.
Epiphanius, and the far greater part of the Ancients (from whom especially in
matters of fact, we are not rashly to depart) make them the Children of Joseph,
by a former Wife. And this seems most genuine and natural, the Evangelists
seeming very express and accurate in the account which they give of them: Is
not this the Carpenter's Son? Is not his Mother called Mary? and his Brethren
James, and Joses, and Simon, and Jude? and his Sisters (whose Names, says the
foresaid Hippolytus, were Esther and Thamar) are they not all with us, whence
then has this man these things? By which it is plain, that the Jews understood
these Persons not to be Christ's Kinsmen only, but his Brothers, the same
Carpenter's Sons, having the same relation to him that Christ himself had:
though indeed they had more, Christ being but his reputed, they his natural
Sons. Upon this account the Blessed Virgin is sometimes called the Mother of
James and Joses; for so amongst the Women that attended at our Lord's
Crucifixion, we find three eminently taken notice of, Mary Magdalen, Matthew.
27.56. Mark 14.40.
Mary the Mother of James and Joses, (...). Gregor. Nyssen. loc. supr. laud.
and the Mother of Zebedees Children. Where by Mary the Mother of James and
Joses, no other can be meant than the Virgin Mary: it not being reasonable to
suppose that the Evangelists should omit the Blessed Virgin, Joh. 19.25.
who was certainly there; and therefore S. John reckoning up the same Persons,
expressly styles her the Mother of Jesus. And though it is true she was but S.
James his Mother-in-law, yet the Evangelists might choose so to style her,
because commonly so called after Joseph's death; Vbi supr.
and probably (as Gregory of Nyssa thinks) known by that Name all along,
choosing that Title, that the Son of God, whom as a Virgin she had brought
forth, might be better concealed, and less exposed to the malice of the envious
Jews: nor is it any more wonder, that she should be esteemed and called the
Mother of James, than that Joseph should be styled and accounted the Father of
Jesus. To which add, that Antiquit. Jud. l. 20. c. 8. p. 698. Matthew. 10.3.
Josephus eminently skilful in matters of Genealogy and descent, expressly says
that our S. James was the Brother of Jesus Christ. One thing there is that may
seem to lie against it, that he is called the Son of Alphaeus. But this may
probably mean no more, than either that Joseph was so called by another Name
(it being frequent, yea almost constant among the Jews for the same Person to
have two Names, Quis unquam prohibuerit duobus vel tribus nominibus, hominem
unum vocari? as De Consens. Evangel. lib. 2. c. 28. col. 432.
S. Augustine speaks in a parallel case) or (as a learned Bolduc. de Eccl. post
leg. c. 7. p. 47.
Man conjectures) it may relate to his being a Disciple of some particular Sect
or Synagogue among the Jews, called Alphaeans, from (...) denoting a Family or
Society of devout and learned Men of somewhat more eminency than the rest,
there being, as he tells us, many such at this time among the Jews; and in this
probably S. James had entered himself, the great reputation of his Piety and
strictness, his Wisdom, Parts, and Learning rendering the conjecture above the
censure of being trifling and contemptible.

3. OF the place of his Birth the Sacred story makes no mention. The Jews in
their Midr. Kobel. and Abod. Zarab cap. 2. and Glossa En Mischp. vid. Chr.
Nold. Hist. Idum. p. 394.
Talmud (for doubtless they intend the same Person) style him more than once
(...) a man of the Town of Sechania; though where that was, I am not able to
conjecture. What was his particular way and course of life before his being
called to the Discipleship and Apostolate, we find no intimations of in the
History of the Gospel, nor any distinct account concerning him during our
Savior's life. After the Resurrection he was honored with a particular
Appearance of our Lord to him, which though silently passed over by the
Evangelists, is recorded by S. Paul, next to the manifesting himself to the
Five Hundred Brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.7.
he was seen of James, which is by all understood of our Apostle. S. De Script.
Eccles. in Jacob. min.
Hierom out of the Hebrew Gospel of the Nazarens (wherein many passages are set
down, omitted by the Evangelical Historians) gives us a fuller relation of it,
viz. that S. James had solemnly sworn that from the time that he had drank of
the Cup at the Institution of the Supper, he would eat Bread no more, till he
saw the Lord risen from the dead. Our Lord therefore being returned from the
Grave, came and appeared to him, commanded Bread to be set before him, which he
took, blessed, and brake, and gave to S. James, saying, Eat thy Bread, my
Brother, for the Son of Man is truly risen from among them that sleep. After
Christ's Ascension (though I will not venture to determine the precise time) he
was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem, preferred before all the rest, for his near
relation unto Christ, for this we find to have been the reason why they chose
Hegesip. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 22. p. 142.
Symeon to be his immediate Successor in that See, because he was after him our
Lord's next Kinsman. A consideration that made Peter and the two Sons of
Zebedee, though they had been peculiarly honored by our Savior, not to
contend for this high and honorable Clem. Al. Hypot. l. 6. ap. Eusebius. l. 2. c.
1. p. 38
Place, but freely choose James the Just to be Bishop of it. This dignity is by
some of the Phot. Epist. 117 ad Theodos. Monach. p. 158. Theophyl. in 1. ad
Cor. 15.7. vid. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 19. p. 265.
Ancients said to have been conferred on him by Christ himself, constituting
him Bishop at the time of his appearing to him. But it is safest with others to
understand it of its being done by the Apostles, or possibly by some particular
intimation concerning it, which our Lord might leave behind him.

4. TO him we find S. Paul making his Address after his Conversion, by whom he
was honored with the right hand of fellowship: Gal. 1.19. 2.9.
to him Peter sent the news of his miraculous deliverance out of Prison, Act.
12.17.
Go show these things unto James, and to the Brethren, that is, to the whole
Church, and especially S. James the Bishop and Pastor of it. But he was
principally active in the Synod at Jerusalem in the great controversy about
the Mosaic Rites: for the case being opened by Peter, Act. 15.13.
and further debated by Paul and Barnabas, at last stood up S. James to pass
the final and decretory sentence, that the Gentile-Converts were not to be
troubled with the bondage of the Jewish Yoke, only that for a present
accommodation some few indifferent Rites should be observed; ushering in the
expedient with this positive conclusion, (...), I thus judge or decide the
matter, this is my sentence and determination. A circumstance the more
considerable, because spoken at the same time when Peter was in Council, (...),
Chrysostom. Homil. 33. in Act. App. p. 676. (...). Hesych. Presb. Hicrosol. Sermon.
in Jac. apud Phot. Cod. CLXXV. col. 1525.
who produced no such intimation of his Authority. Had the Champions of the
Church of Rome but such a passage for Peter's judiciary Authority and Power, it
would no doubt have made a louder noise in the World, than, Thou art Peter, or,
Feed my sheep.

5. HE administered his Province with all possible care and industry, omitting
no part of a diligent and faithful Guide of Souls; strengthening the weak,
informing the ignorant, reducing the erroneous, reproving the obstinate, and by
the constancy of his Preaching conquering the stubbornness of that perverse and
refractory Generation that he had to deal with, many of the nobler and the
better sort being brought over to a compliance with the Christian Faith. Eusebius.
lib. 2. c. 23. p. 64.
So careful, so successful in his charge, that he awakened the spite and malice
of his Enemies to conspire his ruin: a sort of Men, of whom the Apostle has
given too true a character, that they please not God, and are contrary to all
men. Id. ib. p. 63.
Vexed they were to see that S. Paul by appealing to Caesar had escaped their
hands: Malice is as greedy and insatiable as Hell it self, and therefore now
turn their revenge upon S. James, which not being able to effect under Festus
his Government, they more effectually attempted under the Procuratorship of
Albinus his Successor, Ananus the Younger, then High Priest, and of the Sect of
the Sadducees, ((...), says Josephus Antiquit. Jud. lib. 20. c. 8. p 698.
Josephus, speaking of this very passage, of all others the most merciless and
implacable Justicers) resolving to dispatch him before the new Governor could
arrive. To this end a Council is hastily summoned, and the Apostle with some
others arraigned and condemned as Violators of the Law. But that the thing
might be carried in a more plausible and popular way, they set the Scribes and
Pharisees (Crafts-masters in the arts of dissimulation) at work to ensnare him:
who coming to him, Hegesip. Comment. lib. 5. apud Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 23. p. 64
began by flattering insinuations to set upon him. They tell him, that they all
had a mighty confidence in him, and that the whole Nation as well as they gave
him the testimony of a most just man, and one that was no respecter of Persons;
that therefore they desired he would correct the error and false Opinion which
the People had of Jesus, whom they looked upon as the Messiah, and would take
this opportunity of the universal confluence to the Paschal solemnity, to set
them right in their notions about these things, and would to that end go up
with them to the top of the Temple; where he might be seen and heard by all.
Being advantageously placed upon a Pinnacle or Wing of the Temple, they made
this address to him. Tell us, O Justus, whom we have all the reason in the
World to believe, that seeing the People are thus generally led away with the
Doctrine of Jesus that was crucified, tell us, What is this Institution of the
crucified Jesus? To which the Apostle answered with an audible Voice; Why do ye
enquire of Jesus the Son of man? he sits in Heaven on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, and will come again in the Clouds of Heaven. The People below
hearing it, glorified the blessed Jesus, and openly proclaimed Hosanna to the
Son of David. The Scribes and Pharisees perceived now that they had over-shot
themselves, and that instead of reclaiming, they had confirmed the People in
their Error; that there was no way left, but presently to dispatch him, that by
his sad fate others might be warned not to believe him. Whereupon suddenly
crying out, that Justus himself was seduced and become an Impostor, they threw
him down from the Place where he stood. Though bruised, he was not killed by
the fall, but recovered so much strength, as to get upon his Knees, and Pray to
Heaven for them. Malice is of too bad a nature either to be pacified with
kindness, or satisfied with cruelty: Jealousy is not more the rage of a Man,
than Malice is the rage of the Devil, the very soul and spirit of the Apostate
nature. Little portions of revenge do but inflame it, and serve to flesh it up
into a fiercer violence. Vexed that they had not done his work, they fall
afresh upon the poor remainders of his life; and while he was yet at Prayer,
and that a Rechabite who stood by (which, says Haeres. 78. p. 441.
Epiphanius, was Symeon, his Kinsman and Successor) stepped in and entreated them
to spare him, a just and a righteous Man, and who was then praying for them,
they began to load him with a shower of stones, till one more mercifully cruel
than the rest with a Fullers Club beat out his Brains. Thus died this good Man
in the XCVI. Year of his Age, and about XXIV. Epiph. ibid.
Years after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, (as Epiphanius tells us;) being
taken away to the great grief and regret of all good Men, yea of all sober and
just Persons even amongst the Jews themselves; (...), as Antiquit. Jud. lib.
20. c. 8. p 698.
Josephus himself confesses, speaking of this matter. He was buried (says De
glor. Martyr. lib. 1. c. 27. page 33.
Gregory Bishop of Tours) upon Mount Olivet, in a Tomb which he had built for
himself, and wherein he had buried Zacharias, and old Simeon: which I am rather
inclinable to believe, than what Ap. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 23. p. 65
Hegesippus reports, that he was buried near the Temple in the place of his
Martyrdom, and that a Monument was there erected for him, which remained a long
time after. For the Jews were not ordinarily wont to bury within the City, much
less so near the Temple, and least of all would they suffer him, whom as a
Blasphemer and Impostor they had so lately put to death.

6. HE was a Man of exemplary and extraordinary Piety and Devotion, educated
under the strictest Rules and Institutions of Religion, a Priest (as we may
probably guess) of the ancient Order of the Rechabites, or rather, as Contr.
Nazar. Haeres. XXIX. p. 56.
Epiphanius conjectures, (...), according to the most ancient order and form of
Priesthood, when the Sacerdotal Office was the Prerogative of the firstborn:
and such was S. James the Eldest Son of Joseph, and thereby sanctified and set
apart for it. Though whether this way of Priesthood at any time held under the
Mosaic dispensation, we have no intimations in the holy story. But however he
came by it, upon some such account it must be, that he had a privilege (which
the Hegesip. apud Eusebius. loc. laudat. p. 63. Epiph. ibid.
Ancients say was peculiar to him, probably, because more frequently made use
of by him than by any others) to enter (...), not into the Sancta Sanctorum, or
most holy of all, but the Sanctuary, or holy place, whither the Priests of the
Aaronical Order might come. Prayer was his constant business and delight, he
seemed to live upon it, and to trade in nothing but the frequent returns of
converse with Heaven: and was therefore wont to retire alone into the Temple to
pray, which he always performed kneeling and with the greatest reverence, till
by his daily Devotions his knees were become as hard and brawny as a Camels.
And he who has told us, that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, Jam. 5.17.
himself found it true by his own experience, Epiph. Haeres. 78. p. 441.
Heaven lending a more immediate Ear to his Petitions, so that when in a time
of great drought he prayed for Rain, the Heavens presently melted into fruitful
showers. Nor was his Charity toward Men less than his Piety toward God, he
did good to all, watched over Men's souls, and studied to advance their eternal
interests; his daily errand into the Temple was to pray for the happiness of
the People, and that God would not severely reckon with them: he could forgive
his fiercest enemies, and overcome evil with good: when thrown from the top of
the Temple, he made use of all the breath he had left in him, only to send up
this Petition to Heaven for the pardon of his Murderers, I beseech thee, O Lord
God, Heavenly Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

7. HE was of a most meek humble temper, honoring what was excellent in
others, concealing what was valuable in himself: the eminency of his relation,
and the dignity of his place did not exalt him in lofty thoughts above the
measures of his Brethren, industriously hiding whatever might set him up above
the rest. Though he was our Lord's Brother, yet in the Inscription of his
Epistle he styles himself but the Servant of the Lord Jesus, not so much as
giving himself the Title of an Apostle. His temperance was admirable, he wholly
abstained from Flesh, and drank neither Wine nor strong Drink, nor ever used
the Bath. His holy and mortified mind was content with the meanest
accommodations, he went barefoot, and never wore other than Linen garments.
Indeed he lived after the strictest rules of the Nazarite-Order, and as the
Miter, or Sacerdotal Plate ((...) the Epiph. Haeres. 29. p. 56. ex Clem. Al.
and Eusebius. and haeres. 78. p. 441.
Ancients call it) which he wore upon his Head, evinced his Priesthood, which
was rather after Melchisedeck's, or the Priesthood of the firstborn, than the
Aaronical Order, so his never shaving his Head, nor using Unguents, his Habit
and Diet, and the great severity of his Life, showed him to appertain to the
Nazarite-Institution, to which he was holy (says Hegesippus) or consecrated
from his Mother's Womb. A Man of that Divine temper, that he was the love and
wonder of his Age, and for the reputation of his holy and religious Life was
universally styled, James the Just. Indeed the safety and happiness of the
Nation was reckoned to depend upon his Prayers and interest in Heaven, (...).
Hunc Hegesippi locum foeliciter sanc emendat and restituit N. Fullerus noster.
(...). Miscellan. Sacr. lib. 3. c. 1.
which gained him the honorable Title of Oblias or Ozliam, the defense and
fortress of the People; as if when he was gone, their Garrisons would be
dismantled, and their strength laid level with the ground. And so we find it
was, when some few Years after his Death the Roman Army broke in upon them, and
turned all into blood and ruin. As what wonder if the judgments of God like a
Flood come rolling in upon a Nation, when the Sluices are plucked up, and the
Moses taken away that before stood in the Gap to keep them out? Elisha died, 2
King. 13.20.
and a Band of the Moabites invaded the Land. In short, he was the delight of
all good Men, in so much favor and estimation with the People, that they used
to flock after Hieron Com. in c. 1. ad Gal. p. 165. T. 9.
him, and strive who should touch, though it were but the hem of his Garment;
his very Episcopal Chair, wherein he used to sit, being (as H. Eccl. lib. 7. c.
19. p. 265.
Eusebius informs us) carefully preserved, and having a kind of veneration paid
to it, even unto his time: loved and honored not by his friends only, but by
his enemies, the Vid. supr. number. 3.
Jews in their Talmud mentioning James as a worker of Miracles in the Name of
Jesus his Master; yea the Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. p. 65.
wisest of them looked upon his Martyrdom as the inlet to all those miseries
and calamities that soon after flowed in upon them. Sure I am that Verba ejus
cit. Eusebius. loc. laudat.
Josephus particularly reckons the Death of this S. James, as that which more
immediately alarmed the Divine vengeance, and hastened the universal ruin and
destruction of that Nation.

8. HE wrote only one Epistle, probably not long before his Martyrdom, as
appears by some passages in it relating to the near approaching ruin of the
Jewish Nation. He directed it to the Jewish Converts, dispersed up and down
those Eastern Countries, to comfort them under sufferings, and confirm them
against Error. He saw a great degeneracy and declension of manners coming on,
and that the purity of the Christian Faith began to be undermined by the loose
doctrines and practices of the Gnostics, who under a pretense of zeal for the
legal rites generally mixed themselves with the Jews: he beheld Libertinism
marching on a-pace, and the way to Heaven made soft and easy, Men declaiming
against good works as useless and unnecessary, and asserting a naked belief of
the Christian doctrine to be sufficient to salvation. Against these the Apostle
opposes himself, presses Purity, Patience, and Charity, and all the Virtues of
a good Life, and by undeniable Arguments evinces that that faith only that
carries along with it obedience and an holy life can justify us before God,
and entitle us to eternal Life. Besides this Epistle, there is a kind of
preparatory Gospel ascribed to him, published under the Name of (...), (still
extant at this Day) containing the descent, birth and first Originals of
Christ, and the Virgin Mary; at the end whereof the Author pretends to have
written it at a time, when Herod having raised a great tumult in Jerusalem, he
was forced to retire into the Wilderness. But though in many things consistent
enough with the History of the Gospels, yet has it ever been rejected as
spurious and Apochryphal, forged in that licentious Age, when Men took the
boldness to stamp any Writing with the Name of an Apostle.

The End of the Life of S. James the Less.
THE LIFE OF S. SIMON the Zealot.
S. SIMON
S. Simon Zelotes: preached in Egypt Africa and Britain and at length was
crucified Niceph. l. 2. c. 40. Baron. Oct. 28.

St. Simon's Martyrdom.
Matthew. 10.16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in ye midst of wolves

1. Cor. 4.9. God has set forth US ye Apostles last, as it were men appointed
to death, For we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men.



His Kindred. Whence styled the Cananite, and the Zealot. An enquiry into the
nature and temper, and original of the Sect of the Zealots among the Jews. An
account of their wild and licentious practices. This no reflection upon our
Apostle. In what parts of the World he Preached the Gospel. His planting
Christianity in Africa. His removal into the West, and Preaching in Britain.
His Martyrdom there. By whom said to have preached and suffered in Persia. The
difference between him and Symeon Bishop of Jerusalem.

1. SAINT Simon the Apostle was, as some think, one of the four Brothers of our
Savior, Matthew. 10.4.
Sons of Joseph by his former marriage, though no other evidence appear for it,
Mark 3.18.
but that there was a Simon one of the number; too infirm a foundation to build
any thing more upon than a mere conjecture. In the Catalogue of the Apostles he
is styled Simon the Cananite; whence some, led by no other reason that I know
of, than the bare sound of the name, have concluded him born at Cana in
Galilee; as for the same reason Niceph. H. Eccl. lib. 8. c. 30 p. 596.
others have made him the Bridegroom, at whose marriage our Lord was there
present, when he honored the solemnity with his first Miracle, turning Water
into Wine. But this word has no relation to his Country, or the place from
whence he borrowed his Original, as plainly descending from (...) or (...)
which signify Zeal, and denote a hot and sprightly temper. Therefore what some
of the Evangelists call Cananite, others rendering the Hebrew by the Greek word
style, Luke 6.15.
Simon Zelotes, or the Zealot: Acts 1.13.
So called, not (as (...). H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 40. p. 202.
Nicephorus thinks) from his burning zeal, and ardent affection to his Master,
and his eager desire to advance his Religion in the World, but from his warm
active temper, and zealous forwardness in some particular way and profession of
Religion before his coming to our Savior.

2. FOR the better understanding of this we are to know, that as there were
several Sects and Parties among the Jews, so was there one, either a distinct
Sect, (...). Suid* in voc. (...).
or at least a branch of the Pharisees, called the Sect of the Zealots: They
were mighty assertors of the honor of the Law, and the strictness and purity
of Religion, assuming a liberty to themselves to question notorious offenders,
without staying for the ordinary formalities of Law, nay, when they thought
good, and as the case required, executing capital vengeance upon them. Thus
when a blasphemer cursed God by the name of any Idol (says De Idolol. cap. 2.
Sect. 12. page 19.
Maimonides) the (...) or Zealots that next met him might immediately kill him,
without ever bringing him (...) before the Sanhedrim. They looked upon
themselves as the successors of Phineas, who in a mighty passion for the honor
of God, did immediate execution upon Zimri and Cosbi. Psalm. 106.30. Numb.
25.11-13.
An act which was counted unto him for righteousness unto all posterities for
evermore, and God so well pleased with it, that he made with him and his seed
after him the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for
his God, and made an atonement for Israel. In imitation whereof these Men took
upon them to execute judgment in extraordinary cases, and that not only by the
connivance, but with the leave both of the Rulers and the People, till in
aftertimes under a pretense of this, their zeal degenerated into all manner of
licentiousness and wild extravagance, and they not only became the Pests of the
Commonwealth at home, but opened the door for the Romans to break in upon them,
to their final and irrecoverable ruin; they were continually prompting the
People to throw off the Roman yoke, and vindicate themselves into their native
liberty, and when they had turned all things into hurry and confusion,
themselves in the mean while fished in these troubled Waters. Josephus gives a
large account of them, and every where bewails them as the great plague of the
Nation. He tells us of De Bell. Jud. lib. 4. (...). p. 871. and seqq.
them, that they scrupled not to rob any, to kill many of the prime Nobility,
under pretense of holding correspondence with the Romans, and betraying the
liberty of their Country, openly glorifying that herein they were the
benefactors and Saviors of the people. They abrogated the succession of
ancient Families, thrusting obscure and ignoble persons into the Highpriests
office, that so they might oblige the most infamous villains to their party;
and as if not content to injure men, they affronted Heaven, and proclaimed
defiance to the Divinity it self, breaking into and profaning the most holy
place. Stiling themselves Zealots (says he) as if their undertakings were good
and honorable, while they were greedy and emulous of the greatest
wickednesses, and out-did the worst of men. Many attempts were made, especially
by Annas the High Priest, to reduce them to order and sobriety. But neither
force of arms, nor fair and gentle methods could do any good upon them; they
held out, and went on in their violent proceedings, and joining with the
Idumeans, committed all manner of outrage, slaying the Highpriests
themselves. Nay, when Jerusalem was straightly besieged by the Roman Army, they
ceased not to create tumults and factions within, and were indeed the main
cause of the Jew's ill success in that fatal war. It Is probable, that all that
went under the notion of this Sect were not of this wretched and ungovernable
temper, but that some of them were of a better make, of a more sober and
peaceable disposition: And as it is not to be doubted, but that our Simon was
of this Sect in general, so there is reason to believe he was of the better
sort. However this makes no more reflection upon his being called to the
Apostleship, than it did for S. Matthew, who was before a Publican, or S.
Paul's being a Pharisee, and so zealously persecuting the Church of God.

3. BEING invested in the Apostolical office, no further mention appears of him
in the History of the Gospel. Continuing with the Apostles till their
dispersion up and down the World, he then applied himself to the execution of
his charge. He is Eiceph. loc. supra laudat.
said to have directed his journey toward Egypt, thence to Cyrene, and Africa
(this indeed Ad Ann. 44. n. 38.
Baronius is not willing to believe, being desirous that S. Peter should have
the honor to be the first that planted Christianity in Africa) and throughout
Mauritania and all Libya, preaching the Gospel to those remote and barbarous
Countries. Nor could the coldness of the Climate benumb his zeal, or hinder him
from shipping himself and the Christian doctrine over to the Western Islands,
yea, even to Britain it self. Here he preached, and wrought many miracles, and
after infinite troubles and difficulties which he underwent (if we may believe
our Authors, whom, Vbi supra.
though Baronius in this case makes no great account of, yet never scruples
freely to use their verdict and suffrage when they give in evidence to his
purpose) suffered Martyrdom for the Faith of Christ, as is not only affirmed by
Niceph. ib.
Nicephorus and Doroth. in Synops de vit. App p. 148.
Dorotheus, but expressly owned in the Greek (...). Menolog. Graec. ad diem X.
Maii.
Menologies, where we are told, that he went at last into Britain, and having
enlightened the minds of many with the doctrine of the Gospel, was crucified by
the Infidels, and buried there.

4. I KNOW indeed that there want not those who tell Vid. Breviar. Roman. ad
diem 28. Octobr. and Martyrol. Romans ad cund. diem and Baron. Not. ibid. vid.
illum ad Ann. 68. n. 7.
us, that after his preaching the Gospel in Egypt, he went into Mesopotamia,
where he met with S. Jude the Apostle, and together with him took his journey
into Persia, where having gained a considerable harvest to the Christian Faith,
they were both crowned with Martyrdom; which Baronius himself confesses to be
founded upon no better authority, than the Passions of the Apostles, a Book
which at every turn he rejects as trifling and impertinent, as false and
fabulous. But however, wide is the mistake of Sophron. apud Hieron. de Script.
Eccl. in Simone. Isidor. de vit. and obit. SS. utriusque T. cap. 83.
those who confound our Apostle with Symeon the son of Cleophas, successor to
S. James the Just in the Sea of Jerusalem, who was crucified in the hundred and
twentieth year of his Age, in the persecution under Trajan: The different
character of their persons, and the account both of their Acts and Martyrdoms
being sufficiently distinguished in the writings of the Church.

The End of S. Simon 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. JUDE.
St. Jude.
Matthew. 15.55. Is not this the Carpenter's son? are not his brethren James, and
Joses, and Simon, and JUDAS?

Luke 6.16. Judas the Brother of James.

His Martyrdom.
Having preached ye Gospel in Mesopotamia, he went into Persia, where after he
had gained great numbers to Christianity, he suffered martyrdom. Martyrol. Romans
Oct. 28.



The several names attributed to him in the Gospel. Thaddaeus, whence. The
custom of the Jews to alter their names, when bearing affinity with the great
name Jehovah. The name Judas why distasteful to the Apostles. Lebbaeus, whence
derived. His Parentage, and Relation to our Lord. The Question put by him to
Christ. Whether the same with Thaddaeus sent to Edessa. In what places he
preached. His death. His married condition. The story of his Grandchildren
brought before Domitian. His Epistle, and why questioned of old. Its
Canonicalness vindicated. The Book of Enoch, and what its authority. The
contention between Michael and the Devil about Moses his Body, whence borrowed.
S. Jude proved to be the Author of this Epistle. Grotius his conceit of its
being written by a younger Jude, rejected. Its affinity with the second Epistle
of S. Peter. The design of it.

1. THERE are three several names by which this Apostle is described in the
History of the Gospel, Jude, Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus, it being usual in the holy
Volumes for the same person to have more proper names than one. For the first,
it was a name common amongst the Jews, recommended to them as being the name of
one of the great Patriarchs of their Nation. This name he seems to have changed
afterward for Thaddaeus, a word springing from the same root, and of the very
same import and signification, which might arise from a double cause: Partly
from the superstitious veneration, which the Jews had for the name Jehova (the
Nomen (...), or name consisting of four letters) which they held unlawful to be
pronounced by any but the High Priest, and not by him neither, but at the most
solemn times. Hence it was, that when any man had a name, wherein there was the
major part of the letters of this ineffable title (and such was Jehudah or
Juda) they would not rashly pronounce it in common usage, but chose rather to
mould it into another like it, and of the same importance, or that which had a
near affinity and resemblance with it: Partly from a particular dislike of the
name of Judas among the Apostles, the bloody and treasonable practices of Judas
Iscariot having rendered that name very odious and detestable to them. To
prevent therefore all possibility of mistake, and that they might not confound
the righteous with the wicked, S. Matthew and Mark never call him by this, but
by some other name; as no question for the same reason he both styles himself,
and is frequently called by others, John 14.22.
Judas the brother of James; and that this was one great design of it, the
Evangelist plainly intimates, when speaking of him, he says, Judas, not
Iscariot. For his name Lebbaeus, it seems to have been derived either from
(...) an heart, whence S. Hierom renders it Corculum, probably to denote his
wisdom and prudence, or else from (...) a Lion, and therein to have respect to
old Jacob's prophecy concerning Judah, That he should be as a Lion, an old
Lion, and as a Lions whelp, which probably might have a main stroke in fastening
this name upon S. Jude. From this Patriarchal prophecy, we are Bolduc. de Eccl.
post leg. cap. 7 p. 47, 48.
told, that one of the Schools or Synagogues of Learned men among the Jews (who
to avoid confusion were wont to distinguish themselves by different
appellations) took occasion to denominate themselves Labii, as accounting
themselves the Scholars and descendents of this Lion-like son of Jacob; and
that S. Jude was of this society, and because of his eminency among them
retained the title of Labius, or as it was corruptly pronounced, Lebbaeus. I
confess I should have thought the conjecture of a Learned Lightf. H. Hebr. in
Matthew. p. 147.
man very probable, that he might have derived this name from the place of his
nativity, as being born at Lebba, a Town which, he tells us, Hist. Not. lib. 5.
c. 19.
Pliny speaks of in the Province of Galilee, not far from Carmel, but that it
is not Lebba, but Jebba in all copies of Pliny that I have seen. But let the
Reader please himself in which conjecture he likes best.

2. FOR his Descent and Parentage, he was of our Lord's kindred, H. Eccl. lib.
2. c 40. p. 202. Matthew. 13.55. Animadv. in Eusebius. Chron. ad Number. MMCXII. p. 205.
Nicephorus truly making him the son of Joseph, and brother to James Bishop of
Jerusalem; that there was a Jude one of the number is very evident, Are not his
brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? which makes me the more to
wonder at Scaliger, who so confidently denies that any of the Evangelists ever
mention a Jude the brother of our Lord. S. Hierom seems often to confound him
with Simon the Zealot, whose title he ascribes to him, though second thoughts
set him right, as indeed common advertency could do no less, so plain is the
account which the Evangelists give of this matter. When called to the
Discipleship we find not, as not meeting with him, till we find him enumerated
in the Catalogue of Apostles; nor is any thing particularly recorded of him
afterward, John 14.22.
more than one question that he propounded to our Savior, who having told them
what great things he and his Father would do, and what particular
manifestations after his Resurrection he would make of himself to his sincere
disciples and followers, S. Jude (whose thoughts as well as the rest were taken
up with the expectations of a temporal Kindom of the Messiah) not knowing how
this could consist with the public solemnity of that glorious state they
looked for, asked him, what was the reason that he would manifest himself to
them, and not to the World. Our Lord replied, that the World was not capable of
these Divine manifestations, as being a stranger, and an enemy to what should
fit them for fellowship with Heaven; that they were only good men, persons of a
Divine temper of mind, and religious observers of his Laws and Will, whom God
would honor with these familiar converses, and admit to such particular acts
of grace and favor.

3. H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 13. p. 32.
EUSEBIUS relates that soon after our Lord's Ascension S. Thomas dispatched
Thaddaeus the Apostle to Abgarus Governor of Edessa, where he healed diseases,
wrought miracles, expounded the doctrines of Christianity, and converted
Abgarus and his people to the Faith: For all which pains when the Toparch
offered him vast gifts and presents, he refused them with a noble scorn,
telling him, they had little reason to receive from others, what they had
freely relinquished and left themselves. A large account of this whole affair
is extant in Eusebius, translated by him out of Syriack from the Records of the
City of Edessa. This Thaddaeus Comment. in Matthew. c. 10.
S. Hierom expressly makes to be our S. Jude, though his bare authority is not
in this case sufficient evidence; especially since Eusebius makes him no more
than one of the seventy Disciples, which he would scarce have done, had he been
one of the Twelve. He calls him indeed an Apostle, but that may imply no more
than according to the large acception of the word, that he was a Disciple, a
Companion, and an Assistent to them, as we know the Seventy eminently were. Nor
is any thing more common in ancient Ecclesiastic Writers, than for the first
planters and propagaters of Christian Religion in any Country to be honored
with the name and title of Apostles. But however this be, at his first setting
out to preach the Gospel, he went up and down Judaea and Galilee, then through
Samaria into Idumea, and to the Cities of Arabia, and the neighbor Countries,
and after to Syria and Mesopotamia. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40. p. 202.
Nicephorus adds, that he came at last to Edessa, where Abgarus was Governor,
and where the other Thaddaeus, one of the Seventy had been before him. Here he
perfected what the other had begun, and having by his Sermons and Miracles
established the Religion of our Savior, died a peaceable and a quiet death;
though Synops de vit. and mort. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus makes him slain at Berytus, and honorably buried there. By the
almost general consent of the Writers of the Latin Church he is said to have
traveled into Persia, where after great success in his Apostolical Ministry
for many years, he was at last for his free and open reproving the
superstitious rites and usages of the Magi cruelly put to death.

4. THAT he was one of the married Apostles sufficiently appears from his
(...), or Grandsons mentioned by Apud Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 20. p. 89
Eusebius, of whom Hegesippus gives this account. Domitian the Emperor, whose
enormous wickednesses had awakened in him the quickest jealousies, and made him
suspect every one that might look like a corrival in the Empire, had heard that
there were some of the line of David, and Christ's kindred that did yet remain.
Two Grandchildren of S. Jude the Brother of our Lord were brought before him:
Having confessed that they were of the Race and posterity of David, he asked
what possessions and estate they had: they told him that they had but a very
few acres of land, out of the improvement whereof they both paid him Tribute,
and maintained themselves with their own hard labor, as by the hardness and
callousness of their hands (which they then showed him) did appear. He then
enquired of them concerning Christ, and the state of his Kingdom, what kind of
Empire it was, and when and where it would commence. To which they replied,
That his Kingdom was not of this World, nor of the Seigniories and Dominions of
it, but Heavenly and Angelical, and would finally take place in the end of the
World, when coming with great glory, he would judge the quick and the dead, and
award all men recompenses according to their works. The issue was, that looking
upon the meanness and simplicity of the men, as below his jealousies and fears,
he dismissed them without any severity used against them; who being now beheld
not only as kinsmen, but as Martyrs of our Lord, were honored by all,
preferred to places of authority and government in the Church, and lived till
the times of Trajan.

5. S. Jude left only one Epistle, of Catholic and universal concernment,
inscribed at large to all Christians. It was some time before it met with
general reception in the Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 23. p. 66. and lib. 3. c. 25.
Church, or was taken notice of. The Author indeed styles not himself an
Apostle, but no more does S. James, S. John, nor sometimes S. Paul himself. And
why should he fare the worse for his humility, only for calling himself the
servant of Christ, when he might have added not only Apostle, but the Brother
of our Lord? The best is, he has added what was equivalent, Jude the Brother of
James, a character that can belong to none but our Apostle; beside, that the
Title of the Epistle, which is of great Antiquity, runs thus, The general
Epistle of Jude the Apostle. One great argument, as De Script. Eccl. in Juda.
S. Hierom informs us, against the authority of this Epistle of old, was its
quoting a passage out of an Apocryphal Book of Enoch. This Book called the
Apocalypse of Enoch was very early extant in the Church, frequently mentioned,
and passages cited out of it by Irenaeus, Scio Scripturam Enoch, quae hunc
ordinem Angelis dedit, non recipi a quibusdam, quia nec in Armarium Judaicum
admittitur. Opinor non putaverunt illam ante Cataclysmum editam, post cum casum
Orbis omnium rerum abolitorem. salvam esse potuisse. Si ista ratio est,
recordentur, etc. Sed cum Enoch eadem Scriptura etiam de Domino praedicarit, a
nobis quidem nihil omnino rejiciendum est, quod pertineat ad nos. A Judaeis
potest jam videri propterea rejecta, sicut and caetera fere quae Christum
sonant. Eo accedit quod Enoch apud Judam Apostolum testimonium possidet.
Tertull. de Cult. Foemin. lib. 1. c. 3. p. 151.
Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, and others, some of whom accounted
it little less than Canonical. But what if our Apostle had it not out of this
Apocryphal Book, but from some prophecy current from age to age, handed to him
by common tradition, or immediately revealed to him by the Spirit of God? But
suppose it taken out of that Book going under Enoch's name, this makes nothing
against the authority of the Epistle; every thing, I hope, is not presently
false, that is contained in an Apocryphal and Uncanonical writing, nor does the
taking a single testimony out of it any more infer the Apostles approbation of
all the rest, than S. Paul's quoting a good sentence or two out of Menander,
Ar^tus, and Epimenides, imply that he approved all the rest of the writings of
those Heathen Poets. And indeed nothing could be more fit and proper than this
way, if we consider that the Apostle in this Epistle chiefly argues against the
Gnostics, who mainly traded in such Traditionary and Apocryphal writings, and
probably in this very Book of Enoch. The same account may be given of that
other passage in this Epistle concerning the contention between Michael the
Archangel and the Devil about the burial of Moses his Body, no where extant in
the holy Records, supposed to have been taken out of a Jewish writing called
(...) or the Dismission of Moses, De quo in Ascensione Moysi (cujus libelli
meminit in Epistola Apostolus Judas) Michael Archangelus cum Diabolo disputans
de Corpore Moysi, ait Diabolo, Inspiratum serpentem causam extitisse
praevaricationis Adae and Evae. Origin. (...), lib. 3. c. 2. fol. 142. p. 2.
mentioned by some of the Greek Fathers under the title of (...), or the
Ascension of Moses, in which this passage was upon record. Nor is it any more a
wonder that S. Jude should do this, than that S. Paul should put down Jannes
and Jambres for the two Magicians of Pharaoh that opposed Moses, which he must
either derive from Tradition, or fetch out of some Uncanonical Author of those
times, there being no mention of their names in Moses his relation of that
matter. But be these passages whence they will, it is enough to us, that the
Spirit of God has made them Authentic, and consecrated them part of the holy
Canon.

6. BEING thus satisfied in the Canonicalness of this Epistle, none but S. Jude
could be the Author of it; for who but he was the Brother of S. James? a
character by which he is described in the Evangelical story more than once.
Annot. in init. Epist Jud.
Grotius indeed will needs have it written by a younger Jude, the fifteenth
Bishop of Jerusalem, in the reign of Adrian; and because he saw that that
passage [ the Brother of James] stood full in his way, he concludes without any
shadow of reason, that it was added by some Transcriber. But is not this to
make too bold with Sacred things? is not this to indulge too great a liberty?
this once allowed, 'twill soon open a door to the wildest and most extravagant
conjectures, and no man shall know where to find sure-footing for his Faith.
But the Reader may remember what we have elsewhere observed concerning the
Posthume Annotations of that learned man. Not to say that there are many things
in this Epistle that evidently refer to the time of this Apostle, and imply it
to have been written upon the same occasion, and about the same time with the
second Epistle of Peter, between which and this there is a very great affinity
both in words and matter, nay, there want not Bolduc. praelud. in Epist. Jud.
p. 106. ad calcem lib. de Eccl post leg.
some that endeavor to prove this Epistle to have been written no less than
twenty seven years before that of Peter, and that hence it was that Peter
borrowed those passages that are so near akin to those in this Epistle. The
design of the Epistle is to preserve Christians from the infection of
Gnosticism, the loose and debauched principles vented by Simon Magus and his
followers, whose wretched doctrines and practices he briefly and elegantly
represents, persuading Christians heartily to contend for the Faith that had
been delivered to them, and to avoid these pernicious Seducers as pests and
firebrarnds, not to communicate with them in their sins, lest they perished
with them in that terrible vengeance that was ready to overtake them.

The End of S. Jude 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MATTHIAS.
S. MATHIAS.
He preached the Gospel in Ethiopia, suffered Martyrdom and was buried there.
S. Hierom.

St. Matthias his Martyrdom.
Hebr. 11.37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder they were tempted, were
slain with the sword.



S. Matthias one of the Seventy. Judas Iscariot, whence. A bad Minister nulls
not the ends of his Ministration. His worldly and covetous temper. His
monstrous ingratitude. His betraying his Master, and the agravations of the
sin. The distraction and horror of his mind. The miserable state of an evil and
guilty Conscience. His violent death. The election of a new Apostle: The
Candidates, who. The Lot cast upon Matthias. His preaching the Gospel, and in
what parts of the World. His Martyrdom when, where, and how. His Body whither
translated. The Gospel and Traditions vented under his name.

1. SAINT Matthias not being an Apostle of the first Election, immediately
called and chosen by our Savior, particular remarks concerning him are not to
be expected in the History of the Gospel. He was one of our Lord's Disciples
(and probably one of the Seventy) that had attended on him the whole time of
his public Ministry, and after his death was elected into the Apostleship upon
this occasion. Judas Iscariot (so called, probably, from the place of his
nativity, (...) a man of Kerioth, a City anciently situate in the Tribe of
Judah) had been one of the Twelve, immediately called by Christ to be one of
his intimate Disciples, equally empowered and commissioned with the rest to
Preach and work Miracles, was numbered with them, and had obtained part of their
Ministry. And yet all this while was a man of vile and corrupt designs, branded
with no meaner a character, than Thief and Murderer. To let us see that there
may be bad servants in Christ's own family, and that the wickedness of a
Minister does not evacuate his Commission, nor render his Office useless and
ineffectual. The unworthiness of the instrument hinders not the ends of the
ministration: Seeing the efficacy of an ordinance depends not upon the quality
of the person, but the Divine institution, and the blessing which God has
entailed upon it. Judas preached Christ no doubt with zeal and servency, and
for any thing we know, with as much success as the rest of the Apostles; and
yet he was a bad man, a man acted by sordid and mean designs, one that had
prostituted Religion and the honor of his place to covetousness and evil arts.
The love of money had so entirely possessed his thoughts, that his resolutions
were bound for nothing but interest and advantage. But they that will be rich
fall into temptation and a snare. This covetous temper betrayed him, as in the
issue to the most fatal end, so to the most desperate attempt, (...), Contr.
Cells. lib. 4. p. 175.
as Origin calls the putting Christ to death, the most prodigious impiety that
the Sun ever shone on, the betraying his innocent Lord into the hands of those,
who he knew would treat him with all the circumstances of insolent scorn and
cruelty. How little does kindness work upon a disingenuous mind! It was not the
honor of the place, to which when thousands of other were passed by, our Lord
had called him, the admitting him into a free and intimate fellowship with his
person, the taking him to be one of his peculiar domestics and attendants,
that could divert the wretch from his wicked purpose. He knew how desirous the
great men of the Nation were to get Christ into their hands, especially at the
time of the Passover, that he might with the more public disgrace be
sacrificed before all the people, and therefore bargains with them, and for no
greater a sum than under four pounds, to betray the Lamb of God into the paws
of these Wolves and Lions: In short, he heads the party, conducts the Officers,
and sees him delivered into their hands.

2. BUT there is an active principle in man's breast; that seldom suffers daring
sinners to pass in quiet to their Graves: Awakened with the horror of the fact,
conscience began to rouse and follow close, and the man was unable to bear up
under the furious revenges of his own mind: As indeed all wilful and
deliberate sins, and especially the guilt of blood, are wont more sensibly to
alarm the natural notions of our minds, and to excite in us the fears of some
present vengeance that will seize upon us. And how intolerable are those
scourges that lash us in this vital and tender part? The spirit of the man
sinks under him, and all supports snap asunder: As what ease or comfort can he
enjoy, that carries a Vultur in his bosom, always gnawing and preying upon his
heart? Which made (...). Plut. de Anim. tranquil. p. 476. (...). Pythag. in
aur. carm. in quem locum haec inter alia Hierocles, optima prorsus and huic
loco satis apposita. (...). Hicrocl. in Aur. Carm. p. 165.
Plutarch compare an evil Conscience to a Cancer in the breast, that
perpetually gripes and stings the Soul with the pains of an intolerable
repentance. Guilt is naturally troublesome and uneasy, it disturbs the peace
and serenity of the mind, and fills the Soul with storms and thunder. Job 9.4.
Did ever any harden himself against God, and prosper? And indeed how should
he, when God has such a powerful and invisible executioner in his own bosom?
Whoever rebels against the Laws of his duty, and plainly affronts the dictates
of his Conscience, does that moment bid adieu to all true repose and quiet, and
expose himself to the severe resentments of a self-tormenting mind. And though
by secret arts of wickedness he may be able possibly to drown and stifle the
voice of it for a while, yet every little affliction or petty accident will be
apt to awaken it into horror, and to let in terror like an armed man upon him.
A torment infinitely beyond what the most ingenious Tyrants could ever
contrive. Nothing so effectually invades our ease, as the reproaches of our own
minds. The wrath of man may be endured, but the irruptions of Conscience are
irresistible; it is (...) (as Chrysostom very elegantly styles it) to be
choked or strangled with an evil Conscience, which often reduces the man to such
distresses, as to make him choose death rather than life. A sad instance of all
which we have in this unhappy man: who being wearied with furious and
melancholy reflections upon what was past, threw back the wages of iniquity in
open Court, and dispatched himself by a violent death: Vainly hoping to take
sanctuary in the Grave, and that he should meet with that ease in another World
which he could not find in this. He departed, and went and hanged himself, and
falling down burst asunder, and his bowels gushed out: Leaving a memorable
warning to all treacherous and ungrateful, to all greedy and covetous persons,
not to let the World insinuate it self too far into them; and indeed to all to
watch and pray that they enter not into temptation. Our present state is
slippery and insecure; Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall. What privileges can be a sufficient fence, a foundation firm enough to
rely upon, when the Miracles, Sermons, favors, and familiar converses of
Christ himself could not secure one of the Apostles from so fatal an Apostasy?

3. A VACANCY being thus made in the College of Apostles, the first thing they
did after their return from Mount Olivet, where our Lord took his leave of
them, to S. John's house in Mount Sion (the place, if we may believe H. Eccl.
l. 2. c. 1. p. 131.
Nicephorus, where the Church met together) was to fill up their number with a
fit proper person. To which purpose Peter acquainted them, that Judas,
according to the prophetical prediction, being fallen from his ministry, it was
necessary that another should be substituted in his room, one that had been a
constant companion and disciple of the holy Jesus, and consequently capable of
bearing witness to his life, death, and resurrection. Two were propounded in
order to the choice, Joseph called Barsabas, and Justus (whom some make the
same with Joses one of the brothers of our Lord) and Matthias, both duly
qualified for the place. The way of election was by Lots, a way frequently used
both among Jews and Gentiles for the determination of doubtful and difficult
cases, and especially the choosing Judges and Magistrates: And this course the
Apostles the rather took, because the Holy Ghost was not yet given, by whose
immediate dictates and inspirations they were chiefly guided afterward. And
that the business might proceed with the greater regularity and success, they
first solemnly make their address to Heaven, that the Omniscient Being that
governed the World, and perfectly understood the tempers and dispositions of
men, would immediately guide and direct the choice, and show which of these two
he would appoint to take that part of the Apostolic charge, from which Judas
was so lately fallen. The Lots being put into the Urn, Matthias his name was
drawn out, and thereby the Apostolate devolved upon him.

4. NOT long after the promised powers of the Holy Ghost were conferred upon
the Apostles, to fit them for that great and difficult employment, upon which
they were sent: And among the rest S. Matthias betook himself to his Charge and
Province. The first fruits of his Ministry he spent in Judaea, where having
reaped a considerable harvest, he betook himself to other Provinces. An Petr.
de Natal. Histor. Sanct. lib. 3. c. 149.
Author, I confess, of no great credit in these matters, tells us, that he
preached the Gospel in Macedonia, where the Gentiles to make an experiment of
his Faith and Integrity, gave him a poisonous and intoxicating potion, which he
cheerfully drunk off, in the name of Christ, without the least prejudice to
himself; and that when the same potion had deprived above two hundred and fifty
of their sight, he laying his hands upon them, restored them to their sight:
with a great deal more of the same stamp, which I have neither faith enough to
believe, nor leisure enough to relate. The Greeks with more probability report
him to have traveled Eastward, he came (says H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 40. p. 203.
Nicephorus) into the first, (says Ap. Hieron. de Script. Eccl. in Matthia.
Sophronius) into the second Aethiopia, and in both, I believe, it is a
mistake, either of the Authors or Transcribers, for Cappadocia, his residence
being principally near the irruption of the River Apsarus, and the Haven
Hyssus, both places in Cappadocia. Nor is there any Aethiopia nearer those
places than that conterminous to Chaldaea, whereof before. And as for those
that tell us, that he might well enough preach both in the Asian and African
Aethiopia, and that both might be comprehended under that general name, as the
Eastern and Western parts of the World were heretofore contained under the
general title of the India's, it is a fancy without any other ground to stand
on, than their own bare conjecture. The place whither he came was very
barbarous, and his usage was accordingly. For here meeting with a people of a
fierce and intractable temper, he was treated by them with great rudeness and
inhumanity, from whom after all his labors and sufferings, and a numerous
conversion of men to Christianity, he obtained at last the crown of Martyrdom,
Ann. Chr. LXI. or as others, LXIV. Little certainty can be retrieved concerning
the manner of his death. Synops. de vit. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p. 148.
Dorotheus will have him to die at Sebastople, and to be buried there near the
Temple of the Sun. An ancient Colon. Impress. 1490. ad Febr. 24.
Martyrologie reports him to have been seized by the Jews, and as a blasphemer
to have been first stoned, and then beheaded. But the (...).

Menaea Graecor. ad diem IX. August. apud Bolland. de vit. SS. ad Febr. XXIV.
Tom. 3. p. 433.


Greek Offices, seconded herein by several ancient Breviaries, tell us that he
was crucified, and that as Judas was hanged upon a Tree, so Matthias suffered
upon a Cross. His Body is said to have been kept a long time at Jerusalem,
thence thought, by Helen the Mother of the Great Constantine, to have been
translated to Rome, where some parts of it are showed with great veneration at
this day. Though Vid. Chr. Brower. Annal. Treverens. lib. 2. p. 658. and
scriptores ex utraque part contendentes ap. Boll. loc. cit. p. 435.
others with as great eagerness, and probably as much truth, contend that his
Relics were brought to, and are still preserved at Triers in Germany, a
controversy wherein I shall not concern my self. His memory is celebrated in
the Greek Church August the IX, as appears not only from their Menologies, but
from a Novel Extat in Jur. Gr. Romans lib. 2. p. 161.
constitution of Manuel Comnenus, appointing what holy days should be kept in
the Church, while the Western Churches keep February XXIV sacred to his memory.
Among many other Apocryphal writings attributed to the Apostles, there was a
Gospel published under his name, mentioned by H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 25. p. 97.
Orig. in Luc. Homil. 10. Ambr. praef. in Luc. Tom. 5. p. 7.
Eusebius and the Ancients, and condemned with the rest by Decr. Part. 1. Did.
15. cap. Sanct. Romans Sect. Caeterum.
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, as it had been rejected by others before him: Under
his name also there were extant Traditions, cited by Strom. lib. 2. p. 380.
ibid. lib. 3. p. 436.
Clemens of Alexandria, from whence no question it was that the Nicolaitans
borrowed that saying of his, which they abused to so vile and beastly purposes,
as under the pretended patronage of his name and doctrines the Marcionites and
Ibid. lib. 7. p. 765.
Valentinians defended some of their most absurd and impious opinions.

The End of S. Matthias 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. MARK the Evangelist.
The Evangelist St. Mark.
He having been the Coadiutor of St. Paul and St. Peter severally, at
Alexandria planted and governd a Church and there by the violence of the Pagan
multitude suffered Martyrdom. AD. 64. Baron and Centur

St. Mark's Martyrdom.
Hebr. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better resurrection.

Of whom the world was not worthy.



His Kindred, and distinction from others of the same Name. Whether one of the
Seventy. His Conversion. His attendance upon Peter, and Preaching the Gospel in
Italy, and at Rome. His planting Christianity at Alexandria, and great success
there. An account of the Therapeutae ( mentioned by Philo) and their excellent
manners, rules, and way of Life. These proved not to have been Christians by
several arguments. The Original of the mistake whence. S. Mark 's Preaching in
the Parts of Africa. His return to Alexandria, and diligence in his Ministry.
The manner of his Martyrdom. The time of it enquired into. The description of
his Person. His Gospel, when and where written, and why said to be Peter 's.
His great impartiality in his Relations. In what Language written. The Original
whether extant at this Day.

1. SAINT Mark, though carrying something of Roman in his Name, probably
assumed by him upon some great change, or accident of his Life, or which was
not unusual among the Jews, when going into the European Provinces of the Roman
Empire, taken up at his going for Italy and Rome, was doubtless born of Jewish
Parents, originally descended of the Tribe of Hieron. praef. in Marc. Tom. 9.
p. 87.
Levi, and the Line of the Priesthood, and (if H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 43. p. 209.
Nicephorus say true) Sister's Son to Peter, though by others against all
reason confounded with John surnamed Mark the Son of Mary, and Mark Sisters Son
to Barnabas. By the Ancients he is generally thought to have been one of the
Seventy Disciples, and Haeres. LI. p. 186.
Epiphanius expressly tell us, that he was one of those who taking exception at
our Lord's discourse of eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood, went back and
walked no more with him, but was seasonably reduced and reclaimed by Peter. But
no foundation appears either for the one or for the other; nay, Apud. Eusebius. l.
3. c. 39. p. 113.
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, who lived near those times, positively affirms
that he was no hearer nor follower of our Savior. He was converted by some of
the Apostles, and probably by S. Peter, who is said to have been his undertaker
at his Baptism (if I understand Isidore Petri discipulus, and in baptismate
filius. Isid. de vit. and ob. SS. c. 84. p. 542.
aright) for no other reason I suppose, than because he calls him his Son.
Indeed he was his constant attendant in his Travels, supplying the place of an
Amanuensis and Interpreter; for though the Apostles were Divinely inspired, and
among other miraculous powers had the gift of Languages conferred upon them,
yet was the interpretation of Tongues a gift more peculiar to some than others.
This might probably be S. Mark's Talent, in expounding S. Peter's Discourses,
whether by word or writing, to those who understood not the Language wherein
they were delivered. He accompanied him in his Apostolical progress, Preached
the Gospel in Naz. Orat. 25. p. 438.
Italy, and at Rome, where at the request of the Christians of those Parts he
composed and wrote his Gospel.

2. BY Peter he was sent into Egypt to plant Christianity in those Parts,
fixing his main residence at Alexandria, and the places thereabouts: where so
great (says H. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 16. p. 53.
Eusebius) was the success of his Ministry, that he converted Multitudes both
of Men and Women, not only to the embracing of the Christian Religion, but to a
more than ordinarily strict profession of it, insomuch that Philo wrote a Book
of their peculiar Rites and way of Life, the only reason why De Script. Eccl.
in Philone.
S. Hierom reckons him among the Writers of the Church. Indeed Philo the Jew
wrote a Book (...), extant at this day, wherein he speaks of a sort of Persons
called (...), who in many parts of the World, but especially in a pleasant
place near the Meraeotick Lake in Egypt had formed themselves into Religious
Societies, and gives a large account of their Rites and Customs, their strict,
philosophical, and contemplative course of life. He tells Phil. lib. de vita
contemplat. p. 891, 892. and seqq.
us of them, that when they first enter upon this way, they renounce all
secular interests and employments, and leaving their Estates to their
Relations, retire into Groves and Gardens, and Places devoted to solitude and
contemplation; that they had their Houses or Colleges, not contiguous, that so
being free from noise and tumult, they might the better minister to the designs
of a contemplative life; nor yet removed at too great a distance, that they
might maintain mutual society, and be conveniently capable of helping and
assisting one another. In each of these Houses there was an Oratory, called
(...) and (...), wherein they discharged the more secret and solemn Rites of
their Religion; divided in the middle with a Partition Wall three or four
Cubits high, the one apartment being for the Men, and the other for the Women:
Here they publicly met every Seventh day, where being set according to their
seniority, and having composed themselves with great decency and reverence, the
most aged Person among them, and best skilled in the Dogmata and Principles of
their Institution came forth into the midst, gravely and soberly discoursing
what might make the deepest impression upon their minds; the rest attending
with a profound silence, and only testifying their assent with the motion of
their Eyes or Head. Their discourses were usually mystical and allegorical,
seeking hidden senses under plain words, and of such an allegorical Philosophy
consisted the Books of their Religion, left them by their Ancestors: The Law
they compared to an Animal, the Letter of it resembling the Body, while the
Soul of it lay in those abstruse and recondite notions, which the external veil
and surface of the words concealed from vulgar understandings. He tells us
also, that they took very little care of the Body, perfecting their minds by
Precepts of Wisdom and Religion; the day they entirely spent in Pious and
Divine Meditations, in reading and expounding the Law and the Prophets, and the
Holy Volumes of the ancient Founders of their Sect, and in singing Hymns to the
honor of their Maker; absolutely temperate and abstemious, neither eating nor
drinking till Night, the only time they thought fit to refresh and regard the
Body, some of them out of an insatiable desire of growing in knowledge and
virtue, fasting many days together. What Diet they had was very plain and
simple, sufficient only to provide against hunger and thirst, a little Bread,
Salt and Water being their constant bill of fare: their clothes were as mean as
their food, designed only as a present security against cold and nakedness. And
this not only the case of men, but of pious and devout Women that lived (though
separately) among them; that they religiously observed every Seventh Day, and
especially the preparatory Week to the great solemnity, which they kept with
all expressions of a more severe abstinence and devotion. This and much more he
has in that Tract concerning them.

3. THESE excellent Persons Eusebius peremptorily affirms to have been
Christians, converted and brought under these admirable Rules and Institutions
of Life by S. Mark at his coming hither, accommodating all passages to the
Manners and Discipline of Christians: followed herein by Haeres. XXIX p. 57.
Epiphanius, De Script. in Philome.
Hierom, and others of old, as by Ad Ann. 64. n. 11.
Baronius, and some others of later time: and this so far taken for granted,
that Sozom H. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 12. p. 419. Cassian de Instit Monach. lib. 2. c.
5. p. 12.
many have hence fetched the rise of Monasteries and Religious Orders among
Christians. But whoever seriously and impartially considers Philo's account,
will plainly find that he intends it of Jews and Professors of the Mosaic
Religion, though whether Essenes, or of some other particular Sect among them,
I stand not to determine. That they were not Christians, is evident, besides
that Philo gives not the least intimation of it, partly because it is
improbable that Philo being a Jew should give so great a character and
commendation of Christians, so hateful to the Jews at that time in all places
of the World; partly, in that Philo speaks of them as an Institution of some
considerable standing, whereas Christians had but lately appeared in the World,
and were later come into Egypt; partly, because many parts of Philo's account
does no way suit with the state and manners of Christians at that time; as that
they withdrew themselves from public converse, and all affairs of civil life,
which Christians never did, but when forced by violent Persecutions, for
ordinarily, as Justin Martyr and Tertullian tell us, they promiscuously dwelt
in Towns and Cities, plowed their Lands, and followed their Trades, ate and
drank, and were clothed and habited like other men. So when he says, that
besides the Books of Moses and the Prophets, they had the Writings of the
Ancient Authors of their Sect and Institution; this cannot be meant of
Christians: for though Eusebius would understand it of the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, yet, besides that there were few of them published
when Philo wrote this discourse, they were however of too late an Edition to
come under the character of ancient Authors. Not to say that some of their
Rites and Customs were such, as the Christians of those days were mere
strangers to, not taken up by the Christian Church till many Years, and some of
them not till some Ages after. Nay some of them never used by any of the
Primitive Christians; Phil. ibid. p. 901, 902.
such were their religious dances, which they had at their Festival
Solemnities, especially that great one which they held at the end of every
Seven Weeks; when their entertainment being ended, they all rose up, the Men in
one Company, and the Women in another, dancing with various measures and
motions, each Company singing Divine Hymns and Songs, and having a Precentor
going before them, now one singing, and anon another, till in the conclusion
they joined in one common Chorus, in imitation of the triumphant Song sung by
Moses and the Israelites after their deliverance at the Red Sea. To all which
let me add, what a Learned N. Full. Miscell. Sacr. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Man has observed, that the Essenes (if Philo means them) were great Physicians
(thence probably called (...), Healers, though Lib. supr. citat. p. 889.
Philo, who is apt to turn all things into Allegory, refers it only to their
curing, (...), the Souls of Men infected and overrun with difficult and
disperate distempers, created by pleasures and extravagant appetites, and a
long train of other lusts and passions) De Bell. Judaic. lib. 2. (...). p. 786.
Josephus reporting of them, that they accurately study the Writings of the
Ancients, excerping thence whatever is conducive either to Soul or Body; and
that for the curing of Diseases, they diligently enquired into the Virtues of
Roots and Stones, that were most proper to drive away Distempers. An Account no
ways agreeing with the Christians of those times, who miraculously cured
Diseases without the Arts of Physic, or any other Preparations, than calling
the Name of Christ over the afflicted Person. Doubtless that which led Eusebius
into the mistake, was the conformity that he observed between the Christian
(...), in and before his time, who entered upon a more strict and severe course
of life, and these Therapeutae described by Philo, an ordinary fancy being able
to draw a fair parallel between them, and so it was but removing them some Ages
higher, and imagining them to have been converted and founded by S. Mark, and
the work was done. Indeed it is not to be doubted, but that Persons educated
under these excellent rules and methods of life, were more than ordinarily
prepared for the reception of Christianity (between which and their Principles
and Rules of Life, there was so great an affinity and agreement) which must
needs render our Evangelists success great in those Parts, and open the way for
men to come flocking over to the Faith.

4. S. MARK did not confine his Preaching to Alexandria, and the Oriental Parts
of Egypt, but removed S. Metaphr. Martyr. S. Marc. apud Sur. ad diem 25. Apr.
Procop. Diac. Laudat. S. Marc. ib. n. 8. Niceph. H. Eccl. l. 2. c. 43. p. 209.
Westward to the parts of Libya, going through the Countries of Marmarica,
Pentapolis, and others thereabouts, where though the People were both barbarous
in their manners, and idolatrous in their worship, yet by his Preaching and
Miracles he made way for the entertainment of the Gospel, and left them not,
till he had not only gained them to, but confirmed them in the profession of
it. Id ibid.
Returning to Alexandria he preached freely, and ordered and disposed the
affairs of the Church, and wisely provided for succession by constituting
Governors and Pastors of it. But the restless enemy of the Souls of Men would
not long suffer him to be quiet: It was the time of Easter, at what time the
great Solemnities of Serapis happened to be celebrated, when the minds of the
People being excited to a passionate vindication of the honor of their Idol,
broke in upon S. Mark, then engaged in the solemn celebration of Divine
worship, and binding his Feet with Cords, dragged him through the streets and
the most craggy places to the Bucelus, Vid. vit. ejus MS. Arabice script. ap.
Kirsten. p. 37.
a Precipice near the Sea, and for that Night thrust him into Prison, where his
Soul was by a Divine Vision erected and encouraged under the ruins of his
shattered Body. Early the next Morning the Tragedy began again, dragging him
about in the same manner, till his Flesh being raked off, and his Blood run
out, his spirits failed, and he expired. But their malice died not with him,
Metaphrastes adds that they burnt his Body, whose Bones and Ashes the
Christians there decently entombed near the place where he was wont to Preach.
His Body, at least the remains of it were afterward with great pomp removed
from Alexandria to Venice, where they are religiously honored, and he adopted
as the Tutelar Saint and Patron of that State, and one of the richest and
stateliest Churches erected to his Memory, that the World can boast of at this
Day. He suffered in the Month Pharmuthi, on the XXV of April, though the
certain Year of his Martyrdom is not precisely determined by the Ancients. Vbi
supra.
Kirstenius out of the Arabic Memoires of his Life says, it was in the
Fourteenth of the last Year of Claudius; De Script. Eccles. in Marc.
S. Hierom places it in the Eighth of Nero. But extravagantly wide is Synops.
de vit. and mort. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3 p. 148. col. 2.
Dorotheus his computation, who makes him to suffer in the time of Trajan, with
as much truth as Lib. 2. c. 43. p. 209.
Nicephorus on the other hand affirms him to have come into Egyyt in the Reign
of Tiberius. If in so great variety of Opinions I may interpose my conjecture,
I should reckon him to have suffered about the end of Nero's Reign: For
supposing him to have come with S. Peter to Rome about the Fifth or Sixth Year
of Nero, he might thence be dispatched to Alexandria, and spend the residue of
his Life and of that Emperor's Reign in planting Christianity in those parts of
the World. Sure I am that Adv. Haeres. lib. 3. c 1. page 229. citat. etiam ap.
Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 8. p. 172.
Irenaeus reports S. Mark to have outlived Peter and Paul, and that after
their decease he composed his Gospel out of those things which he had heard
Peter preach. But whatever becomes of that, it is evident that Irenaeus
supposed (whose supposition certainly was not founded upon mere fancy and
conjecture) that S. Mark for some considerable time survived the Martyrdom of
those two great Apostles. A passage that so troubled Christophorson (one of
those who in these later Ages first translated Eusebius into Latin) because
crossing the accounts of their Writers in this matter, that he chose rather to
expunge the word, decease, and substitute another of a quite different sense,
expressly contrary to the faith of all ancient Copies, and to the most ancient
Version of Irenaeus it self. But to return. S. Mark as to his Metaphr. ibid. n.
10. Niceph. ib. p. 210.
Person was of a middle size and stature, his Nose long, his Eyebrows turning
back, his Eyes graceful and amiable, his Head bald, his Beard prolix and gray,
his Gate quick, the constitution of his Body strong and healthful.

5. HIS Gospel, the only Book he left behind him, was, as before we observed,
written at the entreaty of the Converts at Clem. Al. Hypotyp. lib. 6. ap.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15 p. 53. Papias ib. l. 3. c. 39. p. 113
Rome, who not content to have heard Peter preach, pressed S. Mark his
Disciple, that he would commit to Writing an Historical account of what he had
delivered to them: which he performed with no less faithfulness than brevity,
all which S. Peter perused, ratified with his Authority, and commanded to be
publicly read in their Religious Assemblies. And though, as we noted but now,
Irenaeus seems to intimate that it was written after Peter's death: yet all
that can be inferred hence will be, what in it self is a matter of no great
moment and importance, that the Ancients were not agreed in assigning the exact
time when the several Gospels were published to the World. Vid. Pap. loc. supr.
citat.
It was frequently styled S. Peter's Gospel, not so much because dictated by
him to S. Mark, as because he principally composed it out of that account which
S. Peter usually delivered in his Discourses to the People. Which probably is
the reason of what Homil. 3. in Matthew. p. 30.
Chrysostom observes, that in his style and manner of expression he delights to
imitate S. Peter, representing much in a few words. Though he commonly reduces
the story of our Savior's Acts into a narrower compass than S. Matthew, yet
want there not passages, which he relates more largely than he. The last
Chapter of his Gospel, at least part of it, was (as Ad Hedib. Quaest. 3 p. 143
T. 3.
Hierom informs us) wanting in all ancient Greek Copies, rejected upon pretense
of some disagreement with the other Gospels, though, as he there shows, they
are fairly consistent with each other. His great impartiality in his Relations
appears from hence, (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 86. in Matthew. p. 719.
that he is so far from concealing the shameful lapse and denial of Peter, his
dear Tutor and Master, that he sets it down with some particular circumstances
and aggravations, which the other Evangelists take no notice of. Some dispute
has been made in what Language it was written, whether in Greek or Latin; That
which seems to give most countenance to the Latin Original, is the note that we
find at the end of the Syriack Version of this Gospel, where it is said that
Mark preached and declared his Holy Gospel at Rome (...); in the Roman, or the
Latin Tongue. An evidence that with me would almost carry the force of a
demonstration, were I assured that this note is of equal value and authority
with that Ancient Version, generally supposed to come very few Centuries short
of the Apostolic Age. But we know how usual it is for such additions to be
made by some later hand. And what credit is to be given to the subscriptions at
the end of S. Paul's Epistles, we have showed elsewhere. Besides, that it is
not here said that he wrote, but that he Preached his Gospel at Rome in that
Language. The Advocates of the Romish Church plead, that it is very congruous
and suitable, that it should at first be consigned to Writing in that Language,
being principally designed for the use of the Christians at Rome. An objection
that will easily vanish, when we consider, that as the Convert Jews there
understood very little Latin, so there were very few Romans that understood not
Greek, it being (as appears from the Writers of that Age) the gentile and
fashionable Language of those Times. Nor can any good reason be assigned, why
it should be more inconvenient for S. Mark to write his Gospel in Greek for the
use of the Romans, than that S. Paul should in the same Language write his
Epistle to that Church. The Original Greek Copy, written with S. Mark's own
hand, is said to be extant at Venice at this Day. Corn. a Lap. praefat. in
Marc. p. 562.
Written (they tell us) by him at Aquileia, and thence after many Hundreds of
Years translated to Venice, where it is still preserved, though the Letters so
worn out with length of time, that they are not capable of being read. A story
which as I cannot absolutely disprove, so am I not very forward to believe, and
that for more reasons than I think worth while to insist on in this place.

The End of S. Mark 's Life.
THE LIFE OF S. LUKE the Evangelist.
S. LUKE.
2. COR. 8.8.19. The Brother, whose praise is in ye Gospel through out all ye
Churches: And not that only, but who was also chosen of ye Churches to travel
with us.

St. Luke his Martyrdom.
Col. 4.14. Luke the beloved Physician. The brother whose Praise is in the
Gospel.

2 Cor. 4.11. We are delivered unto death for Jesus sake. Bearing in the body
the dying of the Lord Jesus.



Antioch S. Luke 's birthplace. The fame and dignity of it. His learned and
liberal education. His study of Physic. His skill in Painting. S. Luke none of
the Seventy. Converted, where, and by whom. His constant attendance upon S.
Paul. In what parts he principally exercised his Ministry. The place, and
manner of his Death. The translation of his Body to Constantinople. His
Writings. Theophilus, who. His Gospel, where written, and upon what occasion.
How fitted for it. The Acts of the Apostles written at Rome, and when. Why
principally containing the Acts of S. Paul. This Book why publicly read just
after Easter in the Primitive Church. S. Luke 's polite and exact style and way
of writing above the rest.

1. SAINT Luke was born at Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria, a City celebrated
for its extraordinary blessings and eminences, the pleasantness of its
situation, the fertility of its soil, the riches of its Traffic, the wisdom of
its Senate, the learning of its Professors, the civility and politeness of its
Inhabitants, by the Pens of some of the greatest Dion. Chrysostom. Orat. 47. de
Patria. Liban. Orat. 11. cui Tit. (...). Tom. 2. Chrysostom. Encom. Antioch. Ti
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 17. ad Pop Antioch. p. 198. Tom. 1.
Orators of their times: And yet above all these renowned for this one peculiar
honor, that here it was that the Disciples were first called Christians. It
was an University, replenished with Schools of learning, wherein were
Professors of all Arts and Sciences. So that being born in the very lap of the
Muses, he could not well miss of an ingenuous and liberal education, his
natural parts meeting with the advantages of great improvements. Nay, we are S.
Metaphr. apud Sur. ad diem 18. October. p. 289.
told, that he studied not only at Antioch, but in all the Schools both of
Greece and Egypt, whereby he became accomplished in all parts of Learning and
humane Sciences. Being thus furnished out with skill in all the preparatory
Institutions of Philosophy, he more particularly applied himself to the study
of Physic, for which the Grecian Academies were most famous; though they that
hence infer the quality of his Birth and Fortunes, forget to consider, that
this noble Art was in those times generally managed by persons of no better
rank than servants: Upon which account a Learned Grot. Annot. in Lue. 1.
man conceives S. Luke, though a Syrian by birth, to have been a servant at
Rome, where he sometimes practiced Physic, and whence being manumitted, he
returned into his own Country, and probably continued his profession all his
life, it being so fairly consistent with, and in many cases so subservient to
the Ministry of the Gospel, and the care of Souls. Besides his abilities in
Physic, he is said to have been very skilful in Metaphr. ib. Niceph. l. 2. c.
43.
Painting, and there are no less than three or four several pieces still in
being, pretended to have been drawn with his own hand; a tradition which De
imag. non manuf. and a S. Luca pict. c. 18. and 19. p. 354.
Gretser the Jesuit sets himself with a great deal of pains, and to very little
purpose to defend, though his Authors, either in respect of credit or
antiquity, deserve very little esteem and value. Romans Subterran. Part. 2. c.
46. n. 10. p. 188.
Of more authority with me would be an ancient Inscription found in a Vault
near the Church of S. Mary in via lata at Rome, supposed to have been the place
where S. Paul dwelt, wherein mention is made of a Picture of the B. Virgin, UNA
EX VII. AB. LUCA DEPICTIS, being one of the seven painted by S. Luke.

2. HE was a Jewish Proselyte, Antioch abounding with men of that Nation, who
had here their Synagogues and Schools of Education, so that we need not with
Theophyl. Argum. in Luc. p. 293.
Theophylact send him to Jerusalem to be instructed in the study of the Law. As
for that opinion of Haeres. 51. p. 188.
Epiphanius and others, that he was one of the Seventy Disciples, one of those
that deserted our Lord for the unwelcome discourse he made to them, but
recalled afterward by S. Paul, I behold it as a story of the same coin and
stamp with that of S. Mark's leaving Christ upon the same occasion, and being
reduced by Peter, and that the one was made to answer the other; as upon no
better ground it is Theoph. ut prius. Arabs vit. Script ap. Kirsten. de Quat.
Evang. p. 39. Luke 1.2.
said that he was one of those two Disciples that were going to Emmaus. For
besides the silence of Scripture in the case, he himself plainly confesses,
that he was not from the beginning an Eyewitness and minister of the Word.
Most probable it is, that he was coverted by S. Paul during his abode at
Antioch, when as the Apostles of catchers of Fish were become fishers of men,
so he of a Physician of the Body became a Physician of the Soul. This, Loc.
supra laudat.
Nicephorus will have to have been done at Thebes, the chief City of Boeotia,
about forty miles from Athens, though it appears not to me by any credible
Author that ever S. Paul was there. He became ever after his inseparable
companion and fellow laborer in the Ministry of the Gospel, especially after
his going into Macedonia, from which time in recording the History of S. Paul's
travels, Acts 16.10.
he always speaks of himself in his own Person. He followed him in all his
dangers, was with him at his several arraignments at Jerusalem, accompanied him
in his desperate Voyage to Rome, where he still attended on him to serve his
necessities, and supply those ministerial Offices, which the Apostle's
confinement would not suffer him to undergo, and especially in carrying
messages to those Churches where he had planted Christianity. This infinitely
endeared him to S. Paul, who owned him for his fellow laborer, called him the
beloved Physician, and the Brother whose praise is in the Gospel, throughout
all the Churches, which the Ancients, and especially Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 44.
Ignatius, apply to our Evangelist.

3. PROBABLE it is that he did not wholly leave S. Paul till he had finished
his course, and crowned all with Martyrdom, though there are that tell Metaphr.
ubi supr. n. 11.
us, that he left S. Paul at Rome, and returned back into the East, traveled
into Egypt and the parts of Libya, Preached the Gospel, wrought Miracles,
converted Multitudes, constituted Guides and Ministers of Religion, yea, that
he himself took upon him the Episcopal charge of the City of Thebais.
Epiphanius gives us this account, that he first Preached in Dalmatia, Vbi supra.
and Galatia (he reads it (...), in Gaul, or France, and peremptorily affirms,
that they are all mistaken that say that it was Galatia where Crescens
Preached, though some think that himself in the mean while is under the most
confident mistake) then in Italy and Macedonia, where he spared no pains,
declined no dangers that he might faithfully discharge the trust committed to
him. The Ancients are not very well agreed, either about the time or manner of
his death, some affirming him to die in Egypt, others in Greece, the Ad diem
xviii. October. p. 645.
Roman Martyrologie in Bithynia, De vit. and mort. App. in Bibl. Pp. Tom. 3. p.
148.
Dorotheus at Ephesus; some make him die a natural, others a violent death.
Indeed neither Eusebius nor S. Hierom take any notice of it: But Orat. 1. in
Julian. p. 76.
Nazianzen, Epist. 12. ad Sever. de Basil. p. 138.
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and several other expressly assert his Martyrdom,
whereof Lib. 2. c. 43. p. 210.
Nicephorus gives this particular account, that coming into Greece he
successfully Preached, and baptized many Converts into the Christian Faith,
till a Party of Infidels making head against him, drew him to execution, and in
want of a Cross whereon to dispatch him presently, hanged him upon an
Olive Tree, in the eightieth (the eighty-fourth says De Script. Eccl. in Luca.
S. Hierom) year of his Age. Vit. Quat. Evangel. p. 45.
Kirstenius from an Ancient Arabic Writer, makes him to have suffered
Martyrdom at Rome, which he thinks might probably be after S. Paul's first
imprisonment there, and departure thence, when S. Luke being left behind as his
Deputy to supply his place, was shortly after put to death, the reason (says
he) why he no longer continued his History of the Apostles Acts, which surely
he would have done, had he lived any considerable time after S. Paul's
departure. His Body afterward, by the command of Constantine, or his Son
Constantius, was solemnly removed to Constantinople, and buried in the great
Church built to the memory of the Apostles.

4. TWO Books he wrote for the use of the Church, his Gospel, and the History
of the Apostles Acts, both dedicated to Theophilus, which many of the Orig.
Homil. 1. in Luc. fol. 94. Ambros. in Luc. 1. p. 9. T. 5. vid. Epiph. Haeres.
51. p. 186.
Ancients suppose to be but a feigned name, denoting no more than a lover of
God, a title common to every Christian. While others with better reason
conclude it the proper name of a particular person, especially since the style
of most excellent is attributed to him, the usual title and form of address in
those times to Princes and great men. Argum. in Luc. p. 293.
Theophylact styles him (...), a man of Consular dignity, and probably a
Prince; the Lib. 10. prope fin. fol. 120.
Author of the Recognitions makes him a Nobleman of Antioch, converted by
Peter, and who upon his conversion gave his House to the Church for the place
of their public and solemn Meetings. We may probably suppose him to have been
some Magistrate, whom S. Luke had converted and baptized, to whom he now
dedicated these Books, not only as a testimony of honorable respect, but as a
means of giving him further certainty and assurance of those things, wherein he
had been instructed by him. For his Gospel, Prooem. in Matthew. Tom. 9.
S. Hierom supposes it to have been written in Achaia during his travels with
S. Paul in those parts, whose help he is generally said to have made use of in
the composing of it, and that this the Apostle primarily intends when he so
often speaks of his Gospel. But whatever assistance S. Paul might contribute
toward it, we are sure the Evangelist himself tells us, that he derived his
intelligence in these matters from those, who from the beginning had been
eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word. Nor does it in the least detract from
the authority of his relations, that he himself was not present at the doing of
them; for if we consider who they were from whom he derived his accounts of
things, Habuit utique authenticam paraturam, as Adv. Marc. lib. 4. c. 2. p. 414
Tertullian speaks, he had a stock both of credit and intelligence sufficiently
authentic to proceed upon, delivering nothing in his whole History but what he
had immediately received from persons present at, and concerned in the things
which he has left upon record. The occasion of his writing it, is thought to
have been partly to prevent those false and fabulous relations which even then
began to be obtruded upon the World, partly, to supply what seemed wanting in
those two Evangelists that wrote before him; and the additions or larger
explications of things are particularly enumerated by Adv. Haeres. lib. 3. c.
14. p. 272.
Irenaeus. He mainly insists upon what relates to Christ's Priestly Office, and
though recording other parts of the Evangelical story, yet it ever is with a
peculiar respect to his Priesthood. Upon which account the Ancients in
accommodating the four Symbolical representments in the Prophets Vision to the
four Evangelists, assigned the Ox or Calf to S. Luke.

5. HIS History of the Apostolic Acts was written no doubt at Rome, at the end
of S. Paul's two Years imprisonment there, with which he concludes his story;
it contains the Actions, and sometimes the sufferings of some principal
Apostles, especially S. Paul; for, besides that his activity in the cause of
Christ made him bear a greater part both in doing and suffering, S. Luke was
his constant attendant, an eyewitness of the whole carriage of his life, and
privy to his most intimate transactions, and therefore capable of giving a more
full and satisfactory account and relation of them; seeing no evidence or
testimony in matters of fact can be more rational and convictive, than his who
reports nothing but what he has heard and seen. Among other things he gives us
a particular account of those great miracles which the Apostles did for the
confirmation of their doctrine. And this (as Sermon. 73. Cur. Act. App. legantur
in Pentec. Tom. 5.
Chrysostom informs us) was the reason why in the Primitive times the Book of
the Acts, though containing those Actions of the Apostles that were done after
Pentecost were yet usually read in the Church before it, in the space between
that and Easter, when as at all other times those parts of the Gospel were read
which were proper to the season, it was ( says he) because the Apostles
miracles being the grand confirmation of the truth of Christ's Resurrection,
and those Miracles recorded in that Book, it was therefore thought most proper
to be read next to the feast of the Resurrection. In both these Books his way
and manner of writing is exact and accurate, his style polite and elegant,
sublime and lofty, and yet clear and perspicuous, flowing with an easy and
natural grace and sweetness, admirably accommodate to an historical design, all
along expressing himself in a vein of purer Greek, than is to be found in the
other Writers of the Holy Story. Indeed being born and bred at Antioch (than
which no place more famous for Oratory and Eloquence) he could not but carry
away a great share of the native genius of that place, though his style is
sometimes allayed with a tang of the Syriack and Hebrew dialect. It was
observed of old (as Comm. in c. 6. Esai. p. 30. T. 5. ibid. in c. 28. p. 118.
Epist. ad Damas. p. 124. T. 3.
S. Hierom tells us) that his skill was greater in Greek than Hebrew, that
therefore he always makes use of the Septuagint Translation, and refuses
sometimes to render words, when the propriety of the Greek Tongue will not bear
it. In short, as an Historian, he was faithful in his relations, elegant in his
Writings; as a Minister, careful and diligent for the good of Souls; as a
Christian, devout and pious: and who crowned all the rest with the laying down
his life for the testimony of that Gospel, which he had both Preached and
Published to the World.

The End of S. Luke' s Life.
DYPTYCHA APOSTOLICA: OR, A Brief Enumeration and Account of the APOSTLES and
their SUCCESSORS, FOR THE First Three Hundred Years in the Five Great Churches,
said to have been Founded by them, thence called by the Ancients, APOSTOLICAL
CHURCHES, VIZ. Antioch, Rome, Jerusalem, Byzantium or Constantinople, and
Alexandria.
ANTIOCH.
THIS I place first, partly because it is generally acknowledged even by the
Romish Writers, that a Church was founded here by S. Peter some considerable
time before that at Rome; partly because here it was that the Venerable name of
Christians did first commence. In which respect the Ap. Theod. H. Eccles. lib.
5. c 9. p. 151.
Fathers in the Council at Constantinople under Nectarius, in their Synodicon
to them at Rome, style the Church of Antioch, (...), The most Ancient, and
truly Apostolical; and Homil. 3. ad Pop. Ant. Tom. 1. p. 40.
S. Chrysostom, The head of the whole World. The Succession of its Bishops till
the time of Constantine (which shall be the Boundary of this Catalogue) was as
follows.

I. S. Peter the Apostle; who governed this Church at least 7. Years.
Nicephorus of Constantinople says Eleven. II. Euodius, who sat 23. Years. In
his time the Disciples were first called Christians at Antioch. III. Ignatius.
After near 40. Years Presidency over this Church he was carried out of Syria to
Rome, and there thrown to wild Beasts in the Theater, Ann. Chr. 110. Trajan.
11. IV. Heron, he was Bishop 20. Years: To him succeeded V. Corneliu^ who kept
the place 13. Years, dying Ann. Chr. 142. VI. Eros, 26, or as Eusebius, 24.
years. VII. Theophilus, 13. a man of great Parts and Learning, many of his
Works were extant in Eusebius his time, and some of them we still have at this
day. VIII. Maximinus, 13. he dying, the next that was chosen was IX. Serapio,
25. many of his Works are mentioned by Eusebius and S. Hierom. To him succeeded
X. Asclepiades, a man of great worth and eminency, and invincible constancy in
the time of persecution; he continued in this See 9. years. XI. Philetus, 8.
XII. Zebinus, or Zebennus, he sat 6. years. XIII. Babylas, 13. after many
conflicts and sufferings for the Faith, he received the crown of Martyrdom
under Decius, and commanded his Chains to be buried with him. XIV. Fabius, or
as the Patriarch Nicephorus calls him, Flavius, possessed the Chair 9. years.
He was a little inclining toward Novatianism. XV. Demetrianus, he sat Bishop,
says Nicephorus 4, says Eusebius, 8. years. XVI. Paulus Samosatenus sat in the
chair 8. years, when for his Unepiscopal manners and practices, his unfound
Dogmata and principles, and especially his mean and unworthy opinions
concerning our Savior, he was condemned and deposed by a Synod at Antioch,
whose Synodical determination is at large extant in Eusebius. XVII. Domnus
succeeded in the place of the deposed. He was son to Demetrian, Paulus his
predecessor in that See; constituted and ordained to the place by the Fathers
of that Synod, who farther give him this honorable character, that he was a
man endued with all Episcopal virtues and ornaments. Eusebius makes him to have
sitten 6, Nicephorus but 2. years. XVIII. Timaeus, he sat in the Chair 10.
years. XIX. Cyrillus, who presided over that Church in the account of
Nicephorus 15, of Eusebius 24. years. XX. Tyrannus, he sat 13. years; in his
time began the tenth Persecution under Dioclesian, which raged with great
severity. XXI. Vitalis, 6. XXII. Philogonius, 5, succeeded by XXIII. Paulinus,
or as Nicephorus calls him, Paulus, who after five years was deposed and driven
out by the prevalency of the Arrian faction. XXIV. Eustathius, formerly Bishop
of Beroea, a learned man, and of great note and eminency in the Council of
Nice, the first general Council, summoned by the Great Constantine, after he
had restored peace and prosperity to the Church.
ROME.
THE foundation of this Church is with just probabilities of reason by many of
the Fathers equally attributed to Peter and Paul, the one as Apostle of the
Circumcision preaching to the Jews, while the other probably as the Apostle of
the Uncircumcision preached to the Gentiles. Its Bishops succeeded in this
order.

I. S. Peter and S. Paul, who both suffered Martyrdom under Nero. II. Linus,
the son of Herculaneus, a Tuscan; he is mentioned by S. Paul, he sat between
11. and 12. years. III. Cletus, or Anacletus, or Anencletus, supposed by many
to be the same person, (though others who reckon Anacletus a Greek, born at
Athens, make them distinct, whom yet we have left out, not being mentioned by
Eusebius) a Roman, the son of Aemilianus, sat 9, though others say but 2.
years. IV. Clemens, a Roman, born in Mount Caelius, the son of Faustinus, near
akin, say some, to the Emperor: He was condemned to dig in the Marble-Quarries
near the Euxin Sea, and by the command of Trajan with an Anchor about his Neck
thrown into the Sea. He was Bishop of Rome 9. years, and 4. months. V.
Euarestus, by birth a Greek, but his Father a Jew of Bethlehem. He is said to
have been crowned with Martyrdom the last year of Trajan, in the ninth of his
Bishopric, or as others, the thirteenth. VI. Alexander, a Roman, though young
in years, was grave in his manners and conversation. He sat 10. years and 7.
months, and died a Martyr. VII. Xystus, or Sixtus, a Roman, he was Martyred in
the tenth year of his Bishopric, and buried in the Vatican. VIII. Telesphorus,
a Greek, succeeded; Justin the Martyr flourished in his time. He died a Martyr,
having sat 11. Years, and 3. months; 10. years, 8. months say others: and lies
buried near S. Peter in the Vatican. IX. Hyginus, the son of an Athenian
Philosopher was advanced to the Chair under Antoninus Pius: He sat 4. years;
Eusebius says 8. X. Pius, an Italian, born at Aquileia, he died having been
Bishop 11. years, and 4. months; according to Eusebius, 15. years. XI.
Anicetus, born in Syria: He is said after 9, or as others, 11. years to have
suffered Martyrdom, and was buried in the Via Appia in the Cemetery of
Callistus. In his time Polycarp came to Rome. XII. Soter, or as Nicephorus
calls him, Soterichus, was a Campanian, the son of Concordius. There was an
intercourse of Letters between him and Dionysius Bishop of Corinth. He died
after he had sat 9. years, or as Eusebius reckons, 7. XIII. Eleutherius, born
at Nicopolis in Greece. To him Lucius King of Britain sent a Letter and an
Embassy. He sat 15. years, died Ann. Chr. 186. and lies buried in the Vatican.
XIV. Victor, an African, the son of Felix, a man of a furious and intemperate
spirit, as appeared in his passionate proceedings in the controversy about the
observation of Easter. He was Bishop 10. years. Onuphrius assigns him 12.
years, and one month. XV. Zephyrinus, a Roman, succeeded, and possessed the
chair 8, but as others, 18. years; 20. says Onuphrius. A pious and learned man,
but a little warping toward the Errors of Montanus. XVI. Callistus, or
Calixtus, the son of Domitius, a Roman: a prudent and modest man. He suffered
much in the Persecution under Alexander Severus, under whom he became a Martyr,
being thrown into a Well by the procurement of Ulpian the great Lawyer, but
severe enemy of Christians. He sat 6. years, or 5. as others, and one month;
and though he made a Cemetery, called after his own name, yet was he buried in
that of Calepodius in the Appian way. XVII. Urbanus, the son of Pontianus, a
Roman, after 4, or as some 6. years, he suffered Martyrdom for the Faith:
Eusebius has 5, S. Hierom in his translation 9. He was buried in Pretextatus
his Cemetery in the Appian way. XVIII. Pontianus, the son of Calphurnius, a
Roman; for his bold reproving the Roman Idolatry he was banished into the
Island Sardinia, where he died; he was Bishop about 3, or 4, or as Eusebius, 5.
years. XIX. Anteros, a Greek, the son of Romulus, He died by that he had kept
his place one month, though others without reason make him to have lived in it
many years, and was buried in the Cemetery of Callistus. XX. Fabianus, a Roman,
he was unexpectedly chosen Bishop, while several others being in competition, a
Pigeon suddenly descended, and sat upon his head, the great emblem of the Holy
Spirit. He died a Martyr after 14. years; buried in the same place with his
predecessor. XXI. Cornelius, a Roman, he opposed and condemned Novatian:
frequent Letters passed between him and Cyprian. After somewhat more than two
years he was first cruelly whipped, and then beheaded: buried in a Vault within
the Grange of Lucina, near the Appian way. XXII. Lueius, a Roman, sat 2, or as
others, 3. years. He suffered martyrdom by the command of Valerian, and was
buried in Callistus his Cemetery. XXIII. Stephanus, a Roman, the son of Julius:
Great contests were between him and Cyprian about rebaptizing those who had
been baptized by Heretics. He was beheaded after he had sat about 2. or 3.
years, though others say 7; and buried with his predecessor. XXIV. Xystus, a
Greek, formerly a Philosopher of Athens. After 1, or as others compute, 2.
years, and 10. months, he suffered Martyrdom, Eusebius reckons it 8. years.
XXV. Dionysius, of a Monk made Bishop, (...), in the judgment of Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria, a truly learned and admirable person. The time of his
Presidency is uncertainly assigned, 6, 9, 10, 11. Eusebius extends it to 12.
years. XXVI. Felix, a Roman: In his time arose the Manichaean Heresy. He
suffered about the fourth or fifth year of his Episcopacy, and lies buried in
the Aurelian way, in a Cemetery of his own, two miles from Rome. XXVII.
Eutychianus, a Tuscan, a man exceedingly careful of the burial of martyrs,
after one years space was himself crowned with martyrdom: Eusebius allows him
but 8. months, Onuphrius 8. years and 6. months. XXVIII. Caius, or as Eusebius
calls him, Gaianus, a Dalmatian, kinsman to the Emperor Dioclesian, and in the
Persecution under him became a martyr. He sat 11. years, some say longer.
Eusebius, 15. years: He was beheaded and buried in Callistus his Cemetery.
XXIX. Marcellinus a Roman: Through fear of torment he did sacrifice to the
gods; but recovering himself, died a martyr, after he had sat 8, or 9. years.
He was beheaded, and buried in the Cemetery of Priscilla in the Salarian way.
To him succeeded XXX. Marcellus, a Roman; he was condemned by Maxentius the
Tyrant to keep Beasts in a Stable, which yet he performed with his prayers and
exercises of devotion. He died after five Years, and six months, and was buried
in the Cemetery of Priscilla. XXXI. Eusebius, a Greek, the son of a Physician.
He suffered much under the Tyranny of Maxentius. He sat 6. years say some, 4.
say others, though Eusebius allows him but 7. months, Onuphrius 1. year, and 7.
months; he was buried in the Appian way near Callistus his Cemetery. XXXII.
Miltiades, an African. He might be a Confessor under Maxentius, but could not
be a martyr under Maximinus, as some report him. He sat 3. or 4, though others
assign him but 2. years: and was buried in the Cemetery of Callistus. XXXIII.
Silvester, a Roman. He was elected into the place. Ann. Chr. CCCXIV. fetched
from the mountain Soracte, whither he had fled for fear of Persecution. He was
highly in favor with Constantine the Great. He sat 23, Nicephorus says 28.
years.
JERUSALEM.
THE Church of Jerusalem may in some sense be said to have been founded by our
Lord himself, as it was for some time cultivated and improved by the Ministry
of the whole College of Apostles. The Bishops of it were as follows.

I. S. James the Less, the Brother of our Lord, by him, say some, immediately
constituted Bishop, but as others more probably by the Apostles: He was thrown
off the Temple, and knocked on the head with a Fullers Club. II. Symeon, the
son of Cleopas, brother to Joseph, our Lord's reputed Father. He sat in this
Chair 23. years, and suffered martyrdom in the reign of Trajan, in the one
hundred and twentieth year of his Age. III. Justus succeeded in his room, and
sat 6. years. IV. Zachaeus, or as Nicephorus the Patriarch calls him,
Zacharias, 4. V. Tobias; to him after 4. years succeeded VI. Benjamin: who sat
2. years. VII. John: who continued the same space. VIII. Matthias, or
Matthaeus, 2. years. IX. Philippus, one Year: next came X. Seneca, who sat 4.
years. XI. Justus, 4. XII. Levi, or Lebes, 2. XIII. Ephrem, or Ephres, or as
Epiphanius styles him, Vaphres, 2. XIV. Joseph, 2. XV. Judas, 2. Most of these
Bishops we may observe to have sat but a short time, following one another with
a very quick succession. Which doubtless was in a great measure owing to the
turbulent and unquiet humor of the Jewish Nation, frequently rebelling against
the Roman powers, whereby they provoked them to fall heavy upon them, and cut
off all that came in their way, making no distinction between Jews and
Christians: as indeed they were all Jews, though differing in the Rites of
their Religion. For hitherto the Bishops of Jerusalem had successively been of
the Circumcision, the Church there having been entirely made up of Jewish
converts. But Jerusalem being now utterly laid waste, and the Jews dispersed
into all other Countries, the Gentiles were admitted not only into the body of
that Church, but even into the Episcopal chair. The first whereof was XVI.
Marcus, who sat 8. years. XVII. Cassianus, 8. XVIII. Publius, 5. XIX. Maximus,
4. XX. Julianus, 2. XXI. Caianus, 3. XXII. Symmachus, 2. XXIII. Caius, 3. XXIV.
Julianus, 4. XXV. Elias, 2. I find not this Bishop mentioned by Eusebius; but
he is recorded by Nicephorus of Constantinople. XXVI. Capito, 4. XXVII.
Maximus, 4. XXVIII. Antoninus, 5. XXIX. Valens, 3. XXX. Dulichianus, 2. XXXI.
Narcissus, 4. He was a man of eminent piety, famous for the great miracles
which he wrought: but not being able to bear the aspersions which some unjustly
cast upon him (though God signally and miraculously vindicated his innocence)
he left his Church, and retired into deserts and solitudes. In his absence was
chosen XXXII. Dius, who sat 8. years. After him XXXIII. Germanio, 4. XXXIV.
Gordius, 5. In his time Narcissus, as one from the dead, returned from his
solitudes, and was importuned by the People again to take the government of the
Church upon him; being highly reverenced by them, both for his strict and
Philosophical course of life, and the signal vengeance which God took of his
accusers. And in this second administration he continued 10. years, suffering
martyrdom when he was near 120. years old. To relieve the infirmities of his
great Age, they took in to be his Colleague XXXV. Alexander, formerly Bishop in
Cappadocia, who at that time had out of devotion taken a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem; the choice being extraordinarily designed by a particular revelation
from Heaven. He was an eminent Confessor, and after having sat 15. Years, died
in Prison under the Decian Persecution. By him Origin was ordained Presbyter.
He was a great Patron of Learning as well as Religion, a studious preserver of
the Records of the Church. He erected a Library at Jerusalem, which he
especially furnished with the Writings and Epistles of Ecclesiastical Persons.
And out of this treasury it was that Eusebius borrowed a great part of his
materials for the composing of his History. XXXVI. Mazabanes, 9. years. XXXVII.
Hymenaeus, 23. XXXVIII. Zabdas, 10. XXXIX. Hermon, 9. He was, as Eusebius tells
us, the last Bishop of this See before that fatal Persecution that raged even
in his time. XL. Macarius, ordained Ann. Christ. CCCXV. He was present in the
great Nicene Council. He sat, says Nicephorus of Constantinople, 20. years, but
S. Hierom allows him a much longer time.
BYZANTIUM, afterward called CONSTANTINOPLE.
THAT this Church was first founded by S. Andrew, we have showed in his Life.
The succession of its Bishops was as follows.

I. S. Andrew the Apostle. He was crucified at Patrae in Achaia. II. Stachys,
whom S. Paul calls, his beloved Stachys, ordained Bishop by S. Andrew; he sat
16. years. III. Onesimus, 14. IV. Polycarpus, 17. V. Plutarchus, 16. VI.
Sedecio, 9. VII. Diogenes, 15. Of the last three no mention is made in
Nicephorus of Constantinople, but they are delivered by Nicephorus Callistus,
lib. 8. c. 6. p. 540. VIII. Eleutherius, 7. IX. Felix, 5. X. Polycarpus, 17.
XI. Athenodorus, 4. He erected a Church called Elea, afterward much beautified
and enlarged by Constantine the Great. XII. Euzoius, 16. Though Nicephorus
Callistus allow but 6. XIII. Laurentius, 11. Years and 6. months. XIV. Alypius,
13. XV. Pertinax, a man of Consular dignity, he built another Church near the
Seaside, which he called, Peace. He sat 19. years, which Nicephorus Callistus
reduces to 9. XVI. Olympianus, 11. XVII. Marcus, 13. XVIII. Cyriacus, or
Cyrillianus, 16. XIX. Constantinus, 7. In the first year of his Bishopric he
built a Church in the North part of the City, which he dedicated to the honor
of Euphemia the Martyr, who had suffered in that Place. In this Oratory he
spent the remainder of his life, quitting his Episcopal Chair to XX. Titus, who
sat 35. years and 6. months, though Nicephorus Callistus makes it 37. years.
After him came XXI. Dometius, Brother (as they tell us) to the Emperor Probus,
he was Bishop 21. years, 6. months. XXII. Probus succeeded his Father Dometius,
and sat 12. Years. As after him XXIII. Metrophanes his brother, who governed
that Church 10. Years. And in his time it was that Constantine translated the
Imperial Court hither, enlarged and adorned it, called it after his own name,
and made it the seat of the Empire. XXIV. Alexander succeeded, a man of great
piety and integrity, zealous and constant in maintaining the truth against the
blasphemies of Arius. He sat 23. years.
ALEXANDRIA.
THE foundations of this Church were laid, and a great part of its
superstructure raised by S. Mark, who though not strictly and properly an
Apostle, yet being an Apostle at large, and immediately commissionated by S.
Peter; it justly obtained the honor of an Apostolical Church. Its Bishops and
Governors are thus recorded.

I. S. Mark the Evangelist, of whose Travels and Martyrdom we have spoken in
his Life. Nicephorus of Constantinople makes him to sit two years. II. Anianus,
charactered by Eusebius, (...), a man beloved of God, and admirable in all
things. He ruled in that Throne 22. Years. III. Avilius, 12, or as Eusebius,
13. IV. Cerdo, succeeded about the first year of Trajan; he sat 10. years,
according to Eusebius, 11. V. Primus, 12. VI. Justus, or Justinus, 10. VII.
Eumenes, 10, or as Eusebius, 13. S. Hierom in his Translation calls him
Hymenaeus. VIII. Marcus or Marcianus, 13, or as Eusebius, 10. IX. Celadion, 10,
but in Eusebius his computation, 14. X. Agrippinus, 14, according to Eusebius,
12. XI. Julianus, 15, though Eusebius allows but 10. XII. Demetrius, 21, but
Eusebius more truly makes him to have governed that Church no less than 43.
years. He was a man of great zeal and piety, and underwent many troubles in the
Persecution at Alexandria. He was at first a great friend to Origin, but
afterward became his enemy, laying some irregularities to his charge: partly
out of emulation at the great reputation which Origin had gained in the World;
partly, in that Origin had suffered himself to be ordained Presbyter by two
other Bishops, Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Caesarea.
XIII. Heraclas, a man of a Philosophical genius, and way of life. He was
educated under the institution of Origin, and by him taken to be his Assistant
in the School of the Catechumens, the whole government whereof he afterward
resigned to him; and upon the death of Demetrius he was advanced to the
government of that Church, the care whereof he took for 16. Years; though
Nicephorus of Constantinople by a mistake, I suppose, for his predecessor,
makes it 43. XIV. Dionysius, 17. He was one of the most eminent Bishops of his
time. He was one of Origen's Scholars, then preferred first Master of the
Catechetical School at Alexandria, and afterward Bishop of that See. In the
Persecution under Decius he was banished first to Taposiris, a little Town
between Alexandria and Canopus; then to Cephro, and other Places in the Deserts
of Libya. But a large account of his own and others sufferings, with many other
transactions of those times, we have out of his own Letters, yet extant in
Eusebius. He died in the Twelfth Year of the Emperor Gallienus. XV. Maximus;
of a Presbyter he was made Bishop of Alexandria; he sat in that Chair 18. Years
according to Eusebius his computation, though Nicephorus of Constantinople
assign but 8. XVI. Theonas, 17, or according to S. Hierom's Version of
Eusebius, 19. To him succeeded XVII. Petrus, 12. He began his office three
Years before the last Persecution. A man of infinite strictness and accuracy,
and of indefatigable industry for the good of the Church. He suffered in the
Ninth Year of the Persecution, with the loss of his Head, gaining the Crown of
Martyrdom. After whose death came in the prosperous and happy days of the
Church, Constantine the Great turning the black and dismal scene of things into
a state of calmness and serenity. XVIII. Achillas, 9, though Nicephorus of
Constantinople allows him but one Year. By him Arius upon his submission was
ordained Presbyter. XIX. Alexander, 23, Under him Arius began more openly to
broach his Heresy at Alexandria, who was thereupon excommunicated and thrust
out by Alexander, and shortly after condemned by the Fathers of the Council of
Nice.
FINIS.

