IMPRIMATUR

Sam. Parker Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Gilberto
Archiep. Cantuar. a sac. dom. Ex Aedibus Lambeth.
September. 12. 1672.
Primitive Christianity. in 3 parts

Learn of me Math. 11. 29. London Printed for R. Chiswell at ye Rose and Crown
in St Paul's Churchyard



Primitive Christianity: OR, THE RELIGION Of the Ancient Christians In the
first Ages OF THE GOSPEL.

In Three Parts.

By WILLIAM CAVE, D D.

(...). Just. Mart. Paraenes. ad Graec. p. 33. Nos non habitu Sapientiam, sed
mente praeferimus:
Non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus.
Minuc. Foel. dial. page 31. The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD NATHANAEL, Lord Bishop of OXFORD, And
Clerk of the Closet to his MAJESTY.
My Lord,
WHen I first designed that these Papers should take sanctuary at your
Lordships Patronage, the Hebrew Proverb presently came into my mind, Keep close
to a great man, (...)
and men will reverence thee. I knew no better way (next to the innocence,
Beresch. Rab. cap. 17. ap. Drus. Adag. Ebraic. Decur. 6. Adag. 8.
and, if it may be, usefulness of the subject I have undertaken) to secure my
self from the censures of envy and ill nature, than by putting my self under
your protection, whose known (...), the sweetness and obligingness of whose
temper is able to render malice it self candid and favorable. Encouraged also
by this consideration, I hardened my self into the confidence of this Address,
which I had not otherwise attempted, but that your Lordships kindness and
generous compassion, and the mighty condescension wherewith you were always
pleased to treat me (while I had the happiness of your Lordships neighborhood,
did at once invite and oblige me to it. I say no more, lest I should affront
that modesty that is so innate to your temper, or come within the least
suspicion of flattery, so repugnant to my own.

One thing only there is, which I cannot but remark, the great honor which
your Lordship has done, not to the Episcopal only, but to the whole ministerial
order, that a person of your Rank and Education would stoop to an employment,
so little valued and regarded in this unthankful and degenerate Age. And herein
your Lordship has been a happy Precedent; your example being already followed
by some, and will shortly by more persons of Noble Descent and Pedigree: a
thing for which the Church of England was never more renowned, since the
Reformation, than it is at this day.

My Lord,

There was a time within the compass of our memmory, when the Bishops amongst
other things were accused (by one of the House of Peers, Church-Hist. lib. 11.
p. 183.
though one that had not the most reason to bring in a charge of that nature)
to be in respect of their Parentage de faece populi, of the very dregs and
refuse of the people (malice will play at small games, rather than not at all.)
A charge as false as it was spiteful: though had it been true, it had been
impertinent; seeing the very order is enough to derive honor upon the person,
even when he cannot as your Lordship, bring it along with him. And indeed so
honorable an Order has Episcopacy ever been accounted, even when there have
been no visible advantages, either of riches or grandeur to attend it, as there
were not in the more early Ages of Christianity, that persons of the greatest
Birth and Fortunes have not thought it below them to exchange the Civil
Tribunal for the Bishops Throne, and to lay down the public Rods and Axes, to
take up the Crosier and the Pedum Pastorale. If we may credit that Catalogue of
the Bishops of Constantinople recorded by Nicephorus, H. Eccles. lib. 8. c. 6.
p. 541.
we find Dometius, Brother to the Emperor Probus, and after him his two Sons,
Probus and Metrophanes, successively sitting in that Chair: As afterward
Nectarius, S. Chrysostoms Predecessor, was of a Senator made Bishop of that
See. Thalassius became Bishop of Caesarea, when he was a Senator, the
Praefectus Praetorio (or the Emperors Lieutenant, one of the highest places
both of trust and honor in the Roman Empire) of Illyricum, and rising to
greater dignities, being designed by the Emperor for the Government of the
East. S. Ambrose (whose Father was an illustrious person, the Prefect of
France) was made Governor of Liguria and Aemilia, and sent thither with
Consular power and dignity, during which employment he was made Bishop of
Milain. Petronius Bishop of Bononia is said to have been first a Praefectus
Praetorio, and to descend of the Family of Constantine the Great. Sidonius
Apollinaris descended for many Generations of noble and illustrious Parents,
his Father the Praefectus Praetorio of Gaul, himself Son-in-Law to Avitus) a
person of extraordinary honor and employment, and afterward Consul and
Emperor) and yet in the midst of this disdained not to become Bishop of
Clermont in France. More such instances I could give, not to speak of
multitudes that were in the middle and later Ages of the Church, especially in
our own Nation. But I return.

My Lord,

I beheld Religion generally laid waste, and Christianity ready to draw its
last breath, stifled and oppressed with the vices and impieties of a debauched
and profligate Age. To contribute toward the recovery whereof, and the
reducing things (if possible) to the ancient Standard, is the design of the
Book that is here offered to you. The subject I assure my self is not
unsuitable either to your Lordships Order, temper, or course of life; if my ill
managery of it has not rendered it unworthy of your Patronage. However such as
it is, it is humbly presented by him who is*

Your Lordships faithfully devoted Servant WILLIAM CAVE.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Know not whether it may be any satisfaction to the curiosity of the Reader,
to understand the birth and original of these Papers; if it be, let him take
this account. No sooner did I arrive at years capable of discerning, but I
began to enquire into the grounds of that Religion, into which I had been
baptized: which I soon found to be so noble and excellent, in all its laws so
just and rational, in all its designs so divine and heavenly, so perfective of
the Principles, so conducive to the happiness of humane nature; a Religion so
worthy of God, so advantageous to man, built upon such firm and uncontrollable
evidence, backed with such proper and powerful arguments that I was presently
convinced of the Divinity that resided in it, and concluded with my self (and I
thought I had reason so to do) that surely the Disciples of this Religion must
needs be the most excellent persons in the world. But alas a few years
experience of the world let me see, that this was the conclusion of one that
had conversed only with Books, and the reasonings of his own mind. I had not
been long an observer of the manners of men, but I found them generally so
debauched and vicious, so corrupt and contrary to the rules of this holy
Religion, that if a modest and honest Heathen was to estimate Christianity by
the lives of its Professors, he would certainly proscribe it as the vilest
Religion in the world. Being offended hereat, I resolved to stand in the ways
and see, and enquire for the good old way, the Paths wherein the ancient
Christians walked: for I could not think that this had always been the unhappy
fate and portion of Christianity; Quando Domini nostri adhuc calebat cruor, and
fervebat recens in credentibus fides. Hieron. ad Demetr. p. 68. tom. 1.
and that if the footsteps of true Christian piety and simplicity were any
where to be found, it must be in those times, when (as S. Hierom notes) the
blood of Christ was yet warm in the breasts of Christians, and the faith and
spirit of Religion more brisk and vigorous.

In pursuance of this design, I set my self to a more close and diligent
reading of the first Fathers and ancient monuments of the Church than ever I
had done before, especially for the three or four first Centures, for much
lower I did not intend to go, because the life and spirit of Christianity did
then visibly decline apace; noting as I went along whatever contributed to my
satisfaction in this affair. Had I consulted my own ease and quiet, I might
have gone a nearer way to work, and have taken up with what I could have picked
up of this nature in Baronius, the Centuries, etc. But I could not satisfy my
self (and I presume it would as little have satisfied the Reader) with shreds,
with things taken upon trust, and borrowed at the second hand. For the same
reason I made little use of the Lives of the Saints, (especially in such
instances whereof there was the least cause to doubt) and the spurious and
suppositious Writings of the Fathers, seldom making use of any but such as are
of unquestionable credit and authority. And because the testimony of an enemy
is ever accounted of great moment and regard, I have been careful to add the
testimonies that have been given to Christians and to their Religion by the
known and professed Adversaries of the Christian Faith; such as Pliny, Lucian,
Porphyry, Julian, etc. more whereof we might have been furnished with, had
those Writings of theirs against the Christian Religion been extant, which the
zeal of the first Christian Princes industriously banished out of the world.
What other Authors of later date I have borrowed any light from in this
discourse, I have faithfully produced in the margent. Two Books indeed I met
with, which at first sight I well hoped would have wholly saved me the labor
of this search; the one written by a person of our own Nation; A modest
Discourse of the piety, charity, and policy of elder Times and Christians, etc.
by Edw. Waterhouse, Esquire Land. 1655.
the other by a Florentine of great name and note: but my hopes were very much
frustrated in both. Paganin. Gaudentius de vita Christianorum ante tempora
Constantini. Florent. 1639. quarto.
For the first, I no sooner looked into it, but found my self wretchedly
imposed upon by the Title, his Elder times and Christians (not to say any thing
of his intermixtures of things nothing to his purpose) seldom reaching any
higher than the middle-Ages of the Church, little or nothing being remarked of
the first Ages of Christianity, the only thing I aimed at. For the other (which
I met not with till I had almost finished this search) I found it miserably
thin and empty, containing little else but short glosses upon some few passages
out of Tertullian, from whence I did not enrich my self with any one
observation, which I had not made before. There is indeed an Epistle of
Fronto's the learned Chancellor of the University of Paris concerning this
Affair; De vita and moribus Christianorum, etc. Par. 1660. quart.
but it contains only some general intimations, and seems to have been designed
by him (as appears from that, and some other of his Epistles) as the
groundwork of a larger and more particular discourse. But his death happening
some few years after the date of that Epistle, cut off all hopes of prosecuting
so excellent a design. These are all that I know of, who have attempted any
thing in this subject, none whereof coming up to the curiosity of my design, I
was forced to resume the task I had undertaken, and to go on with it through
those ancient Writers of the Church; the result of which search is laid
together in this Book.

Whether I have discharged my self herein to the satisfaction of the Reander, I
know not; sure I am, I have endeavored what I propounded to my self, viz. a
Specimen of Primitive Christianity, in some of the most considerable branches
and instances of Religion. Here he will find a Piety active and zealous,
shining through the blackest clouds of malice and cruelty; afflicted innocence
triumphant, notwithstanding all the powerful or politic attempts of men or
Devils; a patience unconquerable under the biggest persecutions; a charity
truly Catholic and unlimited; a simplicity and upright carriage in all
transactions; a sobriety and temperance remarkable to the admiration of their
enemies; and in short, he will here see the divine and holy Precepts of the
Christian Religion drawn down into action, and the most excellent genius and
spirit of the Gospel breathing in the hearts and lives of these good old
Christians. Here he will find a real and evident confutation of that senseless
and absurd calumny, that was fastened upon Christianity, as if it required no
more than an easy and credulous temper of mind; as if under a pretense of
kindness and indulgence to sinners; it ministered to all vice and wickedness.
Celsus confidently begins the charge. There be some amongst the Christians
(says he) that will neither give nor receive a reason of their faith, (...).
Orig. adv. Cells. lib. 1. p. 8. vid. lib. 6. p. 282.
who are wont to cry out, don't examine, but believe; and, thy faith will save
thee; the wisdom of this world is evil, but foolishness good and useful. Julian
carries on the charge somewhat higher, as if the Christian Religion were not
only content with a naked and an empty Faith, but gave encouragement to sin, by
assuring its most desperate Proselytes of an easy pardon. In the conclusion of
his Caesar's, after he had assigned the Roman Emperors their particular Tutelar
Deities, he delivers over Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor,
to the Goddess of Pleasure, who having effeminately tricked and dressed him up,
brought him to the Goddess Asotia or intemperance, where he finds (...), his
Son, Constantius probably (for the passage is a little disturbed and obscure,
for which reason probably the Translator passed it by, and took no notice of
it) making this universal Proclamation, Whoever is an adulterer, (...). Julian
Caesares. p. 53.
or a murderer, whoever is an impure profligate wretch, let him come boldly,
for I declare that being washed in this water [Baptism] he shall immediately be
cleansed: nay, although he again commit those sins, let him but knock his
breast, and beat his head, and I will make him clean. Much to the same purpose
Zosimus (as good a friend to Christianity as either of the former) spitefully
charges it upon Constantine the Great, that being haunted with the conscience
of his prodigeous Villainies, and having no hopes given him by the Gentile
Priests of the expiation of his crimes, embraced Christianity, being told,
(...). Zosim. Hist. lib. 2. p. 534.
that in the Christian Religion there was a promise of cleansing from all fin,
and that as soon as ever any closed with it, pardon would be granted to the
most profligate offenders. As if Christianity had been nothing else but a
Receptacle and Sanctuary for Rogues and Villains, where the worst of men might
be wicked under hopes of pardon. But how false and groundless (especially as
urged and intended by them) this impious charge was, appears from the whole
design and tenor of the Gospel, and that more than ordinary vein of piety and
strictness that was conspicuous in the lives of its first professors, whereof
we have in this Treatise given abundant evidence.

To this representation of their lives and manners, I have added some account
concerning the ancient Rites and Usages of the Church; wherein if any one shall
meet with something that does not jump with his own humor, he will I doubt not
have more discretion than to quarrel with me for setting down things as I found
them. But in this part I have said the less, partly because this was not the
thing I primarily designed, partly because it has been done by others in just
Discourses. In some few instances I have remarked the corruption and degeneracy
of the Church of Rome, from the purity and simplicity of the ancient Church;
and more I could easily have added, but that I studiously avoided
controversies, it being no part of my design to enquire, what was the judgment
of the Fathers in disputable cases, especially the more abstruse and intricate
speculations of Theology, but what was their practice, and by what rules and
measures they did govern and conduct their lives. The truth is, their Creed in
the first Ages was short and simple, Praefat. in Hilar. Oper.
their Faith lying then (as Erasmus observes) not so much in nice and numerous
Articles, as in a good and an holy life. At the end of the Book I have added a
Chronological Index of the Authors, according to the times wherein they are
supposed to have lived, with an account of the Editions of their Works made use
of in this Treatise. Which I did, not that I had a mind to tell the world,
either what, or how many Books I had; a piece of vanity of which had I been
guilty, it had been no hard matter to have furnished out a much larger
Catalogue. But I did it, partly to gratify the request of the Bookseller,
partly because I conceived it might not be altogether unuseful to the Reader;
the Index, to give some light to the quotations, by knowing when the Author
lived, especially when he speaks of things done in or near his own time, and
which must otherwise have been done at every turn in the body of the Book. And
because there are some Writings frequently made use of in this Book, the
Authors whereof in this Index could be reduced to no certain date, especially
those called the Apostolical Canons and Constitutions, it may not be amiss here
briefly to take notice of them. And first for the Canons; as I am far from
their opinion who ascribe them to the Apostles, so I think their great
Antagonist Mr. Daille bends the stick as much too far the other way, not
allowing them a being in the world till the year 500 or a little before. The
truth doubtless lies between these two: It Is evident both from the Histories of
the Church, and many passages in Tertullian, Cyprian, and others, that there
were in the most early Ages of Christianity frequent Synods and Councils for
settling the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, though their determinations
under that notion be not extant at this day. Part of these Synodical Decrees,
so many of them as concerned the Rites and Discipline of the Church, we may
conceive some person of learning and judgment gathered together, probably about
the beginning of the third Century, and put them (especially the first Fifty,
for I look not upon the whole eighty five as of equal value and authority) if
not into the same, into some such form and method, wherein we now have them;
stiling them Ecclesiastical or Apostolical Canons, not as if they had been
composed by the Apostles, but either because containing things consonant to the
Doctrines and Rules delivered by the Apostles, or because made up of usages and
traditions supposed to be derived from them, or lastly because made by ancient
and Apostolic men. That many, if not all, of these Canons were some
considerable time extant before the first Nicene Council, we have great reason
to believe from two or three passages amongst many others. Epist. Canon. ad
Amphil. Can. 3.
S. Basil giving rules about Discipline, appoint a Deacon guilty of Fornication
to be deposed, and thrust down into the rank of Laics, and that in that
capacity he might receive the Communion, there being, says he, (...), an
ancient Canon, that they that are deposed should only fall under this kind of
punishment; the ancients, as I suppose, following herein that command, Thou
shall not punish twice for the same fault: This Balsamon joins with the twenty
fifth Canon of the Apostles, which treats of the very same affair and indeed it
cannot in probability be meant of any other, partly because there was no
ancient Canon (that we know of) in S. Basils time about this business but that,
partly because the same sentence is applied as the reason both in the
Apostolical and S. Basils Canon, Thou shall not punish twice for the same
fault; which clearly shows whence Basil had it, and what he understands by his
ancient Canon. H. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 5.
Theodoret records a Letter of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, to another of
the same name Bishop of Constantinople (this Letter was written a little before
the Council of Nice) where speaking of some Bishops, who had received the
Arians whom he had excommunicated into Communion, he tells him, that herein
they had done what the Apostolical Canon did not allow; evidently referring to
the twelfth and thirteenth Canon of the Apostles, which state the case about
one Bishops receiving those into Communion, who had been excommunicated by
another. De vit. Constant. lib. 3. c. 61. p. 518.
To this let me add, that Constantine in a Letter to Eusebius, commends him for
refusing to leave his own Bishopric to go over to that of Antioch, to which he
was chosen, especially because herein he had exactly observed the rule of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and had kept the commands of God, and the
Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Canon, meaning doubtless the fourteenth
Apostolic Canon, which treats about such removes. Nay learned men both
formerly and of late have observed diverse passages in the Nicene Canons
themselves, which plainly respect these Canons, as might be made appear
(notwithstanding what Daille has excepted against it) were this a proper place
to discourse of it. This for the Canons.

For the Constitutions, they are said to have been composed by S. Clemens, at
the instance and by the direction of the Apostles. And this wild and
extravagant opinion has not wanted its Patrons and defenders, Turrianus,
Bovius, etc. but herein deserted by the more modest and moderate of their own
party; besides that their Apostolicalness (in this sense) is by the learned
Daille everlastingly shattered and broken. De Pseudepigr. Ap. lib. 2. c. 17. p.
408.
But then he sets them at too wide a distance, assigning them to the latter end
of the fifth Century: when it is as clear as the Sun that they were extant, and
in credit with many before the times of Epihanius (though somewhat altered now
from what they were in his time) compiled probably out of many lesser (...) and
(...), Books containing the Doctrines and Rites that had been delivered and
practiced by ancient and Apostolical persons, or at least vented under their
names; but whether, as some conjecture, composed by Clemens Alexandrinus (and
thence by an easy mistake ascribed to Clemens Romanus) I am not at leisure to
consider. In this Class of Writers I may reckon Dionysius the Areopagite,
absurdly enough asserted by many to be genuine, by Daille thrust down to the
beginning of the sixth Century: but most probably thought to have been written
about the middle of the fourth Age, as a person amongst us deservedly of great
name and note has shown in his late Vindication of Ignatius Epistles. These are
the principal of those Authors, who could not be fixed upon any certain year:
the rest have in the Index their particular and respective times. To which I
have added the account of the Editions for the more ready finding (if occasion
be) of any passage quoted out of them.

One thing indeed there is which I cannot but take notice of, it looks so like
a piece of vanity and ostentation, that the margent is charged with so many
quotations: but whoever considers the nature of my design, will quickly see
that it was absolutely necessary, and that it concerned me not to deliver any
thing without good authority; the reason why I have, where I could, brought
them in speaking their own words: though to avoid as much of the charge as was
possible, I omitted the citing Authors in their own Languages, and only set
them down in English, faithfully representing the Authors sense, though not
always tying my self to a strict and precise translation. How pertinent my
quotations are, the Reader must judge; I hope he will find them exact, being
immediately fetched from the fountainhead; here being very few (if any) that
have not been examined more than once. For the method into which the Book is
cast, I chose that which to me seemed most apt and proper, following S. Paul's
distribution of Religion into piety toward God, sobriety toward our selves,
and righteousness toward others; and accordingly divided the discourse into
three parts, respecting those three great branches of Religion; though the
first is much larger than either of the other, by reason of some preliminary
Chapters, containing a vindication of the Christians from those crimes that
were charged upon them, that so the rubbish being cleared and thrown out of the
way, we might have a fairer prospect of their Religion afterward. The Book I
confess is swelled into a greater bulk, than I either thought of, or desired;
but by reason of somewhat a confused Copy never designed for the Press, no
certain measures could be taken of it.

And now if after all this, it shall be enquired, why these Papers are made
public, as I can give no very good reason, so I will not trouble my self to
invent a bad one. It may suffice to intimate, that this discourse (long since
drawn up at leisure hours) lay then by me, when a tedious and uncomfortable
distemper (whereby I have been taken off from all public Service, and the
prosecution of severer studies) gave me too much opportunity to look over my
Papers, and this especially, which peradventure otherwise had never seen the
light. Indeed I must confess I was somewhat the easilier prevailed with to let
this discourse pass abroad, that it might appear, that when I could not do what
I ought, I was at least willing to do what I could. If he that reads it, shall
reap any delight and satisfaction by it, or be in any measure induced to
imitate these primitive virtues, I shall think my pains well bestowed: if not,
I am not the first, and probably shall not be the last, that has written a Book
to no purpose.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Things charged upon the Primitive Christians, respecting their
Religion. CHAP. II. Of the Novelty that was charged upon Christianity. CHAP.
III. Things charged upon the Christians, respecting their outward condition.
CHAP. IV. The Charges brought against them, respecting their life and manners.
CHAP. V. Of the positive parts of their Religion: And first, Of their piety
toward God. CHAP. VI. Of Churches, and places of Public Worship in the
primitive times. CHAP. VII. Of the Lord's Day and the Fasts and Festivals of the
ancient Church. CHAP. VIII. Of the persons constituting the body of the Church,
both people and Ministers. CHAP. IX. Of their usual Worship, both private and
public. CHAP. X. Of Baptism, and the administration of it in the Primitive
Church. CHAP. XI. Of the Lords Supper, and the administration of it in the
ancient Church.
PART II. The Religion of the Primitive Christians as to those virtues that
respect themselves.
CHAP. I. Of their Humility. CHAP. II. Of their Heavenly-mindedness, and
contempt of the World. CHAP. III. Of their sobriety, in respect of their Garb
and Apparel. CHAP. IV. Of their great Temperance and Abstinence. CHAP. V. Of
their singular Continence and Chastity. CHAP. VI. Of their readiness and
constancy in professing their Religion. CHAP. VII. Of their Patience and
Exemplary Carriage under Sufferings.
PART III. Of their Religion as respecting other men.
CHAP. I. Of their Justice and Honesty. CHAP. II. Of their admirable Love and
Charity. CHAP. III. Of their Unity and Peaceableness. CHAP. IV. Of their
Obedience and Subjection to Civil Government. CHAP. V. Of their Penance, and
the Discipline of the Ancient Church.
Primitive Christianity; OR, THE RELIGION OF THE Ancient Christians In the
first Ages of the Gospel.
PART I.
CHAP. I.
Things charged upon the Primitive Christians, respecting their Religion.
Christian Religion likely to meet with opposition at its first setting out.
Chiefly undermined by Calumnies and Reproaches. Three things by the Heathens
charged upon the Christians; some things respecting their Religion; Part 1.
some their outward condition; others their moral carriage, and the matters of
their worship. Their Religion charged with two things, Impiety and Novelty. The
charge of Atheism considered, and answered out of the Fathers. The Heathens
excepted against, as incompetent judges of the affairs of Christianity. In what
sense Christians confessed themselves Atheists. The wretched and absurd Deities
that were amongst the Heathens, and the impure manner of their worship.
Atheism, properly such, disowned and denied by Christians. The account they
gave of their Religion, and the God whom they worshipped.

NO sooner did the Son of God appear in the world, to establish the most
excellent Religion that ever was communicated to Mankind, but he met with the
most fierce and vigorous opposition: persecuted and devoted to death as soon as
he was born, followed all his life with fresh assaults of malice and cruelty,
his credit traduced and slandered, his Doctrine despised and slighted, and
himself at last put to death with the most exquisite arts of torture and
disgrace. And if they thus served the Master of the house, how much more them
of the household; the disciple not being above his Master, nor the servant above
his Lord. Therefore when he gave commission to his Apostles, to publish this
Religion to the world, he told them beforehand, what hard and unkind reception
they must look to meet with, that he sent them forth as Sheep in the midst of
Wolves, that they should be delivered up to the Councils, and scourged in the
Synagogues, and be brought before Kings and Governors, and be hated of all men
for his names sake; nay so high should the quarrel arise upon the account of
Religion, that men should violate some of the nearest Laws of Nature, betray
their friends and kinsfolk; the Brother delivering up the Brother to death, and
the Father the Child, the Children rising up against their Parents, and causing
them to be put to death. This he well foresaw (and the event truly answered it)
would be the fate of its first appearing in the world: and indeed, considering
the present state and circumstances of the world at that time, it could not
reasonably be expected, that the Christian Religion should meet with a better
entertainment; for the genius and nature of its Doctrine was such, as was
almost impossible to escape the frowns and displeasure of men: a Doctrine it
was, that called men off from lusts and pleasures, and offered violence to
their native inclinations, that required the greatest strictness and severity
of life, obliged men to deny themselves, to take up their Cross, and to follow
the steps of a poor crucified Savior, and that upon little other encouragement
at present, than the invisible rewards of another world. It introduced new
Rites and Ceremonies, unknown to those of former Ages, and such as did
undermine the received and established principles of that Religion, that for so
many Generations had governed the world; it revealed and brought to light such
truths, as were not only contrary to the principles of men's education, but many
of them above the reach of natural comprehension, too deep for the line of
humane reason to fathom or find out.

Upon these, and such like accounts, Christianity was sure to encounter with
mighty prejudices and potent opposition; and to it did; for no sooner did it
peep abroad in the world, but it was every where spoken against: Princes and
Potentates, and the greatest powers and policies of the world, did for some
Ages confederate and combine together, to extirpate and banish it out of the
world: and certainly, if Arms and Armies, if strength and subtilty, if malice
and cruelty could have stifled it, it had been smothered in its infancy and
first delivery into the world. But notwithstanding all these oppositions, it
still lifted up his head in triumph, and outbrav'd the fiercest storms of
persecution; and as Tertullian told their Enemies, by every exquisite act of
cruelty, Apol. c. ult. p. 40.
they did but tempt others to come over to the party, the oftener they were
mowed down, the faster they sprang up again, the blood of Christians making the
Churches soil more fat and fertile. Hereupon the great enemy of mankind, betook
himself to other counsels, and sought to undermine, what he saw he could not
carry by open assault and battery; he studied to leaven the minds of men with
false and unjust prejudices against Christianity, and to burden it with whole
loads of reproaches and defamations, knowing no speedier way to hinder its
reception, than to blast its reputation. For this purpose all the arts of spite
and malice were mustred up, and Christians confidently charged with all those
crimes that could render them and their Religion vile and infamous: Now the
things that were charged upon the Christians, were either such as respected
their Religion, or such as concerned their outward state and condition, or such
as related to their moral carriage and behavior, with some things relating to
the matter or manner of their Worship; we shall consider them in order, and how
the Christians of those times vindicated themselves from these imputations.

The Christian Religion at its first coming abroad into the world, was mainly
charged with these two things, Impiety and Novelty: For the first, 'twas
commonly cried out against, as a grand piece of Atheism and Impiety, as an
affront to their Religion, and an undermining the very being and existence of
their gods; this is the sum of the charge, J. Martyr. Ap. 1. p. 47.
as we find it in the ancient Apologists; Athenag. Legate. p 4
more particularly Caecilius the Heathen, in Minucius Felix accuses the
Christians for a desperate undone and unlawful faction, Arnob l. 1. p. 7. Min.
Fael. p. 7.
who by way of contempt did snuff and spit at the mention of their gods, deride
their worship, sooff at their Priests, and despise their Temples, as no better
than Charnel-houses, and heaps of bones and ashes of the dead; for these, and
such like reasons, the Christians were every where accounted a pack of
Atheists, and their Religion the Atheism; and seldom it is that Julian the
Emperor calls Christianity by any other name. Pseudomant. pa. 888. tom. 2.
Thus Lucian bringing in Alexander the Impostor setting up for an Oraclemonger,
ranks the Christians with Atheists and Epicureans, as those that were
especially to be banished from his mysterious Rites. In answer to this charge,
the Christians pleaded especially these three things.

First, that the Gentiles were for the most part incompetent Judges of such
cases as these, as being almost wholly ignorant of the true state of the
Christian Doctrine, and therefore unfit to pronounce sentence against it. Thus
when Crescens the Philosopher had traduced the Christians, as atheistical and
irreligious, Justin Martyr answers, Just. Martyr. loc. laud.
that he talked about things which he did not understand, feigning things of
his own head, only to comply with the humor of his seduced disciples and
followers; that in reproaching the Doctrine of Christ, when he did not
understand it, he discovered a most wicked and malignant temper, and showed
himself far worse than the most simple and unlearned, who are not wont rashly
to bear witness and determine in things not sufficiently known to them. Or if
he did understand its greatness and excellency, then he showed himself much
more base and dis-ingenuous, in charging upon it what he knew to be false, and
concealing his inward sentiments and convictions, for fear, lest he should be
suspected to be a Christian. But Justin well knew, that he was miserably
unskilful in matters of Christianity, having formerly had conferences and
disputations with him about these things; and therefore offered the Senate of
Rome (to whom he then presented his Apology) if they had not heard the sum of
it, to hold another conference with him, even before the Senate it self: which
he thought would be a work worthy of so wise and grave a Council: or if they
had heard it, then he did not doubt, but they clearly apprehended how little he
understood these things; or, that if he did understand them, he knowingly
dissembled it to his Auditors, not daring to own the truth, as Socrates did in
the face of danger: an evident argument that he was (...), not a Philosopher,
but a slave to popular applause and glory.

Secondly, They did in some sort confess the charge, that according to the
vulgar notion which the Heathens had of their Deities, J. Mart. Ap. 2. (sen
verius 1.) p. 56. and p. 55.
they were Atheists, i.e. strangers and enemies to them; that the gods of the
Gentiles were at best but Demons, impure and unclean spirits, who had long
imposed upon mankind, and by their villainies, sophistries, and arts of terror,
had so affrighted the common people, who knew not really what they were, and
who judge of things more by appearance than by reason, that they called them
gods, and gave to every one of them that name, which the Demon was willing to
take to himself, and that they really were nothing but Devils, fallen and
apostate spirits, the Christians evidently manifested at every turn, forcing
them to the confessing it, while by Prayer and invocating the name of the true
God, they drove them out of possessed persons, and therefore they trembled to
encounter with a Christian, as Octavius triumphingly tells Caecilius; that they
entertained the most absurd and fabulous notions of their gods, Page 23.
and usually ascribed such things to them, as would be accounted an horrible
shame and dishonor to any wise and good man, the Worship and mysterious Rites
of many of them being so brutish and filthy, that the honester and severer
Romans were ashamed on it, and therefore overturned their Altars, and banished
them out of the roll of their Deities, though their degenerate posterity took
them in again, Apol. c. 7. p. 7.
as Tertullian observes; their gods themselves so impure and beastly, their
Worship so obscene and detestable, that Julius Firmicus advises them to turn
their Temples into Theaters, de err. prof. Relig. p. 9.
where the secrets of their Religion may be delivered in Scenes, and to make
their Players Priests, and that the common rout might sing the amors, the
sports and pastimes, the wantonnesses and impieties of their gods, no places
being so fit for such a Religion as they. Besides the attributing to them
humane bodies, with many blemishes and imperfections, and subjection to the
miseries of humane life, and to the laws of mortality, they could not deny them
to have been guilty of the most horrid and prodigious villainies and enormities,
revenge and murder, incest and luxury, drunkenness and intemperance, theft and
unnatural rebellion against their Parents, and such like, of which their own
Writings were full almost in every page, which served only to corrupt and
debauch the minds and manners of youth, Min. Fael. p. 19. vid. Arnob. adv.
gent. l. 1. p. 7.
as Octavius tells his adversary, where he pursues this argument at large, with
great eloquence and reason. Nay, those among them that were most inquisitive
and serious, and that entertained more abstract and refined apprehensions of
things than the common people, yet could not agree in any fit and rational
notion of a Deity, Vid. Min. Fael. p. 15* 16.
some ridiculously affirming one thing and some another, till they were divided
into a hundred different opinions, and all of them farther distant from the
truth, than they were from one another; the vulgar in the mean while making
gods of the most brutish objects, such as Dogs, Cats, Wolves, Goats, Hawks,
Dragons, Beetles, Crocodiles, etc. this Origin against Celsus particularly
charges upon the Egyptians, Adv. Cells. l. 3 p. 121.
When you approach (says he) their sacred places, they have glorious Groves and
Chapels, Temples with goodly Gates, and stately Portico's, and many mysterious
and religious Ceremonies; but when once you are entered, and got within their
Temples, you shall see nothing but a Cat or an Ape, or a Crocodile, or a Goat,
or a Dog worshipped with the most solemn veneration. Vid. Athanas. orat. contr.
gent.
Nay they deified senseless and inanimate things, that had no life or power to
help themselves, much less their Worshippers, Herbs, Roots, and Plants; nay
unmanly and degenerate passions, fear, paleness, etc. fell down before stumps
and statues, which owed all their Divinity to the cost and folly of their
Votaries; despised and trampled on by the sorriest Creatures, Mice, Swallows,
etc. who were wont to build nests in the very mouth of their gods, and Spiders
to periwig their heads with Cobwebs: being forced first to make them, and then
make them clean, and to defend and protect them, that they might fear and
worship them, Min. Fael. p. 20.
as he in Minutius wittily derides them; in whose Worship there are (says he)
many things that justly deserve to be laughed at, and others that call for pity
and compassion. And what wonder now, if the Christians were not in the least
ashamed to be called Atheists, with respect to such Deities, and such a
Religion as this was?

Thirdly, In the strict and proper notion of Atheism, they no less truly than
confidently denied the charge, and appealed to their severest adversaries,
whether those who owned such principles as they did, could reasonably be styled
Atheists; none ever pleaded better and more irrefragable arguments for the
existence of a supreme infinite Being, who made and governs all things by
infinite wisdom and almighty power, none ever more ready to produce a most
clear and candid confession of their faith, as to this grand article of
Religion, than they: Although we profess our selves Atheists, with respect to
those whom you esteem and repute to be gods (so their Apologist tells the
Senate) yet not in respect of the true God, J. Martyr. Ap. 1. p. 56.
the parent and fountain of wisdom and righteousness, and all other
excellencies and perfections, who is infinitely free from the least contagion
or spot of evil: Him, and his only begotten Son (who instructed us and the
whole Society of good Angels in these divine mysteries) and the Spirit of
Prophecy, we worship and adore, honoring them in truth, and with the highest
reason, and ready to communicate these things to any one that is willing to
learn them, as we our selves have received them. Can we then be Atheists, Ib.
p. 60.
who worship the great Creator of this world, not with blood, incense, and
offerings (which we are sufficiently taught he stands no need of) but exalt him
according to our power with prayers and praises, in all the addresses we make
to him: believing this to be the only honor that is worthy of him, not to
consume the Creatures which he has given us for our use, and the comfort of
those that want, in the fire by Sacrifice; but to approve our selves thankful
to him, and to sing and celebrate rational hymns and sacrifices, pouring out
our prayers to him as a grateful return for those many good things which we
have received, and do yet expect from him, according to the faith and trust
that we have in him. To the same purpose Athenagoras, Athen. leg. pro
Christian. p. 5.
in his return to this charge; Diagoras indeed was guilty of the deepest
atheism and impiety; but we who separate God from all material being, and
affirm him to be eternal and unbegotten, but all matter to be made and
corruptible, how unjustly are we branded with impiety? It Is true, did we side
with Diagoras in denying a Divinity, when there are so many and such powerful
arguments from the creation and government of the world, to convince us of the
existence of God and Religion, then both the guilt and punishment of Atheism
might deservedly be put upon us. But when our Religion acknowledges one God,
the maker of the Universe, who being uncreate himself, created all things by
his word, we are manifestly wronged both in word and deed; both in being
charged with it, and in being punished for it. We are accused (says Arnobius)
for introducing profane Rites and an impious Religion; Lib. 1. p. 7.
but tell me, O ye men of reason, how dare you make so rash a charge? To adore
the mighty God, the Sovereign of the whole Creation, the Governor of the
highest powers, to pray to him with the most obsequious reverence; under an
afflicted state to lay hold of him with all our powers, to love him, and look
up to him, is this a dismal and detestable Religion, a Religion full of
sacrilege and impiety, destroying and defiling all ancient Rites? is this that
bold and prodigious crime, for which your Gods are so angry with us? and for
which you your selves do so rage against us, confiscating our Estates,
banishing our persons, burning, tearing, and racking us to death with such
exquisite tortures? We Christians are nothing else but the worshippers of the
supreme King and Governor of the world, according as we are taught by Christ
our Master: search, and you will find nothing else in our Religion: this is the
sum of the whole affair; this the end and design of our divine Offices; before
him it is that we are wont to prostrate and bow our selves, him we worship with
common and conjoined devotions, from him we beg those things which are just and
honest, and such as are not unworthy of him to hear and grant. So little reason
had the Enemies of Christianity, to brand it with the note of Atheism and
Irreligion.

CHAP. II.
Of the Novelty that was charged upon Christianity.
Christianity excepted and cried out against as a late novel Doctrine. This a
common charge: continued, when Christianity had been some hundreds of years in
the world. Christianity greatly prejudiced by this charge. Men loath to forsake
the Religion of their Ancestors. What the Christians answered to it. Christian
Religion the same in substance and effect with that of the ancient Jews: in
that respect by far the oldest Religion in the World; proved and urged by
Tertullian, Cl. Alexander, Eusebius, etc. Its lateness and novelty no real
prejudice to rational and unbiased men. The folly and vanity of adhering to
absurd and unreasouable Customs and Principles, because ancient, and of
refusing to change opinions for the better. An objection, if Christ and
Christianity were so great blessings to mankind, why was it so long before God
revealed them; answered out of Arnobius.

THis Artifice proving weak and ineffectual, the next charge was its lateness
and novelty, that it was an upstart Sect, and but of yesterdays standing, not
known in the world many years before, whereas the Religion of the Gentiles had
uncontroulably and almost universally obtained from Ages and Generations; a
Doctrine newly sprung up, and come as 'twere from a far Country, (...), as it is
in Theophilus Antiochenus: Lib. 3. p. 119* B.
a divorce, or rending themselves from the institutions of their Ancestors, Ad
Nation. lib. 1. c. 10. p. 46.
as Tertullian has it. This charge begun betimes, when S. Paul preached at
Athens, Act. 17. 18.
we find this the first thing charged upon him, that he was a setter forth of
strange gods, because he preached to them Jesus and the resurrection; and it
was followed with a loud cry in succeeding times: you are wont to object to us
(says Arnobius) that our Religion is novel, Lib. 2. p. 40
start up not many days ago, and that you ought not to desert your ancient way,
and the Religion of your Country, Praepar. Evang. lib. 1. c. 2. p. 5.
to espouse barbarous and foreign Rites. And Eusebius tells us, the Heathens
were wont to reason thus: what strange profession of Religion is this? what new
way of life? wherein we can neither discern the Rites amongst us used in
Greece, nor amongst any Sect of the Barbarians; who can deny them to be
impious, who have forsaken the Customs of their Fathers, observed before in all
Cities and Countries, revolting from a way of Worship, which had been
universally received from all Ages both by Greeks and Barbarians, entertained
both in Cities and Villages, countenanced and approved by the common vote and
consent of all Kings, Lawmakers, Philosophers, and the greatest persons
whatsoever. Nay we may observe, that after Christianity had been settled for
some hundreds of years in the world, and was become the prevailing Religion,
and had in a manner banished all others out of doors, and driven them into
corners, yet this charge still continued; Ep. 51. oper. Jul. part. 2. p. 208.
thus Julian the Emperor writing to the people of Alexandria, concerning the
Galilaeans (so he was wont in scorn to call the Christians) that he wondered
that any of them durst dwell amongst them, or that they would suffer these
despisers of the Religion of their Country to be in any place amongst them,
calls Christianity the new Doctrine that had been preached to the world: the
very same title which Lucian had also long since bestowed upon it, De mort.
Peregrin. tom* 2. p. 762.
where speaking of our Savior, he calls him the great man that was crucified
in Palestine, who introduced that new Religion into the world. Symmach. Ep.
lib. 10.
So Symmachus some years after Julian (a man no less eminent for his parts and
eloquence, Ep. 54. ad Valent.
than for his power and authority, Theod Arcad. A. A. A. p. 537.
being Chief Priest and Prefect of Rome) confidently owns to the Emperors
themselves (though they were Christians) that he did endeavor to defend the
institutions of their Ancestors, the settled Rights and Laws of the Country (he
means them of Religion) that he designed to settle that state of Religion,
which for so many Ages had been profitable to the Commonwealth; Page 538.
and therefore begs of them, that what they had received when they were
Children, Page 539.
now they were old they might leave to their Posterity; that they were to be
true to the trust that had from so many Ages been devolved upon them, and were
to follow their Parents, as they had happily done their Ancestors that had gone
before them. So he; pleading the cause of Paganism from its antiquity ^ and
prescription, obliquely reflecting upon the novellism of Christianity, for more
he durst not speak, the Emperors (to whom he made his address) being
themselves Christians. This indeed must needs be a mighty prejudice against the
Christian Religion, at its first coming into the world, for all men as they
have a natural reverence for Religion, so they have a great veneration for
Antiquity, the Customs and Traditions of their Fathers, which they entertain as
a most inestimable depositum, and for which they look upon themselves as
obliged to contend, as for that which is most solemn and sacred. What more
excellent and venerable (says the Heathen in Minucius Faelix) than to entertain
the discipline of our Forefathers, Min. Fael. ^ p. 5.
to solemnize that Religion that has been delivered to us, to worship those
Gods, the knowledge of whom has been infused into us by our Parents, not boldly
to determine concerning the Deities, but to believe those who have been before
us. To the same purpose Lactantius speaking of the Heathens, Lactan^. l. 2* c.
6. p. 171.
they go on (says he) most pertinaciously, to maintain and defend the Religion
derived down to them from their Ancestors, not so much considering what they
are, as concluding them to be right and good, because the Ancients conveyed
them to them; nay, so great the power and authority of antiquity, that it is
accounted a kind of impiety to question it, or enquire into it. Upon these
accounts the Gentiles bore so hard upon Christianity, beholding it as a
Mushroom-Sect, sprung up of a sudden, and as an incroaching Inmate, undermining
the established Religions of the world.

Now we find two pleas especially, which the Christians made to this Indictment.

First, That the charge was not wholly and universally true, for besides that
many principles of Christianity were the same with those of the Law of Nature,
the Christian Religion was for substance the same with that of the ancient
Jews; whose Religion claimed the precedenncy of all others in the word. That
the Religion was in substance and effect the same, is expressly asserted and
proved by Eusebius; Prapar. Evang. l* ^. c. 5. p. 9. etc.
the ancient Patriarchs were the Christians of the old world, who had the same
Faith, Religion, and Worship common with us, nay the same name too, as he
endeavors to prove, from that, touch not mine anointed, (...), my Christ's or
Christians: and how far superior in age they were to any thing that is recorded
of the most ancient Gentiles, to their oldest Writers, Vid. Athen. leg. pro*
Christianis. p. 16. Clem. Alex strom. lib.
Orpheus, Homer, Hesiord, nay to their very gods themselves, is sufficiently
made good by many of the ancient Fathers; there being at the easiest
computation between Moses and Homer, above 600 years; nay Cadmus the first
inventer of Letters among the Graecians was some Ages junior unto Moses.
Therefore Origin tells Celsus, Adv. Cells. l. 6. p. 279.
that Moses and the Prophets were not only more ancient than Plato, but than
Homer himself, yea than the very invention of Letters amongst the Graecians who
yet were as proud of their antiquity, as any other Nation in the World. Nay
whatever useful and excellent notions the great Masters of Religion amongst the
Heathens had amongst them, Praepara^. Evang. lib. 10. tot. Clem. Alex. strom.
l. 1. p. 320.
it is plain they borrowed, or more truly stole them from the Writings of the
Ancients, Tert. Ap. c. 47. vid.
Jews, as is abundantly demonstrated by Eusebius at large; Theod. de curand.
as before him it had been done by Clemens of Alexandria, Grec Assect. Sermon. 2.
de Princip.
and by Tertullian before them both, who shows that all their Poets and
Philosophers had drunk deep of the Fountain of the Prophets, and had forced
their best Doctrines and Opinions from thence, though subtly altering and
disguising them, to make them look more like their own: so that upon this
consideration, the accusation was unjust and false, and Christianity appears
the oldest Religion in the world.

Secondly, Admit the Christian Religion, in a more limited and restrained
sense, to be of a far later standing than the Religion of the Gentiles, yet
they pleaded, that 'twas infinitely reasonable, that they should change for the
better, whenever it offered it self to them; that novel truth was better than
ancient error, and that they ought not to be eternally bound up in old
inveterate Customs and Principles, when those which were abundantly more
reasonable and satisfactory were presented to them. You tell us (says Clemens
Alex.) Admonit. ad gent. p. 57.
that you may not subvert the Customs received from your Ancestors: but if so,
why then are we not content without any other food than our Mothers milk, to
which we were accustomed, when we first came into the world: why do we increase
or impair our estates, and not rather keep them at the same pitch, just as we
received them from our Fathers: why have we left off those toys and sports, to
which we were wonted while Infants and Children, but only because years and
discretion (although we had no other Tutor) would make us quit those childish
and trifling vanities. That old age (says S. Ambrose) has true cause to blush,
Ambros. Ep. 2 contr.
that is ashamed to reform; Symmach. inter Ep.
it is not multitude of years, but the goodness of manners that makes gray hairs
worthy of praise and honor; Symmach. p. 562.
no age is too late to learn, nor is it shame to grow better. Lactant. loco
supra laudato.
What will thou do (says Lactantius to the Heathen) will thou follow Reason or
thy Ancestors? If Reason, then thou must needs relinquish the authority and
institutions of thy Forefathers, because that way only can be right, that is
warranted and prescribed by Reason: but if piety toward thine Ancestors sway
with thee to follow them, thou must confess, both that they were Fools in
devoting themselves to a Religion contrary to Reason, and that thou thy self
art unwise and simple, in worshipping what thou art convinced to be false:
besides, that they had little reason to boast of those goodly Ancestors, to
whom they adhered so close, and upon whose authority they did so much depend,
as he goes on to demonstrate in the remaining part of that Chapter. That you
object to us the novelty of our Religion (so Arnobius) may we not charge some
such fault upon the first and most ancient Ages of the world, Adv. gent. l. 2.
p. 40, 41.
who at first lived in a very poor and mean state; but by little and little
changed it into a more liberal and splendid course of life? was it any crime
that they changed their beasts skins into more comely and ^ convenient
Garments, or that they were no longer fond of their thatcht Cottages, or chose
to dwell like wild beasts in Rocks and Caverns, when they had learnt to build
better habitations? it is natural to all mankind to prefer better before what is
worse, profitable before what is useless, and to seek after what we are assured
is more grateful and excellent: therefore when you charge us with Apostasy
from the Religion of the Ancients, you should rather consider the cause than
the action, and not so much upbraid us with what we have left, as examine what
it is we have entertained. For if merely to change our opinion, and to pass
from ancient Institutions to what is more late and new, be a fault and crime;
then none so guilty of the charge as your selves, who have so often changed your
manners and course of life, and by embracing new Rites and Customs, have
condemned those that went before: which he there makes good by particular
instances: and the same answer St. Ambrose gives to Symmachus, if nothing but
ancient Rites will please you, how comes it to pass, that there has been a
succession of new and foreign Rites even in Rome it self; of which he gives him
many particular examples: In short, Arnobius wittily argues thus, Ib. p. 42.
Our way of Religion (you say) is new, and yours ancient: and what does this
either hurt our cause, or help yours? If ours be new, 'twill in time become
old; is yours old, there was a time when it was new: the goodness and authority
of Religion is not to be valued by length of time, but by the excellency of its
worship, nor does it become us to consider so much when it begun, as what it is
we Worship.

It may not be impertinent in this place to take notice of what the Heathens
objected as a branch of this charge: Id. ib. p. 43. vid. Greg.
that if God's sending Christ into the world, Nyss* Orat.
was so great a blessing, Catechet. c* 29. tom. 2. p. 521.
why did this Savior of mankind come no sooner, to reveal this Religion, to
lead men into the truth, to tell the world who this true God was, and to reduce
us to the adoration of him; if so, why did God suffer him to stay so long, and
to be born (as 'twere) but a few hours before, in comparison of the preceding
Ages of the world? To this Arnobius answers, with a great deal of modesty and
reason, that he could not tell; that 'twere easy to retort the same captious
question upon them; if 'twere so much to the benefit of the world, that
Hercules, Aesculapius, Mercury, etc. should be gods, why were they born and
deified no sooner, that not only posterity but antiquity might have reaped
advantage by them? If there was reason in one case, then there was also in the
other; but to assign proper and particular reasons was not possible; it not
being within the power of such a short-sighted Creature as man is, to fathom
the depth of the Divine Councils, or to discover by what ways or methods he
disposes his affairs; these things being known only to him who is the grand
Parent, the Sovereign Lord and Governor of all things: that although we are
not able to assign the cause why a thing comes to pass in this or that
particular manner, yet this concludes never a whit the more, that the thing is
not so, or that it is less credible, when it has otherwise the most clear and
unquestionable evidence and demonstration. More particularly he answers, that
our Savior cannot be said to have been lately sent in respect of God, because
in respect of eternity there is nothing late; where there is neither beginning
nor end, there can be nothing too soon, nothing too late: Time indeed is
transacted by parts and terms, but these have no place in a perpetual and
uninterrupted series of eternal Ages: what if that state of things, to which he
came to bring relief, required that season of time to come in? what if the
condition of ancient and modern times were in this case not alike? or called
for somewhat different methods of cure? it may be the great God then chose to
send Christ, when the state of mankind was more broken and shattered, and
humane nature become more weak and unable to help it self: this we are sure of,
that if what so lately came to pass had been necessary to have been done some
thousands of years ago, the supreme Creator would have done it, or had it been
necessary to have been done thousands of years hence, nothing could have forced
God to have anticipated the settled periods of time one moment; for all his
actions are managed by fixed and eternal reasons, and what he has once
determined, cannot be frustrated by any change or alteration. And thus we see
how easily, and yet how satisfactorily, the primitive Christians wiped off that
double imputation of impiety and novelty, which the Gentiles had so
undeservedly cast upon their Religion.

CHAP. III.
Things charged upon the Christians, respecting their outward condition.
The Christians looked upon and despised by the Heathens, as a company of rude
and illiterate persons, mechanics, silly women and children. This Charge
considered and largly answered by Origin. Christianity provides for the truest
and best knowledge: it excludes none learned or unlearned. Christians not shy
of communicating the knowledge of their mysteries to men sober and inquisitive.
The efficacy of Christianity in prevailing upon men of the acutest parts and
greatest learning. The Christians accused for being poor and mean. This charge
(universally) false. Christianity entertained by persons of all sorts, of the
highest as well as the lowest rank. Several instances of such: Fl. Clemens and
Fl. Domitilla (Domitian's near kindred) Christians; another Domitilla
Domitian's Niece, Acil. Glabrio the Consul, Apollonius the Senator, and others.
Philip the Emperor proved to be no Christian: the rise of the story whence.
Though Christianity had had no such persons under its profession, this had been
no just reasonable prejudice. External pomp and grandeur not necessary to
Religion. The advantages Christians reaped from their meanness and contempt of
the world. Of their being charged as a people useless and unserviceable to the
public. This disowned. The opinion that it was not lawful for Christians to
bear Arms, or Offices, particular only to some persons and in some cases, and
why. How much the world was beholden to Christians, for reclaiming men from
vice and wickedness. The Gospel greatly instrumental that way; its general
influence upon those whom it did not convert: the Writings of Philosophers
generally better after Christianity appeared, and why. The excellent Prayer of
Simplicius. Christians very useful by frequent working beneficial miracles,
curing diseases, raising the dead, dispossessing Devils, etc. This miraculous
power continued for several Ages in the Church. Christians further traduced as
pernicious to the world, as the cause of all public evils and calamities. This
objected at every turn. The occasion of S. Augustine's and Orosius his writing
a vindication of it. This Charge justly retorted upon the Heathens, and they
sent to seek the cause of public calamities nearer home. Some few hinted by
Tertullian. Christians unjustly charged with it, because the world was pestered
with such evils before Christianity appeared in it. The public State better
and more prosperous, since Christianity than before. Its prosperity ebbed or
increased, according to the entertainment Christianity found in the world.

THE second sort of arts which the Enemies of Christianity made use of, to
render Christians vile and despicable, related to the circumstances of their
external state and condition in the world, where two things were laid to their
charge, that they generally were a very mean and inconsiderable sort of men,
and that they were an useless and unserviceable people, nay pernicious and
mischievous to the world. They were looked upon as the lowest and meanest rank
of men, persons neither considerable for their parts and learning, nor for
their estates and quality. Inconsiderable they were accounted in respect of
parts and learning; Adv. gent. l. 3 p. 49.
you scorn and spit us out as rude and simple, and think that the treasury of
all divine and excellent knowledge is open only to your selves, as Arnobius
tells them. Thus Celsus objected, Orig. contr. Cells. l. 3. p. 137.
that amongst the Christians no wise and learned men were admitted to the
mysteries of their Religion; let no man come that is learned, wise, and prudent
(for these things, says he, they account evil and unlawful) but if any be
unlearned, an infant or an idiot, let him come and welcome; openly declaring,
that none but Fools, and such as are devoid of sense and reason, Slaves, silly
Women, and little Children are fit Disciples for the God they worship. We may
observe (says he) these trifling and Mountebank Impostors, Ib. p. 141.
bragging great things to the vulgar, not in the presence and company of wise
men (for that they dare not) but wherever they espy a flock of Boys, Slaves,
and weak simple people, there they presently crowd in, and boast themselves;
Page 144.
you shall see (as he goes on in this charge) Weavers, Tailors, Fullers, and
the most rustic and illiterate Fellows, at home when before their elders and
betters as mute as Fishes; but when they can get a few Children and silly Women
by themselves, then who so wise and learned, who so full of talk, and so able
to teach and instruct as they? Much to the same purpose Cecilius discourses in
Minucius Faelix, Min. Fael. p. 7.
that the Christians were men of a desperate and unlawful faction, who
gathering a company out of the very dregs and refuse of the people, of silly,
easy, credulous Women, who by reason of the weakness of their Sex are easily
imposed and wrought upon, combine them into a wicked confederation, a people
mute in public, but in corners talkative and full of prattle. Now to this part
of the accusation Origin answers, that it is for the main false, Page 137. and
seq.
and proceeds from the spirit of malice and reproach: the sum of his answer as
he delivers it to the several parts of the Charge, take thus: That the
Christian Doctrine invites and calls men to wisdom, as appears both from the
Writings of the Jews of old, and the Scriptures of the New Testament, wherein
we find many singularly eminent for wisdom and learning, Moses, Solomon,
Daniel, and such like of old, and the blessed Jesus made choice of such
Disciples as whom he judged fittest to communicate the secrets of his Religion
to, and privately opened and explained to them, what he only delivered in
parables and similitudes unto others; that he promised to send forth Prophets,
Matthew. 23. 34.
wise men, and Scribes, for the divulging and propagating of his Doctrine; that
S. Paul reckons wisdom and knowledge in the first rank of the gifts of God, 1
Cor. 12. 8.
and that if he any where seem to reflect severely upon wisdom or humane
learning (which probably may be the first rise of this Charge) he only censures
the abuse, never intending to blame the thing it self; that when he prescribes
the properties of a true Bishop, or Governor of the Church, he requires this
as one necessary qualification, that he be apt to teach, and able by sound
Doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers: Tit. 1. 9.
that we are so far from prohibiting any, that come who will, wise, learned,
and prudent, provided the rude, simple, and unlearned be not excluded, for to
them also the Gospel does promise and provide a remedy, making them meet for
God; that, no man but must confess that it is an excellent thing to study the
best arts and discipline, and that learning, the study of Arts, and prudence
are so far from being an^ hinderance to the knowledge of God, that they
mightily help it and advance it: that, it is a great calumny to compare us to
wandering impostors, who by our reading and expounding the Divine Oracles, do
only exhort the people to piety toward the great God, and to the rest of those
virtues which are its individual companions; endeavoring to rescue men from a
contempt of the Deity, and all brutish* and irregular passions; a thing which
the very best Philosophers of them all could wish for: that Christians are so
far from admitting any, hand over head, that they first pre-examine the minds
of those that desire to become their auditors; and having privately had trial
of them, before they receive them into the Congregation, when they perceive
them fully resolved to lead a pious and religious life, then they admit them in
their distinct orders, some that are newly admitted, but not yet baptized,
others that have given some evidence and demonstration of their purpose to live
as becomes Christians; amongst whom there are Governors appointed to inspect
and enquire into the life and manners of those who have been admitted, that
they may expel and turn off those candidates of Religion who answer not their
profession; and heartily entertain those that do, and by daily converses build
them up and make them better: that, it is false to say that we apply our selves
only to Women and Children, and that in corners, when we endeavor what we can
by all means to fill our Societies with wise and prudent persons, and to such
we open the more sublime and recondite principles of Religion, otherwise
accommodating our discourses to the capacities of meaner persons, who stand
more in need of milk than strong meat: that, we desire that all men may be
trained up in the Word of God, and that Servants and Children may have such
instructions given them, as are suitable and convenient no them, the Ministers
of our Religion professing themselves to be debtors both to the Greeks and
Barbarians, both to the wise and to the unwise, that as much as may be they may
outgrow their ignorance, and attain to the best kind of wisdom: and whereas we
are accused to seduce and circumvent silly Women and little Children, and to
draw them away from more weighty and serious counsels; let him produce any
such, and enquire of them whether ever they heard better Masters than ours, or
if they did, why they would leave so grave a discipline, and suffer themselves
to be seduced into a worse* but he will find no such thing to fasten upon us; but
that on the contrary we reclaim Women from immodesty, from falling out with
their Husbands, and parting from them, from the wild extravagancies of the
sports and Theaters, and from all superstition whatsoever: the youth who are
prone to vice and luxury, we restrain, by telling them not only how base and
degenerous a thing it is to indulge their lust, but into how much danger they
precipitate their souls, and what punishments the divine vengeance lays up for
such profligate offenders: we openly, not in corners, promise eternal happiness
to those who live according to the rules of the divine Law, who set God always
before their eyes, and whatever they do, endeavor to approve themselves to
him: and is this the discipline, these the doctrines of Weavers, Tailors,
Fullers, and the most rustic and illiterate persons? surely no: if at any
time, we refuse to produce our instructions and counsels before Masters of
Families, or the Doctors of Philosophy: know, that if they be studious of
virtue, enemies to vice, and such as breath after the best things, before such
we are most willing and ready to instruct our youth, being well assured we
shall find them favorable Judges: but if they be enemies to goodness and
virtue, and opposers of sound wholesome Doctrine, then if we hold our peace, no
fault can justly be laid upon us: for in such circumstances the Philosophers
themselves would not discover the dictates and mysteries of their Philosophy.
This is the substance of the several answers, which Origin pursues more at
large through several pages: which though very rational and satisfactory, yet
we find something pleaded more direct and positive to the charge; viz. that
although amongst the Christians (as it is in any Society of men) the vulgar and
more common sort, might not be men of the sharpest understanding, or versed in
the more polite arts of learning, yet wanted they not (and those no small
number) great Scholars, men of acute parts and raised abilities, such as had
run through the whole circle of the Sciences, who daily came over to them: So
Arnobius, urging the triumphant power and efficacy which the Christian Faith
had over the minds of men, Adv. gent. l. 2. p. 21.
who (says he) would not believe it, when he sees in how short a time it has
conquered so great a part of the world; when men of so great wit and parts,
Orators, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, Physicians, and Philosophers, have
thrown up those former sentimets; of which but a little before they were so
tenacious, and have embraced the Doctrines of the Gospel. So fast did the
Christian Church fill with the most eminent professors of all parts of
Learning, that were then known to the world.

Nor were the Christians of those times more despised upon the account of their
weakness and ignorance, than they were for their meanness and poverty; they
were looked upon as de ultima faece, as the scum and refuse of the people,
scarce a considerable man to be found amongst them. Page 9.
See (says the Heathen in Minucius Faelix) the most and best of all your party
are a poor, beggarly, hungerstarv'd generation, that have neither riches, nor
reputation to bear them out. This Charge (however impertinent, seeing the
goodness of any Religion depends not upon the greatness of its professors) was
yet as untrue as 'twas unreasonable, the Christians having amongst them persons
of the chiefest place and quality, and after some years the Princes and
Potentates of the world, and even the Emperors themselves struck sail to the
Scepter of Christ. When Scapula the President of Carthage threatened the
Christians with severe and cruel usage, Tertullian bids him bethink himself; Ad
Scap. c. 4. p. 71.
what will thou do (says he) with so many thousands of men and women of every
sex, age, and dignity, as will freely offer themselves? What fires, what Swords
will thou stand in need of? What is Carthage it self like to suffer, if
decimated by thee; when every one shall find there his near Kindred and
Neighbors, and shall see there Matrons, and men perhaps of thy own rank and
order, and the most principal persons, and either the Kindred or Friends of
those who are thy own nearest friends. Spare them therefore for your own sake,
if not for ours. And if there were persons of such quality in Afric (so remote,
and in a manner so barbarous a Province) what may we suppose there were in Rome
it self, and other parts of the Roman Empire. Cap. 37. p. 30.
And in his Apology, speaking of the vast spreading of the party, though (says
he) we be men of quite another way, yet have we filled all places among you,
your Cities, Islands, Castles, Corporations, Councils, nay your Armies
themselves, your Tribes, Companies, yea the Palace, the Senate, and the Courts
of Justice; only your Temples we have left you free. Sure I am Pliny in his
Letter to the Emperor, Lib. 10.
tells him, Epist. 97.
that Christianity had not only overrun City and Country, but that it had
infected many of every sex, age, and order of men.

And indeed it were no hard matter out of the ancient Histories and
Martyrologies of the Church, nay from the Heathen Writers themselves, to prove
that persons of the highest rank and quality, even in those times, embraced
Christianity, and sealed it with their blood. Of which it may suffice to give
an account only of some few. Not to insist upon the Saints which S. Paul tells
us were in Nero's Palace, we find many considerable persons, and some of them
near a kin to the Emperor under the reign of Domitian (that cruel Prince and
persecutor of Christians) entertaining the profession of the Gospel. And first
let us hear the account which Dion Cassius the famous Historian gives us. He
tells us that about the latter end of Domitian's Reign he condemned many (some
whereof were slain, Lib. 67. in Domit* p. 766.
others stripped of their estates) and amongst the rest Flavius Clemens the
Consul, his own Cousin-german, and his Wife Flavia Domitilla, near akin also to
the Emperor, upon pretense of Atheism ((...)) and for that they had embraced
the Rites and Religion of the Jews. His Nephew Clemens he put to death, his
Wife Domitilla he banished into the Island Pandateria. Upon the same account
also he put to death Acilius Glabrio, who, together with Trajan had been Consul
the year before. That the persons here described were Christians, is plain,
partly from the Charge of Atheism here fastened upon them (the common and
familiar accusation, and the title given to Christianity by the Heathens, as we
observed before) and partly because they are said to have passed over to the
Rites and Customs of the Jews; nothing being more ordinary in the Historians of
those times, than to mistake Christians for Jews, and to call them so, because
both proceeding out of the same Country, Christ himself and his Apostles being
Jews born, and his Religion first published and planted there. And that which
may give some more countenance to this, is, that Suetonius speaking of
Domitian's condemning this Fl. Clemens, I^ Domitian. c. 15. p. 803.
represents him as a man contemtissimae inertiae, as a most contemptibly dull
and sluggish person, which we know was generally charged upon the Christians,
that they were an useless and unactive people, as we shall have occasion by and
by more particularly to remark. Besides this Fl. Domitilla, the Wife of
Clemens, there was another of the same name, his Niece by the Sister's side
(unless Dion Cassius mistook, and put down Wife for Niece, which there is no
reason to suppose, seeing both may very well consist together) who (as Eusebius
informs us) was with many more banished by Domitian in the fifteenth year of
his Reign, Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 18. p. 89.
into the Island Pontia, and there put to death for the profession of
Christianity; whose persecutions and martyrdoms (says he) are recorded by
Heathen-writers themselves. Amongst whom, I suppose, he principally intends
Brettius or Brutius the Historian, Can. Chron. ad An. Chr. 97. p. 208. and
Chron. p. 80. Edit. Graec.
whom he cites elsewhere, and out of whom he there quotes this very passage,
That under Domitian many of the Christians suffered martyrdom, amongst whom was
Fl. Domitilla, Niece by the Sister's side to Fl. Clemens the Consul, who for
being a Christian was banished into the Island Pontia. She is said after a
great deal of hard and tedious usage to have been burnt, together with the
house wherein she was; her memory celebrated in the Roman Calendar upon the
seventh of May. Martyr. Romans ad 7. Maii.


Besides these, we find that Christianity getting ground under the quiet Reign
of the Emperor Commodus, many of the greatest birth and fortunes in Rome,
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 21. p. 189*
together with their whole Families flocked over to the Christian Faith.
Amongst whom was Apollonius, a man famous for Philosophy, and all polite humane
literature, who so gallantly pleaded his cause before the Senate, and was
himself a Senator, De Script.
as S. Hierom informs us. Eccles. in Apoll.
I shall but mention one instance more, and that is of Philip the Emperor; Li.
6* c. 34. p. 232.
whom Eusebius expressly affirms to have been a Christian, and the first of the
Emperors that was so; followed herein by a whole troop both of ancient and
modern Writers. Nay we are told by some a formal story, that this Philip and
his Son were converted by the preaching of Pontius the Martyr, Act. Pont. apud.
Sur. ad 14.
and baptized by Fabiam Bishop of Rome. Maii. tom. 3.
But notwithstanding the smoothness of the story, and the number of
authorities, I must confess it seems to me scarcely probable, that a person of
so bad a life, guilty of such enormous villainies, as that Emperor was, should
either be, or be thought a Christian; or if he was, that the whole world should
not presently ring of it. Certain I am, that all Historians of that time are
wholly silent in the case, nor is there the least intimation of any such thing
in any Writer, either Heathen or Christian before Eusebius. Nay Origin who
wrote his Book in defense of Christianity under the Reign of this very
Emperor, and about this very time (nay and two Epistles, one to Philip, the
other to his Wife Severa, if we may believe Eusebius) yet not only makes no
mention of it, when it would have made greatly for his purpose, but tacitly
implies there was no such thing. For Celsus reproving the boldness and
petulancy of the Christians, as if they should give out, that if they could but
bring over the present Emperors to their Religion, all other men would quickly
be brought over: Origin point blanck denies the Charge, and tells him there is
no need of any answer, Adv. Cells. l. 8. p. 42^*
for that none of the Christians ever said so. An answer which surely he would
not have given, had the Emperor at that time been a Christian; not to insist
upon many other intimations which might be produced out of that Book against
it. Hist. Ro^ l. 9. non long ab init.
Besides, Eutropius reports, that Philip and his Son being slain by the
Soldiers, were yet inter Divos relati, deified, or advanced into the number of
their Gods. An honor which it is certain the Senate would not have done them,
had they either been, or but suspected to have been Christians. To all which I
may add, that Eusebius himself (in whom the first footsteps of this story
appear) builds it upon no better a foundation, ib. 6. c. 34*
than a (...), a bare tradition and report. That which seems to have given both
birth and color to the story is this. One Philippus an illustrious person
under the Emperor Severus, Martyr.
was a long time Governor of Egypt; Eugen. apud Sur. ad 25. December. tom. 6.
he by the means of his Daughter Eugenia was converted to Christianity, under
whose shelter the Christians there enjoyed great peace and favor (nay the
story adds, though certainly without any ground, that he was created Bishop of
Alexandria) till the Emperor being acquainted with his being a Christian,
presently removed him, and by the help of his Successor Terentius caused him to
be secretly murdered and made away. This (if any thing) was the rise of the
story; and that which makes it more probable, is, the honor and excellency of
that employment, the greatest of all the Offices in the Roman Empire, the
command and state little less than regal; and therefore the Emperors in their
Letter to this Philip (wherein they reproach him for ingratitude and apostasy)
tell him that in a manner he was made a King, when he was chosen President of
Egypt. Accordingly the title of the Governor of Egypt (as appears from the
Historians, but especially the Notitia Imperii) was Praefectus Augustalis; and
how easy was it to mistake Philippus Augustus for Philippus Augustalis? But
enough of this, as also the falseness of that charge, that the Christians were
such a sorry inconsiderable people.

But however, let us suppose them to have been as mean and poor, as the malice
and cruelty of their adversaries did endeavor to make them, yet this was no
real prejudice to their cause, nor any great hurt to them. That the most part
of us are accused to be poor (says Octavius in answer to Caecilius his charge)
it is not our dishonor, but our glory; the mind as it is dissolved by plenty and
luxury, so it is strengthened and girt close by indigence and frugality; and yet
how can that man be poor, who wants not, who is not greedy of what is another
man's, who is rich in and toward God? that man is rather poor, who when he has
a great deal desires more: the truth is, no man can be so poor, as he was when
he was born; the Birds live without any patrimony entailed upon them, and the
Beasts find pastures every day; and yet these are born for our use, all which
we fully enjoy, when we do not covet them: much lighter and happier does he go
to Heaven, who is not burdened by the way with an unnecessary load of riches:
and yet did we think estates so useful to us, we could beg them of God, who
being Lord of all, might well afford a little to us; but we had rather despise
them than enjoy them, and rather choose innocence and patience, desiring more to
be good than to be great and prodigal. If we endure outward sufferings and
tortures, it is not so much pain as it is a warfare; our courage is increased by
infirmities, and calamity is very often the discipline of virtue; the nerves both
of body and mind without exercise would grow loose and faint; and therefore God
is neither unable to help us, not yet negligent of us, as being the Governor
of the world, and the Father of his Children; but trys and examines every ones
temper in an adverse state, as Gold is tried in the fire. Besides it must needs
be a sight very pleasing to God, to behold a Christian conflicting with grief
and misery, preparing himself to encounter threatenings and torments, pressing
in upon the very noise of death, and the horror of the Executioner,
maintaining his liberty against Kings and Princes, and only yielding to God,
whose he wholly is, coming off from all the attempts of adversity with victory
and triumph. So argues that excellent person (and who ever reads him in his
native language must confess it) with equal strength of eloquence and reason,
where he also briefly touches that objection so common amongst the Heathens,
that if Christians were so dear to God, why then did he suffer them to be
oppressed with so many miseries* and troubles, Arnob adv. gent. l. 2. prop. fin.
and not come in to vindicate and relieve them: an argument fully cleared by
Arnobius, Lactant. l* 5. de justit. c. 2^.
Lactantius, and other ancient Apologists for the Christian Faith.

But this was not all, they were charged as a very useless and unserviceable
people, that contributed nothing to the happiness of the Commonwealth; nay as
destructive and pernicious to humane society, and as the procuring cause of all
those mischiefs and calamities that befell the world. In answer to the first,
their being useless as to the common good, Ap. c. 42. p. 33.
hear what Tertullian says in the case; How can this be (says he) when we live
amongst you, have the same diet, habit, manner, and way of life? we are no
Brachmans or Indian Gymnosophists, who live in Woods, and banish themselves
from all civil life: we are not unmindful of what we owe to our great Creator,
and therefore despise none of his Creatures, though careful to use them with
temperance and sobriety; wherefore we live not in the world without the use of
your Markets, Shambles, Bathes, Taverns, Shops, Stables, your Marts, and other
ways of humane commerce: we go to Sea with you, bear Arms, till and improve the
ground, use merchandise, we undergo Trades amongst you, and expose our works to
your use; and how then we can seem unserviceable to your affairs, with which
and by which we live, Ib c. 43.
I see not. Certainly (says he) if any have cause truly to complain of our
being unprofitable, they are Bawds, Panders, Pimps, Hectors and Ruffians,
sellers of poison, Magicians, Southsayers, Wizards, and Astrologers: and to be
unserviceable to these, is the greatest serviceableness. But besides this, they
pleaded for themselves, that their Religion was highly beneficial to the world,
and in its own nature contributed to the peace and happiness of mankind; it
cannot be denied but that some of the Primitive Christians were shie of
engaging in Wars, and not very forward to undergo public places of authority
and power; but (besides that this was only the opinion of some private persons,
and not the common and current practice or determination of the Church) it
arose partly from some mistaken passages in the Gospel, turning Evangelical
Counsels into positive precepts; but principally because such Offices and
Employments were usally clogged with such circumstances and conditions, as
obliged them to some things repugnant to the Christian Law: otherwise where
they could do it without offering violence to their Religion and their
Conscience, they shunned it not, but frequently bore Arms, and discharged such
Public Offices as were committed to them, as cannot be unknown to any that are
never so little versed in the History of the first Ages of the Church: never
were there better, more faithful and resolute Soldiers, more obedient to the
Orders of their Commanders, more ready to attempt the most hazardous
enterprises, never boggling at any thing which they could do without sin: of
which, amongst many others I shall instance only in that of the Thebaean
Legion, who being commanded upon a bloody and unlawful butchery, Martyrol.
Adonis ad X. Kalend. October.
to destroy and cut off the Christians their brethren, meekly returned this
answer to the Heathen Emperor Maximianus, under whom they served; we offer our
hands against any Enemy, but count it unlawful to embrue them in the blood of
the innocent: our Swords know how to strike a Rebel or an Enemy, but not to
wound those who are Citizens and guiltless; we remember that we took up Arms
for, not against friends and fellow Citizens: we have always fought for justice
and piety, and for the safety of the innocent; these have been hitherto the
price of those dangers that we have run upon; we have fought for fidelity,
which how shall we be able to keep to you, if we do not first keep it to our
God. So far were the Christians of those times from refusing to engage in the
service of their Prince. Nay those of them who were so bound up by their
private sentiments, as not to think it lawful, yet reckoned they otherways made
equivalent compensation: thus when Celsus pressed the Christians to undergo
public Offices, and to help the Emperors in their Wars; Adv. Cells. l. 8. p.
426, 427.
Origin answers, that they did so, though by a divine not humane help, by
praying for their persons, and their prosperity and success; above all men
(says he) we fight for the Emperor, while we train our selves in exercises of
piety, and contend by prayers for him. But besides these there were several
other instances which the Christians pleaded to vindicate themselves, from
being unserviceable to the good of mankind, amongst which I shall at present
take notice only of these two.

First, That they really sought to reclaim men from vice and sin, to a good and
a virtuous life; by which means (besides that they provided for men's highest
and nearest interest, the interest of their souls, and their eternal happiness
in another life) they greatly consulted the peace and welfare of the places
where they lived; for vicious and wicked men are the pests and plagues of
humane society, that taint and infect others by their bad examples or
persuasions, and entail vengeance upon the places of their residence; whilst
good men engage the favor and blessing of heaven, and both by their counsels
and examples bring over others to sobriety and virtue, whereby they establish
and strengthen the foundations of Government, and the happiness of civil life,
and none so eminent for this as the Christians of old; this is the great
triumphant argument wherewith Origin at every turn exalts the honor of
Christianity; Adv. Cells. lib. 1. p. 9.
this (says he) we find in the multitudes of those that believe, who are
delivered from that sink of vices, wherein before they were wont to wallow:
enquire into the lives of some of us, Ib. p. 21.
compare our former and our present course, and you will find in what filthiness
and impieties they tumbled, before they entertained the Christian Doctrine; but
since the time that they entered into it, how gentle and moderate, how grave and
constant are they become, Ib. p. 53.
and some so inflamed with the love of purity, that they forbear even what
lawfully they might enjoy; how largely are the Churches of God, founded by
Christ, spread over all Nations, consisting of such as are converted from
innumerable evil ways to a better mind: And elsewhere vindicating the Doctrine
of Christ, from the mischievous cavils of his adversary, Lib. 2. p. 78
he tells us how 'twas impossible that could be pestilent and hurtful, which
had converted so many from their vices and debaucheries, to a course most
agreeable to Nature and Reason, and to a life of temperance and all other
virtues: and the same he urges frequently in other places, and what greater
kindness and benefit could be done to men? Lib. 8. p. 427.
Does Celsus call upon us (says he) to bear Offices for the good of our
Country; let him know that the Country is much more beholden to Christians than
to the rest of men, while they teach men piety toward God, the tutelar
Guardian of the Country, and show them the way to that heavenly City that is
above, which they that live well may attain to, though here they dwell in the
smallest City in the world. Nor do the Christians thus employ themselves, Ib.
p. 428.
because they shun the public Offices of the civil life; but only reserve
themselves for the more divine and ncessary services of the Church, in order to
the good and happiness of men; for this they think very just and reasonable,
that they should take care of all men, of them of their own party, that they
may every day make them better; of others, that they may draw them to the
belief and practice of piety and Religion; that so worshipping God in truth,
and doing what they can to instruct others, they may be united to the great
God, and to his blessed Son, who is the wisdom, truth, and righteousness, and
by whom it is that every one is converted to a pious and religious life.

Theodoret discoursing against the Gentiles, De curand. Graec. affectib. Sermon.
9. de Leg. p. 128.
of the excellency of the Laws of Christ, above any that were given by the best
Philosophers or wisest men amongst the Heathens, gives them instances of whole
Nations whom Christianity had brought off from the most brutish and savage
manners, he tells them of the Persians who by the Laws given them by Zarada
lived in incestuous mixtures with their own Mothers, Sisters, and Daughters,
looking upon it as a lawful and warrantable practice; till entertaining
Christianity, they threw off those abominable Laws, and submitted to that
temperance and chastity which the Gospel requires of us. And whereas before
they were wont to cast out the bodies of their dead, to be devoured by Beasts
and Birds of prey, since they embraced the Christian Religion, they abstained
from that piece of inhumanity, and decently committed them to the earth; from
which they could not be restrained, either by the Laws of their Country, or the
bitterness of those torments which they underwent. The Massagetes who thought
it the most miserable thing in the world to dye any other than a violent death,
and therefore made a Law that all persons arrived to old age should be offered
in Sacrifice and eaten, no sooner submitted to Christianity, but abhorred those
barbarous and abominable Customs. The Tibarens, who used to throw aged persons
down the steepest Rocks, left it off upon their embracing of the Gospel. Upon
the same account the Hyrcani and the Caspians reformed their manners, who were
formerly wont to keep Dogs on purpose to devour the bodies of the dead. Nor did
the Scythians any longer together with their dead bury those alive who had been
their nearest friends and kindred. So great a change (says my Author) did the
Laws of Christ make in the manners of men, and so easily were the most
barbarous Nations persuaded to entertain them, a thing which Plato, though the
best of all Philosophers, could never effect amongst the Athenians, his own
Fellow Citizens, who could never induce them to govern the Commonwealth,
according to those Laws and Institutions which he had prescribed them.

Nay where the Gospel did not produce this effect to reclaim men from their
vices and vanities, and to bring them over to the Religion of the crucified
Savior; yet had it this excellent influence upon the world, that it generally
taught them better lessons, refined their understandings, and filled their
minds with more useful and practical notions about Religion than they had
before. To which purpose it is mainly observable, that those Philosophers who
lived in the time of Christianity, after the Gospel publicly appeared in the
world, wrote in a much more divine strain, entertained more honorable and
worthy sentiments about God and Religion, and the duties of men in their
several capacities, than those of their Sect that went before them. Of which I
conceive no account can be given so satisfactory as this, that the genius and
spirit of the Gospel began then to fly abroad, and to breathe in a freer air,
and so could not but leave some tincture and savor upon the spirits of men,
though its most inveterate Enemies. (...). Theod. de Cur. Graec. Ass. Sermon. 2.
de princip. p. 33.
Besides that many of them did more nearly converse with the Writings of
Christianity, which they read either out of curiosity, or with a design to
confute and answer them. This doubtless sharpened the edge of their
understandings, and furnished them with better notions, more useful precepts
and rules of life, than are to be met with in any of the old Philosophers:
witness those excellent and uncommon strains of piety that run through the
Writings of Seneca, Epictetus, Antoninus, Arrian, Plutarch, Hierocles,
Plotinus, and the rest that lived in those first Ages of the Gospel: of which I
could give considerable instances, were it necessary to my purpose. I shall
only as a specimen, set down that Prayer wherewith Simplicius (Enemy enough to
Christianity) concludes his Comment upon Epictetus: and thus he makes his
address to God.

(...). Page 331.


I Beseech thee, O Lord, thou that art the Father and guide of our rational
powers, grant that we may be mindful of those noble and generous natures with
which thou have invested us; and assist us, that as persons endued with
self-moving principles, we may cleanse our selves from all bodily and brutish
passions, that we may subdue and govern them, and in a due and decent manner
use them only as Organs and instruments. Help us through the light of the
truth, accurately to correct our reason, and to unite it to those things that
have a real existence. And in the third place, I beseech my Savior, that he
would perfectly dispel the mist that is before the eyes of our minds, that
according to that of the Poet, we may rightly understand what belongs either to
God or man.

Besides the matter of this Prayer, which is very sublime and spiritual, the
manner of its composure is considerable, consisting of three parts, and those
addressed as it were to three persons, answerable to those in the blessed
Trinity, the Lord (or Father) the Savior (or Christ) and the light of truth
(which even in Scripture is a common Periphrasis of the Holy Spirit:) whether
he intended this, I will not say, sure I am it looks very like it. But enough
of this.

Secondly, That they ordinarily wrought such miracles as were incomparably
beneficial to the world, in curing diseases, raising the dead, and rescuing
possessed persons from the merciless rage and cruelty of the Devil: we may
observe, that in those primitive times there were innumerable multitudes of
possessed persons, beyond what were in the Ages either before or since; the
Divine Providence doubtless permitting it to be so, that by this means there
might be a fairer occasion of commending Christianity to the world; and there
is nothing which we more commonly meet with in the Writings of the ancient
Fathers, than testimonies concerning their triumphant power over evil spirits:
Justin Martyr discoursing of the end of Christ's coming into the world, Apol.
1. p. 45.
for the salvation of men, and the subversion of Devils, tells the Senate, that
these things are so, you may know by what is done before your eyes; for many
that were possessed by Devils, throughout the whole world, and even in this
City of yours, whom all your Inchanters, Sorcerers, and Conjurers were not able
to cure, many of us Christians adjuring them by the name of Jesus Christ, who
was crucified under Pontius Pilate, have perfectly cured, and do still cure,
disarming and driving out of men those Demons that had seized upon them; and
the same he affirms more than once and again in his discourse with Trypho the
Jew. Adv haeres. lib. 2. c. 57. p. 218.
Ironaeus arguing against the Heretics, tells us, that the true Disciples of
Christ did in his name many strange things for the good of others, according as
every one had received his gift, some so signally expelling Devils, that those
out of whom they were cast came over to the Faith; others foretelling future
events: others curing men of the most grievous distempers, by putting their
hands upon them, and restoring them to their former health: many that have been
raised from the dead, and afterward lived many years amongst us: and indeed
innumerable (says he) are the gifts which God has every where bestowed upon his
Church, whereby in the name of the crucified Jesus, many and great miracles are
daily done to the great advantage of the world. Ad Scap. c. 2 p 69.
Tertullian appeals to the Heathens, as a thing commonly known amongst them,
that they daily restrained the power of Devils, and cast them out of men; Ib.
c. 4. p. 71.
and he tells Scapula the President, that he might be satisfied of this from
his own Records, and those very advocates who had themselves reaped this
benefit from Christians; as for instance, a certain Notary, and the Kinsman and
Child of another; besides diverse other persons of note and quality (not to
speak of the meaner sort) who had been recovered either from Devils or from
desperate Diseases: nay Severus the Father of Antoninus having been cured by
being anointed with Oil by Proculus a Christian, he kept him in his Palace till
his death; whom Antoninus knew well, having been himself nursed by a Christian:
and in his Apology he challenges the Heathens to produce any possessed person
before the public Tribunals, and the evil spirit being commanded by any
Christian shall then as truly confess himself to be a Devil, as at other times
he falsely boasts himself to be a god. And elsewhere putting the case that the
Christians should agree to retire out of the Roman Empire, Apol. c. 37. p 30.
he asks them what protection they would then have left against the secret and
invisible attempts of Devils, O^ig contr. C. lib. 1. p. 5 7. 53. l. 3 p. 124.
l. 7. p. 334. 376.
who made such havoc both of their souls and bodies, whom the Christians so
freely expelled and drove out; Cypr. Ep. ad Donat. p. 3. ad Demetrian. p. 201.
206. Min Fael. p. 23
that it would be a sufficient piece of revenge, that hereby they should leave
them open to the uncontrouled possession of those evil spirits. 'Twere endless
to produce all the testimonies of this nature, that might be fetched from
Origin, Minucius Faelix, Arnob. adv. gent. l. 1. p. 13.
Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius, Lactant. de Or. error. l. 2. c. 15.
p. 220.
and all the old Apologists for the Christian Religion, (some whereof I have
briefly noted in the Margin) who constantly pleaded this as a mighty and
uncontrollable argument of the truth and divinity of their Religion, Eusebius.
demonstrat. Evang. l. 3. p. 132.
and of their great usefulness to mankind; nay this miraculous power continued
in the Church some considerable time after Constantine and the world was become
Christian, Naz. Or. 1. Apol. p. 35. Aug. de C. D. l. 22. c. 8. p. 1339.
as appears from S. Basil, Nazianzen, and others; and though I do not give heed
to all the miracles which are reported by S. Hierom, Greg. Nyss. Or. in suam
ordinat. tom. 1. p 876.
in the lives of Hilarion, Paulus, and some others; or by Palladius in his
Historia Lausiaca; yet doubtless many of them were very true and real; Athanas.
de incarn. verb. p. 35. edit. Lat.
God withdrawing this extraordinary power, as Christianity gained faster
footing in the world, and leaving the Church to those standing methods by which
it was to be managed and governed to the end of the world.

And yet notwithstanding the case was thus plain and evident, how much the
world was beholden to Christians, yet were they looked upon as the pests of
humane society, counted and called the common enemies of mankind, Ap. c. 37. p.
30.
as Tertullian complains; that, they were the causes of all public calamities,
and that for their sakes it was, that vengeance did so often remarkably haunt
the Roman Empire. This was the common outcry; if the City be besieged (says
Tertullian) if any thing happen ill in the Fields, Ib. c. 1. p. 2.
in the Garrisons, in the Islands, presently they cry out, ' it is because of the
Christians: Ibid. c. 40. p. 32.
they conspire the ruin of good men, and thirst after the blood of the
innocent, patronizing their hatred with this vain pretense, that the Christians
are the cause of all public misfortunes and calamities; if Tiber overflow the
walls, if the Nile do not (as it is wont) overflow the fields, if the Heaven do
not keep its accustomed course, if an Earthquake happen, if a Famine, or a
Plague, presently the cry is, away with the Christians to the Lions. Thus
Demetrian the Proconsul of Afric objected to S. Cyprian, Cypr. ad Demetr. p.
197.
that they might thank the Christians, that wars did oftener arise, that
Plagues and Famines did rage so much, and that immoderate and excessive rains
hindered the kindly seasons of the year. The same, Arnob. adv. gent. lib. 1. p.
1.
Arnobius tells us, the Heathens were wont to object at every turn, and to
conclude it as sure as if it had been dictated by an Oracle, that since the
Christians appeared in the world, the world had been well-nigh undone, mankind
has been overrun with infinite kinds of evil; and the very gods themselves had
withdrawn that solemn care and providence, wherewith they were wont to
superintend humane affairs. Nay so hot and common was this Charge amongst the
Pagans, that when the Goths and Vandals broke in upon the Roman Empire, S.
Augustine was forced to write those excellent Books De Civit. Dei, Aid.
Retractat. l. 2. c. 43. tom. 1. p. 52.
purposely to stop the mouth of this objection, as upon the same account and at
his request Orosius wrote his seven Books of History against the Pagans. P.
Oros. praef ad lib. Hist. ad D. Aug.
Omitting some of the answers given by the Fathers (as being probably less
solid, and not so proper in this case; such as, that 'twas no wonder if
miseries happened, and things grew worse in this old age of time, the world
daily growing more feeble and decrepit; and that these things had been foretold
by God, Ad Dem^trian. p. 198, 199.
and therefore must necessarily come to pass; two arguments largely and
strongly pleaded by S. Cyprian: that those evils were properly resolvable into
natural causes; and that every thing is not presently evil, because it crosses
our ease and interest as Arnobius answers: passing by these) I shall take
notice only of two things which the Christians pleaded in this case. Arnob. ut
supra p. 4.


First, That the Gentiles should do very well to seek the true causes of these
things nearer home, and to enquire whether 'twas not for their own sakes, that
the Divine Providence was thus offended with them; there being very just
reasons to think so. Tertullian points them to such causes as these. Ap. c. 40.
p. 33.
First, their horrible affronting their natural notions of God, that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain
in their imaginations, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.
and their foolish heart was darkened, and they changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four footed beasts, and creeping things, as S. Paul had told them long before:
and that therefore 'twas reasonable to suppose, Ap. c. 41. vid. Arnob. l. 1. p.
6, 7.
that God was more angry with them, who instead of him worshipped pieces of
wood and Statues, or at best Genii and Devils, than with those who sincerely
paid their adorations to him alone. Secondly, Passing by God the great Master
of all goodness and innocence, and the severe revenger of all impiety, they
tumbled themselves in all manner of vice and wickedness; and what wonder if the
Divine Justice followed close at their heels. Vt supra. p. 199. 200
You are angry (says Cyprian) that God is angry, as if in living ill you
deserved well, and as if all that has happened to you were not less and lighter
than your sins: and thou, Demetrian, who art a Judge of others, but in this a
Judge of thy self, inspect the retirements of thy conscience, and behold thy
self now, who shall one day be seen naked by all; and thou will find thy self
enslaved and led captive by some sins or other; and why then should thou
wonder that the flames of the divine anger should rise higher, when the sins of
men do daily administer more fuel to it: an answer which he there prosecutes to
very excellent purpose. Thirdly, Their prodigious unthankfulness to God for all
the former blessings they had received from him: so far as they were
ungrateful, they were highly guilty, and God could not but punish them; had
they sought him, whom in part they could not but know, and been observant of
him, they would in this case have found him a much more propitious, than an
angry Deity, as Tertullian tells them. Upon these and such like accounts, they
might well conclude it was, that the vengeance of God did press so hard upon
them, and that therefore they had no true reason to lay the fault at any other
door but their own.

Secondly, As to the thing it self, as 'twas charged upon them, they point
blank denied it to be true, and that for two reasons especially.

First, Because the world had been sadly and frequently pestered with such
evils and miseries long before the Christian Religion appeared in it: I pray
(says Tertullian) what miseries did overwhelm all the world, Ap. c. 40. p. 32.
and even Rome it self, before the times of Tiberius, i. e. before the coming
of Christ; have we not read of Hierapolis, and the Islands of Delos, and
Rhodes, and Cos destroyed with many thousands of men? does not Plato speak of
the greatest part of Asia and Afric swallowed up by the Atlantic Sea? an
Earthquake drank up the Corinthan Sea, and the force of the Ocean rent off
Sicilia from Italy: not to ask where were the Christians, the great contemners
of your gods? but where were your gods themselves, when the Flood overran the
world? Palestine had not yet received the Jewish Nation out of Egypt, much less
had the Christians sat down there, when Sodom and Gomorrah and the adjacent
parts were burnt up by a shower of fire and Brimstone; of which the Country
smells to this day. Nor could Tuscia and Campania complain of the Christians,
when a fire from Heaven destroyed the Vulsinii and the Pompeii. None as yet
worshipped the true God at Rome, when Hannibal at Cannae made such a slaughter
of the Romans, that the very Rings that he took (which were the honorable
Badges of none but Roman Knights) were measured by the Bushel: they were all
your gods that then had the general worship, when the Gauls took the Capitol it
self. So smartly does that grave man retort their own arguments upon
themselves. Arnobius fully and elegantly pursues this, Lib. 1. p. 2, 3.
that in this respect the former times were no better than these, which they so
much complained of, and bids them run over the Annals and Records that were
written in all languages, and they would find that all Nations had frequently
had their common miseries and devastations: the clearing of which was likewise
the great design Orosius proposed to himself, Praefat. ut supra. p. 2.
in drawing down the History of the world through all the Ages and Generations
of it.

Secondly, Because since the coming of Christianity, the world had been in a
better and more prosperous state than it was before, especially when ever the
Christian Religion met with any favor and encouragement; the reason of it
Tertullian gives: Apol. c. 40. p. 33.
although we should compare present with former miseries, yet they are much
lighter now, since God sent Christians into the world; for since then,
innocence has balanced the iniquities of the Age, and there have been many who
have interceded with Heaven. Quest. 126 p. 476.
The Author of the Questions and Answers in Justin Martyr (for that it was not
Justin himself, I think no man can doubt, that reads him, the man betraying
himself openly enough to have lived in the times of prevailing Christianity)
putting this question, whether paganism was not the better Religion, forasmuch
as under it there was great prosperity and abundance, whereas 'twas quite
otherwise since Christianity came in fashion; he answers, among other things,
that (besides that plenty was no argument of the goodness of any Religion,
Christians being to be judged of rather by the holiness than the prosperity of
their Religion) there was so much the more abundance in these times of
Christianity, by how much there were fewer Wars, than was while Paganism
governed the world. Never were wars more succesfully managed, never was
prosperity more triumphant, than when Christians met with kind entertainment.
Melito* Bishop of Sardis, in an Oration which he presented to the Emperor M.
Antoninus in behalf of the Christians (part whereof is yet extant in Eusebius)
tells him that Christianity commencing under the Reign of Augustus was a good
(...) of the prosperity of the Empire, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. c. 26. p.
148.
and that ever since, the majesty of the Roman Empire had increased: of whom he
being the Heir and Successor, he could not better assure it to himself and his
Son, than by protecting that Religion that had been born and bred up together
with the Empire, and for which his Ancestors amongst other Religions had had an
esteem and honor: that there could be no better argument, that this Religion
contributed to the happiness of the Empire (with which it began and had grown
up) than that since the Reign of Augustus no misfortune, but on the contrary,
according to all men's wishes every thing had happened to be magnificent and
prosperous. Hence Eusebius notes once and again, that the affairs of the Empire
commonly flourished, Vid. ib. l. 7. c. 1. l. 8. c. 13.
while Christianity was protected, but when that was persecuted, things began
to go to rack, De Martyr. Palest. c. 3. p. 322.
and their ancient peace and prosperity could not be retrieved, till peace and
tranquillity was restored to the Christians: therefore Cyprian tells the
Proconsul, Ad Demet. p. 200.
that their cruelty to the Christians was one of those crying sins that had
provoked God to inflict so many heavy miseries upon them, not only refusing to
worship God themselves, but unjustly persecuting those innocent persons that
did, with all the methods of rage and fierceness. So little hand had the
Christians in entailing vengeance upon the world, that their Enemies rather
wilfully pulled it down upon their own heads.

CHAP. IV.
The Charges brought against them, respecting their life and manners.
The Primitive Christians accused of the grossest sins, Sacrilege, Sedition,
Treason, Incest, Murder, etc. The particular consideration of these referred to
their proper places. What they offered in the general for their vindication
considered. They openly asserted their innocence, and appealed to the known
piety of their lives. None accounted Christians, however eminent in profession,
unless their lives answerable. Their abstaining from appearance of evil, or
doing any thing that symbolized with the idolatrous Rites of the Heathens.
Their being willing to be brought to the strictest trial, and to be severely
punished, if found guilty of those crimes. Their complaints of being
(generally) condemned, merely for bearing the name of Christians. They greatly
gloried in that title. This name prohibited by Julian, and Christians commanded
in scorn to be called Galilaeans. The Christians appealed for their vindication
to the Consciences of their impartial Enemies, and by them acquitted. The
testimonies of Pliny, Ser. Grannianus, Antoninus Pius, M. Antoninus, Trypho the
Jew, and Apollo's Oracle to this purpose. The excellency of Christians if
compared with the best of Heathens. All such disowned for Christians, as did
not exactly conform to the rule and discipline of Christianity.

ALL the attempts that had been hitherto made against the honor and reputation
of Christians, seemed but like the first skirmishings of an Army, in respect of
the main Battalia that was yet behind, the Charge that was made against their
moral carriage and behavior; and here they were accused at every turn of no
less than Sacrilege, Sedition, and High Treason, of incest and promiscuous
mixtures, of murder, and eating the flesh of Infants at their sacramental
Feasts: These were sad and horrid crimes, and had they been true, would justly
have made Christianity stink in the nostrils of all sober and considering men:
but they were as false as they were black and hellish: the particular Answers
to these Charges (together with some things relating to matters of Worship)
shall be considered hereafter, according as they fall in in their more proper
places; I shall only at present take notice of the general vindication which
the Christians made of themselves, from these Indictments that were brought in
against them; and the sum of what they pleaded lies especially in these three
things.

First, They did openly assert and maintain their innocence, and show by their
lives as well as their Apologies, that they were men of quite another make and
temper, than their Enemies did generally represent them: their Religion and way
of life was admired by all: who (says S. Clement to the Corinthians) did ever
dwell amongst you, Clem. Ep. ad Corinth. p. 2. 4.
that did not approve of your excellent and unshaken Faith; that did not wonder
at your sober and moderate piety in Christ? you were forward to every good
work, adorned with a most virtuous and venerable conversation, doing all things
in the fear of God, and having his Laws and Commands written upon the tables of
your hearts. They placed Religion then not in talking finely, but in living
well. Leg. pro Christ. p. 12.
Amongst us (says Athenagoras) the meanest and most mechanic persons, and old
women, although not able to discourse and dispute for the usefulness of their
profession, do yet demonstrate it in their lives and actions; they don't indeed
critically weigh their words, and recite elegant Orations, but they manifest
honest and virtuous actions; while being buffeted they strike not again, nor
sue them at Law that spoil and plunder them; Liberally give to them that ask,
and love their neighbors as themselves. And this we do, because we are assured
that there is a God that superintends humane affairs, who made both us and the
whole world, and because we must give to him an account of all the transactions
of our lives, therefore we choose the most moderate, humane, and benign, and, to
many, the most contemptible course of life, for we reckon that no evil in this
life can be so great, though we should be called to lay down our lives, which
ought not to be esteemed little and of no value, in comparison of that
happiness which we hereafter look for from the great Judge of the world,
promised to those who are of an humble, benign, and moderate conversation.
Adm^nit. ad gent. p. 76.
Clemens of Alexandria gives us this short account of them; as the fairest
possession we give up our selves to God, entirely loving him, and reckoning
this the great business of our lives: no man is with us a Christian, or
accounted truly rich, temperate, and generous, but he that is pious and
religious, nor does any farther bear the image of God, than he speaks and
believes what is just and holy: so that this in short is the state of us who
follow God; such as are our desires, such are our discourses; such as are our
discourses, such are our actions; such as are our actions, such is our life; so
universally good is the whole life of Christians. Certainly none were ever
greater Enemies to a naked profession, and the covering a bad life under the
title of Christianity. Do any live otherwise than Christ has commanded, it is a
most certain argument they are no Christians, though with their tongues they
never so smoothly profess the Christian Doctrine; for it is not mere Professors,
but those who live according to their profession, that shall be saved, Ap. 2.
p. 63.
as Justin Martyr declares before the Emperors. Let no man ( says Basil)
impose upon himself with inconsiderate words, Comment. in cap. 1.
saying, though I be a sinner, Esai. tom. 2. p. 28.
yet I am a Christian, and I hope that title will be my shelter; but hearken
sinner, all wicked men shall be bundled up together, and in the great day of
the divine vengeance shall be indifferently thrown into those merciless and
devouring Flames.

Nay so careful were they to avoid all sin, that they stood at a wide distance
from any thing, that though lawful in it self, Lib. 7. p. 375.
yet seemed to carry an ill color with it; this Origin tells Celsus was the
reason why they refused to do any honor to an Image, lest thereby they should
give occasion to others to think that they ascribed divinity to them: for this
reason they shunned all community with the Rites and Customs of the Heathens,
abstaining from things strangled, or that had been offered to Idols, from
frequenting the public Bathes, or going to the Sights and Shows, because they
seemed to owe their original to idolatry, and were the occasion of many gross
enormities; they refused to wear Crowns of Laurel, lest they should seem to
patronize the Custom of the Gentiles, who were wont to do so in their sacred
and solemn Rites, as appeared eminently in the Solemnities of the Emperors
Severus and Caracalla, when the Tribune delivering the donative to the
Soldiers, and all came to receive it with Crowns upon their heads, one of them
brought his in his hand, and being demanded the reason, answered that he was a
Christian, and could not do it; which was the occasion of Tertullian's Book de
Corona Militis, wherein he sets himself to defend it.

Secondly, They were willing to put themselves upon the strictest trial, and to
undergo the severest penalties, if found guilty of those Crimes that were
charged upon them: So their Apologist bespeaks the Emperors; Just. Martyr. Ap.
2. p. 54.
we beseech you ( says he) that those things that are charged upon the
Christians may be enquired into, and if they be found to be so, let them have
their deserved punishment, nay let them be more severely punished than other
men: but if not guilty, then it is not reasonable, that innocent persons should
suffer merely upon report and clamor. And speaking of those that only took
sanctuary at the name of Christians, he adds, that those who lived not
according to the Laws of Christ, and were only called by his name, they begged
of them that such might be punished. To the same purpose Athenagoras in his
Embassy, Leg pro Christian p. 3.
taking notice how their Enemies laid wait for their lives and fortunes, loaded
them with heaps of reproaches, charging them with things that never so much as
entered into their minds, and of which their accusers themselves were most
guilty, he makes this offer; let but any of us be convict of any crime either
small or great, and we refuse not to be punished, nay are ready to undergo the
most cruel and heavy penalty: but if we be only accused for our name (and to
this day all our accusations are but the sigments of obscure and uncertain
fame, no Christian having ever been convict of any fault) then we hope it will
become such wise, gracious, and mighty Princes as you are, to make such Laws as
may secure us from those wrongs and injuries. But alas, so clear was their
innocence, that their bitterest adversaries durst not suffer them to come to a
fair open trial; if you be so certain that we are guilty (says Tertullian to
the Heathens) why then are we not treated in the same nature with all
malefactors; Ap^^ c. 2. p. 2.
who have leave both by themselves and their advocates to defend their
innocence, to answer and put in pleas, it being unlawful to condemn any before
they be heard, and have liberty to defend themselves; whereas Christians only
are not permitted to speak any thing that might clear their cause, maintain the
truth, and make the Judge able to pronounce righteous sentence: it is enough to
justify the public odium, if we do but confess our selves Christians, without
ever examining of the crime; contrary to the manner of procedure against all
other Delinquents, whom it is not enough barely to charge to be murderers,
sacrilegious, or incestuous, or enemies to the Public (the titles you are
pleased to bestow upon us) unless they also take the quality of the fact, the
place, manner, time, partners and accessories under examination. But no such
favor is shown to us, but we are condemned without any inquisition passed upon
us. And good reason there was, that they should take this course, seeing they
could really find nothing to condemn them for, but for being Christians. This
one would think strange, especially amongst a people so renowned for justice
and equity as the Romans were, and yet in these times nothing more ordinary;
therefore when Vrbicius the Prefect of Rome had condemned Ptolomeus merely upon
his confessing himself a Christian, Just. Mart.
one Lucius that stood by cried out, Ap. 1. p. 43.
What strange course is this, what infamous misdemeanour is this man guilty of;
that when he is no adulterer, fornicator, no murderer, no thief, or robber,
thou should punish him only because he calls himself a Christian? certainly,
Urbicius, such justice as this does not become the piety of the Emperor, or
the Philosophy of Caesar his Son, or the sacred and venerable Senate. Ap. c. 3.
p. 4.
And Tertullian tells us, 'twas the common accusation they had in their mouths,
such or such a one is a goodman, only he is a Christian; or, I wonder at such a
one, a wise man, but lately turned Christian. Ad Demetrian. page 200.
So Cyprian, I remember, reduces his adversary to this unavoidable dilemma;
choose one of these two things, to be a Christian, either is a fault, or it is
not; Vid. Tertul.
if it be a fault, why do thou not kill every one that confesses it? Ap. c.
1, 2, 3.
if it be not, J. Mart.
why do thou persecute them that are innocent? Ap. 2* p 54. 68, 69.
Hence we find nothing more common in the old Apologists, Athenag. leg pro
Christian. p. 3, 4.
than complaints concerning the unreasonableness of being accused, condemned,
and punished, merely for their name, this being the first and great cause of
all that hatred and cruelty that was exercised toward them, 'twas the innocent
name that was hated in them, all the quarrel was about this title, and when a
Christian was guilty of nothing else, 'twas this made him guilty, as Tertullian
complains at every turn. The truth is, they mightily gloried in this title, and
were ambitious to own it in the face of the greatest danger; Eusebius. Hist.
therefore when Attalus the famous French Martyr was led about the
Amphitheatre, Eccles. l. 5. c. 1. p. 162.
that he might be exposed to the hatred and derision of the people, he
triumphed in this, that a tablet was carried before him with this Inscription,
THIS IS ATTALUS THE CHRISTIAN. Ib. p. 158.
And Sanctus another of them being often asked by the President, what his name
was, what his City and Country, and whether he was a Freeman or a Servant,
answered nothing more to any of them, than that he was a Christian, professing
this name to be Country, Kindred, and all things to him. Nay so great was the
honor and value which they had for this name, that Julian the Emperor (whom
we commonly call the Apostate) endeavored by all ways to suppress it, that
when he could not drive the thing, he might at least banish the name out of the
world; and therefore did not only himself constantly call Christians
Galilaeans, Naz invect. in Julian. 1. p. 81.
but made a Law, that they should be called only by that name. But to return,
the sum is this, the Christians were so buoyed up with the conscience of their
innocence, that they cared not who saw them, were willing and desirous to be
scanned and searched to the bottom, and to lie open to the view of all; and
therefore desired no other favor, than that that Apology which Justin Martyr
presented to them, Ap. 1. p. 51.
might be set out with the Decree of the Senate, that so people might come to
the true knowledge of their case, and they be delivered from false suspicions,
and these accusations, for which they had been undeservedly exposed to so many
punishments.

Thirdly, They appealed for their vindication to the judgment and consciences
of their more sober and impartial Enemies, and were accordingly acquitted by
them, as guiltless of any heinous crimes. Pliny the younger being commanded by
the Emperor Trajan, to give him an account of the Christians, Epist. l. 10.
tells him, Ep. 97.
that after the best estimate that he could take, and the strictest inquisition
that he could make by tortures, he found no worse of them than this, that they
were wont to meet early for the performance of their solemn devotions, and to
bind themselves under the most sacred obligations; to commit no vice or
wickedness, and that their Religion was nothing else but an untoward and
immoderate superstition. This is the testimony which that great man, (who being
Proconsul of Bithynia was capable to satisfy himself, and who was no less
diligent to search into the matter) gives concerning them. Eusebius. Hist.
Next after him Ser^^us Granianus the Proconsul of Asia, Eccles. l. 4. c. 8. 9.
p. 122.
writes to the Emperor Adrian (Trajans successor) to represent to him how
unjust it was to put Christians to death, when no crime was duly laid to their
charge, merely to gratify the tumultuous clamours of the people, to whom the
Emperor answers, that they should not be unjustly troubled, that if any thing
was truly proved against them, he should punish them according to the nature of
the fault; but if done out of malice or spite, he should then accordingly
punish the accuser as a calumniator. J. Martyr.
Next to Adrian, Antoninus Pius (if he be not mistaken for his successor
Marcus) in his Epistle to the Commons of Asia, Ap. 2. p. 100.
tells them, that they had traduced the Christians, and had objected those
crimes to them, which they could not prove; that they were more firm and
undaunted in their profession than themselves, and had a greater freedom with
and confidence toward God; (...).
and that therefore he resolved to ratify and follow the determination of his
Father. After him comes M. Antoninus, Ib. p. 101, 102.
who having obtained that famous and signal Victory against the Quades in
Germany, confesses in his Letter to the Senate (which Letter, though I know
it is questioned by some learned men, as now extant, whether true and genuine,
yet that there was such a Letter is evident enough from Tertullian, Ap. c. 5.
p. 6. and ad Scap. c. p. 4. 71.
who himself lived within a few years of that time, and appeals to it) that it
was clearly gotten by the prayers of the Christian Legion which he had in his
Army, and therefore commands that none be molested for being Christians, and
that if any accuse a Christian for being such, without a sufficient crime
proved against him, he shall be burnt alive for his accusation, that a
Christian confessing himself to be one shall be safe and secure, and that the
Governor of the Province shall not drive him to renounce his profession, and
this he commands to be confirmed by the Decree of the Senate. So clear did the
Christians appear to their greatest Enemies, especially in their more calm and
sober intervals. Nay Trypho the Jew (and that very notion speaks him enemy
enough, J. Mart. dial cum Tryph. p. 227.
yet) confesses them clear of those foul aspersions; for when the Martyr had
asked him, whether he disliked the Christians manners and way of life, and
whether he really believed that they ate men's flesh, and putting out the
Candles ran together in promiscuous mixtures? the Jew answered, that those
things whereof they were accused by many were unworthy of belief, as being so
extremely abhorrent to humane nature; and that the precepts which are commanded
in their Gospel (which his curiosity had prompted him to read) were so great
and admirable, that he supposed no man could be able to keep and obey them. And
to instance in no more, the Heathen Oracle it self pronounced in favor of the
Christians; for Apollo giving forth his Oracles, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 2.
c. 50. 51. p. 467.
not as he was wont by humane voice, but out of a dark and dismal cavern,
confessed it was because of just men that lived upon the earth; and when
Dioclesian enquired who those just men were, one of the Heathen Priests that
stood by answered, that they were the Christians. This Constantine the Great
tells he himself heard, being then a young man, and in company at that time
with the Emperor Dioclesian, and he there solemnly calls God to witness for
the truth of the story.

From all which it appears how innocent the Christians were of those things
which the Gentiles charged upon them, how infinitely strict and unblameable in
their lives, and therefore triumphed over the Heathens in the purity and
innocence of their conversations. Lib. 3. p. 128, 129.
Origin tells Celsus, that the Churches of God which had taken upon them the
discipline of Christ, if compared to the common Societies of men, were amongst
them like lights in the world. For who (says he) is there, but he must needs
confess that the worser part of our Church is much better than the popular
assemblies; as for instance, the Church of God at Athens is meek and quiet, as
endeavoring to approve it self to the great God; whereas now the popular
assembly of Athens is seditious and tumultuous, and no ways to be compared with
the Church of God in that City; and the same may be said of the Churches of
God, and the vulgar assemblies which are at Corinth, Page 29.
or Alexandria. So Minucius Foelix, should we Christians be compared with you,
although our Discipline may seem somewhat inferior, yet we should be found
infinitely to transcend you: you forbid adultely, and then practice it; we keep
entirery to our own Wives; you punish wickedness when committed, with us even a
wicked thought is sin; you stand in awe of those who are conscious of your
crimes, we of nothing but our consciences, without which we cannot be; and last
of all it is with your party that the Prison is filled and crowded, no Christian
is there, unless such a one as is either a shame to his Religion, or an
Apostate from it: and a little after he tells his adversary, Page 31.
how much they exceeded the best Philosophers, who were filthy and tyrannical,
and only eloquent to declaime against those vices of which themselves were most
guilty: that we Christians do not measure wisdom by men's habits, but by their
minds and tempers, and do not speak great things, but live them, having this to
boast of, that we really attain to those things which they earnestly sought,
but could not find. Thus Lactantius having excellently discoursed of the
prodigious debaucheries and wickednesses of the Heathens; De justit. l. 5* c.
9. p. 485.
but which of these things (says he) can be objected to our people, whose whole
Religion is to live without spot or blemish? from whence they might easily
gather, had they any understanding, that piety is on our side, and that they
themselves are vile and impious. And Eusebius tells us, Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c.
7. p. 121. vid. Constant. Or. ad caetum. S. S. c. 23. p. 599.
that in his time the Christian Faith had by gravity, sincerity, modesty, and
holiness of life, so conquered all opposition, that none durst bespatter it, or
charge it with any of those calumnies, which the ancient Enemies of our
Religion used to fasten upon it. What Religion (says Arnobius) can be truer,
more useful, powerful, just than this? which (as he elsewhere notes) renders
men meek, Adv. Gent. lib. ^ 4. 67.
speakers of truth, modest, chaste, charitable, kind and helpful to all, as if
most nearly related to us; and indeed this is the genuine and natural tendency
of the Christian Doctrine, and which it cannot but effect, wherever it is
kindly embraced and entertained. So true is that which Athenagoras told the
Emperors, Leg. pro Christian. p. 4.
that no Christian could be a bad man, unless he were an hypocrite; and
Tertullian openly declares, Apol. c. 46. p. 36.
that when men depart from the discipline of the Gospel, they so far cease
amongst us to be accounted Christians: Ad Nation. l. 1. c. 5. p. 43.
and therefore when the Heathens objected, that some that went under that name
were guilty of great enormities, and enquired how comes such a one to be a
cheat, if the Christians be so righteous; how so cruel, if they be merciful? he
answers, that by this very thing they bore witness, that they who were real
Christians were not such; that there is a vast difference between the crime and
the name, the opinion and the truth; that they are not presently Christians
that are called so, but cheat others by the pretense of a name; that they
shunned the company of such, and did not meet or partake with them in the
offices of Religion; that they did not admit those whom mere force and cruelty
had driven to deny Christianity, much less such as voluntarily transgressed the
Christian Discipline; and that therefore the Heathens did very ill to call them
Christians, whom the Christians themselves did disown, who yet were not wont to
deny their own party.

CHAP. V.
Of the positive parts of their Religion: and first of their piety toward God.
The Religion of the ancient Christians considered, with respect to God,
themselves, and other men. Their piety seen in two things, their detestation of
Idolatry, and great care about the matters of divine Worship. What notion they
had of Idolatry; their abhorrency of it. Their refusing to give divine honor
to Angels and created Spirits; this condemned by the Laodicean Council. Their
denying any thing of divine honor to Martyrs and departed Saints. The famous
instance of the Church of Smyrna concerning S. Polycarp. S. Augustine's
testimonies to this purpose. Their mighty abhorrence of the Heathen Idolatry.
The very making an Idol accounted unlawful. Hatred of Idolatry one of the first
principles instilled into new Converts. Their affectionate bewailing any that
lapsed into this sin. Several severe penalties imposed by the ancient Council
of Illiberis upon persons guilty of Idolatry. They were willing to hazard any
thing rather than sacrifice to the Gods. Constantius his plot to try the
integrity of his Courtiers. A double instance of the Christian Soldiers in
Julian's Army. Their active zeal in breaking the Images of the Heathen gods,
and assaulting persons while doing sacrifice to them; this whether justifiable.
Notwithstanding all this, the Christians accused by the Heathens of Idolatry;
of worshipping the Sun: whence that charge arose. Of adoring a Cross. Of
worshipping an Asses head. Christians called Asinarii. The absurd and monstrous
Picture of Christ mentioned by Tertullian. The occasion of this ridiculous
fiction whence.

HAving thus seen with how much clearness the ancient Christians vindicated
themselves from those unjust aspersions, which their spightful and malicious
adversaries had cast upon them; we come now to take a more direct and positive
view of their Religion; which according to S. Paul's division, we shall consider
as to their piety toward God; Tit. 2. 12.
those virtues which more immediately concerned themselves, and those which
respected their behavior and carriage toward others. Their piety toward God
appeared in those two main instances of it, a serious and hearty detestation of
Idolatry, and a religious care about the concerns of Divine Worship.

Idolatry in those times was the prevailing sin of the world; De idololat c. 1.
p. 85.
the principal crime of mankind, the great guilt of the Age, and the almost
sole cause of men's being brought into judgment, as what in a manner contains
all sins under it, as Tertullian begins his Book upon that subject; a crime of
the first rank, and one of the highest sorts of wickedness, as it is called by
the most ancient Council in Spain. Conc. Illiberit. Can. 1.
They looked upon it as a sin that undermined the very being of the Deity, and
ravished the honor of his Crown. Before we proceed any further, we shall first
enquire what was the notion they generally had of Idolatry; and they then
accounted that a man was guilty of Idolatry, when he gave divine adoration to
any thing that was not God, not only when he worshipped a material Idol, but
when he vested any creature with that religious respect and veneration that was
only due to God: Idolatry (says Tertullian) robs God, Vt supra c. 11.
denying him those honors that are due to him, and conferring them upon
others, so that at the same time it does both defraud him and reproach him: Ib.
c. 15. p. 95.
and a little after he expressly affirms, that whatever is exalted above the
Standard of civil Worship, in imitation of the divine excellency, is directly
made an Idol: thus S. Gregory, for his solid and excellent learning called the
Divine (a title never given to any besides him but to St. John the Apostle)
defines Idolatry (which, Greg. Naz: Orat. Paneg. in Nativit. Ch^isti Or. 38. p.
620.
says he, is the greatest evil in the world) to be the translation of that
worship that is due to the Creator upon the Creature. Accordingly we find them
infinitely zealous to assert divine adoration, as the proper and incommunicable
prerogative of God alone, and absolutely refusing to impart religious Worship
to any though the best of Creatures; surely if any, one would think Angels, the
first rank of created beings, creatures of such sublime excellencies and
perfections, might have challenged it at their hands; but hear what Origin says
to this; Contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 415. 416.
we adore (says he) our Lord God, and serve him alone, following the example of
Christ, who when tempted by the Devil to fall down and worship him, answered,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; which is
the reason why we refuse to give honors to those spirits that preside over
humane affairs, because we cannot serve two Masters, to wit, God and Mammon: as
for these Demons, we know that they have no administration of the
conveniences of man's life: yea, though we know that they are not Demons, but
Angels, that have the Government of fruits and seasons, and the productions of
Animals committed to them; we indeed speak well of them, and think them happy,
that they are entrusted by God to manage the conveniences of man's life; but
yet do not give them that honor that is only due to God; for this neither does
God allow of, neither do they desire it; but equally love and regard us when we
do not, as if we did sacrifice to them. And when Celsus a little before had
smartly pressed him to do honor to Demons, he rejects the motion with great
contempt, Page 395.
away (says he) with this counsel of Celsus, who in this is not in the least to
be hearkened to; for the great God only is to be adored, and prayers to be
delivered up to none but his only begotten Son, the first born of every
creature, that as our High Priest he may carry them to his Father and to our
Father, to his God and to our God. It Is true that the Worship of Angels did
(and that very early, as appears from the Apostles caveat against it in his
Epistle to the Colossians) creep into some parts of the Christian Church, but
was always disowned and cried out against, and at last publicly and solemnly
condemned by the whole Laodicean Council: it is not lawful (says the thirty
fifth Canon of that Council) for Christians to leave the Church of God, and to
go and invocate Angels, and to make prohibited assemblies: if therefore any one
shall be found devoting himself to this private Idolatry, let him be accursed;
forasmuch as he has forsaken the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and has
delivered up himself to Idolatry. From which nothing can be more clear, than
that it was the sense of these Fathers, that the worshipping of Angels was not
only downright Idolatry, but a plain apostasy from the Christian Faith.

Nor were they more peremptory in denying divine honor to Angels, than they
were to Martyrs and departed Saints: for though they had a mighty honor and
respect for Martyrs (as we shall take notice afterward) as those that had
maintained the truth of their Religion, and sealed it with their blood, and
therefore did what they could to do praise and honor to their memories, yet
were they far from placing any thing of Religion or divine adoration in it;
whereof 'twill be enough to quote one famous instance. The Church of Smyrna
writing to the Churches of Pontus, Eusebius Hist.
to give them an account of the martyrdom of Polycarpus their Bishop, Eccles. l
4. c. 15. p. 134*
tells them, that after he was dead, many of the Christians were desirous to
have gotten the remains of his body (possibly to have given them decent and
honorable burial) but were prevented in it by some Jews, who importuned the
Proconsul to the contrary, suggesting that the Christians leaving their
crucified Master, might henceforth worship Polycarpus, whereupon they add, that
this suggestion must needs proceed from ignorance of the true state of
Christians; this they did (say they) not considering how impossible it is that
ever we should either forsake Christ, who died for the salvation of mankind, or
that we should worship any other. We adore him as the Son of God; but the
Martyrs, as the Disciples and Follows of our Lord, we deservedly love for
their eminent kindness to their own Prince and Master; whose Companions and
Fellow-Disciples we also by all means desire to be. This instance is so much
the more valuable in this case, not only because so plain and pertinent but
because so ancient, and from persons of so great authority in the Church: For
this is not the testimony of any one private person, but of the whole Church of
Smyrna, according as it had been trained up under the Doctrine and Discipline
of Polycarpus, the immediate Disciple of S. John. This was the Doctrine and
practice of Christians then, and it held so for some Ages after, even down to
the times of S. Augustine, when yet in many other things the simplicity of the
Christian Religion began to decline apace: we set apart (says he) no Temples,
Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 8. c. 27. p. 492. vid. l. 22. c* 10. col. 1355.
nor Priests, nor divine services, nor sacrifices to Martyrs; because they are
not God, but the same who is theirs, is our God: indeed we honor their
memories, as of holy men, who have stood for the truth, even unto death, that
so the true Religion might appear, and those which are false be convinced to be
so: but who ever heard a Priest standing at the Altar, built for the honor and
worship of God over the body of the holy Martyr, to say in his Prayers, I offer
sacrifice to thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian; for in such commemorations we
offer to that God, who made them both men and Martyrs, and has made them
partners with holy Angels in the heavenly glory; and by these solemnities we
both give thanks to the true God for the victories which they have gained, and
also stir up our selves by begging his assistance, to contend for such crowns
and rewards as they are possessed of; so that whatever offices religious men
perform in the places of the Martyrs, they are only ornaments to their
memories, not sacrifices or divine services done to the departed, as if they
were Deities. More to the same purpose we may find in that place, as also in
infinite other places of his Works, where (were it worth the while) I could
easily show that he does no less frequently than expressly assert, that though
the honor of love, respect, and imitation, yet no religious adoration is due
either to Angels, Martyrs, or departed Saints.

But the great instance, wherein the primitive Christians manifested their
detestation of Idolatry was in respect of the idolatrous Worship of the Heathen
world, the denying and abhorring any thing of divine honor that was done to
their gods. They looked upon the very making of Idols (though with no intention
to worship them) as an unlawful trade, and as inconsistent with Christianity:
how have we renounced the Devil and his Angels (says Tertullian, De Idololat.
c. 6. p. 88.
meaning their solemn renunciation in baptism) if we make Idols, nor is it
enough to say, though I make them, I do not worship them; there being the same
cause not to make them, that there is not to worship them; viz. the offense
that in both is done to God: yet thou do so far worship them, as thou make
them that others may worship them: and therefore he roundly pronounces, that no
Art, Cap. 11. p. 92. vid. c. 9. 10.
no Profession, no service whatsoever that is employed either in making or
ministering to Idols, can come short of Idolatry. They startled at any thing
that had but the least shadow of symbolizing with them in their Idolatry;
therefore the Ancyran Council condemned them to a two years supension from the
Sacrament, Can. 7.
who sat down with their Heathen friends upon their solemn Festivals in their
Idol-Temples, although they brought their own Provisions along with them, and
touched not one bit of what had been offered to the Idol. Their first care in
instructing new Converts, was to leaven them with the hatred of Idolatry: those
that are to be initiated into our Religion (says Origin) we do before all
things instill into them a dislike and contempt of all Idols and Images, Adv.
Cells. l. 3. p. 120.
and lift up their minds from worshipping Creatures instead of God, to him who
is the great Creator of the world. If any through weakness chanced at any time
to lapse into this sin, how pathetically did they bewail it? So Celerinus in
his Epistle to Lucian, giving him an account of a woman that to avoid
persecution had done sacrifice, Inter Epist.
and thereby fallen from Christ, Cypr. Ep. 20. p. 32.
he bewails her as dead, tells him that it stuck so close to him, that though
in the time of Easter, a time of festivity and rejoicing, yet he wept night and
day, and kept company with sackcloth and ashes, and resolved to do so, till by
the help of Christ and the prayers of good men, she shouled by repentance be
raised up again. The better to prevent this sin (wherein weaker Christians were
sometimes ensnared in those times of cruelty and persecution) the discipline of
the ancient Church was very severe against it, of which we can have no better
evidence, than to take a little view of the determinations relating to this
case of that ancient Council of Illiberis, Council Illiber. Can. 2. vid. not.
held some years before the time of Constantine; Albaspin. p. 5. and de rit.
Eccles. Obs. 22.
there we find, that if any Christian after Baptism took upon him the
Flamin-ship or Priesthood of the Gentiles (an Office ordinarily devolved upon
the better sort, and which Christians sometimes either made suit for, to gain
more favor with the people, or had it forced upon them by the Laws of the
Country, so that they must either undergo it, or fly and forfeit their
Estates) such a one no not at the hour of death was to be received into the
Communion of the Church. The reason of which severity was, because who ever
underwent that Office must do sacrifice to the gods, and entertain the people
with several kinds of Sights, Plays, and Sports, which could not be managed
without murders, and the exercise of all lust and filthiness, whereby they did
double and treble their sin, Vid. Can. 3. p. 8.
as that Council speaks. If a Christian in that Office did but allow the
charges to maintain those Sports and Sights (although he did not actually
sacrifice, which he might avoid, by substituting a Gentile Priest in his room)
he was indeed to be taken into communion at last, but was to undergo a very
severe penance for it all his life. Nay although he did neither of the former,
yet if he did but wear a Crown (a thing usually done by the Heathen Priests) he
was to be excluded from communion for two years together. Can. 55. p. 69.
If a Christian went up to the Capitol (probably out of curiosity) only to see
the sacrifices of the Gentiles, Can. 59. p. 71.
and did not see them, yet he should be as guilty as if he had seen them, his
intention and will being the same, as the learned Albaspine (and I think truly)
understands the Canon; Can. 41. p. 57.
and in such a case, if the person was one of the faithful, he was not to be
received till after ten years repentance. Every Master of a Family was
commanded to suffer no little Idols or Images to be kept in his house, to be
worshipped by his Children or Servants; but if this could not be done without
danger of being betrayed and accused by his Servants (a thing not unusual in
those times) that then at least he himself should abstain from them; otherwise
to be thrown out of the Church. Being imbued with such principles, and trained
up under such a discipline as this, it is no wonder if they would do or suffer
any thing rather than comply with the least symptom of Idolatry; they willingly
underwent banishment and confiscation, amongst several of which sort Caldonius
tells Cyprian of one Bona, Ep. 18. p. 30
who being violently drawn by her Husband to sacrifice, they by force guiding
her hand to do it, cried out and protested against it, that 'twas not she but
they that did it, and was thereupon sent into banishment. They freely laid down
their greatest honors and dignities, rather than by any idolatrous act to
offer violence to their consciences. Whereof Constantius, the Father of
Constantine, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 19. p. 417.
made this wise experiment, he gave out that all the Officers and great men of
the Court should either do sacrifice to the gods, or immediately quit his
service, and the Offices and preferments which they held under him; whereupon
many turned about, while others remained firm and unshaken; upon this the
prudent and excellent Prince discovered his Plot, embraced, commended, and
advanced to greater honors those who were faithful to their Religion and their
conscience; reproaching and turning off those who were so ready to quit and
forfeit them. Socr. Hist.
Thus Jovianus a man of considerable note and quality, Eccles. l. 3. c. 22. p.
195
and an Officer of great place in Julian's Army, when the Emperor sent out his
Edict, that all the Soldiers should either sacrifice, or lay down their Arms,
presently threw away his belt, rather than obey that impious command; though
the Emperor at that time, for reasons of State would not suffer him to depart.
And after the death of Julian, when by the unanimous vote of the whole Army he
was chosen Emperor, he utterly refused it, 'till the Army had renounced their
Pagan idolatry and superstition. And though it is true, that life is dearest to
men of all things in this world; yet how cheerfully did they choose rather to
shed their blood, than to defile their consciences with Idolatry; of which
Eusebius gives us many instances, and indeed this was the common test in those
times, either sacrifice or die. Phileas Bishop of Thmuis in a Letter to his
people, Eusebius. Hist.
giving them an account of the martyrdoms that happened at Alexandria, Eccles. l.
8. c. 10. p. 304
tells them, that many after having endured strange and unheard of torments,
were put to their choice, whether they would sacrifice and be set at liberty,
or refuse and lose their heads; whereupon all of them without any hesitation
readily went to embrace death; knowing well how the Scripture is, that whoever
sacrifices to strange gods shall be cut off; and again, thou shall have no
other gods but me. And in the next Chapter Eusebius tells us of a whole City of
Christians in Phrygia, which together with all the men, women and children was
burnt to ashes, for no other reason, but because they universally confessed
themselves to be Christians, and refused to obey those that commanded them to
worship Idols: instances of which kind there are enough to be met with in the
Histories of the Church.

And so fixed and unmovable were they in this, that no promises or hopes of
reward, no fears or threatenings could either tempt or startle them; memorable a
passage or two that we meet withal to this purpose: it was a custom amongst the
Romans to show some respect and honor not only to the Emperors themselves,
but even to their Statues and Images, by bowing the body, or some other act of
external veneration. Naz Orat. invect. 1. in Julian. Or. 13. p. 83. vid. Sozom.
Hist.
Now Julian the Emperor (whose great design was to reduce all men, but
especially his Army back to Paganism and Idolatry) made use of this crafty
project; Eccles. l. 5. c. 17.
he placed the Pictures of Jupiter, and other Heathen gods, so close to his own
Statues, that they could not bow to the one, but they must also to the other;
politickly reducing them to this strait, that either they must refuse to pay
civil honor to their Prince (which had been a sufficient crime against them)
or seem at least to do honor to the gods; with this device the less wary and
cautelous were entrapped; but others that were more pious and purdent chose
rather to deny the Prince that civil homage, Naz. ib. p. 84.
and fall into the arms of martyrdom, than by such an ambiguous adoration to
seem to patronize Idolatry. At another time he fell upon this stratagem: upon a
solemn day, when the Emperors were wont to bestow Largesses upon the
Soldiers, he caused the Army to be called before him, sitting then in great
pomp and splendor, and a large donative of Gold to be laid on the one side,
and a heap of Frankincense with fire by it on the other, proclamation being
made, that they that would sacrifice the one, should have the other. By this
means many of the Christian Soldiers were ensnared, performed the Sacrifice,
received the Donative, and went home jolly and secure. But being at Dinner with
their Companions, and drinking to each other (as the custom was) with their
eyes lift up, and calling upon Christ, and making the Sign of the Cross, as often
as they took the Cup into their hands; one at the Table told them, he wondered
how they could call upon Christ, whom they had so lately abjured. Amazed at
this, and asking how they had abjured him, they were told, that they had
sacrificed, which was all one as to deny Christ. Whereupon starting up from the
Table, they ran up and down the Marketplace in a furious and frantic manner,
crying out, we are Christians, we are Christians in heart and truth; and let
all the world take notice, that there is but one God, to whom we live, and for
whom we'll dye; we have not broken the faith which we swore to thee, O blessed
Savior, nor renounced our profession; if our hands be guilty, our hearts are
innocent, it is not the Gold that has corrupted us, but the Emperors craftiness
that deceived us: and with that running to the Emperor, they threw down their
Gold before him, with this address, we have not, Sir, received a donative, but
are condemned to dye; instead of being honored we are vilified and disgraced;
take this Largess and give it to your Soldiers; as for us, kill us and
sacrifice us to Christ, whom alone we own as our highest Prince; return us
fire for fire, and for the ashes of the sacrifice, reduce us to ashes. Cut off
those hands, which we so wickedly stretched out; those feet that carried us to
so great a mischief; give others the Gold, who may have no cause to repent
on it; for our part Christ is enough for us, whom we value instead of all
things. With this noble and generous resolution though the Emperor was highly
enraged, yet because he envied them the honor of martyrdom, he would not put
them to death, but banished them, and inflicted other penalties which might
sufficiently evidence his rage against them.

Nay with so warm a zeal were they acted against Idolatry, that many of them
could not contain themselves from falling foul upon it, wherever they met it,
though with the immediate hazard of their lives. Eusebius. de mart. Pal. c. 2. p.
320.
So Romanus Deacon and Exorcist of the Church of Caesaria seeing great
multitudes of people at Antioch flocking to the Temples, and doing sacrifice to
the gods, came to them, and began very severely to reprove and reproach them;
for which being apprehended, after many strange and cruel usages he was put to
death, with all imaginable pain and torture. Thus Apphianus a young man, when
the Cryers by proclamation summoned all the Inhabitants of Caesaria to
sacrifice to the gods, the Tribunes particularly reciting every man's name out
of a Book, to the great terror of all that were Christians, privately and
unknown to us (says Eusebius, Ib. c. 4. p. 324.
who lived at that time in the same house with him) stole out, and getting near
Vrbanus the President (who was then compassed about with a Guard of Soldiers)
just as he was about to offer Sacrifice, caught hold of his right hand, which
he grasped so fast, that he forced him to let fall the Sacrifice, gravely
admonishing him to desist from such errors and vanities: Clearly showing (says
the Historian) that true Christians are so far from being drawn from the
Worship of the true God, that by threatenings and torments they are rather
heightened into a greater and more ingenuous freedom and boldness in the
profession of the Truth. For this fact the young man was almost torn in pieces
by the Soldiers, whose rage and fierceness could scarce suffer him to be
reprieved for acuter tortures, which were exerised toward him with all
possible cruelty; and when all could do no good upon him, he was thrown half
dead into the Sea. Socrat. H.
The like we read of three famous Christians at Merum a City in Phrygia,
Eccles. l. 3. c. 15. p. 186.
where when the Governor of the Province under Julian the Apostate had
commanded the Heathen Temple to be opened, they got by night into the Temple,
and broke to pieces all the Statues and Images of the gods. Whereupon when a
general persecution was like to arise against all the Christians of the City,
that the ignorant and innocent might not suffer, the Authors of the fact came
of their own accord to the Judge, and confessed it; who offered them pardon if
they would sacrifice, which they rejected with disdain, (...)
and told him they were much readier to endure any torments and death it self,
than to be defiled with sacrificing: and accordingly were first treated with
all sorts of torments, and then burnt upon an Iron Grate; retaining their
courage to the last, and took their leave of the Governor with this sarcasm,
If thou have a mind, Amachius, to eat roast meat, turn us on the other side,
lest we be but half roasted, and so prove ungrateful to thy taste. So mightily
did a restless passion for the divine honor possess the minds of those
primitive Christians. And though it is true such transports of zeal are not
ordinarily warrantable (for which reason the Council of Illiberis justly
prohibited Can. 60. p. 72.
those who were killed in the defacing and demolishing Idols, to be reckoned in
the number of Martyrs) yet do they sufficiently show what a spirit of eagerness
and activity ruled in those times against the false Religions of the world.

By all this we may see how unjustly the Christians were traduced and accused
for Idolaters; three things were commonly charged upon them, that they
worshipped the Sun, the Cross, and an Asses head. For the first, their
worshipping the Sun, Tertullian answers, Apol. c. 16. p. 16.
that the mistake arose from a double cause, partly that the Christians of
those times did generally pray toward the East and the Sunrising, which the
Heathens themselves also did, though upon different grounds: and partly because
they performed the Solemnities of their Religion upon the day that was
dedicated to the Sun, which made the Gentiles suspect that they worshipped the
Sun it self. They were next charged with worshipping Crosses; a charge directly
false; as for Crosses (says Octavius) we neither desire, Minu. Fael. p. 24.
nor worship them, it is you who consecrate wooden gods, that perhaps adore
wooden Crosses as parts of them; for what else are your Ensigns, Banners, and
Colors, with which you go out to war, but golden and painted Crosses; the very
Trophies of your Victory do not only resemble the fashion of a simple Cross,
but of a man that is fastened to it; Loc. supra citat.
the very same answer which Tertullian also returns to this Charge. The
occasion of it no doubt was, the Christians talking of, and magnifying so much
their crucified Master, and their almost constant use of the sign of the Cross,
which (as we shall see afterward) they made use of even in the most common
actions of their lives; but for paying any adoration to a material Cross, was a
thing to which those times were the greatest strangers; otherwise understanding
the Cross for him that hung upon it, they were not ashamed with the great
Apostle, to glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to count it the
matter of their highest joy and triumph. But the absurdest part of the Charge
was, that they worshipped the head of an Ass. I hear (says the Heathen in
Minucius Faelix) that being seduced by I know not what fond persuasion they
worship the consecrated head of an Ass, Page 8.
one of the filthiest Creatures; a Religion fitly calculated for persons of
such a dull and stupid disposition. Hence Tertullian tells us, Ibid.
that Christians were called* Vid. ad Nation l. 1. c. 14. p. 50.
Asinarii, Assworshippers, and that Christ was painted, and publicly exposed
by the bold wicked hand of an apostate Jew, with Asses ears, one of his feet
hoof'd, holding a Book in his hand, and having a Gown over him, with this
Inscription DEVS CHRISTIANORVM ONONYCHITES Ononychites.]
The Asse-hoof'd God of the Christians. De variis hujus vocis lectionib. vid.
Rigalt. in loc. and Voss. de idol. l. 3. c. 75. p. 565. Page 23.
A most ridiculous representation, and the issue of the most foolish spite and
malice: when I saw it (says he) I laughed both at the title and the fashion.
This Octavius tells his Adversary was the result and spawn of lying same, begot
and nourished by the Father of lies: for who (says he) can be so silly as to
worship this? or who can be so much more silly as to believe that it should be
worshipped? unless it be that you your selves do consecrate whole Asses in the
Stable with your Goddess Epona, and religiously adorn them in the Solemnities
of Isis, and both sacrifice and adore the heads of Rams and Oxen: you make gods
of a mixture of a Goat and a Man, and dedicate them with the faces of Dogs and
Lions. More he has there to the same purpose, as Tertullian also had answered
the same thing before him. The true ground of this ridiculous Charge, as
Tertullian observes, was a fabulous report that had been a long time common
amongst the Heathens, vid. etiam ad Nation. l. 1. c. 11. p. 49.
that the Jews when wandering in the wilderness, and almost ready to die of
thirst, were conducted by wild Asses to a Fountain of water, for which great
kindness they formed the shape of an Ass, and ever after worshipped it with
divine honors. This is confidently reported both by Tacitus and Plutarch,
Tacit. Hist. l. 5. c. 4. Plut. sympos. lib. 4. Quest. 5. p. 670.
as it had been many years before by Appio the Alexandrian in his Books against
the Jews, and by this means the Heathens, who did frequently confound the Jews
and Christians, came to form and fasten this Charge upon them; when it was
equally false in respect of both: for as Tertullian observes, Apol. c. 16.
the same Tacitus who reports this, tells us in another place, that when Pompey
at the taking of Jerusalem presumptuously broke into the Holy of Holies,
whither none but the High Priest might enter, out of a curiosity to pry into
the most hidden secrets and arcana's of their Religion, he found no Image at
all there; whereas (says Tertullian) had they worshipped any such thing, there
had been no likelier place to have met with it, and therefore brands him with
the charge of the most lying Historian in the world. And thus we see how the
ancient Christians manifested and maintained their love and piety toward God,
by a most vigorous and hearty opposition of that Idolatry that reigned so
uncontroulably in the Heathen world.

CHAP. VI.
Of Churches, and places of Public Worship in the primitive times.
Place a circumstance necessary to every action. The piety of Christians in
founding places for the Solemnities of Religion. They had distinct and separate
places for their Public Assemblies, even in the Apostles times. Proved out of
the New Testament, as also in the succeeding Ages, from the testimonies of the
Fathers, and Heathen Writers. The common objection of the Gentiles, that
Christians had no Temples, considered and answered. Churches increased as
Christianity met with favorable entertainment: restored and repaired by
Dioclesian, Maximinus, Constantine. The fashion of theri Churches oblong; built
toward the East: The form of their Churches described. The Vestibulum or
Porch: the Narthex, and what in it. The Nave or body of the Church; the Ambo or
Reading-Pew, the station of the faithful. The (...) or Chancel; the Altarium or
Lords Table. The Bishops Throne and Seats of the Presbyters. The Diaconicon,
what: the Prothesis. Christians then beautified their Churches. Whether they
had Altars in them. Decent Tables for the celebration of the divine offices;
those frequently by the Fathers styled Altars, and in what sense. They had no
such gaudy Altars as the Heathens had in their Temples, and the Papists now in
their Churches. Altars when begun to be fixed and made of Stone. Made Asylum's
and places of refuge, and invested with many privileges by Christian
Emperors. No Images in their Churches for above four hundred years, proved out
of the Fathers. Pictures in Churches condemned by the Council of Illiberis. An
account of Epiphanius his tearing the Picture of Christ in the Church of
Anablatha; and the great force of the argumemt thence against Image Worship.
Christian Churches when first formally consecrated: the Encoenia of the ancient
Church. Our Wakes or Feasts in memory of the dedication of particular Churches.
What Incomes or Revenues they had in the first Ages. Particular Churches had
some standing Revenues even under the Heathen Emperors. These much increased
by the piety of Constantine and the first Christian Princes, their Laws noted
to that purpose. The reverence showed at their going int Churches, and during
their stay there, even by the Emperors themselves.

THE Primitive Christians were not more heartily zealous against the idolatrous
Worship of the Heathen-gods, than they were religiously observant of whatever
concerned the honor and Worship of the true, as to all the material parts and
circumstances of it; as will easily appear, if we consider what care they had
about the place, time, persons, and both the matter and manner of that Worship
that they performed to God, under each of which we shall take notice of what is
most considerable, and does most properly relate to it, so far as the Records
of those times give us an account of it.

Place is an inseparable circumstance of Religious Worship; for every body by
the natural necessity of its being requires some determinate place either for
rest or motion: now the Worship of God being in a great part an external
action, especially when performed by the joint concurrence of several persons,
does not only necessarily require a place, but a place conveniently capacious
of all that join together in the same public actions of Religion. This reason
put all Nations even by the light of Nature upon erecting public places for
the honor of their gods, and for their own convenience in meeting together to
pay their religious services and devotions. But my present enquiry reaches no
farther than the Primitive Christians, not whether they met together for the
discharge of their common duties; (which I suppose none can doubt of) but
whether they had Churches, fixed and appropriate places for the joint
performance of their public offices. And that they had even in those early
times, will I think be beyond all dispute, if we take but a short survey of
those first Ages of Christianity: in the sacred Story we find some more than
probable footsteps of some determinate places for their solemn conventions, and
peculiar only to that use. Of this nature was that (...)* or Upper Room into
which the Apostles and Disciples, Act. 1. 13.
after their return from the ascension of our Savior, went up, as into a place
commonly known and separate to that use, there by fasting and prayer to make
choice of a new Apostle; and this supposed by a very ancient tradition to have
been the same room wherein our Savior the night before his death celebrated
the Passover with his Disciples, and instituted the Lords Supper. Such a one,
if not (which I rather think) the same, Act. 2. 1.
was that one place, wherein they were all assembled with one accord upon the
day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost visibly came down upon them; and this the
rather because the multitude (and they too strangers of every Nation under
heaven) came so readily to the place upon the first rumor of so strange an
accident, which could hardly have been, had it not been commonly known to be
the place where the Christians used to meet together: and this very learned men
take to be the meaning of that Act. 2. 46. they continued daily with one accord
in the Temple, and breaking bread (...), not as we render it, from house to
house, but at home, as it is in the margin, or in the house, they ate their meat
with gladness and singleness of heart, i.e. when they had performed their daily
devotions at the Temple at the accustomed hours of prayer, they used to return
home to this Upper Room, there to celebrate the holy Eucharist, and then go to
their ordinary meals: this seems to be a clear and unforced interpretation; and
to me the more probable, because it immediately follows upon their assembling
together in that one place at the day of Pentecost, which Room is also called
by the same name of house, at the second Verse of that Chapter; and it is no
ways unlikely (as M. Mede conjectures) but that when the first Believers sold
their Houses and Lands, and laid the money at the Apostles feet to supply the
necessities of the Church, some of them might give their houses (at least some
eminent Room in them) for the Church to meet, and perform their sacred duties:
which also may be the reason why the Apostles writing to particular Christians,
speaks so often of the Church that was in their house; which seems clearly to
intimate not so much the particular persons of any private Family living
together under the same band of Christian discipline, as that in such or such a
house (and more especially in this or that room of it) there was the constant
and solemn convention of the Christians of that place, for their joint
celebration of divine Worship. And this will be farther cleared by that famous
passage of S. Paul, where taxing the Corinthians, for their irreverence and
abuse of the Lords Supper, one greedily eating before another, and some of them
to great excess, 1 Cor. 11. 22.
What (says he) have you not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise ye the
Church of God. Where that by Church is not meant the Assembly meeting, but the
place in which they used to assemble, is evident partly from what went before,
for their coming together in the Church, verse 18. is expounded by their coming
together into one place, verse 20. plainly arguing that the Apostle meant not
the persons but the place; partly from the opposition which he makes between
the Church and their own private houses; if they must have such irregular
Banquets, they had houses of their own, where 'twas much fitter to do it, and
to have their ordinary repast, than in that place which was set apart for the
common exercises of Religion, and therefore ought not to be dishonored by such
extravagant and intemperate feastings; for which cause he enjoins them in the
close of that Chapter, that if any man hunger he should eat at home. And that
this place was always thus understood by the Fathers of old, were no hard
matter to make out, as also by most learned men of later times, of which it
shall suffice to intimate two of our own, Nic. Full. miscell. S. l. 2. c. 9.
men of great name and learning, who have done it to great satisfaction. Mr.
M^de p* 405.


Thus stood the case during the Apostles times; for the Ages after them we find
that the Christians had their fixed and definite places of Worship; especially
in the second Century, as had we no other evidence, might be made good from the
testimony of the Author of that Dialogue in Lucian (if not Lucian himself,
Philopatr. tom. 2. p. 1007.
of which I see no great cause to doubt) who lived under the Reign of Trajan,
and who expressly mentions that House or Room wherein the Christians were wont
to assemble together. And Clemens in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians
assures us, Page 52.
that Christ did not only appoint the times when, the persons by whom, but the
places where he would be solemnly served and worshipped: Ap. 2. p. 98.
And Justin Martyr expressly affirms, that upon Sunday all Christians whether in
Town or Country, used to assemble together in one place, which could hardly be
done, had not that place been fixed and settled: De idolola. c. 7. p. 88.
the same we find afterward in several places of Tertullian, who speaks of
their coming into the Church and the House of God, Adv. Valentin. c. 3. p. 2.
51.
which he elsewhere calls the House of our Dove, i.e. our innocent and
Dove-like Religion, and there describes the very form and fashion of it; and in
another place speaking of their going into the water to be baptized, De Coron.
Mil. c. 3. p. 101.
he tells us they were wont first to go into the Church to make their solemn
renunciation before the Bishop. About this time in the Reign of Alexander
Severus the Emperor (who began his Reign about the year 222.) the Heathen
Historian tells us, that when there was a contest between the Christians and
the Vintners about a certain public place, Lamprid. in vit. Alex. Sever* c.
49. p. 575.
which the Christians had seized and challenged for theirs, the Emperor gave
the cause for the Christians against the Vintners, saying ' it was much better
that God should be worshipped there any ways, than that the Vintners should
possess it. If it shall be said that the Heathens of those times generally
accused the Christians for having no Temples, and charged it upon them as a
piece of atheism and impiety, Min. Fael. p. 8. -- 26.
and that the Christian Apologists did not deny it, as will appear to any that
will take the pains to examine the places alleged in the margin; Arnob. adv.
gent. l. 6. p. 83.
to this the answer in short depends upon the notion which they had of a
Temple, Lact. de O^ig. error. l. 2. c. 2. p. 141.
by which the Gentiles understood the places devoted to their gods, and wherein
their Deities were enclosed and shut up, places adorned with Statues and
Images, with fine Altars and ornaments; and for such Temples as these they
freely confessed they had none, no nor ought to have, for that the true God did
not (as the Heathens supposed theirs) dwell in Temples made with hands, nor
either needed nor could possibly be honored by them: and therefore they
purposely abstained from the word Temple, and I do not remember that it is used
by any Christian Writer for the place of the Christian Assemblies, for the best
part of the first three hundred years: and yet those very Writers who deny
Christians to have had any Temples, do at the same time acknowledge, that they
had their meeting places for divine Worship, Lib. 4. p. 67.
their conventicula as Arnobius calls them, and complains they were furiously
demolished by their Enemies. If any desire to know more concerning this, as
also that Christians had appropriate places of Worship for the greatest part of
the three first Centuries, let him read a Discourse purposely written upon this
subject, by a most learned man of our own Nation, Mr. Jos. Mede discourse
concerning Churches oper. part. 1. lib. 2.
nor indeed should I have said so much as I have about it, but that I had noted
most of these things, before I read his Discourse upon that subject.

Afterward their Churches began to rise apace, according as they met with more
quiet and favorable times; especially under Valerian, Gallienus, Claudius,
Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 1. p. 292.
Aurelian, and some other Emperors: of which times Eusebius tells us, that the
Bishops met with the highest respect and kindness both from people and
Governors; and adds, but who shall be able to reckon up the innumerable
multitudes that daily flocked to the Faith of Christ, the number of
Congregations in every City, those famous meetings of theirs in their Oratories
or sacred places, so great, that not being content with those old Buildings
which they had before, they erected from the very foundations more fair and
spacious Churches in every City. This was several years before the times of
Constantine, and yet even then they had their Churches of ancient date. This
indeed was a very serene and Sunshiny season, but alas it begun to darken
again, and the clouds returned after rain; for in the very next Chapter he
tells us that in the Reign of Dioclesian, there came out Imperial Edicts,
commanding all Christians to be persecuted, the Bishops to be imprisoned, the
holy Bible to be burnt, and their Churches to be demolished and laid level with
the ground: De Schismat. Donat. l. 2. p. 40.
which how many they were, may be guessed at by this, that (as Optatus tells
us) there were about this time above forty Basilicae or Churches in Rome only.
Upon Constantines coming into a partnership of the Empire, the Clouds began to
dispense and scatter, Eusebius. l. 9. c. 10. p. 364.
and Maximi^us (who then governed the Eastern parts of the Empire) a bitter
Enemy to Christians, was yet forced by a public Edict to give Christians the
free liberty of their Religion, and leave to repair and rebuild (...), Id. lib.
10. c. 2. p. 370.
their Churches; which shortly after they every where set upon, raising their
Churches from the ground to a vast height, and to a far greater splendor and
glory than those which they had before, the Emperors giving all possible
encouragement to it by frequent Laws and Constitutions: the Christians also
themselves contributing toward it with the greatest cheerfulness and
liberality, even to a magnificence, comparable to that of the Jewish Princes
toward the building of Solomon's Temple, Ib* c* 4. p. 377.
as Eusebius tells them in his Oration at the dedication of the famous Church
at Tire. And no sooner was the whole Empire devolved upon Constantine, Devit
Constant. l. 2. c. 45, 46. p. 464.
but he published two Laws, one to prohibit Pagan Worship, the other
commanding Churches to be built of a nobler size and capacity than before; to
which purpose he directed his Letters to Eusebius and the rest of the Bishops
to see it done within their several jurisdictions, charging also the Governors
of Provinces to be assisting to them, and to furnish them with whatever was
necessary and convenient: Orat. de laud. Constable. c. 7. p. 660.
insomuch that in a short time the world was beautified with Churches and
sacred Oratories, both in Cities and Villages, and in the most barbarous and
desert places, called (...), says the Historian (from whence our Kirk and
Church) the Lords Houses, because erected not to men, but to the honor of our
Lord and Savior. 'Twere needless to insist any longer upon the piety of
Christians in building Churches in and after the times of Constantine, the
instances being so vastly numerous; only I cannot omit what Nazianzen reports
of his own Father, Or. funebr. in laud Patr. Or. 19. p. 313.
who though Bishop of a very small* and inconsiderable Diocese, yet built a
famous Church almost wholly at his own charge.

Thus we have seen that from the very infancy of the Gospel, the Christians
always had their settled and determinate places of divine Worship; for the form
and fashion of their Churches it was for the most part oblong, Constit. Apost.
l. 2. c. 57 p. 875.
to keep (say some) the better correspondence with the fashion of a Ship, the
common notion and metaphor by which the Church was wont to be represented, and
to put us in mind that we are tossed up and down in the world, as upon a stormy
and tempestuous Sea, and that out of the Church there is no safe passage to
Heaven, the Country we all hope to arrive at. They were generally built toward
the East (toward which also they performed the more solemn parts of their
Worship, the reasons whereof we shall see afterward in its due place)
following herein the Custom of the Gentiles, though upon far other grounds than
they did, and this seems to have obtained from the first Ages of Christianity;
Adv. Valentin. p. 251.
sure I am 'twas so in Tertullian's time, who opposing the plain and simple way
of the Orthodox Assemblies to the skulking and clancular Conventicles of the
Heretics, who Serpent-like crept about in holes and corners; says he, the
house of our Dove-like Religion is simple, built on high and in open view, and
respects the light as the figure of the Holy Spirit, and the East as the
representation of Christ. It cannot be thought that in the first Ages, while
the flames of persecution raged about their ears, the Christian Churches should
be very stately and magnificent, but such as the condition of those times would
bear, their splendor increasing according to the entertainment that
Christianity met withal in the world, till the Empire becoming Christian, their
Temples rose up into grandeur and gallantry, as amongst others may appear by
the particular description which Eusebius makes of the Church at Tire,
mentioned before, and that which Constantine built at Constantinople in honor
of the Apostles, De vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 58, 59. p. 555.
both which were incomparably sumptuous and magnificent.

I shall not undertake to describe at large the exact form, and the several
parts and dimensions of their Churches (which varied somewhat according to
different times and Ages) but briefly reflect upon such as were most common and
remarkable: at the entrance of their Churches (especially after they began to
arrive at more perfection) was the Vestibulum (called also Atrium and (...))
the Porch, in greater Churches of somewhat larger capacity, adorned many times
with goodly Cloisters, marble Columns, Fountains, and Cisterns of water, and
covered over for the convenience of those that stood or walked there. Here
stood the lowest order of Penitents, beging the prayers of the faithful as they
went in. For the Church it self, it usually consisted of three parts; the first
was the Narthex (which we have no proper word to render by) it was that part of
the Church that lay next to the great door by which they entered in: in the
first part of it stood the Catechumens, or first learners of Christianity, in
the middle the Euergumeni, or those who were possessed by Satan, and in this
part also stood the Font, or place of baptismal initiation; and toward the
upper end was the place of the Hearers, who were one of the ranks of Penitents.
The second part contained the middle, or main body of the Church (called by the
Greeks (...), by the Latins Navis, from whence our term the Nave of the Church
comes) where the faithful assembled for the celebration of Divine Service,
where the men and the women had their distinct apartments, Constable. Apost l 2. c.
57. p. 875.
lest at such times unchaste and irregular appetites should be kindled by a
promiscuous interfering with one another; Roma subterran l. 2. c. 10. Number. 23.
p. 204.
of which pious and excellent contrivance mention is made in an ancient Funeral
Inscription found in the Vatican Coemetery at Rome; such a one buried, SINISTRA
PART VIRORUM, on that side of the Church where the men sat. In this part of
the Church next to the entering into it stood the Class of the Penitents, who
were called (...), because at their going out they fell down upon their knees
before the Bishop, who laid his hands upon them. Next to them was the Ambo, the
Pulpit or rather reading-desk, whence the Scriptures were read and preached to
the people. Above that were the Faithful, the highest rank and order of the
people, and who alone communicated at the Lords Table. The third part was the
(...), or (...), separated from the rest of the Church by neat Rails, called
Cancelli, whence our English word Chancel, to denote the part of the Church to
this day: into this part none might come but such as were in holy orders,
unless it were the Greek Emperors, who were allowed to come up to the Table to
make their Offerings, and so back again; within this division the most
considerable thing was the (...), the Altar (as they metaphorically called it,
because there they offered the commemorative Sacrifice of Christ's Body and
Blood) o^ the Communion Table ((...) as it is frequently styled by the Greek
Fathers) behind which at the very upper end of the Chancel was the Chair or
Throne of the Bishop (for so was it almost constantly called) on both sides
whereof were the (...), the Seats of the Presbyters (for the Deacons might not
here sit down:) the Bishops Throne was raised up somewhat higher from the
ground, and from hence I suppose it was that he usually delivered his Sermons
to the people: Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 5. p. 304.
therefore Socrates seems to note it as a new thing in Chrysostoms, that when
he preached, he went to sit (...) upon the Pulpit (he means that in the body of
the Church, for so Sozomon tells us that he sat in the Reading Desk in the
middle of the Church) that by reason of his low voice he might be better heard
of the people. Lib. 8. c. 5. p. 764.
Adjoining to the Chancel on the North-side, probably, was the Diaconicon, Can.
21. De Templ. Graec. Number. 14. p. 25.
mentioned both in the Laodicean Council (though I know both Zonaras and
Balsamon, and after them the learned Leo Allatius will have another thing to be
meant in that place) as also in a Law of Arcadius and Honorius against
Heretics; C. Th. Lib. 16. Tit. 5. l. 29. ubi vid. Jac. Gothofr. Com.
and probably so called either because peculiarly committed to the Deacon of
the place, or as the great Commentator upon that Law will have it, because set
apart (...); to some sacred services. It was in the nature of our modern
Vestries, the Sacristy, wherein the Plate, Vessels, and Vestments belonging to
the Church, and other things dedicated to holy uses, were laid up, and where in
after times Relics and such like Fopperies were treasured up with great care
and diligence. On the other side of the Chancel was the Prothesis; or place
where things were prepared in order to the Sacrament, where the Offerings were
laid, and what remained of the Sacramental Elements, till they were decently
disposed of. And this may serve for a short view of the Churches of those first
times, after they began to grow up into some beauty and perfection.

But though the Christians of those times spared no convenient cost in founding
and adorning public places for the Worship of God, yet were they careful to
keep a decent mean between a sordid slovenliness, and a too curious and over
nice superstition. In the more early times, even while the fury and fierceness
of their Enemies kept them low and mean, yet they beautified their Oratories
and places of Worship; especially if we may believe the Author of the Dialogue
in Lucian (whom we mentioned before, and who lived within the first Age) who
bringing in one Critias that was persuaded by the Christians, to go to the
place of their Assembly (which by his description seems to have been an (...),
or Vpper-Room) tells us that after they had gone up several stairs, they came
at last into an House or Room that was overlaid with Gold, where he beheld
nothing but a company of persons with their bodies bowed down, and pale faces.
I know the design of that Dialogue in part is to abuse and deride the
Christians, but there is no reason to suppose he feigned those circumstances
which made nothing to his purpose. As the times grew better, they added more
and greater ornaments to them; concerning two whereof there has been some
contest in the Christian world, Altars and Images. As for Altars, the first
Christians had no other in their Churches than decent Tables of wood, upon
which they celebrated the holy Eucharist; these it is true in allusion to those
in the Jewish Temple, the Fathers generally called Altars, and truly enough
might do so, by reason of those Sacrifices they offered upon them, viz. the
commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice in the blessed Sacrament, the Sacrifice of
prayer and thanksgiving, and the oblation of Alms and Charity for the poor
(usually laid upon those Tables) which the Apostle expressly styles a Sacrifice.
These were the only Sacrifices (for no other had the Christian world for many
hundreds of years) which they then offered upon their Altars, which were much
of the same kind with our Communion-Tables at this day* For that they had not
any such fixed and gaudy Altars (as the Heathens then had in their Temples, and
Papists still have in their Churches) is most evident, Vid. Clem. Alex.
stromat. l. 7. p. 117.
because the Heathens at every turn did charge and reproach them for having
none, Orig. adv. Cells. lib. 4. p. lib. 8. p. 383.
and the Fathers in their answers did freely and openly acknowledge and avow
it; asserting and pleading that the only true sacred Altar was a pure and a
holy mind, M. Faell^^. p. 8 -- 26.
and that the best and most acceptable Sacrifice to God was a pious heart,
Arnob. adv. gent. l. 6. p. 83.
and an innocent and religious life. Lactant. l. 2. c. 2.
Haec nostra sacrificia, haec Dei sacra sunt, these (say they) are our
oblations, these the sacrifices we give to God. This was the state of Altars in
the Christian Churches for near upon the first three hundred years; till
Constantine coming in, and with him peace and plenty, the Churches began to
excel in costliness and bravery every day, and then their wooden and moveable
Altars began to be turned into fixed Altars of Stone or Marble, though used to
no other purpose than before, and yet this too did not so universally obtain
(though severely urged by Sylvester Bishop of Rome) but that in very many
places Tables or moveable Altars of wood continued in use a long time after, as
might easily be made appear from several passages in Athanasius and others,
Athanas. ad Orthodox. p. 729.
yea even to S. Augustine's time, and probably much later, Tom. 1.
were it proper to my business to search after it. Et Ep. ad Solit. vit. agent.
No sooner were Altars made fixed and immovable, Aug. Quest. V. and N. T.
Ques. 101. and alibi saepe.
but they were compassed in with Rails to fence off rudeness and irreverence,
and persons began to regard them with mighty observance and respect; which soon
grew so high, that they became Asylums and refuges to protect innocent persons
and unwitting offenders from immediate violence and oppression; an instance
whereof Nazianzen gives us in a Christian Widow a woman of great place and
quality, Orat. 20. in laud. Basil. 353.
who flying from the importunities of the President, who would have forced her
to marry him, had no other way but to take sanctuary at the holy Table in S.
Basils Church at Caesarea; she was demanded with many fierce and terrible
threatenings, but the holy man stoutly refused, although the President was his
mortal Enemy, and sought only a pretense to ruin him. Many such cases may be
met with in the History of the Church: nor was this a privilege merely founded
upon custom, but settled and ratified by the Laws of Christian Emperors,
concerning the particular cases whereof, together with the extent and
limitation of these immunities, there are no less than six several Laws of the
Emperors Theodosius, Lib. 9. Tit. 45. de hi^ qui ad Ecclesias confugi^nt.
Arcadius, and Theodosius junior, yet extant in the Theodosian Code. But how
far those Asyla's and Sanctuaries were good and useful, and to what evil and
pernicious purposes they were improved in aftertimes, is without the limits of
my present task to enquire.

But if in those times there was so little ground for Altars (as used in the
present sense of the Church of Rome) there was yet far less for Images; and
certainly might things be carried by a fair and impartial trial of Antiquity,
the dispute would soon be at an end; there not being any one just and good
authority to prove that Images were either worshipped, or used in Churches, for
near upon four hundred years after Christ; and I doubt not but it might be
carried much farther, but that my business lies mainly within those first Ages
of Christianity. Nothing can be more clear than that the Christians were
frequently challenged by the Heathens, as for having no Altars and Temples, so
that they had no Images or Statues in them, and that the Christian Apologists
never denied it, but industriously defended themselves against the charge, and
rejected the very thoughts of any such thing with contempt and scorn, as might
be abundantly made good from Tertullian, Clem. Alexandrinus, Origin, Minucius
Faelix, Arnobius and Lactantius, many of whose testimonies have been formerly
pointed to. Amongst other things Origin plainly tells his Adversary (who had
objected this to the Christians) that the Images that were to be dedicated to
God were not to be careed by the hand of Artists; Lib. 8. p. 389.
but to be formed and fashioned in us by the Word of God, viz. the virtues of
justice and temperance, of wisdom and piety, etc. that conform us to the Image
of his only Son: These (says he) are the only Statues formed in our minds, and
by which alone we are persuaded it is fit to do honor to him who is the Image
of the invisible God, the prototype and architypal pattern of all such Images.
Had Christians then given adoration to them, or but set them up in their places
of Worship, with what face can we suppose they should have told the world, that
they so much slighted and abhorred them; and indeed what a hearty detestation
they universally showed to any thing that had but the least shadow of Idolatry,
Can. 3^. p. 50.
has been before proved at large. The Council of Illiberis that was held in
Spain some time before Constantine expressly provided against it, decreeing that
no Pictures ought to be in the Church, nor that any thing that is worshipped
and adored should be painted upon the walls: words so clear and positive, as
not to be evaded by all the little shifts and glosses which the Expositors of
that Canon would put upon it. The first use of Statues and Pictures in public
Churches was merely historical, or to add some beauty and ornament to the
place, which after Ages improved into Superstition and Idolatry. The first that
we meet with upon good authority (for all the instances brought for the first
Ages are either false and spurious, or impertinent and to no purpose) is no
elder than the times of Epiphanius, and then too met with no very welcome
entertainment, as may appear from Epiphanius his own Epistle translated by S.
Hierom; where the story in short is this. Inter opera Hieron. tom. 2. p. 161.
Coming (says he) to Anablatha a Village in Palestine, and going into a Church
to pray, I espied a Curtain hanging over the door, whereon was painted the
Image of Christ or of some Saint; which when I looked upon, and saw the Image
of a man hanging up in the Church, contrary to the authority of the Holy
Scriptures, I presently rent it, and advised the Guardians of the Church rather
to make usd of it as a Winding Sheet for some poor man's burying: whereat when
they were a little troubled, and said 'twas but just, that since I had rent
that Curtain, I should change it, and give them another; I promised them I
would, and have now sent the best I could get, and pray' entreat them to accept
it, and give command that for the time to come no such Curtains, being contrary
to our Religion, may be hung up in the Church of Christ; it more becoming your
place solicitously to remove whatever is offensive to, and unworthy of the
Church of Christ, and the people committed to your Charge. This was written to
John Bishop of Jerusalem, in whose Diocese the thing had been done; and the
case is so much the more pressing and weighty, by how the greater esteem and
value Epiphanius (then Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus) for his great age and
excellent learning, had in the Church of God. This instance is so home and
pregnant, that the Patrons of Image Worship are at a mighty loss what to say to
it, and after all are forced to cry out against it as supposititious. De
Eccles. Triumph. l. 2. c. 9. col. 776.
Bellarmine brings no less than nine arguments (if such they may be called) to
make it seem probable: but had he been ingenuous, he might have given one
reason more true and satisfactory than all the rest, why that part of the
Epistle should be thought forged and spurious, viz. because it makes so much
against them. More might be produced to this purpose, but by this I hope it is
clear enough, that the honest Christians of those times, as they thought it
sufficient to pray to God without making their addresses to Saints and Angels,
so they accounted their Churches fine enough without Pictures and Images to
adorn them.

Their Churches being built and beautified (so far as consisted with the
ability and simplicity of those days) they sought to derive a greater value and
esteem upon them by some peculiar consecration; for the wisdom and piety of
those times thought it not enough barely to devote them to the public services
of Religion, unless they also set them apart with solemn Rites of a formal
dedication. This had been an ancient Custom both amongst Jews and Gentiles, as
old as Solomon's Temple, nay as Moses and the Tabernacle. When 'twas first taken
up by Christians is not easy to determine; only I do not remember to have met
with the footsteps of any such thing in any approved Writer (for the Decretal
Epistles every one knows what their faith is) till the Reign of Constantine: in
his time Christianity being become more prosperous and successful, Churches
were every where erected and repaired, Hist. Eccl. l. 10. c* 3. p. 370.
and no sooner were so, but (as Eusebius tells us) they were solemnly
consecrated, and the dedications celebrated with great festivity and rejoicing;
an instance whereof he there gives of the famous Church of Tire, at the
dedication whereof he himself made that excellent Oration inserted into the
body of his History. About the thirtieth year of his Reign he built a stately
Church at Jerusalem over the Sepulcher of our Savior, Devit Constant. l. 4. c.
42, 43.
which was dedicated with singular magnificence and veneration, and for the
greater honor, by his imperial Letters he summoned the Bishops, who from all
parts of the East were then met in Council at Tire, to be present and assisting
at the Solemnity. The Rites and Ceremonies used at these dedications, as we
find in Eusebius, were a great confluence of Bishops and Strangers from all
parts, the performance of divine offices, singing of hymns and Psalms, reading
and expounding of the Scriptures, Sermons and Orations, receiving the holy
Sacrament, prayers, and thanksgivings, ^iberal Alms bestowed on the poor, and
great gifts given to the Church, and in short, mighty expressions of mutual
love and kindness, and universal rejoicing with one another. What other
particular Ceremonies were introduced afterward, concerns not me to enquire,
only let me note, that under some of the Christian Emperors, when Paganism lay
gasping for life, and their Temples were purged and converted into Christian
Churches, Cod. Theod. lib. 16. Tit. 10* de page sacrific. and templis. leg. 25.
ubi^vid. Com. G^thofr.
they were usually consecrated only by placing a Cross in them, as the
venerable Ensign of the Christian Religion, as appears by the Law of Theodosius
the younger to that purpose. The memory of the dedication of that Church at
Jerusalem was constantly continued and kept alive in that Church, Niceph. Call.
Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. ^0. p. 653.
and once a year, to wit, on the 14. of September, on which day it had been
dedicated, was solemnized with great pomp and much confluence of people from
all parts, the Solemnity usually lasting eight days together, which doubtless
gave birth to that custom of keeping anniversary days of commemoration of the
dedication of Churches, which from this time forwards we frequently meet with
in the Histories of the Church, and much prevailed in after Ages, some shadow
whereof still remains amongst us at this day, in the Wakes observed in several
Counties, which in correspondence with the Encoenia of the ancient Church, are
annual Festivals kept in Country Villages, in memory of the dedication of their
particular Churches.

And because it was a custom in some Ages of the Church, that no Church should
be consecrated till it was endowed, it may give us occasion to enquire what
Revenues Churches had in those first Ages of Christianity. It Is more than
probable that for a great while they had no other public incomes, than either
what arose out of those common contributions which they made at their usual
Assemblies, every one giving or offering according to his ability or devotion,
which was put into a common stock or treasury, or what proceeded from the
offerings which they made out of the improvement of their Lands, Can. 3, 4.
the Apostolic Canons providing that their First Fruits should be partly
offered at the Church, partly sent home to the Bishops and Presbyters: the care
of all which was committed to the President or Bishop of the Church, (for who
says the Author of the forecited Canons, Can. 41.
is fitter to be trusted with the riches and revenues of the Church, than he
who is entrusted with the precious souls of men) and by him disposed of for the
maintenance of the Clergy, the relief of the poor, or whatever necessities of
the Church. As Christianity increased, and times grew better, they obtained
more proper and fixed revenues, houses and lands being settled upon them; for
such it is certain they had even during the times of persecution; for so we find
in a Law of Constantine and Licinius, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. p. 389.
where giving liberty of Religion to Christians, and restoring them freely to
the Churches which had been taken from them, and disposed of by former
Emperors; they further add; and because (say they) the same Christians had not
only places wherein they were wont to assemble, but are also known to have had
other possessions, which were not the propriety of any single person, but
belonged to the whole body and community; all these by this Law we command to
be immediately restored to those Christians, to every Society and Community of
them what belonged to them. And in a rescript to Anulinus the Proconsul about
the same matter, Ib. p. 390.
they particularly specify, whether they be Gardens or Houses, or whatever
else belonged to the right and propriety of those Churches, that with all speed
they be universally restored to them; Lib. 9. c. p. 364.
the same which Maximinus also (though no good friend to Christians, yet either
out of fear of Constantine, or from the conviction of his conscience awakened
by a terrible sickness) had ordained for his parts of the Empire. Afterward
Constantine set himself by all ways to advance the honor and interests of the
Church; Sozom.
out of the Tributes of every City which were yearly paid into his Exchequer,
Hist. Eccl* lib. 1. c. 8. p. 411.
he assigned a portion to the Church and Clergy of that place, and settled it by
a Law, which (excepting the short Reign of Julian who revoked it) was as the
Historian assures us, Ib. lib. 5. c. 5. p. 600*
in force in his time. Where any of the Martyrs or Confessors had died without
kindred, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 36. and* seq.
or been banished their native Country, and left no heirs behind them, he
ordained that their Estates and Inheritance should be given to the Church of
that place, and that whoever had seized upon them, or had bought them of the
Exchequer should restore them, and refer themselves to him for what recompense
should be made them. He took away the restraint which former Emperors had laid
upon the bounty of pious and charitable men, Cod. l. 1.
and gave every man liberty to leave what he would to the Church: Tit. 2. de S.
S. Eccl. leg. 1.
he gave salaries out of the public Corn, which though taken away by Julian,
was restored by his Successor Jovianus, Ibid. leg. 12.
and ratified as a perpetual donation by the Law of Valentinian and Marcianus.
After his time the Revenues of Churches increased every day, pious and devout
persons thinking they could never enough testify their piety to God, by
expressing their bounty and liberality to the Church.

I shall conclude this discourse, by observing what respect and reverence they
were wont in those days to show in the Church, as the solemn place of Worship,
and where God did more peculiarly manifest his presence: and this certainly was
very great. Ep. ad Hebr. in c. 9. hom. 15. tom. 10. p. 1862.
They came into the Church, as into the Palace of the great King (as Chrysostom
calls it) with fear and trembling, upon which account he there presses the
highest modesty and gravity upon them: before their going into the Church they
used to wash at least their hands, Tert. de Orat. c. 11. p. 133.
as Tertullian probably intimates, and Chrysostom expressly tells us; Chrysostom.
hom* 52. in Math. p. 463. hom. in Joan. 72* p. 371.
carrying themselves while there with the most profound silence and devotion;
nay so great was the reverence which they bore to the Church, that the
Emperors themselves who otherwise never went without their Guard about them,
yet when they came to go into the Church used to lay down their Arms, to leave
their Guard behind them, and to put off their Crowns, reckoning that the less
ostentation they made of power and greatness there, the more firmly the
imperial Majesty would be entailed upon them, Lib. 9. Tit. 45. leg. 4. vid.
Chrysostom. Oratpost redit. ab exil.
as we find it in the Law of Theodosius and Valentinian, inserted at large into
the last edition of the Theodosian Code. But of this we may probably speak
more, Tom. 4. p. 850.
when we come to treat of the manner of their public adoration.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Lord's Day and the Fasts and Festivals of the ancient Church.
Time as necessary to religious actions as Place. Fixed times of Public
Worship observed by all Nations. The Lords Day chiefly observed by Christians:
Styled Sunday, and why. Peculiarly consecrated to the memory of Christ's
Resurrection. All kneeling at prayer on this day forbidden, and why. Their
public Assemblies constantly held upon this day. Forced to assemble before day
in times of persecution; thence jeered by the Heathens as Latebrosa and
Lucifugax Natio. The Lords day ever kept as a day of rejoicing; all fasting
upon it forbidden. The great care of Constantine, and the first Christian
Emperors, for the honor and observance of this Day. Their Laws to that
purpose. Their constant and conscientious attendance upon public Worship on
the Lords Day. Canons of ancient Councils about absenting from public Worship.
Sabbatum, or Saturday, kept in the East as a religious day, with all the
public Solemnities of Divine Worship: how it came to be so. Otherwise in the
Western Churches, observed by them as a Fast, and why. This not universal. S.
Ambrose his practice at Milain, and counsel to S. Augustine in the case. Their
solemn* Fasts either Weekly or Annual; Weekly on Wednesdays and Fridays, held
till three in the Afternoon. Annual Fast that of Lent, how ancient. Upon what
account called Quadragesima. Observed with great strictness. The Hebdomada
Magna, or the Holy Week, kept with singular austerity, and the reason of it.
Festivals observed by the Primitive Christians. That of Easter as ancient as
the times of the Apostles. An account of the famous Controversy between the
eastern and Western Churches, about the keeping of Easter. The intemperate
spirit of Pope Victor. Irenaeus his moderate interposal. The case sinally
determined by the Council of Nice. The Vigils of this Feast observed with great
expressions of rejoicing. The bounty of Christian Emperors upon Easter Day*
The Feast of Pentecost how ancient. Why styled Whitsunday. Dominica in Albis,
why so called. The whole space between Easter and Whitsuntide kept Festival.
The Acts of the Apostles why publicly read during that time. The Feast of
Epiphany anciently what. Christmas Day, the ancient observation of it. Epiphany
in a strict sense what, and why so called. The Memoriae Martyrum what. When
probably first begun. The great reverence they had for Martyrs. Their passions
styled their Birthday, and why. These anniversary Solemnities kept at the Tombs
of Martyrs. Over these magnificent Churches erected afterward. What religious
exercises performed at those meetings. The first rise of Martyrologies.
Oblations for Martyrs, how understood in the ancient Writers of the Church.
These Festivals kept with great rejoicing, mutual love and charity; their (...)
or common Feasts. Markets held for that purpose in those places. The ill use
which aftertimes made of these memorials.

TIme is a circumstance no less inseparable from religious actions than Place,
for man consisting of a soul and body cannot always be actually engaged in the
service of God, that is the privilege of Angels, and souls freed from the
fetters of mortality; so long as we are here, we must worship God with respect
to our present state, and consequently of necessity have some definite and
particular time to do it in. Now that man might not be left to a floating
uncertainty in a matter of so great importance, in all Ages and Nations men
have been guided by the very dictates of Nature to pitch upon some certain
seasons, wherein to assemble and meet together to perform the public offices
of Religion. What and how many were the public Festivals instituted and
observed either amongst Jews or Gentiles, I am not concerned to take notice of.
For the ancient Christians, they ever had their peculiar seasons, their solemn
and stated times of meeting together to perform the common duties of Divine
Worship; of which because the Lord's Day challenges the precedence of all the
rest, we shall begin first with that. And being unconcerned in all the
controversies which in the late times were raised about it; I shall only note
some instances of the piety of Christians in reference to this day, which I
have observed in passing through the Writers of those times. For the name of
this day of Public Worship, it is sometimes, especially by Justin Martyr and
Tertullian, called Sunday, because it happened upon that day of the week, which
by the Heathens was dedicated to the Sun, and therefore as being best known to
them, the Fathers commonly made use of it in their Apologies to the Heathen
Governors. This title continued after the world became Christian, and seldom
it is that it passes under any other name in the Imperial Edicts of the first
Christian Emperors. But the more proper and prevailing name was (...), or Dies
Dominica, the Lord's Day, as it is called by S. John himself, Rev. 1. 10.
as being that day of the Week whereon our Lord made his triumphant return from
the dead; Ap. 2. p. 99.
this Justin Martyr assures us was the true original of the title; upon Sunday.
(says he) we all assemble and meet together, as being the first day wherein
God, parting the darkness from the rude chaos, created the world, and the same
day whereon Jesus Christ our Savior rose again from the dead; for he was
crucified the day before Saturday, and the day after (which is Sunday) he
appeared to his Apostles and Disciples: by this means observing a kind of
analogy and proportion with the Jewish Sabbath which had been instituted by God
himself. For as that day was kept as a commemoration of Gods Sabbath, or
resting from the work of Creation, so was this set apart to religious uses, as
the solemn memorial of Christ's resting from the work of our redemption in this
world, completed upon the day of his resurrection. Which brings into my mind
that custom of theirs so universally common in those days, that whereas at
other times they kneeled at prayers, on the Lords day they always prayed
standing, as is expressly affirmed both by Justin Martyr and Tertullian; Ap. 2.
p. 98.
the reason of which we find in the Author of the Questions and Answers in J.
Martyr: De Coron. c. 3. p. 102.
it is (says he) that by this means we may be put in mind both of our fall by
sin, Resp. ad Quest. 115. p. 468.
and our resurrection or restitution by the grace of Christ; that for six days
we pray upon our knees, is in token of our fall by sin; but that on the Lords
day we do not bow the knee, does symbolically represent our resurrection, by
which through the grace of Christ we are delivered from our sins, and the
powers of death: this he there tells us was a custom derived from the very
times of the Apostles, for which he cites Irenaeus in his Book concerning
Easter. And this custom was maintained with so much vigor, that when some
began to neglect it, the great Council of Nice took notice of it, Can* 20.
and ordained that there should be a constant uniformity in this case, and that
on the Lords day (and at such other times as were usual) men should stand, when
they made their prayers to God. So fit and reasonable did they think it to do
all possible honor to that day, on which Christ rose from the dead. Therefore
we may observe all along in the sacred story, that after Christ's resurrection
the Apostles and primitive Christians did especially assemble upon the first
day of the week: and whatever they might do at other times, yet there are many
passages that intimate, that the first day of the week was their more solemn
time of meeting; on this day it was that they were met together, when our
Savior first appeared to them, and so again the next week after: on this day
they were assembled when the Holy Ghost so visibly came down upon them, when
Peter preached that excellent Sermon, converted and baptized three thousand
souls. Thus when S. Paul was taking his leave at Troas, upon the first day of
the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread, i.e. as almost all
agree, to celebrate the holy Sacrament, he preached to them, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
sufficiently intimating that upon that day 'twas their usual custom to meet in
that manner; and elsewhere giving directions to the Church of Corinth (as he
had done in the like case to other Churches) concerning their contributions to
the poor suffering Brethren, he bids them lay it aside upon the first day of
the week, which seems plainly to respect their religious assemblies upon that
day, for then it was that every one according to his ability deposited
something for the relief of the poor, and the uses of the Church.

After the Apostles, the Christians constantly observed this day, meeting
together for prayer, expounding and hearing of the Scriptures, celebration of
the Sacraments, and other public duties of Religion. Upon the day called
Sunday (says J. Martyr) all of us that live either in City or Country meet
together in one place; Ap. 2. p. 98*
and what they then did, Lib. 10.
he there describes, Ep. 97.
of which afterward. This doubtless Pliny meant, when giving Trajan an account
of the Christians, he tells him that they were wont to meet together to worship
Christ stato die, upon a set certain day, by which he can be reasonably
understood to design no other but the Lords day; for though they probably met
at other times, yet he takes notice of this only, either because the
Christians, whom he had examined, had not told him of their meeting at other
times, or because this was their most public and solemn convention, and which
in a manner swallowed up the rest. By the violent persecutions of those times
the Christians were forced to meet together before day, so Pliny in the same
place tells the Emperor, Ad Vxor. l. 2. c. 4. p. 168.
that they assembled before daylight, to sing their morning hymns to Christ.
Whence it is that Tertullian so often mentions their nocturnal convocations;
for putting the case that his Wife after his decease should marry with a
Gentile-Husband, amongst other inconveniences he asks her, whether she thought
he would be willing to let her rise from his Bed to go to their night-meetings;
De sug. in persecut. c. 14. p. 543.
and in the case of persecution he tells Fabius, that if they could not
celebrate Dominica solennia, their Lord's Day Solemnities in the day time, they
had the night sufficiently clear with the light of Christ. This gave occasion
to their spightful Adversaries to calumniate and asperse them: M. Fael. p. 7.
the Heathen in Minucius charges them with their night-Congregations, upon
which account they are there scornfully called latebrosa and lucifugax natio an
obscure and skulking Generation; Orig. adv. Cel. 1. p. 4. -- 7.
and the very first thing that Celsus objects is, that the Christians had
private and clancular Assemblies, or Combinations; to which Origin answers,
that if it were so, they might thank them for it who would not suffer them to
exercise it more openly; that the Christian Doctrine was sufficiently evident
and obvious, and better known through the world, than the opinion and
sentiments of their best Philosophers; and that if there were some mysteries in
the Christian Religion which were not communicated to every one, 'twas no other
thing than what was common in the several Sects of their own Philosophy. But to
return.

They looked upon the Lord's Day as a time to be celebrated with great
expressions of joy, as being the happy memory of Christ's resurrection, and
accordingly restrained whatever might savor of sorrow and sadness; fasting on
that day they prohibited with the greatest severity, accounting it utterly
unlawful, as Tertullian informs us. De Cor. mil. c. 3. p. 102.
It was a very bitter censure that of Ignatius (or whoseever that Epistle was,
for certainly it was not his) that who ever fasts on a Lord's Day is a murderer
of Christ; Ep. ad Philip. p. 112.
however it is certain, that they never fasted on those days, no not in the time
of Lent it self; nay the Montanists, though otherwise great pretenders to
fasting and mortification, did yet abstain from it on the Lord's Day. And as
they accounted it a joyful and good day, so they did what ever they thought
might contribute to the honor of it. No sooner was Constantine come over to
the Church, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18, 19, 20. p. 534.
but his principal care was about the Lord's Day, he commanded it to be solemnly
observed, and that by all persons whatsoever, he made it to all a day of rest;
that men might have nothing to do but to worship God, and be better instructed
in the Christian Faith, and spend their whole time without any thing to hinder
them in prayer and devotion, according to the custom and discipline of the
Church: and for those in his Army who yet remained in their Paganism and
infidelity, he commanded them upon Lords-days to go out into the Fields, and
there pour out their souls in hearty prayers to God; and that none might
pretend their own inability to the duty, he himself composed and gave them a
short form of prayer, which he enjoined them to make use of every Lord's Day: so
careful was he that this day should not be dishonored or mis-imployed, even by
those who were yet strangers and enemies to Christianity. Cod. Just. l. 3. Tit.
12. de feriis l. 3.
He moreover ordained, that there should be no Courts of Judicature open upon
this day, no Suits or Trials at Law, but that for any works of mercy, such as
the emancipating and setting free of Slaves or Servants, this might be done.
That there should be no Suits nor demanding debts upon this day, Cod. Theod.
lib. 2. Tit. 8. de feriis l. 1. lib. 8.
was confirmed by several Laws of succeeding Emperors, and that no Arbitrators
who had the Umpirage of any business lying before them, Tit. 8. l. 3.
should at that time have power to determine or take up litigious causes,
penalties being entailed upon any that transgressed herein. Ib. lib. 15.
Theodosius the Great, Tit. 5. de spectac. l. 2.
anno 386. by a second Law ratified one which he had passed long before,
wherein he expressly prohibited all public Shows upon the Lord's Day, that the
worship of God might not be confounded with those profane Solemnities. This
Law the younger Theodosius some few years after confirmed and enlarged, Ib.
Leg. 5. Dominico.
enacting, that on the Lords day (and some other Festivals there mentioned) not
only Christians, but even Jews and Heathens should be restrained from the
pleasure of all Sights and Spectacles, and the Theaters be shut up in every
place; and whereas it might so happen that the Birthday or inauguration of the
Emperor might fall upon that day, therefore to let the people know how
infinitely he preferred the honor of God, before the concerns of his own
majesty and greatness, he commanded that if it should so happen, that then the
imperial Solemnity should be put off, and deferred till another day.

I shall take notice but of one instance more of their great observance of this
day, and that was their constant attendance upon the Solemnities of public
Worship; they did not think it enough to read and pray, and praise God at home,
but made conscience of appearing in the public Assemblies, from which nothing
but sickness and absolute necessity did detain them: and if sick, or in prison,
or under banishment, nothing troubled them more, than that they could not come
to Church, and join their devotions to the common Services. If persecution at
any time forced them to keep a little close, yet no sooner was there the least
mitigation, but they presently returned to their open duty, and publicly met
all together. No trivial pretenses, no light excuses were then admitted for any
ones absence from the Congregation, but according to the merit of the cause
severe censures were passed upon them. The Synod of Illiberis provided, Can.
21. p. 28.
that if any man dwelling in a City (where usually Churches were nearest hand)
should for three Lords Days absent himself from the Church, he should for some
time be suspended the Communion, that he might appear to be corrected for his
fault. They allowed no separate Assemblies, no Congregations but what met in
the public Church; if any man took upon him to make a breach, and to draw
people into corners, he was presently condemned, and a suitable penalty put upon
him. When Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia (a man petending to great strictness
and austerity of life) began to cast off the Discipline of the Church, and to
introduce many odd observations of his own, amongst others, to contemn Priests
that were married, to fast on the Lords day, and to keep meetings in private
houses, drawing away many, but especially women, Sozom. l 3. c. 14 p. 521.
(as the Historian observes) who leaving their Husbands were led away with
error, and from that into great filthiness and impurity. No sooner did the
Bishops of those parts discover it, but meeting in Council at Gangra the
Metropolis of Paphlagonia about the year 340. they condemned and cast them out
of the Church, Conc. Gargr. Can. 4, 5.
passing these two Canons among the rest: If any one shall teach that the House
of God is to be despised, and the assemblies that are held in it, let him be
accursed: If any shall take upon him out of the Church, privately to preach at
home, and making light of the Church shall do those things that belong only to
the Church, without the presence of the Priest, and the leave and allowance of
the Bishop, let him be accursed. Correspondent to which, Can. 31.
the Canons called Apostolical, Conc. Antioch. Can. 5.
and the Council of Antioch, ordain, that if any Presbyter setting light by his
own Bishop, shall withdraw and set up separate meetings, and erect another
Altar (i. e. says Zonaras, keep unlawful Conventicles, preach privately, and
administer the Sacrament) that in such a case he shall be deposed, as ambitious
and tyrannical, and the people communicating with him be excommunicate, as
being factious and schismatical; only this not to be done, till after the third
admonition. After all that has been said, I might further show what esteem and
value the first Christians had of the Lords day, by those great and honorable
things they have spoken concerning it; of which I Will produce but two passages;
the one is that in the Epistle ad Magnesios, which if not Ignatius, must yet be
acknowledged an ancient Author: Page 149.
Let every one (says he) that loves Christ keep the Lords day Festival, the
resurrection day, the Queen and Empress of all days, in which our life was
raised again, and death conquered by our Lord and Savior. The other that of
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, Edict. Theoph. apud Balsam. in Synod. Tom. 2.
part 1. p. 170.
who speaks thus, that both custom and reason challenge from us, that we should
honor the Lords day, and keep it Festival, seeing on that day it was that our
Lord Jesus Christ completed his resurrection from the dead.

Next to the Lords day, the Sabbath, or Saturday (for so the word Sabbatum is
constantly used in the Writings of the Fathers, when speaking of it as it
relates to Christians) was held by them in great veneration, and especially in
the Eastern parts honored with all the public Solemnities of Religion. For
which we are to know, that the Gospel in those parts mainly prevailing amongst
the Jews, they being generally the first Converts to the Christian Faith, they
still retained a mighty reverence for the Mosaic Institutions, and especially
for the Sabbath, as that which had been appointed by God himself (as the
memorial of his rest from the work of Creation) settled by their great Master
Moses, and celebrated by their Ancestors for so many Ages, as the solemn day of
their public Worship, and were therefore very loath that it should be wholly
antiquated and laid aside. For this reason it seemed good to the prudence of
those times (as in others of the Jewish Rites, so in this) to indulge the
humor of that people, and to keep the Sabbath as a day for religious offices.
Hence they usually had most parts of Divine Service performed upon that day,
they met together for public Prayers, for reading the Scriptures, celebration
of the Sacraments, and such like duties. This is plain not only from some
passages in Ignatius and Clemens his Constitutions, but from Writers of more
unquestionable credit and authority. Homil. de Sement. in init.
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria tells us, that they assembled on Saturdays,
not that they were infected with Judaism, but only to worship Jesus Christ the
Lord of the Sabbath: Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 8. p. 312.
and Socrates speaking of the usual times of their public meeting, calls the
Sabbath and the Lords day the weekly Festivals, on which the Congregation was
wont to meet in the Church, for the performance of Divine Services. Therefore
the Council of Laodicea amongst other things decreed, Can. 16. 49. 51.
that upon Saturdays the Gospels and other Scriptures should be read, that in
Lent the Eucharist should not be celebrated but upon Saturday and the Lords
day, and upon those days only in the time of Lent it should be lawful to
commemorate and rehearse the names of Martyrs. Upon this day also as well as upon
Sunday all Fasts were severely prohibited (an infallible argument they counted
it a Festival day) one Saturday in the year only excepted, viz. that before
Easter Day, which was always observed as a solemn Fast. Things so commonly
known as to need no proof. But though the Church thought fit thus far to
correspond with Jewish Converts, as solemnly to observe the Sabbath; yet to
take away all offense, and to vindicate themselves from compliance with
Judaism, they openly declared that they did it only in a Christian way, and
kept it not as a Jewish Sabbath, as is expressly affirmed by Athanasius,
Athanas. Homil. de Sement.
Nazianzen, and others; and the forementioned Laodicean Synod has a Canon to
this purpose, Tom. 1. p. 835.
that Christians should not judaize, Can. 29.
and rest from all labor on the Sabbath, but follow their ordinary works (i.
e. so far as consisted with their attendance upon the public Assemblies) and
should not entertain such thoughts of it, but that still they should prefer the
Lords day before it; and on that day rest as Christians; but if any were found
to judaize they should be accursed.

Thus stood the case in the Eastern Church; in those of the West we find it
somewhat different, amongst them it was not observed as a religious Festival,
but kept as a constant Fast, the reason whereof (as it is given by Pope
Innonocent, in an Epistle to the Bishop of Eugubium, where he treats of this
very case) seems most probable; if Innocent. Ep. ad decium Eugubin. c. 4.
Sabbato vero.
(says he) we commemorate Christ's resurrection not only at Easter, but every
Lords day, and fast upon Friday because 'twas the day of his passion, we ought
not to pass by Saturday, which is the middle-time between the days of grief and
joy; the Apostles themselves spending those two days (viz. Friday and the
Sabbath) in great sorrow and heaviness: and he thinks no doubt ought to be made
but that the Apostles fasted upon those two days, whence the Church had a
Tradition, that the Sacraments were not to be administered on those days, and
therefore concludes, that every Saturday or Sabbath ought to be kept a Fast. To
the same purpose the Council of Illiberis ordained, Can. 36. p. 35.
that a Saturday Festival was an error that ought to be reformed, and that men
ought to fast upon every Sabbath. But though this seems to have been the
general practice, yet it did not obtain in all places of the West alike. In
Italy it self, 'twas otherwise at Milain; where Saturday was a Festival; Paulin
in vit. Ambr. operibus Ambros. praefix^
and it is said in the life of S. Ambrose, who was Bishop of that See, that he
constantly dined as well upon Saturday as the Lords day, (it being his custom
to dine upon no other days but those, and the memorials of the Martyrs) and
used also upon that day to preach to the people; though so great was the
prudence and moderation of that good man, that he bound not up himself in these
indifferent things, but when he was at Millain he dined upon Saturdays, and
when he was at Rome, he fasted as they did upon those days: Ad Januar. Epist.
118. col. 557 tom. 2.
This S. Augustine assures us he had from his own mouth; for when his Mother
Monica came after him to Millain (where he then resided) she was greatly
troubled to find the Saturday Fast not kept there, as she had found it in other
places; for her satisfaction he immediately went to consult S. Ambrose, then
Bishop of that place, who told him he could give him no better advice in the
cause, that to do as he did: When I come to Rome (said he) I fast on the
Saturday as they do at Rome, when I am here I do not fast. So likewise you, to
whatsoever Church you come, observe the custom of that place, if you mean not
either to give or take offense. With this answer he satisfied his Mother, and
ever after when he thought of it, looked upon it as an Oracle sent from Heaven.
So that even in Italy the Saturday Fast was not universally observed. Nay a
very learned man (and a Bishop of the Roman Church) thinks it highly probable,
Albasp. de vet. Ecclrit. obs. 13. p. 90.
that for the first Ages especially, Saturday was no more kept as a Fast at
Rome, than in the Churches of the East: though the great argument whereby he
would establish it (viz. because some Latin Churches, who must needs follow
the pattern of the Church of Rome, did not keep it so) is very infirm and weak;
and needs no more than that very instance of the Church of Millain to refute
it, which though under the Popes nose, did not yet keep that day as a Fast,
although this was many years after it had been so established and observed at
Rome.

And now that I am got into this business, I shall once for all dispatch the
matter about their Fasts, before I proceed to their other Festivals. It Is
certain the ancient Christians had two sorts of solemn Fasts, weekly and
annual. Their weekly Fasts (called Jejunia quartae and sextae seriae) were kept
upon Wednesdays and Fridays, appointed so, as we are told, for this reason,
because on Wednesday our Lord was betrayed by Judas, on Friday he was crucified
by the Jews. Vid. Con^^it. App. l. 5. c. 14. p. 929. l. 7. c. 24. p. 978.
This custom Epiphanius (how truly I know not) refers to the Apostles, and
elsewhere tells us that those days were observed as Fasts through the whole
world. Sermon. Compen. p. 466.
These Fasts they called their Stations (not because they stood all the while,
Haeres. 85. p. 387.
but by an allusion to the military Stations and keeping their Guards, as
Tertullian observes, De Orat. c. 14. p. 136.
they kept close at it) and they usually lasted (...), as Epiphanius informs
us, Sermon. Compend. de fid. p 466.
till the ninth hour, i. e. till three of the Clock in the Afternoon, at which
time having ended their Fast devotions, they received the Eucharist, and then
broke up the Station, and went home; whence it is that Tertullian calls them
stationum semijejunia, De jejun. c. 13. p. 551.
the half Fasts of Stations: and he seems to censure the practice of some who
having privately resolved upon an entire Fast of the whole day, De Orat. c. 14.
p 135.
refused to receive the Eucharist at the public stationary Fasts, because they
thought that by eating and drinking the sacramental Elements, they put a period
to their fasting: Vid. de jejun p. 545. A. p. 544. B.
for it was usual in those times with many, after the stationary Fasts were
ended, to continue and hold on the Fast until the evening. The Historian tells
us that it had been a very ancient custom in the Church of Alexandria, Socrat.
l. ^ c. 22. p. 28.
upon these days to have the Scriptures read and expounded, and all other parts
of Divine Service, except the celebration of the Sacrament, and that it was
chiefly in those days that Origin was wont to teach the people: whether the
omitting of the Sacrament then might be a peculiar custom to that Church, I
know not, certain I am 'twas upon those days administered in other places. Tom.
3. Epist. 289. p. 279.
So S. Basil enumerating the times how often they received it every week,
expressly puts Wednesday and Friday into the number. The remains of these
primitive Stations are yet observed in our Church at this day, which by her 15.
Canon has ordained, That though Wednesdays and Fridays be not holy days, yet
that weekly upon those times Minister and People shall resort to Church at the
accustomed hours of prayer.

Their Annual Fast was that of Lent, by way of preparation to the Feast of our
Saviors Resurrection, this (though not in the modern use of it) was very
ancient, B. Tail. Duct: Dub. lib. 3. c. 4. p. 629.
though far from being an^ Apostolical Canon, as a learned Prelate of our
Church has fully proved. From the very first Age of the Christian Church 'twas
customary to fast before Easter; but for how long, it was variously observed
according to different times and places; some fasting so many days, others so
many weeks, and some so many days on each week; Id. ib. vid. Thorndike. rel.
assembl. c. 8. p. 276.
and it is most probably thought, that it was at first styled (...) or
Quadragesima, not because 'twas a Fast of forty days, but of forty hours, begun
about twelve on Friday (the time of our Saviors falling under the power of
death) and continued till Sunday morning, the time of his rising from the dead.
Afterward it was enlarged to a longer time, drawn out into more days, and then
weeks, till it came to three, and at last to six or seven weeks. But concerning
the different observations of it in several places, let them who desire to know
more consult Socrates and Sozomen, Socrat. l. 5. c. 22.
who both speak enough about it. Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.
This Quadragesimal Fast was kept in those times with great piety and Religion,
people generally applying themselves with all seriousness to acts of penance
and mortification, Hom. 1. in Genesis tom. 2. p. 1.
whence Chrysostom calls Lent the remedy and Physic of our souls; and to the
end that the observation of it might be more grave and solemn, Theodosins M.
and his Colleague Emperors passed two Laws, ^od Theod. lib. 9.
that during the time of Lent all Process and enquiry into criminal actions
should be suspended, Tit. 35. de Question. ll 4. and 5.
and no corporal punishments inflicted upon any; it being unfit (as the second
of those Laws expresses it) that in the holy time of Lent the body should
suffer punishment, while the soul is expecting absolution. But with what care
soever they kept the preceding parts, it is certain they kept the close of it
with a mighty strictness and austerity, I mean the last week of it, Constit.
Apostol. l. 5. c. 17, 18. p. 932.
that which immediately preceded the Feast of Easter; this they consecrated to
more peculiar acts of prayer, abstinence, Epiphan. (...) p. 466.
and devotion; and whereas in the other parts of Lent they ended their fast in
the evening, in this they extended it to the Cock-crowing, or first glimpse of
the morning; to be sure they ended it not before midnight, for to break up the
Fast before that time was accounted a piece of great profaneness and
intemperance, as Apud. Zonar. in Synod. Tom 2. part. 1. p. 1.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria determines in a Letter to Basilides, wherein he
largely and learnedly states the case. This was the Hebdomada Magna, the great
(or holy) week; Hom. 30. in Genesis p. 328.
so called (says Chrysostom) not that it has either more hours or days in it
than other weeks, but because this is the week in which truly great and
ineffable good things were purchased for us; within this time death was
conquered, the curse destroyed, the Devils tyranny dissolved, his instruments
broken, Heaven opened, Angels rejoiced, the partition wall broken down, and God
and man reconciled. For this cause we call it the great week, for this cause
men fast, and watch, and do Alms, to do the greater honor to it: the Emperors
themselves, to show what veneration they have for this time, commanding all
Suits and Processes at Law to cease, Tribunal-doors to be shut up, and
Prisoners to be set free, imitating herein their great Lord and Master, who by
his death at this time delivered us from the prison and the chains of sin;
meaning herein those Laws of Theodosius, Gratian, and Valentinian, which we
lately mentioned.

We proceed now to enquire what other Festivals there were in those first Ages
of the Church, which I find to be chiefly these; Easter, Whitsuntide, and
Epiphany, which comprehended two, Christmas and Epiphany properly so called. I
reckon them not in their proper order, but as I suppose them to have taken
place in the Church. Of these Easter challenges the precedence both for its
antiquity, and the great stir about it; that in and from the very times of the
Apostles (besides the weekly returns of the Lords day) there has been always
observed an Anniversary Festival in memory of Christ's Resurrection, no man can
doubt, that has any insight into the affairs of the ancient Church; all the
dispute was about the particular time when it was to be kept, which became a
matter of as famous a Controversy as any that in those Ages exercised the
Christian world. The state of the case was briefly this; the Churches of Asia
the less kept their Easter upon the same day, whereon the Jews celebrated their
Passover, viz. upon the 14. day of the first Month (which always began with the
appearance of the Moon) mostly answering to our March, and this they did, upon
what day of the week soever it fell, and hence were styled Quartodecimans,
because keeping Easter quarta decima Luna, upon the 14. day after the (...) or
appearance of the Moon. The other Churches, and especially those of the West
did not follow this custom, but kept Easter upon the Lords day following the
day of the Jewish Passover, partly the more to honor the day, and partly to
distinguish between Jews and Christians: the Asiaticks pleaded for themselves
the practice of the Apostles; Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, who had lived and
conversed with them, having kept it upon that day, together with S. John and
the rest of the Apostles, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. p. 193.
as Irenaeus (who himself knew Polycarpus, and doubtless had it from his own
mouth) speaks in a Letter about this very thing though himself was of the other
side. Ibid. p. 191.
And Polycrates in a Letter to the same purpose, instances not only in S. John,
but S. Philip the Apostle* who himself and his whole Family used so to keep it,
from whom it had been conveyed down in a constant and uninterrupted observance
through all the Bishops of those places, some whereof he there enumerates, and
tells us that seven Bishops of that place in a constant succession had been his
Kinsmen, and himself the eighth, and that it had never been kept by them upon
any other day; this we are not so to understand, as if S. John and the Apostles
had instituted this Festival, and commanded it to be observed upon that day,
but rather that they did it by way of condescension, accommodating their
practice in a matter indifferent to the humor of the Jewish Converts (whose
number in those parts was very great) as they had done before in several other
cases, and particularly in observing the Sabbath or Saturday. The other
Churches also (says Eusebius) had for their patronage an Apostolical Tradition,
Ib. c. 23. p. 190.
or at least pretended it: and were the much more numerous party. This
difference was the spring of great bustles in the Church; for the Bishops of
Rome stickled hard to impose their custom upon the Eastern Churches, whereupon
Polycarpus comes over to Rome to confer with Anicetus who was then Bishop about
it; Id. l. 4. c. 14. p. 127.
and though they could not agree the matter, yet they parted fairly. After this
Pope Victor renewed the quarrel, and was so fierce and peremptory in the case,
that he either actually did, H. Vales. Annot. in. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24. p. 105.
col. 1.
or (as a learned man inclines rather to think, probably to mollify the odium
of the Fact) severely threatened to excommunicate those Eastern Churches for
standing out against it: this rash and bold attempt was ill resented by the
sober and moderate men of his own party, who writ to him about it; and
particularly Irenaeus (a man, as Eusebius notes, truly answering his name, both
in his temper and his life, quiet and peaceable) who gravely reproved him for
renting the peace of the Church, and troubling so many famous Churches for
observing the customs derived to them from their Ancestors, with much more to
the same purpose. But the Asian Bishops little regarded what was either said or
done at Rome, and still went on in their old course, though by the diligent
practices of the other party they lost ground, but yet still made shift to keep
the cause on foot till the time of Constantine, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 3.
c. 14. -- 17.
who finding this controversy amongst others much to disquiet the peace of the
Church, did for this and some other reasons summon the great Council of Nice,
by whom this question was solemnly determined, Easter ordained to be kept upon
one and the same day throughout the world, not according to the custom of the
Jews, but upon the Lords day, and this Decree ratified and published by the
imperial Letters to all the Churches.

The Eve of Vigils or this Festival were wont to be celebrated with more than
ordinary pomp, with solemn watchings, Naz. Or. 2. in Pasch.
with multitudes of lighted Torches both in the Churches and their own private
houses, Orat. 42. p. 676.
so as to turn the night it self into day, and with the general resort and
confluence of all ranks of men, both Magistrates and people. This custom of
lights at that time was, Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 22. p. 536.
if not begun, at least much augmented by Constantine, who set up Lamps and
Torches in all places as well within the Churches as without; that through the
whole City the night seemed to outvye the Sun at Noonday. And this they did (as
Nazianzen intimates) as a Prodromus or forerunner of that great light, Ibid. p.
677.
even the Sun of righteousness, which the next day arose upon the world. Ibid.
and Orat. 19. p. 304.
For the Feast it self, the same Father calls it the holy and famous Passover,
a day which is the Queen of days, the Festival of Festivals, and which as far
excels all other, even of those which are instituted to the honor of Christ,
as the Sun goes beyond the other Stars. A time it was famous for works of mercy
and charity, every one both of Clergy and Laity striving to contribute
liberally to the poor: a duty (as one of the Ancients observes) very congruous
and suitable to that happy season, Commod. instruction. c. 75. p. 57.
for what more fit, than that such as beg relief should be enabled to rejoice
at that time, when we remember the common fountain of our mercies? Therefore no
sooner did the morning of this day appear, Eusebius. ut. supra.
but Constantine used to arise, and in imitation of the love and kindness of
our blessed Savior, to bestow the richest and most noble gifts, and to diffuse
the influences of his bounty over all parts of his Empire. And his example
herein it seems was followed by most of his Successors, who used upon this
Solemnity by their imperial Orders to release all Prisoners, unless such as
were in for more heavy and notorious crimes, high Treason, Murders, Rapes,
Incest, and the like. And Chrysostom tells us of a Letter of Theodosius the
Great sent at this time throughout the Empire, Hom. 20. ad pop. Antioch. p.
230. tom. 1.
wherein he did not only command, that all Prisoners should be released and
pardoned, but wished he was able to recall those that were already executed, and
to restore them to life again. And because by the negligence and remissness of
messengers, or any accident those Imperial Letters might sometimes happen to
come too late, therefore Valentinian the younger provided by a standing Law,
Lib. 9. C. Theod. Tit. 38. de indulg. l. 8.
that whether order came or not, the Judges should dispense the accustomed
indulgence, and upon Easter day in the morning cause all Prisons to be open,
the Chains to be knocked off, and the persons set at liberty.

The next Feast considerable in those primitive times, was that of Whitsunday
or Pentecost, a Feast of great eminency amongst the Jews, in memory of the Law
delivered at Mount Sinai at that time, and for the gathering and bringing in of
their Harvest; and of no less note amongst Christians for the Holy Ghosts
descending upon the Apostles and other Christians, in the visible appearance of
fiery cloven tongues, which happened upon that day, and those miraculous powers
then conferred upon them. It was observed with the same respect to Easter, that
the Jews did with respect to their Passover, viz. (as the word imports) just
fifty days after it, reckoning from the second day of that Festival: it seems
to some to have commenced from the first rise of Christianity, not only because
the Apostles and the Church were assembled upon that day, but because S. Paul
made so much haste to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost, which they
understand of his great desire to keep it there as a Christian Feast. Act. 20.
16.
But the argument seems to me no way conclusive, for the Apostle might desire
to be there at that time, both because he was sure to meet with a great number
of the Brethren, and because he should have a fitter opportunity to preach the
Gospel to the Jews, who from all parts flocked thither to the Feast, as our
Savior himself for the same reason used to go up to Jerusalem at all their
great and solemn Feasts. But however this was, it is certain the observation of
it is ancient, 'twas mentioned by Irenaeus in a Book which he wrote concerning
Easter, as the Author of the Questions and Responses in J. Martyr tells us;
Quest. 115.
by Tertullian, and after him by Origin more than once. Tert. de Idol. c. 14. p
94.
This Feast is by us styled Whitsunday, Adv. Cells. ^. 8 p. 392.
partly because of those vast diffusions of light and knowledge which upon this
day were shed upon the Apostles, in order to the enlightening of the world; but
principally because this (as also Easter) being the stated time for Baptism in
the ancient Church, those who were baptized put on white Garments, in token of
that pure and innocent course of life they had now engaged in (of which more in
its proper place:) this white Garment they wore till the next Sunday after, and
then laid it aside; whence the Octave or Sunday after Easter came to be styled
Dominica in Albis, the Sunday in white, it being then that the new-baptized put
off their white Garments. We may observe that in the Writers of those times the
whole space of fifty days between Easter and Whitsunday goes often under the
name of Pentecost, and was in a manner accounted Festival, Tert de Idol. c 14.
de Bapt. c. 19. de Cor. mil. c. 3. vid Max.
as Tertullian informs us, and the forty third Canon of the Illiberitan Council
seems to intimate. During this whole time Baptism was conferred, T^^rin Homil.
3 de S. Pentecost* p. 223.
all Fasts were suspended and counted unlawful, they prayed standing as they
did every Lords day; and at this time read over the Acts of the Apostles,
wherein their sufferings and miracles are recorded, as we learn from a Law of
the younger Theodosius, C. Th. lib. 15. Tit. 5. l* 5*
wherein this custom is mentioned, and more plainly from S. Chrysostom, Sermon 73.
who treats of it in an Homily on purpose, Cur. Act.
where he gives this reason why that Book which contained those actions of the
Apostles which were done after Pentecost; App legantur in Pentec. Tom. 5.
should yet be read before it, when as at all other times those parts of the
Gospel were read, which were proper to the season, because the Apostles
miracles being the grand confirmation of the truth of Christ's Resurrection, and
those miracles recorded in that Book, it was therefore most proper to be read
next to the Feast of the Resurrection.

Epiphany succeeds; this word was of old promiscuously used either for the
Feast of Christ's Nativity, or for that which we now properly call by that name:
afterward the Titles became distinct; that of Christ's Birth (or as we now term
it Christmas Day) was called (...) the Nativity, (...),
and (...) the appearance of God in the flesh; Orat. 38. p 613.
two names importing the same thing as Nazianzen notes. For the antiquity of
it, the first footsteps I find of it are in the second Century, though I doubt
not but it might be celebrated before, mentioned by Theophilus Bishop of
Caesaria, about the time of the Emperor Commodus: but if any credit might be
given to the Decretal Epistles, Decret. Telesph. sect. nocte vero.
it was somewhat elder than that, Pope Telesphorus, who lived under Antoninus
Pius, ordaining Divine Service to be celebrated, and an angelical Hymn to be
sung the night before the Nativity of our Savior. However that it was kept
before the times of Constantine, we have this sad instance. Niceph. H. Eccles.
l. 7. c. 6. p. 446. forsan ex Sim. Metaphrast. qui eadem habet in Martyr Ind.
and Domn. apud Sur. ad 26. December. tom. 6.
That when the persecution raged under Dioclesian, who then kept his Court at
Nicomedia, amongst other acts of barbarous cruelty done there, finding
multitudes of Christians young and old met together in the Temple, upon the day
of Christ's Nativity, to celebrate that Festival, he commanded the Church doors
to be shut up, and fire to be put to it, which in a short time reduced them and
the Church to ashes. I shall not dispute, whether it was always observed upon
the same day that we keep it now, the twenty fifth of December; it seems
probable, that for a long time in the East it was kept in January, under the
name, and at the general time of the Epiphania, till receiving more light in
the case from the Churches of the West, they changed it to this day; sure I am
S. Chrysostom in an Homily on purpose about this very thing affirms, Sermon. 31.
that it was not above ten years since in that Church (i. e. Antioch) it began
first to be observed upon that day, Tom. 5. p. 417.
and there offers several reasons to prove that to be the true day of Christ's
Nativity.

The Feast of Epiphany, properly so called, was kept on the sixth of January,
and had that name from a threefold apparition or manifestation commemorated
upon that day, which all happened, though not in the same year, yet upon the same
day of the year. The first was the appearance of the Star, which guided the
wise men to Christ. The second was the famous appearance at the baptism of
Christ, when all the persons in the holy Trinity did sensibly manifest
themselves, the Father in the voice from Heaven, the Son in the River Jordan,
and the Holy Ghost in the visible shape of a Dove. This was ever accounted a
famous Festival, and as S. Chrysostom tells us, Hom. 23. de Baptismo Christi.
tom 1. p. 278.
was properly called Epiphany, because he came in a manner into the world
incognito; but at his baptism openly appeared to be the Son of God, and was so
declared before the world. At this time it was that by his going into the River
Jordan he did sanctify water to the mystical washing away of sin (as our
Church expresses it) in memory whereof, Ibid.
Chrysostom tells us, they used in this Solemnity at midnight to draw water,
which they looked upon as consecrated this day, and carrying it home to lay it
up, where it would remain pure and incorrupt for a whole year, sometimes two or
three years together, the truth whereof must rest upon the credit of that good
man. The third manifestation commemorated at this time, was that of Christ's
divinity, which appeared in the first miracle that he wrought in turning water
into Wine; therefore 'twas called Bethphania, because it was done in the house
at that famous Marriage in Cana of Galilee, which our Savior honored with his
own presence. All these three appearances contributed to the Solemnity of this
Festival.

But beside these, there was another sort of Festivals in the primitive Church,
kept in commemoration of Martyrs: for the understanding of which we are to
know, that in those sad and bloody times when the Christian Religion triumphed
over persecution, and gained upon the world by nothing more than the constant
and resolute sufferings of its professors, whom no threatenings or torments
could baffle out of it; the people generally had a vast reverence for those who
suffered thus deep in the cause of Christianity, and laid down their lives for
the confirmation of it. They looked upon Confessors and Martyrs as the great
Champions of their Religion, who resisted unto blood, and dyed upon the spot to
make good its ground, and to maintain its honor and reputation; and therefore
thought it very reasonable to do all possible honor to their memories, partly
that others might be encouraged to the like patience and fortitude, and partly
that virtue even in this world might not lose its reward. Hence they were wont
once a year to meet at the Graves of Martyrs, there solemnly to recite their
sufferings and their triumphs, to praise their virtues, and to bless God for
their pious examples, for their holy lives and their happy deaths, for their
Palms and Crowns. These anniversary Solemnities were called memoriae martyrum,
the memories of the Martyrs, a title mentioned by Cyprian, but certainly much
older than his time; Epist. 37. p. 51.
and indeed when they were first taken up in the Church is I think not so
exactly known: the first that I remember to have met with, is that of Polycarp
(whose martyrdom is placed by Eusebius anno 168. Eusebius. Chron. ad An. 168.
under the third Persecution) concerning whose death and sufferings the Church
of Smyrna (of which he was Bishop) giving an account to the Church of
Philomelium, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15. p. 135.
and especially of the place where they had honorably entombed his bones, they
do profess that (so far as the malice of their Enemies would permit them, and
they prayed God nothing might hinder it) they would assemble in that place, and
celebrate the Birthday of his Martyrdom with joy and gladness: where we may
especially observe, that this Solemnity is styled his Birthday, and indeed so
the primitive Christians used to call the days of their death and passion
(quite contrary to the manner of the Gentiles, who kept the Natalitials of
their famous men) looking upon these as the true days of their nativity,
wherein they were freed from this Valley of tears, these regions of death, and
born again unto the joys and happiness of an endless life. The same account
Origin gives (if that Book be his, a very ancient Author however) we keep
(says he) the memories of the Saints, Expose. in Job. l. 3. fol. 39. tom. 2.
of our Ancestors, and friends that dye in the faith, both rejoicing in that
rest which they have obtained, and begging for our selves a pious consummation
in the faith: and we celebrate not the day of their nativity, as being the
inlet to sorrow and temptation, but of their death, as the period of their
miseries, and that which sets them beyond the reach of temptations. And this we
do, both Clergy and People meeting together, inviting the poor and needy, and
refreshing the Widows and the Orphans; that so our Festival may be both in
respect of them, whom we commemorate, the memorial of that happy rest which
their departed souls do enjoy; and in respect of us the odor of a sweet smell
in the sight of God. Under Constantine these days were commanded to be observed
with great care and strictness, De vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 23 p 536.
enjoining all his Lieutenants and Governors of Provinces to see the memorials
of the Martyrs duly honored; and so sacred were they accounted in those days,
that it was thought a piece of profaneness to be absent from them; therefore
S. Basil thought he could not use a more solemn argument, Epist 336. tom. 3. p.
328.
to persuade a certain Bishop to come over to him upon this occasion, than to
adjure him by the respect he bore to the memories of the Martyrs, that if he
would not do it for his, yet he should for their sakes, toward whom it was
unfit he should show the least disregard. Hence it is that Libanius sometimes
takes notice of the Christians under no other character than this, Apologet.
pro doctr. sua p. 592.
Enemies to the gods, (...), that haunt and frequent Tombs and Sepulchers. For
the time of these assemblies it was commonly once a year, viz. upon the day of
their martyrdom, for which end they took particular care to keep Registers of
the days of the Martyrs passions. So Cyprian expressly charges his Clergy to
note down the days of their decease, Loco supra annot.
that there might be a commemoration of them amongst the memories of the
Martyrs. Theodoret tells us, that in his time they did not thus assemble once
or twice, De Cur. Graec. assect. Sermon. 8. de martyrib. p. 121.
or five times in a year, but kept frequent memorials, oftentimes every day
celebrating the memorials of Martyrs, with hymns and praises unto God. But I
suppose he means it of days appointed to the memory of particular Martyrs,
which being then very numerous, their memorials were distinctly fixed upon
their proper days, the Festival of S. Peter, or S. Paul, Thomas, Sergius,
Marcellus, etc. as he there enumerates them. For the places, these Solemnities
were kept at first at the Tombs where the Martyrs had been buried, which
usually were in the Coemeteria or Churchyard, distinct in those times from
their places of Public Worship, and at a great distance from them, as being
commonly without the Cities. Here their burying places where in large Cryptae
or Grots under ground, where they celebrated these memorials, and whither they
used to retire for their common devotions in times of great persecution, when
their Churches were destroyed or taken from them. And therefore when Aemilian
the Governor of Egypt under the Reign of Valerian would screw up the
persecution against Christians, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. c. 11. p. 258. l. 9. c. 2.
p. 349.
he forbad their meetings, and that they should not so much as assemble in the
places which they called their Churchyards; the same privilege which
Maximinus also had taken from them. By reason of the darkness of these places,
and their frequent assembling there in the night, to avoid the fury of their
Enemies, they were forced to use Lights and Lamps in their public meetings,
but they who make this an argument to patronize their burning of Lamps and
Wax-Candles in their Churches at Noonday (as it is in all the great Churches of
the Roman Communion) talk at a strange rate of wild inconsequence. I am sure S.
Hierom when charged with it, Adv. vigilant. tom. 2. p. 123.
denied that they used any in the day time, and never but at night when they
rose up to their night-devotions. He confesses indeed 'twas otherwise in the
Eastern Churches, where when the Gospel was to be read, they set up Lights, as
a token of their rejoicing for those happy and glad tidings that were contained
in it, light having been ever used as a symbol and representation of joy and
gladness: A custom probably not much elder than his time. Afterward when
Christianity prevailed in the world, the devotion of Christians erected
Churches in those places; the Temples of the Martyrs (says Theodoret) being
spacious and beautiful, Ibid.
richly and curiously adorned, and shining with great luster and brightness.
These Solemnities, as the same Author informs us, were kept not like the
Heathen Festivals with luxury and obsceneness, but with devotion and sobriety,
Vid. Constit. App. l. 8. c. 45. p. 1040.
with divine Hymns and religious Sermons, with fervent prayers to God, Vid.
Epiphan. (...). p. 466.
mixed many times with sighs and tears. Here they heard Sermons and Orations,
joined in public prayers and praises, received the holy Sacrament, offered
gifts and charities for the poor, recited the names of the Martyrs then
commemorated with their due elogies and commendations, and their virtues
propounded to the imitation of the hearers. For which purpose they had their
set Notaries who took the acts, sayings, and sufferings of Martyrs, which were
after compiled into particular Treatises, and were recited in these annual
meetings, and this was the first original of Martyrologies in the Christian
Church. From this custom of offering up prayers, praises, and alms at those
times, it is that the Fathers speak so often of oblations and sacrifices at the
Martyrs Festivals. De Cor. mil. c. 3. p. 102.
Tertullian often, upon an anniversary day (says he) we make oblations for them
that are departed, De exhort. Castil. p. 523.
in memory of their Natalitia or Birth days, and to the same purpose elsewhere.
De monog. p. 531.
As often (says Cyprian) as by an anniversary commemoration we celebrate the
passion days of the Martyrs, Epist. 34. p. 48. and Ep. 37.
we always offer sacrifices for them; and the same phrases often occur in many
others of the Fathers. By which it is evident, they meant no more than their
public prayers, and offering up praises to God for the piety and constancy,
and the excellent examples of their Martyrs, their celebrating the Eucharist at
these times, as the commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice, their oblation of alms
and charity for the poor, every one of which truly may, and often is styled a
sacrifice or oblation; and are so understood by some of the more moderate,
Rigalt. obs. ad Cypr. H. Vales. annot. ad Eusebius. Hist. annot. p. 262.
Picharell. de missa. p. 103.-107.
even of the Romish Church: and with good reason, for that they did not make
any real and formal sacrifices and oblations to Martyrs, but only honor them
as holy men, and friends to God, who for his and our Saviors honor, and the
truth of Religion, Loco supra cit. p. 116.
chose to lay down their lives, I find expressly affirmed by Theodoret.

These Festivals being times of mirth and gladness were celebrated with great
expressions of love and charity to the poor, and mutual rejoycings with one
another. Here they had their (...), or Feasts, every one bringing something to
the common Banquet, out of which the poor also had their share. These Feasts at
first were very sober and temperate, and such as became the modesty and
simplicity of Christians, Cap. 12. p. 585.
as we heard before out of Theodoret, and is affirmed before him by Constantine
in his Oration to the Saints. But degenerating afterward into excess and
intemperance, they were every where declaimed against by the Fathers, till they
were wholly laid aside. Upon the account of these Feasts, and for the better
making provisions for them, we may conceive it was that Markets came to be kept
at these times and places, for of such S. Basil speaks (...), Reg. fus. disput.
interrogat. 40. tom. 2. 2. p. 589.
Markets held at the memorials and Tombs of Martyrs; these he condemns as
highly unsuitable to those Solemnities, which were only instituted for prayer,
and a commemoration of the virtues of good men, for our encouragement and
imitation, and that they ought to remember the severity of our otherwise meek
and humble Savior, who whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, when by
their marketings they had turned the house of prayer into a den of thieves. And
the truth is these anniversary commemorations, though in their primitive
institution they are highly reasonable and commendable, yet through the folly
and dotage of men they were after made to minister to great superstition and
idolatry; so plain is it that the best and usefullest things may be corrupted
to bad purposes. For hence sprung the doctrine and practice of prayer and
invocation of Saints, and their intercession with God, the worshipping of
Relics, Pilgrimages, and visiting Churches, and offering at the Shrines of
such and such Saints, and such like superstitious practices, which in after
Ages overrun so great a part of the Christian Church; things utterly unknown
to the simplicity of those purer and better times.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the persons constituting the body of the Church, both people and Ministers.
The people distinguished into several ranks. Catechumens of two sorts.
Gradually instructed in the principles of the Christian Faith. Accounted only
Christians at large. The more recondite mysteries of Christianity concealed
from persons till after baptism. Three reasons assigned of it. How long they
remained in the state of Catechumens. The several Classes of Penitents, the
(...), the (...) or the faithful. Their particular stations in the Church.
Their great reverence for the Lords Supper. The Clergy why called (...). Of
two sorts: the highest Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. Bishops as superior
to Presbyters how ancient by the most learned opposers of Episcopacy. Their
office and privilege, what. Chorepiscopi, who. Their power and privilege
above Presbyters. The (...) or Visiters in every Diocese. Of Metropolitans,
what their power and authority above ordinary Bishops; their antiquity. Of
Patriarchs, and in what respects superior to Metropolitans and Archbishops. An
account of conforming the external jurisdiction of the Church to the Civil
Government of the Roman Empire. Presbyters their place and duty. Whether they
preached in the presence of the Bishop. Deacons, their Institution, office,
number. The Archdeacon. Of inferior orders. The Subdeacon. The Acolythus. The
Exorcist. The Reader. The Doorkeeper. What the nature of their several places.
Ordination to these Offices how managed. The people present at and consenting
to the Ordination. Sacerdotes praedicarii, what. The Christian discipline in
this case imitated by the Emperor Severus, in appointing Civil Officers. Great
trials and testimonials to be had of persons to be ordained. Clergymen to
rise by degrees. The age usually required in those, that were to be promoted to
the several orders. Of Deaconesses, their antiquity, age, and office. The great
honor and respect showed to Bishops and Ministers. Looked upon as common
Parents. Nothing of moment done without their leave. Their welcome, and the
honor done them wherever they came: this made good by several instances.
Bishops invested with power to determine civil controversies. The plentiful
provision made for them. The great privileges and immunities granted by
Constantine, and his Successors to the Bishops and Clergy, noted out of the
Theodosian Code.

FRom the consideration of time and place, we proceed to consider the Persons
that constituted and made up their Religious Assemblies; and they were either
the body of the people, or those who were peculiarly consecrated and set apart
for the public ministrations of Religion. For the Body of the people, we may
observe that as Christianity at first generally gained admission in great Towns
and Cities, so all the Believers of that place usually assembled and met
together: the Christians also of the Neighbor-villages resorting thither at
times of public Worship. But Religion increasing apace, the public Assembly
especially in the greater Cities quickly began to be too vast and numerous, to
be managed with any order and convenience, and therefore they were forced to
divide the body into particular Congregations, who had their Pastors and
spiritual Guides set over them, but still were under the superintendency and
care of him that was the President or Bishop of the place. And according as the
Church could form and establish its discipline, the people either according to
their seniority and improvement, or according to the quality of the present
condition they were under, began to be distinguished into several ranks and
Classes, which had their distinct places in the Church, and their gradual
admission to the several parts of the public Worship. Balsam.
The first were the Catechumens, Zo^ar.
and of these there were two sorts, Aristen. in ^an. 5.
the (...), Conc. Neo-Caesar.
or more perfect, such as had been Catechumens of some considerable standing,
and were even ripe for Baptism; these might stay not only the reading of the
Scriptures, but to the very last part of the first Service. The others were the
(...), the more rude and imperfect, who stood only amongst the Hearers, and
were to depart the Congregation, as soon as the Lessons were read: these were
as yet accounted Heathens, who applied themselves to the Christian Faith, and
were catechized and instructed in the more plain grounds and rudiments of
Religion. These principles were gradually delivered to them, according as they
became capable to receive them; first the more plain, and then the more
difficult. Indeed they were very shye of imparting the knowledge of the more
recondite Doctrines of Christianity to any till after Baptism. Praef. ad
Catech. Illum. p. 13.
So S. Cyril expressly assures us, where speaking to the illuminate or Baptized:
if during the chatechetical exercise, says he, a Catechumen shall ask thee,
what that means which the Preachers say, tell him not, for he is yet without;
and these mysteries are delivered to thee only. The weak understanding of a
Catechumen being no more able to bear such sublime mysteries, than a sick man's
head can large and immoderate draughts of Wine. And at the end of his Preface
he has this note, Ibid. p. 21.
These Catechetical discourses may be read by those that are to be baptized, or
the faithful already baptized: but to Catechumens or such as are no Christians
thou may not impart them; for if thou do, expect to give an account to God.

S. Basil discoursing of the Rites and Institutions of Christianity, De Spirit.
S. c. 27. p. 352. tom. 2.
divides them into two parts, the (...), and the (...). The (...) were those
parts of Religion which might (...), be familiarly preached and expounded to
the people: The (...) were the more sublime and hidden Doctrines and parts of
the Christian Faith; and these were (...), things not rashly and commonly to be
divulged, but to be locked up in silence. Of this nature were the Doctrines of
the Trinity and Hypostatick Union, Vid. Dionys. Areop. de Eccl. Hier^rch. c. 1.
p. 230.
and such like, especially of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper.
For though they acquainted their young hearers with so much of them as was
necessary to stir up their desires, yet as to the main of the things
themselves, the sacramental Symbols, the manner of their celebration, the modus
of the divine presence at the holy Eucharist, the meaning of all those mystical
Rites and Ceremonies that were used about them, these were carefully concealed
both from Strangers and Catechumens, and communicated only to those who were
solemnly initiated and baptized. Hence that ancient form so common in the
Sermons and Writings of the Fathers, whereby when accidentally discoursing
before the people of any of these mysterious parts of Religion, they used to
fetch themselves off with an (...) Those that are initiated know what is said.
Chrysostom.
This was so usual, Hom. 67. in Genes. p. 719. Tom. 1. and alibi saepiss Isid.
that this phrase occurs at least fifty times in the Writings of S. Chrysostom
only, Pelus. l. 4.
as Casaubon has observed: Epist. 162. p. 82. aliique.
who has likewise noted three reasons out of the Fathers, why they so
studiously concealed these parts of their Religion. Exercit. 16. ad Annal. Bar.
S. 43. p. 556.
First, the nature of the things themselves, so sublime and remote from vulgar
apprehensions, that they would signify little to Pagans or Catechumens not yet
fully instructed and confirmed in the faith, and would either be lost upon
them, or in danger to be derided by them. Secondly, that hereby the Catechumens
and younger Christians might be inflamed with a greater eagerness of desire to
partake of the mysteries and privileges of the Faithful; humane nature being
desirous of nothing more, than the knowledge of what is kept and concealed from
us. To help them forwards in this, Ad V^^l.
S. Augustine tells us, Epist. 107. col. 493.
that in their public prayers they were wont to beg of God to inspire the
Catechumens with a desire of baptismal regeneration. The same account
Chrysostom gives us, Hom. 2. in cap. 1. 1 ad Cor p. 740.
this being part of the form used in their public Service, Let us pray that
the most gracious and merciful God would hear the prayers of the Catechumens;
and what it was they prayed for, he presently add, viz. that they might no
longer remain in that state. Upon these accounts initiation by Baptism, but
especially admission to the Lords Supper, is amongst other titles in the
Writers of those times called Desiderata, because so earnestly desired and
sought for by those that were not yet taken in. The truth is, Vid. Chrysostom. ibid.
till persons arrived at this state, they were not accounted Christians (or but
in a large sense as Candidates that stood in order to it) and therefore could
not satisfy themselves either to live or dye in that condition, wherein they
wanted the great seals and pledges of their Christianity. Thirdly, to beget in
men's minds the higher esteem and veneration for these religious mysteries,
nothing producing a greater contempt even in sacred things, than too much
openness and familiarity. So that a little obscurity and concealment might seem
necessary to vindicate them from contempt, and secure the majesty and reverence
that was due to them. This made the Fathers and Seniors of the Church (says S.
Basil) in prescribing Rites and Laws, Loc. supr. laud.
leave many things in the dark, behind the vail and curtain, that they might
(...), preserve the sacredness and dignity that was due to the mysteries of
Religion. For a thing (says he) cannot properly be said to be a mystery, when
it is once exposed to every vulgar and common ear. But of this enough, if not
too much.

And as they were careful to keep the higher parts of Christianity within the
cognizance of the faithful, so they were not less careful to teach and instruct
the Catechumens in all those principles they were capable of being taught. This
at their first coming over was done privately and at home, by persons deputed
on purpose to that office by the Bishop, (as Balsamon clearly intimates) till
they were sufficiently instructed in the first and more intelligible principles
of the faith. In Can. 26.
Then they were admitted into the Congregation, Conc. Laodie.
and suffered to be present at some parts of the Divine Service, especially the
Sermons, which were made for the building them up unto higher measures of
knowledge; which being ended, they were commanded to depart the Church, not
being suffered to be present at the more solemn Rites, especially the
celebration of the Lords Supper: and in this manner they were trained up, till
they were initiated by baptism, and taken into the highest form of Christians.
How long persons remained in the state of the Catechumens is difficult to
determine, it not being always nor in all places alike, but longer in some and
shorter in others, and probably according to the capacity of the persons. Lib
8. c. 32. p. 1032.
The Apostolic Constitutions appoint three years for the Catechumen to be
instructed; but provide withal that if any one be diligent and virtuous, and
have a ripeness of understanding for the thing, he may be admitted to Baptism
sooner: for (say they) not the space of time, but the fitness and manners of
men, are to be regarded in this matter.

The next sort were the Penitents, such as for some misdemeanors were under
the censures and severity of the Church, and were gradually to obtain
absolution from it. Of these there were several degrees, five especially
mentioned by S. Gregory of Neo-Caesarea, Epist. Canon. (...).
who lived about the year 250. The first were the (...), Can. 11. p. 121.
such as wept* and lamented, and were rather Candidates to be received into the
order of Penitents, than Penitents properly so called. These usually stood in a
squalid and mournful habit at the Church Porch, with tears and great
importunity begging of the Faithful as they went in, to pray for them. The
second were the (...), the Hearers, who were admitted to hear the holy
Scriptures read and expounded to the people. Their station was at the upper end
of the Narthex, or first part of the Church, and were to depart the
Congregation at the same time with the Catechumens. The third Class of
Penitents was that of the (...), the Prostrate, because service being ended,
Sozom. H.
they fell down before the Bishop, Eccl. lib. 7. c. 16. p. 727.
who together with the Congregation falling down and making confession in their
behalf, after raised them up, and laid his hands upon them. These stood within
the body of the Church next the Pulpit or Reading-Pew, and were to depart
together with the Catechumens. The fourth were the (...), the Consistentes,
such as stayed with the rest of the Congregation, and did not depart with the
Catechumens, but after they and the other Penitents were gone out, stayed and
joined in prayer and singing (but not in receiving the Sacrament) with the
faithful. These after some time were advanced into the fifth and last order of
the Communicantes ((...) S. Gregory calls it) and were admitted to the
participation of the holy Sacrament. This was the state of the Penitents in the
primitive Church. Persons having fully passed through the state of the
Catechumenate, became then immediate Candidates of Baptism, presented their
names to the Bishop, and humbly prostrating themselves begged that they might
be entered into the Church. These were called Competentes, because they did
Competere gratiam Christi, sue for the grace of Christ conferred in Baptism.
The last rank was that of the (...) or the Faithful, who having been baptized
and confirmed, and having approved themselves by the long train and course of a
strict pious life, were then admitted to the participation of the Lords Supper;
which being the highest and most venerable mystery of the Christian Religion,
was not then rashly given to any, but to such only as had run through all other
degrees, and by a course of piety evidenced themselves to be such real and
faithful Christians, as that the highest mysteries and most solemn parts of
Religion might be committed to them. This was the highest order, and looked
upon with great regard, and for any of this rank to lapse and be overtaken with
a fault, cost them severer penances, than were imposed upon the inferior forms
of Christians.

This in short was the state of the people. But because it is not possible any
body or community of men should be regularly managed without some particular
persons to superintend, direct, and govern the affairs of the whole Society,
therefore we are next to enquire what persons there were in the primitive
Church, that were peculiarly set apart to steer its affairs, and to attend upon
the public Offices and Ministrations of it. That God always had a peculiar
people, whom he selected for himself out of the rest of mankind, is too evident
to need any proof. Such were the Patriarchs, and the holy seed of old: such the
Jews, chosen by him above all other Nations in the world. This was his (...),
his particular lot and portion, comprehending the body of the people in
general. But afterward this title was confined to narrower bounds, and became
appropriate to that Tribe, which God had made choice of to stand before him, to
wait at his Altar, and to minister in the services of his Worship. And after
the expiration of their Economy, was accordingly used to denote the ministry
of the Gospel, the persons peculiarly consecrated and devoted to the service of
God in the Christian Church: the Clergy being those, qui divino cultui
ministeria religionis impendunt (as they are defined in a Law of the Emperor
Constantine) who are set apart for the ministeries of Religion, C. Th. lib. 16.
Tit. 3. de Episc. Eccl. and Cler. l. 2.
in matters relating to the Divine Worship. Now the whole (...) (as it is often
called in the Apostles Canons) the roll of the Clergy* of the ancient Church
(taking it within the compass of its first four hundred years) consisted of two
sorts of persons; the (...), who were peculiarly consecrated to the more proper
and immediate acts of the Worship of God: and the (...), such as were set apart
only for the more mean and common services of the Church. Of the first sort
were these three, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons.

The first and principal Officer of the Church was the President or Bishop,
usually chosen out of the Presbyters. I shall not here concern my self in the
disputes, whether Episcopacy as a superior order to Presbytery, was of divine
institution (a controversy sufficiently ventilated in the late times) it being
enough to my purpose, what is acknowledged both by Blondel and Salmasius, the
most learned defenders of Presbytery, that Bishops were distinct from, and
superior to Presbyters in the second Century, or the next Age to the Apostles.
The main work and office of a Bishop was to teach and instruct the people, to
administer the Sacraments, to absolve Penitents, to eject and excommunicate
obstinate and incorrigible offenders, to preside in the Assemblies of the
Clergy, to ordain inferior Officers in the Church, to call them to account and
to suspend or deal with them according to the nature of the offense, to urge
the observance of Ecclesiastical Laws, and to appoint and institute such
indifferent Rites, as were for the decent and orderly administration of his
Church. In short, according to the notation of his name he was (...), a
Watchman and Sentinal, and therefore obliged (...), diligently and carefully to
inspect and observe, to superintend and provide for those that were under his
charge. This Zonaras tells us was implied in the Bishops Throne, In Can. Apost.
Can. 58.
being placed on high in the most eminent part of the Church, to denote how
much 'twas his duty from thence to overlook, and very diligently to observe the
people that were under him. These and many more were the unquestionable rights
and duties of the Episcopal Office; which because it was very difficult and
troublesome for one man to discharge, especially where the (...) or Diocese (as
we now call it) was any thing large, therefore upon the multiplying of Country
Churches, it was thought fit to take in a subordinate sort of Bishops called
Chorepiscopi, Country or (as amongst us they have been called) suffragan
Bishops, whose business it was to superintend and inspect the Churches in the
Country, that lay more remote from the City, where the Episcopal See was, and
which the Bishop could not always inspect and oversee in his own person. These
were the Vicarii Episcoporum (as they are called in Isidores Version of the
thirteenth Canon, both of the Ancyran and Neocaesarean Council) the Bishops
Deputies, chosen out of the fittest and gravest persons. In the Canon of the
last mentioned Council they are said to be chosen in imitation of the seventy,
not the seventy Elders which Moses took in to bear part of the Government, (as
some have glossed the words of that Canon) but of the seventy Disciples whom
our Lord made choice of, to send up and down the Countries to preach the
Gospel, as both Zonaras and Balsamon understand it: and thereupon by reason of
their great care and pains are commanded to be esteemed very honorable. Their
authority was much greater than that of Presbyters, and yet much inferior to
the Bishop. Conc. Antioch. Can. 10.
Bishops really they were, though their power confined within narrow limits;
they were not allowed to ordain either Presbyters or Deacons, (unless
peculiarly licensed to it by the Bishop of the Diocese) though they might
ordain Subdeacons, Readers and any inferior Officers under them. They were to
be assistant to the Bishop, might be present at Synods and Councils (to many
whereof we find their subscriptions) and had power to give Letters of peace, i.
e. such Letters, Ibid. Can. 8.
whereby the Bishop of one Diocese was wont to recommend any of his Clergy to
the Bishop of another, that so a fair understanding and correspondence might be
maintained between them; a privilege expressly denied to any Presbyter
whatsoever. But lest this wandering employment of the Chorepiscopi should
reflect any dishonor upon the Episcopal Office, there were certain Presbyters
appointed in their room (called (...), Conc. Laod. Can. 57.
or Visiters, often mentioned in the ancient Canons and Acts of Councils) who
being tied to no certain place were to go up and down the Country, to observe
and correct what was amiss. And these doubtless were those (...) (spoken of in
the thirteenth Canon of the Neocaesarean Council) those rural Presbyters, who
are there forbid to consecrate the Eucharist in the City Church, in the
presence of the Bishop or the Presbyters of the City.

As Christianity increased and overspread all parts, and especially the Cities
of the Empire, it was found necessary yet farther to enlarge the Episcopal
Office, and as there was commonly a Bishop in every great City, so in the
Metropolis (as the Romans called it) the Mother City of every Province (wherein
they had Courts of Civil Judicature) there was an Archbishop or a Metropolitan,
who had Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over all the Churches within that Province.
He was superior to all the Bishops within those limits; to him it belonged
either to ordain, or to ratify the elections and ordinations of all the
Bishops within his Province, insomuch that without his confirmation they were
looked upon as null and void. Once at least every year he was to summon the
Bishops under him to a Synod, to enquire into and direct the Ecclesiastical
affairs within that Province; to inspect the lives and manners, the opinions
and principles of his Bishops, to admonish, reprove, and suspend them that were
disorderly and irregular; if any controversies or contentions happened between
any of them, he was to have the hearing and determination of them; and indeed
no matter of moment was done within the whole Province without first consulting
him in the case. Besides this Metropolitan there was many times another in the
same Province, who enjoyed nothing but that name and title, his Episcopal See
being by the Emperors Pragmatic erected into the dignity of a Metropolis. He
was only an Honorary Metropolitan, without any real power and jurisdiction, and
had no other privilege, but that he took place above other ordinary Bishops,
in all things else equally subject with them to the Metropolitan of the
Province, Can. 12.
as the Council of Chalcedon determines in this case. When this Office of
Metropolitan first began, I find not, only this we are sure of, that the
Council of Nice settling the just rights and privileges of Metropolitan Bishops
speaks of them as a thing of ancient date, ushering in the Canon with an (...),
Can. 6.
let ancient customs still take place. The original of the institution seems to
have been partly to comply with peoples occasions, who often resorted to the
Metropolis for dispatch of their affairs, and so might fitly discharge their
Civil and Ecclesiastical concerns both at once; and partly because of the great
confluence of people to that City, Vid. Conc. Antioch.
that the Bishop of it might have pre-eminence above the rest, Can. 9.
and the honor of the Church bear some proportion to that of the State.

After this sprang up another branch of the Episcopal Office, as much superior
to that of Metropolitans, as theirs was to ordinary Bishops, these were called
Primates and Patriarchs, and had jurisdiction over many Provinces. For the
understanding of this it is necessary to know, that when Christianity came to be
fully settled in the world, they contrived to model the external Government of
the Church, as near as might be to the Civil Government of the Roman Empire;
the parallel most exactly drawn by an ingenious person of our own Nation:
Edward Breerwood Patriarch. Governm. of the ancient Church. Quest. 1.
the sum of it is this. The whole Empire of Rome was divided into Thirteen
Dioceces (so they called those divisions) these contained about one hundred and
twenty Provinses, and every Province several Cities. Now as in every City there
was a temporal Magistrate for the executing of justice, and keeping peace both
for that City, and the Towns round about it, so was there also a Bishop for
spiritual order and Government, whose jurisdiction was of like extent and
latitude. In every Province there was a Proconsul or President, whose seat was
usually at the Metropolis or chief City of the Province; and hither all
inferior Cities came for judgment in matters of importance. And in proportion
to this there was in the same City an Archbishop or Metropolitan for matters of
Ecclesiastical concernment. Lastly, in every Diocese the Emperors had their
Vicarii or Lieutenants, who dwelt in the principal City of the Diocese, where
all imperial Edicts were published, and from whence they were sent abroad into
the several Provinces, and where was the chief Tribunal, where all Causes not
determinable elsewhere were decided. And to answer this, there was in the same
City a Primate, to whom the last determination of all appeals from all the
Provinces in differences of the Clergy, and the Sovereign care of all the
Diocese for sundry points of spiritual Government did belong. This in short is
the sum of the account which that learned man gives of this matter. So that the
Patriarch as superior to Metropolitans, was to have under his jurisdiction not
any one single Province, but a whole Diocese (in the old Roman notion of that
word) consisting of many Provinces. To him belonged the ordination of all the
Metropolitans that were under him, as also the summoning them to Councils, the
correcting and reforming the misdemeanors they were guilty of, and from his
judgment and sentence in things properly within his cognizance there lay no
appeal. To this I shall only add what Salmasius has noted, De Primat. c. 19. p.
331.
that as the Diocese that was governed by the Vicarius had many Provinces under
it, so the Praefectus Praetorio had several Diocesses under him: and in
proportion to this probably it was, that Patriarchs were first brought in, who
if not superior to Primates in jurisdiction and power, were yet in honor, by
reason of the dignity of those Cities where their Sees were fixed, as at Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, a title and dignity which
they retain to this day.

The next Office to Bishops was that of Presbyters, to whom it belonged to
preach to the people, to administer Baptism, consecrate the Eucharist, and to
be assistent to the Bishop both in public ministrations, and in dispatching
the affairs of the Church. The truth is, the Presbyters of every great City
were a kind of Ecclesiastical Senate, under the care and presidency of the
Bishop, whose counsel and assistance he made use of in ruling those Societies
of Christians that were under his charge and government, and were accordingly
reckoned next in place and power to him: thus described by S. Gregory in his
Iambics. (...). Corm. 23. p. 244. Tom. 2.


-- (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
The venerable Senate of Presbyters, that preside over the people, and possess
the second Throne, i. e. the place next to the Bishop: C. Theod. Leg. 11.
they are called Clerici superioris loci, and otherwhiles (unless we understand
it of the Chorepiscopi) Antistites in secundo ordine; Tit. 39. de fid.
and accordingly in Churches had seats of eminency placed for them next to the
Bishops Throne. Test. lib. 10. Sidon. Apoll. lib. 4. Epist. 11. p. 96.
Whereby was implied (says Zonaras) that they ought to use a proportionable
care and In Can. 58. Apost.
providence toward the people, to inform and teach them, to direct and guide
them, being appointed as Fellow Laborers with, and Assistants to the Bishop.
But though Presbyters by their ordination had a power conferred upon them to
administer holy things, yet after that the Church was settled upon foundations
of order and regularity, they did not usually exercise this power within any
Diocese, without leave and authority from the Bishop, much less take upon them
to preach in his presence. This custom (however it might be otherwise in the
Eastern Church) we are sure was constantly observed in the Churches of Afric
till the time of Valerius, Possid in vit. Aug. c. 5. col 862
S. Augustine's Predecessor in the Sea of Hippo. Who being a Greek, Tom. 1.
and by reason of his little skill in the Latin tongue, unable to preach to
the edification of the people, admitted S. Augustine (whom he had lately
ordained Presbyter) to preach before him. Which though at first 'twas ill
resented by some Bishops in those parts, yet quickly became a president for
other Churches to follow after.

After these came Deacons: What the duty of their place was appears from their
primitive election, Act. 6.
the Apostles setting them apart to serve or minister to the Tables, i.e. to
attend upon and take charge of those daily provisions that were made for poor
indigent Christians; but certainly it implies also their being destinated to a
peculiar attendance at the service of the Lords Table. And both these may be
very well meant in that place, it being the custom of Christians then to meet
every day at the Lords Table, where they made their offerings for the poor, and
when poor and rich had their meals together. And hence it was ever accounted
part of the Deacons Office, as to take care of the poor, and to distribute the
moneys given for their relief and maintenance, so to wait upon the celebration
of the Eucharist, which being consecrated by the Bishop or Presbyter, the
Deacon delivered the Sacramental elements to the people. Besides this they were
wont also to preach and to baptize, and were employed in many parts of the
public Service, especially in guiding and directing of the people. The number
of them in any one place was usually restrained to seven, this being the number
originally instituted by the Apostles, and which might not be altered, although
the City was never so great and numerous, as it is in the last Canon of the
Neocaesarean Council. As the Presbyters were to the Bishop, so the Deacons were
to the Presbyters, to be assistent to them, and to give them all due respect
and reverence. And therefore when some of them began to take too much upon them
to distribute the Sacrament before the Bishop or Presbyter, and to take place
amongst the Presbyters, the Council of Nice took notice of it as a piece of
bold and saucy usurpation, Can. 18.
severely commanded them to know their place, and to contain themselves within
their own bounds and measures, and neither to meddle with the Sacrament but in
their order, nor to sit down before the Presbyters, unless it be by their leave
and command, as it is expressed by the Laodicean Synod. Can. 20.
Accordingly the first Council of Arles forbids the Deacons to do any thing of
themselves, Can. 18.
but to reserve the honor to the Presbyters. Out of the body of these Deacons
there was usually one chosen to overlook the rest, the Archdeacon; an Office
supposed to have been of good antiquity in the Church, and of great authority,
especially in after times, being generally styled the Eye of the Bishop, to
inspect all parts and places of his Diocese. This was he that in the Church of
Rome was called the Cardinal Deacon, De Episc.
who (as Onuphrius tell us) was at first but one, Tit and Diacon. Cardin. p. 24.
though the number increased afterward. While Churches were little, and the
services not many, the Deacons themselves were able to discharge them, but as
these increased so did their labors, and therefore 'twas thought fit to take
in some inferior Officers under them. This gave being to

Subdeacons, who were to be assistent to the Deacon, as the Deacon to the
Presbyter, Conc. Laodic. Can. 43 ubi vid.
and he to the Bishop. One great part of his work was to wait at the
Church-doors in the time of public Worship, Zon and Balsam.
to usher in, and to bring out the several Orders of the Catechumens and
Penitents, that none might mistake their proper stations, and that no confusion
or disorder might arise to the disturbance of the Congregation. When he was
first taken in, I cannot find, but he is mentioned in an Epistle of the Roman
Clergy to them of Carthage about S. Cyprians retirement, Inter Epist.
and elsewhere very often in Cyprian's Epistles. Cypr. Epist. 2. p. 8.
Where he also speaks of the Acolythus; Epist. 28. p. 41.
what his proper business was, is not so certain; by some his Office is said to
have been this, to Follow (as the world implies) or to go along with the Bishop
in the quality of an honorable attendant, to be ready at hand to minister to
him, and to be a companion and witness of his honest and unblameable
conversation, in case any evil fame should arise, that might endeavor to blast
his reputation. But by others he is said to have been a Taper-bearer to carry
the Lights, which were set up at the reading of the Gospel. And this seems to
be clear from the fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 6.
where at his ordination he is appointed to receive at the Archdeacons hand a
Candlestick with a Taper, that he may know it is the duty of his place, to light
up the Lights in the Church. This might very well be in those times, but it is
certain the Office of Acolythus was in use long before that custom of setting
up Lights at the reading of the Gospel was brought into the Church. By Cyprian
also is mentioned the Office of the Exorcist, Epist. 16. p. 29. and 146.
whose business was to attend the Catechumens and the Energumeni, or such as
were possessed of the Devil. For after the miraculous power of casting out
Devils began to cease, or at least not to be so common as it was, these
possessed persons used to come to the out-parts of the Church, where a person
was appointed to exorcise them, i.e. to pray over them in such prayers as were
peculiarly composed for those occasions, and this he did in the public name of
the whole Church, the people also at the same time praying within; by which
means the possessed person was delivered from the tyranny of the evil spirit;
without any such charms and conjurations, and other unchristian forms and
rites, which by degrees crept into this Office, and are at this day in use in
the Church of Rome. Besides, to the Exorcists Office it belonged to instruct
the Catechumens, and to train them up in the first principles of the Christian
Faith: in which sense the Exorcist is by Harmenopulus explained by Catechist,
Epist. Can. ss. 1. Tit. 9.
and to exorcise (says Balsamon) is (...), Jur. Graec.
to instruct unbelievers. Romans p. 16.


Next to the Exorcist was the Lector or Reader (mentioned frequently by S.
Cyprian) whose business was to stand near the Ambo or Pulpit, In Can. 26.
and to read those portions of holy Scripture which were appointed to be read
as principal parts of the Divine Service. Conc. Laod.
This Office Julian (who was afterward Emperor) when a young Student at
Nicomedia took upon him, and became a Reader in that Church, Socrat. H.
which he did only to blind his Cousin Constantius, Eccl. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 166.
who began to suspect him as inclining to Paganism, to which he openly revolted
afterward, and became a bitter and virulent enemy to Christians, making an ill
use of those Scriptures, which he had once privately studied and publicly read
to the people. I know not whether it may be worth the while to take notice of
the Ostiarii or Door-keepers, answerable to the Nethinims in the Jewish Church,
who were to attend the Church Doors at times of public meetings, to keep out
notorious Heretics, Jews, and Gentiles from entering into the Christian
Assemblies: it doubtless took its rise in the times of persecutions, Christians
then being forced to keep their meetings as private and clancular as they
could, and to guard their Assemblies with all possible diligence, lest some Jew
or Infidel stealing in, should have gone and accused them before the
Magistrate. What other Officers there were (or whether any at all) in those
times in and about the Church, will not be worth our labor to enquire.

To these Offices they were set apart by solemn rites of prayer and imposition
of hands; a ceremony (so far as (...) is strictly taken for lifting up the hand
in suffrage) commonly used at Athens, and some of the States of Greece in the
designing and electing persons to be public Magistrates. But more particularly
in use amongst the Jews, and from them doubtless (as many other of the
Synagogue-rites) transferred into the Christian Church, and there constantly
used both as to the lifting up and laying on the hands, as the rite of
conferring ordination upon the Ministers of Christ. Only it is here to be
remembered, that there was a double imposition of hands, in setting apart
Ecclesiastical Officers: the one was (...), or by way of consecration, and this
was the proper way of ordaining the first rank of Officers, Bishops,
Presbyters, and Deacons: the other (...), by way of blessing, hands being laid
upon them only as in the absolution of Penitents by way of solemn benediction,
and thus the inferior Officers, Subdeacons, Readers, etc. and Deaconesses were
set apart: All orders under Bishops were ordained by the Bishop, the Bishop
himself by all the Bishops of that Province, who used to meet together for that
purpose, if nearness of place and other conveniences would allow; Conc. Nicen.
Can. 4.
otherwise three (and in cases of necessity two) might do it; the rest
testifying their consent in writing, and the person thus ordained was to be
confirmed by the Metropolitan of that Province. And whereas the Council of
Antioch provides, Can. 19.
that no Bishop shall be ordained without the Metropolitan being present, it is
to be understood (as Balsamon tells us) of his leave and permission, or his
appointing it to be so. For the ordination of the rest of the Clergy, Priests,
Deacons, etc. the act and presence of one Bishop might suffice: and as no more
than one was required, so one at least was necessary, the power of conferring
order, being even by those who otherwise have had no mighty kindness for
Episcopacy, acknowledged an unquestionable right of the Episcopal Office.
Insomuch that in the case of Athanasius it was a just exception against
Ischyras, Athan.
that he had been ordained by Colythus, Apol. 2. de fug. sua. p. 570.
who was no higher than a Presbyter, and consequently his ordination by the
Council was adjudged null and void. Tom. 1.


At all ordinations, especially of superior Officers, the people of the place
were always present, and ratified the action with their approbation and
consent. And indeed it cannot be denied but that the people in some places
especially, were very much considered in this affair, Vid. Constit. App. lib 8.
c. 4. p. 1004.
it being seldom or never done without their presence and suffrage. To this end
the Bishop was wont before every ordination to propound and publish the names
of those who were to have holy Orders conferred upon them, Cypr. Epist. 68 p.
113. 114.
that so the people who best knew their lives and conversations, might
interpose, if they had any thing material to object against it. By which means
the unworthy were discovered and rejected, the deserving honored and admitted,
the ordination became legitimate and satisfactory, having past the common vote
and suffrage, without any exception made against it, as Cyprian speaks. Hence
the Clergy of what order soever were said Praedicari, to be propounded or
published: And this way seemed so fit and reasonable, that Severus the Emperor
(a wise and prudent Prince) in imitation of the Christians established it in
the disposal of Civil Offices. Lamprid. in vit. Alex. Sev. c. 45. p. 570.
For when he had a mind to send out any Governors of Provinces, or to appoint
Receivers of his Revenues, he propounded the names of those he intended,
desiring the people to except against the persons, if they knew them guilty of
any crimes which they were able to make good against them: affirming it to be
unfit (says his own Historian) that when the Christians and Jews did it in
publishing those who were to be ordained their Priests and Ministers, the same
should not be observed in the election of Governors of Provinces, who had the
lives and fortunes of men committed to them. When the case so happened that the
ordination was more remote or private, they were then required to bring
sufficient testimonials; Epist. 24. p. 35.
thus Cyprian when ordaining Saturus and Optatus to be Readers, we examined,
says he, whether the Testimonials agreed to them, which they ought to have, who
are admitted into the Clergy.

And indeed they proceeded in this affair with all imaginable care and
prudence; Basil. Epist. 181 p 194 Tm. 3.
they examined men's fitness for the place to which they were set apart,
enquired severely what had been the course and manner of their life, how they
had carried themselves in their youth, and whether they had governed it by the
strict rules of piety. This ancient custom (as S. Basil calls it) was ratified
by the Nicene Council, Can. 9.
declaring that none should be ordained Presbyter without previous examination,
especially a strict enquiry into his life and manners. For the Apostolic
Church (says Joseph the Egyptian in his Arabic Paraphrase of that Canon)
admits none in this case, but him that is of great innocence and an unspotted
life, free from those crimes and enormities, which he there particularly
reckons up. They suffered not men in those days to leap into Ecclesiastical
Orders, but by the usual steps, and staying the appointed times. Ad Antonian.
Epist. 52. p. 67.
Cyprian commends Cornelius Bishop of Rome, that he did not skip into the
Chair, but passed through all the Ecclesiastical Offices, ascending through all
the degrees of Religion, till he came ad sacerdotii sublime fastigium, to the
top of the highest order. A thing expressly provided for by the Synod of Sardis,
Ca^ 10.
that no man though never so rich, though furnished with never so good a knack
of speech and oratory, should yet be made Bishop before he had passed through
the preceding Orders of Reader, Subdeacon, Deacon, and Presbyter, that having
been found fit in each of these, he might step by step ascend up to the
Episcopal Chair: and that he should spend some considerable time in each of
these degrees, that so his faith, and the innocence and excellency of his life,
his constancy and moderation might be made known to all, and his fitness for
that sacred function being made apparent might procure him the greater honor
and reverence from others. Men were then forced to stay their full time before
they could be promoted to any higher Order; they did not commence Divines and
Bishops in a day ((...) as Nazianzen elegantly calls them) like some he
complains of in his time, Orat. 1. de Theol. p. 535 and in laud. Bas. Or. 20.
p. 335.
who were not polished by time and study, but fitted and made Bishops all at
once; whom therefore he wittily compares to the Dragons teeth, which the Fable
tells us Cadmus sowed at Thebes, which immediately sprung up Giants out of the
earth, armed Cap-a-pe, perfect men and perfect Warriors in one day: and just
such, says he, were some Prelates, consecrated, made wise and learned in one
day, who yet understood nothing before, nor brought any thing to the Order, but
only a good will to be there. For the Age of the persons that were to be
ordained, they usually observed the Apostolic Canon, not to choose a Novice,
but of an age competent to that Office, that he was chosen to; though it varied
according to times and persons, and the occasions of the Church. For that of
Bishops, I find not any certain age positively set down. Photius in his
Nomo-Canon speaks of an Imperial constitution that requires a Bishop not to be
under thirty five: (...). p. 20.
but the Apostolical Constitutions allow not a man to be made a Bishop under
fifty years of age, Lib. 2. c. 1. p. 824.
as having then passed all juvenile petulancies and disorders. It Is certain
they were not generally (some extraordinary instances alter not the case)
promoted to that Office, till they were of a considerable age, and thence
frequently styled majores natu in the Writings of the Church. Presbyters were
commonly made at thirty; yea the Council of Neocaesarea decreed, Can. 11.
that no man though otherwise of never so unquestionable a conversation, should
be ordained Presbyter before that age; the reason whereof they give, because
Christ himself was not baptized, nor began to preach till the thirtieth year of
his age. Conc. Aga. Can. 17.
The Council of Agde requires the same age, but assigns another reason, not
before thirty years of age, because then, say they, he comes to the age of a
perfect man. Deacons were made at twenty five, and the like distance and
proportion observed for the inferior Officers under them. I take no notice in
this place of Monks, Hermits, etc. partly because, although they were under a
kind of Ecclesiastical relation, by reason of their more than ordinarily strict
and severe profession of Religion, yet were they not usually in holy Orders;
and partly because Monachism was of no very early standing in the Church,
beginning probably about the times of the later persecutions; and even then too
Monks were quite another thing, both in profession, habit, and way of life,
from what they are at this day, as will abundantly appear to him that will take
the pains to compare the account which S. Hierom, Augustine, Palladius,
Cassian, and others give of those primitive Monks, with the several Orders in
the Church of Rome at this day.

I shall only add, that out of the Monks persons were usually made choice of to
be advanced into the Clergy, as is evident not only from multitudes of
instances in the Writers of the fourth, and following Centuries, but from an
express Law of the Emperor Arcadius to that purpose: Cod. Theod. lib. 16. Tit.
2. de Epis. copis, etc. (...) 2.
the strictness of their lives, and the purity of their manners more
immediately qualifying them for those holy Offices; insomuch that many times
they were advanced unto the Episcopal Chair, without going through the usual
intermediate Orders of the Church: several instances whereof (Serapion,
Apollonius, Agatho, Aristo, and some others) Athanasius reckons up in his
Epistle to Dracontius, Tom. 1. p. 738.
who being a Monk refused a Bishopric to which he was chosen. But because we
meet in the ancient Writings of the Church with very frequent mention of
persons of another Sex, Deaconesses, who were employed in many Offices of
Religion, it may not be amiss in this place to give some short account of them.
Their original was very early, and of equal standing with the infancy of the
Church; such was Phebe in the Church of Cenchris, mentioned by S. Paul; such
were those two Servant-maids spoken of by Pliny in his Letter to the Emperor,
whom he examined upon the Rack; such was the famous Olympias in the Church of
Constantinople, not to mention any more particular instances. They were either
Widows, and then not to be taken into the service of the Church under
threescore years of age, according to S. Paul's direction; or else Virgins, who
having been educated in order to it, and given testimony of a chaste and sober
conversation, were set apart at forty: what the proper place and ministry of
these Deaconesses was in the ancient Church, Syntagm. c. 11. lit. T. p. 71.
though Matthew Blastares seems to render a little doubtful, yet certainly it
principally consisted in such offices as these; Epiph Haeres. 79. p. 447.
to attend upon the Women at times of Public* Worship, especially in the
administration of Baptism, that when they were to be divested in order to their
immersion, they might overshadow them, so as nothing of indecency and
uncomeliness might appear; sometimes they were employed in instructing the more
rude and ignorant sort of women, Cl. Alex. strom. lib 3. p. 448. Council 4.
Carthag. Can. 12.
in the plain and easy principles of Christianity, and in preparing them for
Baptism; otherwhiles in visiting and attending upon Women that were sick, in
conveying messages, counsels, consolations, relief (especially in times of
persecution, when it was dangerous for the Officers of the Church) to the
Martyrs and them that were in Prison; and of these women no doubt it was that
Libanius speaks of amongst the Christians, Orat. de vinctis. p. 56.
who were so very ready to be employed in these offices of humanity. But to
return.

Persons being thus set apart for holy Offices, the Christians of those days
discovered no less piety in that mighty respect and reverence which they paid
to them; that the Ministers of Religion should be peculiarly honored and
regarded, seems to have been accounted a piece of natural justice by the common
sentiments of mankind; the most barbarous and unpolished Nations that ever had
a value for any thing of Religion, have always had a proportionable regard to
them, to whom the care and administration of it did belong. Julian the Emperor
expressly pleads for it as the most reasonable thing in the world, Julian.
fragm. Oper. p. 1. p. 542.
that Priests should be honored, yea in some respects above civil Magistrates,
as being the immediate attendants and domestic servants of God, our
intercessors with Heaven, and the means of deriving down great blessings from
God upon us. But never was this clearlier demonstrated than in the practice of
the primitive Christians, who carried themselves toward their Bishops and
Ministers, with all that kindness and veneration which they were capable to
express toward them. S. Paul bears record to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 15.
that he was accounted so dear to them, that if the plucking out their eyes
would have done him any good, they were ready to have done it for his sake; and
S. Clement testifies of the Corinthians, Page 2.
that they walked in the Laws of God, being subject to them that had the rule
over them; yielding also due honor to the seniors or elder persons that were
amongst them. That by (...) in this place he should mean Civil Magistrates (as
some have told us) I can hardly be persuaded, both because it is the same word
that is used by the Author to the Hebrews obey (...) them that have the rule
over you, Heb. 13. 17 H. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 38. p. 110. de Script. Eccl. in Clem.
and submit your selves (and indeed both Eusebius and S. Hierom of old observed
such a mighty affinity in the phrase between this and the Epistle to the
Hebrews, as certainly to conclude S. Clemens to have been, if not the Author,
at least the Translator of that Epistle) and also because the sole occasion of
S. Clements writing this Epistle was a mutiny which they had made against their
spiritual Guides and Governors, and therefore according to the right art of
Orators, he first commends them for their eminent subjection to them, that he
might with the more advantage reprove and censure them for their schism
afterward, which he does severely in the latter part of the Epistle, and
toward the end of it exhorts those who had laid the foundation of the
Sedition, to become subject to their Presbyters; and being instructed to
repentance, to bow the knees of their hearts, to lay aside the arrogant and
insolent boldness of their tongues, and to learn to subject and submit
themselves. Vid. Constit. Apost. lib. 2. c. 33. p. 859.
The truth is Bishops and Ministers were then looked upon as the common Parents
of Christians, whom as such they honored and obeyed, and to whom they repaired
for counsel and direction in all important cases. De monogam. c. 11. p. 531.
It Is plain from several passages in Tertullian, that none could lawfully marry
till they had first advised with the Bishop and Clergy of the Church, Ad Vxor.
l. 2. c. 2. 9.
and had asked and obtained their leave; which probably they did to secure the
person from marrying with a Gentile, Vid. de Coron. mil. c. 13. p. ^39.
or any of them that were without, and from the inconveniences that might
ensue upon such a match. No respect, no submission was thought great enough,
whereby they might do honor to them, Vid. Chrysostom. de S. Melet. Antioch. Hom.
45. tom. 1. p. 526. and Annot. p. 91
they were wont to kiss their hands, to embrace their feet, and at their going
from, or returning home, or indeed their coming unto any place, to wait upon
them, and either to receive or dismiss them with the universal confluence of
the people. Happy they thought themselves if they could but entertain them in
their houses, and bless their roofs with such welcome guests. Amongst the
various ways of kindness which Constantine the Great showed to the Clergy, De
vit. Constant. lib. 1. c. 42. p. 429.
the Writer of his life tells us, that he used to treat them at his own Table,
though in the meanest and most despicable habit, and never went a journey, but
he took some of them along with him, reckoning that thereby he made himself
surer of the propitious and favorable influence of the divine presence. What
honors he did them at the Council of Nice, Lib. 3.
where he refused to sit down, till they had given him intimation, with what
magnificent gifts and entertainments he treated them afterward, the same
Author relates at large. The truth is, the piety of that devout and excellent
Prince thought nothing too good for those who were the messengers of God, and
ministers of holy things, Theodor.
and so infinitely tender was he of their honor, Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 11.
as to profess, that if at any time he should spy a Bishop overtaken in an
immodest and uncomely action, he would cover him with his own imperial Robe,
rather than others should take notice of it, to the scandal of his place and
person. And because their spiritual authority and relation might not be
sufficient to secure them from the contempt of rude and profane persons,
therefore the first Christian Emperors invested them with power even in Civil
cases, as the way to beget them respect and authority amongst the people. H.
Eccles. lib. 1. c. 9. p. 413.
Thus Constantine, (as Sozomon tells us, and he sets it down as a great
argument of that Princes reverence for Religion) ordained, that persons
contending in Law, might if they pleased remove their cause out of the Civil
Courts, and appeal to the judgment of the Bishops, whose sentence should be
firm, and take place before that of any other Judges, as if it had been
immediately passed by the Emperor himself; and cases thus judged by Bishops,
all Governors of Provinces and their Officers were presently to put into
execution; C. Tit. 4. de Episc. Audient. (...). 7. 8.
which was afterward ratified by two Laws, one of Arcadius, another of
Honorius to that purpose. This power the Bishops sometimes delegated to their
inferior Clergy, making them Judges in these cases, as appears from what
Socrates reports of Silvanus Bishop of Troas, H. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 37. p. 383.
that finding a maladministration of this power, he took it out of the hands
of his Clergy, and devolved the hearing and determining causes over to the
Laity. And to name no more, S. Augustine more than once and again tells us,
Epist. 147. col. 685. vid. Epist.
how much he was crowded and even oppressed in deciding the contests and causes
of secular persons. Nebrid. ad Aug. Ep. 114. and alibi passim.
It seems they thought themselves happy in those days, if they could have their
causes heard and determined by Bishops.

A pious Bishop, and a faithful Minister was in those days dearer to them than
the most valuable blessings upon earth, and they could want any thing rather
than be without them; Chrysostom.
when Chrysostom was driven by the Empress into banishment, Ep. 125. tom. 4. p.
763.
the people as he went along burst into tears, and cried out, ' it was better the
Sun should not shine, than that John Chrysostom should not preach; and when
through the importunity of the people he was recalled from his former
banishment and diverted into the Suburbs till he might have an opportunity to
make a public vindication of his innocence, Socrat.
the people not enduring such delays, Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 16. p. 324.
the Emperor was forced to send for him into the City; the people universally
meeting him, and conducting him to his Church, with all expressions of
reverence and veneration. Metaphrast. in vit. Chrysostomi apud Surium ad diem
27.
Nay while he was yet Presbyter of the Church of Antioch, so highly was he
loved and honored by the people of that place, that though he was chosen to
the Sea of Constantinople, Jan tom. 1.
and sent for by the Emperors Letters, though their Bishop made an Oration on
purpose to persuade them to it, yet would they by no means be brought to part
with him; and when the Messengers by force attempted to bring him away, he was
forced to prevent a tumult, to withdraw and hide himself; the people keeping a
Guard about him, lest he should be taken from them: nor could the Emperor or
his Agents with all their arts effect it, till he used this wile, he secretly
wrote to the Governor of Antioch, who pretending to Chrysostom, that he had
concerns of moment to impart to him, invited him to a private place without the
City, where seizing upon him, by Mules which he had in readiness, he conveyed
him to Constantinople; where that his welcome might be the more magnificent,
the Emperor commanded that all persons of eminency, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, should with all possible pomp and state go six miles to meet him. Of
Nazianzen (who sat in the same Chair of Constantinople before him) I find,
Greg. Presb. de vit. Gregor. Nazian. praefix. oper. Naz.
that when he would have left that Bishopric by reason of the stirs that were
about it, and delivered up himself to solitude and a private life, as a thing
much more suitable to his humor and genius, many of the people came about him,
with tears beseeching him not to forsake his Flock, which he had hitherto fed
with so much sweat and labor. They could not then lose their spiritual Guides,
but they looked upon themselves as Widows and Orphans, resenting their death
with a general sorrow and lamentation, as if they had lost a common Father.
Nazianzen reports, In laud. patr. Or. 19 p. 304.
that when his Father (who was Bishop of but a little Diocese) lay very sick,
and all other remedies proved unsuccessful, the people generally flocked to
Church (and though it was then the joyful time of Easter) broke out into
mournful and passionate complaints, and with the most earnest prayers and tears
besought God for his life. In laud.
And of Basil Bishop of Caesarea he tell us, Basil. Or. 20. p. 371.
that when he lay a dying, the whole* City came about him, not able to bear his
departure from them, praying as if they would have laid hands upon his soul,
and by force detained it in his body; they were (says he) even distracted with
the thoughts of so great a loss, nor was there any who would not have been
willing to have been deprived of part of his own life, might it have added unto
his. His Funeral was solemnized with all possible testimonies of love and
honorable attendance, and with the abundant tears not only of Christians, but
of Jews and Heathens; the confluence so vast, that many were pressed to death
in the crowd, and sent to bear him company to his long home. And that we may
see that their respect did not lie merely in a few kind words, or external
protestations, they made it good in more real and evident demonstrations, by
providing liberal maintenance for them, parting at first with their own estates
to supply the uses of the Church, and after that making no less large than
frequent contributions, which could not but amount to very considerable sums,
the piety of Christians daily adding to their liberality; of which we may make
some estimate, Amm. Marcellin. lib. 27. p. 1739.
by what the Heathen Historian with a little kind of envy relates only of the
Church of Rome (and doubtless it was so in some proportion in other places)
that the profits of the Clergy arising from oblations chiefly was so great, as
to enable them to live in a Prince-like state and plenty. And not long after it
became the object not only of admiration but envy, (...), etc. Tom. 6. p. 896
edit. Savil.
insomuch that Chrysostom was forced to make one whole Sermon against those
that envied the wealth of the Clergy. It was also the great care of those
times, to free them from what might be either scandalous or burthensom to their
calling. Eusebius. Hist.
Constantine decreed, that the Orthodox Clergy should be exempt from all Civil
Offices, Eccl. lib. 10. c. 7. p 394. and Cod.
or whatever might hinder their attendance upon the services of the Church:
Theod lib. 16. Tit. 2. leg. 1. 2.
his Son Constantius, Ib. L 12.
that Bishops in many cases should not be chargeable in the secular Courts, Ib
L. 21.
but be tried in an Assembly of Bishops, which privilege was extended by
Honorius to all the Clergy, that they should be tried before their Bishops; Ib
Tit. 11. l. 1.
before whom also he ordained, that all causes properly belonging to Religion
should be brought, and be determined by them; and by another constitution, that
for the veneration that is due to the Church, Ib. lib. 2. Tit. 4 l. 7.
all Ecclesiastical causes should be decided with all possible speed. And to
name no more, that the persons of Ministers might be secured from foreign
attempts, Lib. 16. Tit. 2. l. 31.
he and his Colleague Arcadius made a Law, that whosoever did offer any
violence to them, should upon conviction or confession of the fact be punished
with death; and that the ministers of Civil justice should not stay till the
Bishop complained of the injury that was done (it being probable that he would
rather incline to mercy and forgiveness) but that every one in this case should
be admitted and encouraged to prefer and prosecute the charge: and in case the
rude multitude should by arms or otherwise obstruct execution, and that the
powers of that place could not see it done, that then they should call in the
assistance of the Governor of the Province, to see Justice put into execution.
And because next to his person nothing is so dear to a Clergie-man as his
credit and reputation, Ibid. L. 41.
therefore the Emperor Honorius took care by a Law, that whosoever (be he a
person of the highest rank) should charge any Clergie-man with Crimes which he
was not able to make good, he himself should be publicly accounted vile and
infamous, it being but just and equal (says the Law) that as guilt should be
punished, and offenders reckoned as spots and blemishes to the Church, so that
injured innocence should be righted and maintained. How infinitely tender the
first general Council of Constantinople was in this case, to secure the honor
and good name of Bishops and Clergymen, against the malicious insinuations
and charges of false accusers, may appear by the large provision which they
make about it in the sixth Canon of that Council; and because it sometimes so
happens, that a man's enemies are those of his own house, therefore the
Apostolical Canons ordain, Can. 55, 56.
that if any Clergyman reproach and defame a Bishop, he shall be deposed from
his Ministry, for thou may not (says the Canon) speak evil of the Ruler of
thy people; but if it be a Presbyter or Deacon, whom he thus reproaches, he
shall be suspended from the execution of his Office. So sacred and venerable
did they then account the persons and concernments of those who ministered in
the affairs of Divine Worship.

CHAP. IX.
Of their usual Worship, both private and public.
The Christians worship of God in their Families discovered. Their usual times
of prayer. Praying before and after meals. Singing of Psalms, and reading the
Scriptures at the same time. Frequency in prayer noted in diverse instances.
Their great reverence for the holy Scriptures, in reading, expounding,
committing them to memory. Several instances of it. Their care in instructing
their Families in divine things. Singing of Psalms mixed with their usual
labors. An account of their public Worship. The order of the Service in their
Assemblies. Prayer: Reading the Scriptures: Two Lessons out of each Testament.
Clemens his Epistle, and the Writings of other pious men read in the Church.
Singing a part of the public Service. How ancient: What those Hymns were. The
Sermon or discourse, upon what subject usually. Such discourses called
Tractatus; and why. More Sermons than one at the same time. Sermons preached in
the afternoon as well as in the morning. The mighty concourse and confluence of
people to these public Solemnities. The departure of the Catechumens,
Penitents, etc. The Missa Catechumenorum, what. The Missa Fidelium. The word
missa or mass, whence, and how used in the Writers of those times. The
singular reverence they showed in these Duties. Great modesty and humility.
Praying with hands lift up in the form of a Cross, why. They prayed either
kneeling or standing. Sitting in prayer noted as a posture of great
irreverence. Praying toward the East. The universality of this Custom. The
reasons of it enquired into. Their reverence in hearing Gods Word. The people
generally stood. Standing up at the Gospels. The remarkable piety and devotion
of Constantine the Great. No departing the Congregation till the blessing was
given.

THus far we have discovered the piety of those ancient times, as to those
necessary circumstances that relate to the Worship of God, we are next to see
wherein their Worship it self did consist, which we shall consider both as
private and public, that which they performed at home, and that which was done
in their solemn and Church Assemblies, only let it be remembered, that under the
notion of Worship I here comprehend all those duties of piety that refer to
God: the duties of their private worship were of two sorts, either such as were
more solemn and stated, and concerned the whole Family, or such as persons
discharged alone, or at least did not tie up themselves to usual times: For the
first, which are properly Family duties, they were usually performed in this
order; at their first rising in the morning, they were wont to meet together,
and to betake themselves to prayer (as is plainly implied in Chrysostoms
exhortation) to praise God for the protection and refreshment of the night,
Hom. 1. de precat tom. 1. p. 750. vid. Basil.
and to beg his grace and blessing for the following day: Ep. ad Greg. de vit
solit. tom. ^. p. 43. A.
this was done by the Master of the house, unless some Minister of Religion
were present: it is probable that at this time they recited the Creed, or some
confession of their Faith, by which they professed themselves Christians, and
as 'twere armed themselves against the assaults of dangers and temptations;
however I question not, but that now they read some parts of Scripture, which
they were most ready to do at all times, and therefore certainly would not omit
it now. That they had their set hours for prayer, the third, De Orat. dom. p.
196 strom. lib. 7. p. 722.
sixth and ninth hour, is plain both from Cyprian, Clem. Alexandrinus, and
others: this they borrowed from the Jews, who divided the day into four greater
hours, the first, third, sixth, and ninth hour, three last whereof were stated
hours of prayer; the first hour began at six in the morning, and held till
nine; the third from nine till twelve; and at this hour it was that the
Apostles and Christians were met together, when the Holy Ghost descended upon
them; the sixth hour was from twelve till three in the afternoon, and at this
time Peter went up to the house top to pray; the ninth was from three till six
at night, and now it was that Peter and John went up to the Temple, it being
the ninth hour of prayer; this division was observed by the Christians of
succeeding times, though whether punctually kept to in their Family devotions I
am not able to affirm. Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 7. p. 728.
About noon before their going to dinner some portions of Scripture were read,
Tert. Apol. c. 39. p. 32.
and the meat being set upon the Table, a blessing was solemnly begged of God,
Sozom. praefat. ad. Hist. Eccl. p. 395.
as the fountain of all blessings (and so religious herein was the good
Emperor Theodosius junior, that he would never taste any meat, no not so much
as a Fig, or any other Fruit, before he had first given thanks to the great
Sovereign Creator) and both meat and drink set apart with the sign of the Cross
(a custom they used in the most common actions of life) as is expressly affirmed
both by Tertullian and Origin, De Cor. mil. c. 3. p. 102 lib. 2. in Job fol.
36. col. 2. tom. 2.
where he also gives a form of such prayers as they were wont to use before
meals, viz. that lifting up their eyes to Heaven, they prayed thus, Thou that
give food to all flesh, grant that we may receive this food with thy
blessing; thou Lord have said, that if we drink any thing that is deadly, if we
call upon thy name it shall not hurt us, thou therefore who art Lord of all
power and glory, turn away all evil and malignant quality from our food, and
what ever pernicious influence it may have upon us; when they were at dinner,
they sung Hymns and Psalms; a practice which Clem. Alexandrinus commends as
very suitable to Christians, Paedag. lib. 2. c. 4. p. 165.
as a modest and decent way of praising God, while we are partaking of his
Creatures. In Psalm. 41. tom. 3. p. 147.
Chrysostom greatly pleads for it, that men should be careful to teach them
their Wives and Children, and which they should use even at their ordinary
works, but especially at meals, such divine Songs being an excellent antidote
against temptations; for (says he) as the Devil is never more ready to ensnare
us than at meals, either by intemperance, ease, or immoderate mirth, therefore
both before and at meals we should fortify our selves with Psalms, nay and
when we rise from the Table with our Wives and Children, we should again sing
Hymns to God. Cypr. Epist. 1. p. 7.
They used also to have the Scriptures read, Clem. Alex. ut supra.
and as I have elsewhere noted out of Nazianzen, every time they took the Cup
to drink, made the sign of the Cross and called upon Christ. Dinner being
ended, Basil. Ep. ad Greg. tom 3. p. 46
they concluded with prayer, giving thanks to God for their present
refreshment, and begging his continued provision of those good things which he
had promised to them. So great a place had Religion in those days even in men's
common and natural actions, and so careful were they not to starve the soul,
while they were feeding of the body: Much after the same rate they spent the
rest of the day, till the night approached, when before their going to rest,
the Family was again called to prayer, after which they went to bed; about
midnight they were generally wont to rise to pray and to sing hymns to God;
Clem Alex. paedag. lib. 2. c. 9. p. 185.
this custom was very ancient, and doubtless took its original from the first
times of persecution, when not daring to meet together in the day, they were
forced to keep their religious Assemblies in the night; and though this was
afterward antiquated, as being found inconvenient for the generality of
Christians, yet did it still continue in the nocturnal hours of Monasteries and
religious Orders.

But besides these stated and ordinary devotions, performed by a joint
concurrence of the Family, the Christians of those days were careful to spend
all the time they could even when alone in actions of peity and religion: Hist.
Eccl. lib 2. c 23. p 63. ex Hegesippo.
they were most frequent in prayer; Eusebius reports of S. James the just, that
he was wont every day to go alone into the Church, and there kneeling upon the
pavement so long to pour out his prayers to God, till his knees became as hard
and brawny as a Camels; the same which Nazianzen also tells us of his good
Sister Gorgonia, In laud.
that by often praying her knees were become hard, Gorgon. Or. 10. p. 183.
and did as 'twere stick to the ground. De vit.
Constantine the Great though burdened with the cares of so vast an Empire,
Constable. lib. 4. c. 22.
did yet every day at his wonted hours withdraw from all the company of the
Court, retire into his Closet, and upon his knees offer up his prayers to God;
Ibid. c. 15* p. 533.
and to let the world know how much he was devoted to this duty, he caused his
Image in all his Gold Coins, in his Pictures and Statues to be represented in
the posture of a person praying, with his hands spread abroad, and his eyes
lift up to Heaven. Their next care was diligently and seriously to read the
Scripture, to be mighty in the Divine Oracles, as indeed they had an invaluable
esteem of and reverence for the Word of God, Epist. 43. p. 804.
as the Book which they infinitely prized beyond all others; upon which account
Nazianzen very severely chides his dear friend Gregory Nyssen, that having laid
aside the holy Scriptures (the most excellent Writings in the world) which he
was wont to read both privately to himself, and publicly to the people, he had
given up himself to the study of foreign and profane Authors, desirous rather
to be accounted an Orator than a Christian. S. Austine tells us, Vid. Confess*
lib 3. c. 5. and l. 7. c. 20, 21.
that after his conversion (how meanly soever he had before thought of them)
the Scriptures were become the matter of his most pure and chaste delight, in
respect whereof all other Books (even those of Cicero himself, which once he
had so much doted on) became dry and unsavory to him. In the study of this
Book it was that Christians then mainly exercised themselves, as thinking they
could never fully enough understand it, or deeply enough imprint it upon their
hearts and memories. Socrat. H. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 22. p. 361.
Of the younger Theodosius they tell us, that rising early every morning, he
together with his Sisters interchangeably sung Psalms of praise to God; the
holy Scriptures he could exactly repeat in any part of them, and was wont to
discourse out of them with the Bishops that were at Court, as readily as if he
had been an old Bishop himself. Eusebius. Hist.
We read of Origin, Eccl. l. 6. c. 2. p. 202.
though then but a child, that when his Father commanded him to commit some
places of Scripture to memory, he most willingly set himself to it, and not
content with the bare reading, he began to enquire into the more profound and
recondite meaning of it, often asking his Father (to his no less joy than
admiration) what the sense of this or that place of Scripture was; and this
thirst after divine knowledge still continued and increased in him all his
life, Ep. ad Marcell. tom. 1. p. 129.
S. Hierom reporting it out of a Letter of one that was his great companion and
benefactor, that he never went to meals without some part of Scripture read,
never to sleep, till some about him had read them to him, and that both by
night and day no sooner had he done praying but he betook himself to reading,
and after reading returned again to prayer. Eusebius. de Martyr.
Valens Deacon of the Church of Jerusalem, Palest. c. 11. p. 336.
a venerable old man, had so entirely given up himself to the study of the
Scriptures, that it was all one to him to read, or to repeat whole pages
together. Ib c. ult. p. 334.
The like we find of John an Egyptian Confessor (whom Eusebius saw and heard)
that though both his eyes were put out, and his body mangled with unheard of
cruelty, yet he was able at any time to repeat any places or passages either
out of the old or new Testament; which when I first heard him do in the public
Congregation, I supposed him (say he) to have been reading in a Book, till
coming near, and finding how it was, I was struck with great admiration at it.
Certainly Christians then had no mean esteem of, took no small delight in these
sacred Volumes: for the sake of this Book (which he had chosen to be the
companion and counselor of his life) Nazianzen professes he had willingly
undervalued and relinquished all other things; De pace. Or. 12. p. 193.
this was the mine where they enriched themselves with divine treasures, a Book
where they furnished themselves with a true stock of knowledge; Epitaph.
as S. Hierom speaks of Nepotian, Nepot. nom. 1. p. 25.
that by daily reading and meditation he had made his soul a Library of Christ;
Ep. ad Paul. p. 157.
and he tells us of Blesilla a devout Widow, that though she was so far
overrun with weakness and sickness, that her foot would scarce bear her body,
or her neck sustain the burden of her head, yet she was never found without a
Bible in her hand.

Nor did they covetously hoard up, and reserve this excellent knowledge to
themselves, but freely communicated it to others, especially were careful to
catechize and instruct their Children and Servants in the principles of
Religion. Page 3.
S. Clemens praises the Corinthians that they took care to admonish their young
men to follow those things that were modest and comely, Ib. p. 31.
and accordingly exhorts them to instruct the younger in the knowledge of the
fear of God, to make their children partakers of the discipline of Christ, to
teach them how much humility and a chaste love do prevail with God, that the
fear of him is good and useful, and preserves all those who with pure thoughts
lead a holy life according to his will. De vit.
The Historian observes of Constantine, Constable. lib. 4. c. 51.
that his first and greatest care toward his Sons, was to secure the happiness
of their souls, by sowing the seeds of piety in their minds, which he did
partly himself, instructing them in the knowledge of divine things, and partly
by appointing such Tutors as were most approved for Religion: Ib. c. 52. p. 552.
and when he had taken them into a partnership of the Government, and either by
private admonitions, or by Letters gave them counsels for the steering
themselves, this was always the first and chief, that they should prefer the
knowledge and worship of God, the great King of the world, before all other
advantages, yea before the Empire it self. In land. Caesarii Or. 10. p. 161.
For this Nazianzen peculiarly commends his Mother, that not only she her self
was consecrated to God, and brought up under a pious education, but that she
conveyed it down as a necessary inheritance to her Children; Id. Or. 11. p. 180.
and it seems her Daughter Gorgonia was so well seasoned with these holy
principles, that she religiously walked in the steps of so good a pattern, and
did not only reclaim her Husband, but educated her Children and Nephews in the
ways of Religion, giving them an excellent example while she lived, and leaving
this as her last charge and request when she died. This was the discipline
under which Christians were brought up in those times, Religion was instilled
into them betimes, which grew up and mixed it self with their ordinary labors
and recreations, insomuch that the most rude and illiterate persons instead of
profane wanton Songs, which vitiate and corrupt the minds of men (...) as
Chrysostom calls them, In Psalm. 117: tom. 3. p. 358.
(Songs of the Devils composure) used nothing but spiritual and divine Hymns,
so that (as Hierom relates of the place where he lived) you could not go into
the field, Ep. ad Marcell. tom. 1. p. 127.
but you might hear the Plowman at his Hallelujahs, the Mower at his Hymns, and
the Vine-Dresser singing David's Psalms.

Thus they carried themselves at home, what they did in public in their
Church Assemblies, on the Lord's Day especially, is next to be considered; the
manner whereof I shall briefly represent, as it generally and for the most part
obtained in those Ages, for it could not but vary something according to time
and place. And here I should save my self the trouble of any further search, by
setting down the account which Justin Martyr and Tertullian give of their
public Worship in their Apologies for the Christians, but that I am satisfied
they did not design to give a perfect and punctual account of what was done at
their religious Assemblies, as might sufficiently appear from this one thing,
that the first of them in those places speaks not any thing of their Hymns and
Psalms, which yet that they were (even in the times wherein they lived) a
constant part of the Divine Service, no man that is not wholly a stranger in
Church-Antiquity can be ignorant of. I shall therefore out of them and others
pick up and put together what seems to have constituted the main body of their
public duties, and represent them in that order wherein they were performed,
which usually was in this manner. At their first coming together into the
Congregation, they began with Prayer, as Tertullian at least probably intimates
(for I do not find it in any besides him) we come together (says he) unto God,
Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
that being banded as 'twere into an Army we may besiege him with our prayers
and petitions; a violence which is very pleasing and grateful to him; I do not
from hence positively conclude that prayer was the first duty they began with,
though it seems fairly to look that way, especially if Tertullian meant to
represent the order as well as the substance of their devotions. After this
followed the reading of the Scriptures both of the old and new Testament, both
the Commentaries of the Apostles and the Writings of the Prophets, Apol. 2. p.
98.
as J. Martyr informs us. How much of each was read at one meeting, in the
first time, is not known, it being then unfixed and arbitrary; because their
meetings, by the sudden interruption of the Heathens, were often disturbed and
broken up, and therefore both Justin and Tertullian confess that they only read
as much as occasion served, and the condition of the present times did require:
but afterward there were set portions assigned, both out of the Old and New
Testament, Lib. 2 c. 57* p. 875.
two Lessons out of each, as we find it in the Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions. Nay not only the Canonical Scriptures, but many of the Writings
of Apostolical men (such as were eminent for place and piety) were in those
days publicly read in the Church, Eusebius. Hist.
such was the famous Epistle of S. Clemens to the Corinthians; Eccl. lib. 4. c.
23 p. 149*
of which and of the custom in like cases Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who
lived about the year 172. gives Soter Bishop of Rome this account: to day (says
he) we kept holy the Lord's Day, wherein we read your Epistle, which we shall
constantly read for our instruction, as we also do the first Epistle which
Clemens wrote to us. H. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 3. p. 72.
The like Eusebius reports of Hermas his Pastor (a Book so called) and S.
Hierom of the Writings of S. Ephrem the famous Deacon of Edessa, De Script.
Ecclesiast. in voc. Ephrem. p. 300.
that in some Churches they were publicly read, after the reading of the holy
Scriptures. About this part of the service it was that they sung Hymns and
Psalms, a considerable part of the Divine Worship (as it had ever been
accounted both amongst Jews and Gentiles) and more immediately serviceable for
celebrating the honor of God, and lifting up the minds of men to divine and
heavenly raptures. 'Twas in use in the very infancy of the Christian Church,
spoken of largely by S. Paul, and continued in all Ages after, insomuch that
Pliny reports it as the main part of the Christians Worship, Lib. 10.
that they met together before day to join in singing Hymns to Christ as God:
Ep. 97.
these Hymns were either extemporary raptures, so long as immediate inspiration
lasted, or set compositions, either taken out of the holy Scriptures, or of
their own composing, Ap. c. 39. p. 32.
as Tertullian tells us: Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28. p. 196
for it was usual then for any persons to compose divine Songs to the honor of
Christ, and to sing them in the Public Assemblies, till the Council of
Laodicea ordered, Can. 59.
that no Psalms composed by private persons should be recited in the Church;
where though by the (...) the two Greek Scholiasts will have certain Psalms
ascribed to Solomon and others to be understood, yet it is much more reasonable
to understand it of private constitutions, usual a long time in the Church, and
here for good reason prohibited. By this Council it was likewise appointed,
Can. 17.
that the Psalms should not be one entire continued service, but that a Lesson
should be interposed in the midst after every Psalm; which was done (as
Balsamon and Alexius Aristenus tell us) to take off the weariness of the
people, whose minds might be apt to tire in passing through those prolix
offices all together, especially the Lessons being so large and many. In this
duty the whole Congregation bore a part, joining all together in a common
celebration of the praises of God; afterward the custom was to sing alternatim
course by course, answering one another, Theod. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 24. p.
78.
first brought in (as we are told) by Flavianus and Diodorus in the Church of
Antioch in the Reign of Constantine; Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 8. p. 313.
but if we may believe Socrates, some hundreds of years before that, by
Ignatius who was Bishop of that Church, who having in a vision heard the Angels
praising the holy Trinity with alternate Hymns, thereupon introduced the use of
it in that Church, which from thence spread it self into all other Churches;
and whether Pliny (who lived about that time) might not mean some such thing by
his secum invicem canere, that the Christians sung Hymns one with another, or
in their courses, may be considered by those who think it worth their labor to
enquire. In the mean time we proceed; the Reader having done (they are the
words of Justin the martyr) the President of the Assembly makes a Sermon by way
of instruction and exhortation, Loc. supr. (...).
to the imitation and practice of those excellent things that they had heard.
And indeed Sermons in those times were nothing else but the expositions of some
part of the Scriptures which had been read before, and exhortations to the
people to obey the doctrines contained in them, and commonly were upon the
Lesson which was last read, because that being freshest in the peoples memory,
was most proper to be treated of, Sermon. 237. de temp. tom. 10. col. 1116.
as S. Augustine both avers the custom, and gives the reason. Hence, in the
Writers of the Church, Preachers came to be called Tractatores, and their
Sermons Tractatus, because they handled or treated of such places of Scripture
as had been a little before read unto the people. According as occasion was
these Sermons were more or fewer, sometimes two or three at the same Assembly,
the Presbyters first and then the Bishop, as is expressly affirmed in the
Apostolical Constitutions, Vt supra. p. 876.
then (i.e. after the reading of the Gospel) let the Presbyters exhort the
people one by one, not all at once, and after all the Bishop, as it is fitting
for the Master to do. And thus Gregory Nyssen excuses himself for not
introducing his Sermons with a tedious Preface, (...). tom. 1. p. 872.
because he would not be burdensome to the people, who had already taken pains
to hear those admirable discourses that had been made before him.

This course they held not in the morning only, but likewise in the afternoon
(at some times at least) when they had their public Prayers and Sermons to the
people. (...). Hom. 10. ad Pop. Antioch. p. 116. Tom. 1.
This Chrysostom assures us of in an Homily upon this very subject, in
commendation of those who came to Church after Dinner, and that as he tells
them, in greater numbers than before; who instead of sleeping after Dinner,
came to hear the divine Laws expounded to them; instead of walking upon the
Exchange, and entertaining themselves with idle and unprofitable chat, came and
stood amongst their brethren, to converse with the discourses of the Prophets.
And this he tells them he put them in mind of, not that it was a reproach to
eat and to drink, but that having done so, it was a shame to stay at home, and
deprive themse^ves of those religious Solemnities. The same 'twere easy to
make good from several passages in S. Basil, S. Augustine, and others, who
frequently refer to those Sermons which they had preached in the morning.

But how many soever the discourses were, the people were ready enough to
entertain them, flocking to them as to their spiritual meals and banquets.
Apol. c. 39.
We meet together (says Tertullian) to hear the holy Scriptures rehearsed to
us, that so according to the quality of the times we may be either forewarned
or corrected by them: for certainly with these holy words we nourish our Faith,
erect our hope, seal our confidence, and by these inculcations are the better
established in obedience to the divine commands. Orat. 32. p. ^17.
Nazianzen tells us what vast numbers used to meet in his Church at
Constantinople, of all Sexes, of all sorts and ranks of persons, rich and poor,
honorable and ignoble, learned and simple, Governors and People, Soldiers
and Tradesmen, all here unanimously conspiring together, and greedily desirous
to learn the knowledge of divine things. The like Chrysostom reports of the
Church at Antioch, that they would set aside all affairs at home, Hom. 56. tom.
1. p. 623.
to come and hear Sermons at Church; he tells them 'twas the great honor of
the City, not so much that it had large Suburbs and vast numbers of people, or
brave houses with gilded Dining-Rooms, Hom. 4. in verb. Esaiae vid. Dom. etc.
tom. 3. p. 750.
as that it had a diligent and attentive people. And elsewhere, that 'twas the
great encouragement of his ministry, to see such a famous and cheerful
concourse, a people so well ordered and desirous to hear; that 'twas this
advanced their City above the honor of a Senate, or the Office of Consul, or
the variety of Statues or ornaments, or the plenty of its Merchandise, or the
commodiousness of its situation; in that its people were so earnest to hear
and learn, its Churches so thronged and crowded, and all persons inflamed with
such an insatiable desire of the word that was preached to them; yea that this
it was that adorned the City even above Rome it self. And indeed the
commendation is the greater, in that commonness did not breed contempt, it
being usual in that Church (as Chrysostom often intimates) for a good part of
the year to have Sermons every day.

Well, Sermon being ended, prayers were made with and for the Catechumens,
Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 6. p. 1006.
Penitents, Possessed, and the like, according to their respective capacities
and qualifications, the persons that were in every rank departing as soon as
the prayer that particularly concerned them was done: first the Catechumens,
and then the Penitents, as is prescribed in the nineteenth Canon of the
Laodicean Council: for no sooner was the service thus far performed, but all
that were under baptism, or under the discipline of penance, i. e. all that
might not communicate at the Lords Table, were commanded to depart, the Deacon
crying aloud, (...), Those that are Catechumens go out; in the Latin Church
the form was ITE, MISSA EST, depart, there is a dismission of you, missa being
the same with missio, as remissa often used in some Writers for remissio (and so
the word missa is used by Cassian even in his time, De institut. monach lib. 3.
c. 7. p. 26.
for the dismission of the Congregation.) Hence it was that the whole Service
from the beginning of it till the time that the Hearers were dismissed came to
be called Missa Catechumenorum, the Mass or Service of the Catechumens, as that
which was performed afterward at the celebration of the Eucharist was called
Missa Fidelium, the Mass or Service of the Faithful, because none but they were
present at it; and in these notions and no other the word is often to be met
with in Tertullian, and other ancient Writers of the Church; it is true, that in
process of time, as the discipline of the Catechumens wore out, so that title
which belonged to the first part of the Service was forgotten, and the name
missa was appropriated to the Service of the Lords Supper, and accordingly was
made use of by the Church of Rome, to denote that which they peculiarly call
the Mass or the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Altar at this day: and the more
plausibly to impose this delusion upon the people, they do with a great deal of
confidence muster up all those places of the Fathers where the word missa is to
be found, and apply it to their Mass; though it would puzle them to produce but
one place, where the word is used in the same sense as they use it now, out of
any genuine and approved Writer of the Church for at least the first four
hundred years. But to return, the Catechumens, etc. being departed, and the
Church doors shut, they proceeded to the Lords Supper, at which the Faithful
only might be present, wherein they prayed for all states and ranks of men,
gave the the Kiss of charity, prayed for consecration of the Eucharist, then
received the sacramental Elements, made their Offerings, and such like; of
which I do not now speak particularly, because I intend to treat distinctly of
the Sacraments afterward: for the same reason I say nothing concerning their
admonitions, Church Censures, absolutions, etc. because these will come under
consideration in another place, as also because though managed at their public
Assemblies, were yet only accidental to them, and no settled parts of the Divine
Service. This in short was the general form of public Worship in those ancient
times, which although it might vary somewhat according to times and places, did
yet for the main and the substance of it hold in all.

That which remains, is a little to remarque how the Christians carried
themselves in the discharge of these solemn duties, which certainly was with
singular reverence and devotion, such gestures and actions as they conceived
might express the greatest piety and humility. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. p. 255
Let both men and women (says Clemens of Alexandria) come to Church in comely
apparel, with a grave pace, with a modest silence, with a love unfeigned, chaste
both in body and mind, and so as they may be fit to put up prayers to God. De
Orat.
Let our speech in prayer (says Cyprian) be under discipline, Dom. p. 188.
observing a decorous calmness and modesty; we are to remember that we are
under the eye of God, whom we are not to offend either in the habit of our
body, or the manner of our speech; for as it is the fashion of those that are
impudent to clamor and make a noise, so on the contrary it becomes a sober man
to pray with a modest voice: when therefore we come together with our brethren
into the Assembly, to celebrate the divine Sacrifices with the Minister of God,
we ought to be mindful of order and a reverent regard, and not to throw about
our prayers with a wild and confused voice, or with a disorderly prattling to
cast forth those petitions, which ought with the greatest modesty to be put up
to God. The men prayed with their heads bare, as not ashamed to look up to
heaven for what they begged of God; the women covered, as a sign of the modesty
of that Sex, and therefore Tertullian severely checks the practice of some
women in his time, who in time of worship had no covering on their heads, or
what was as good as none; what reproof (says he) do they deserve, De Virg.
Veland p. 504.
that continue unvailed in singing Psalms, or in any mention of God; or do they
think it is enough to lay some thin and slight thing over their heads in prayer,
and then think themselves covered. Where he manifestly refers to those rules
which the Apostle prescribes in this case, and concludes at last, that they
should at all times and in all places be mindful of the rule, being ready and
provided against all mention of the name of God, who if he be in women's hearts,
will be known on their heads, viz. by a modest carriage and covering of them in
their addresses to him. Their hands they did not only lift up to heaven (a
posture in prayer common both among Jews and Gentiles) but they did expan and
spread them abroad, that so by this means they might shadow out an image of the
Cross, or rather a resemblance of him that hung upon it, De Orat. c. 11. Apol.
c. 39.
as Tertullian more than once and again informs us: Prayer (says another) is a
conversing with God, Asterius Amasen.
and the way to heaven, and to stretch out our hands is to form the resemblance
of Christ crucified; Hom. de precat. apud Phot.
which whoever prays should do, not only as to the form and figure, Cod. 271.
col. 1496.
but in reality and affection; for as he that is fastened to the Cross surely
dies, so he that prays should crucify the desires of the flesh, and every
inordinate lust and passion. In the performing of this duty, they either
kneeled, which was most usual, or stood, which they always did upon the Lords
day, for a reason which we have spoken of before; fitting was ever held a
posture of great rudeness and irreverence; nay Tertullian falls heavy upon some
that used presently to clap themselves down upon their seats, De Orat. c. 12.
p. 134.
as soon as ever prayer was done, and downright charges it as against
Scripture; if it be an irreverent thing (as he argues) to sit down before, or
over against a person for whom thou have a mighty reverence and veneration; how
much more does it savor of irreligion to do so in the presence of the living
God, while the Angel is yet standing by thee to carry up the prayer to heaven,
unless we have a mind to reproach God to his face, and tell him that we are
weary of the duty.

Another custom which they had in prayer was, that they constantly prayed
toward the East; this was so universally common, that there is scarce any
ancient Ecclesiastical Writer but speaks of it; though not many of them agree
in assigning the reason of it; the custom doubtless begun very early, and is
generally ascribed to the Apostles; so the Author of the Questions and Answers
assures us, Quest. 118. p. 471.
and tells us it was because the East was accounted the most excellent part of
the Creation, and seeing in prayer we must turn our faces toward some quarter,
De Spirit.
'twas fittest it should be toward the East: S. c. 27 p. 352. tom. 2
just (says he) as in making the sign of the Cross in the name of Christ,
Athanas. ad Antioch.
we use the right hand, because it is better than the left, Quest. 37. p. 285.
tom. 2.
not in its own nature, but only in its positure and fitness for our use. Constable
App. lib. 2. c. 57. p. 876.
S. Basil likewise reckons it amongst the traditions that had been derived from
the Apostles, but tells us the Mystery of it was, that hereby they respected
Paradise, which God planted in the East, begging of him that they might be
restored to that ancient Country from whence they had been cast out. This might
probably be with those who dwelt in the Western parts of the world, but how it
could be done by those who lived East of the Garden of Eden (suppose in any
parts of India) I am not able to imagine. Strom. lib. 7 p. 72^.
Clemens Alex. tells us that herein they had respect to Christ, for as the East
is the birth and womb of the natural day, from whence the Sun (the Fountain of
all sensible light) does arise and spring; so Christ the true Sun of
righteousness, who arose upon the world with the light of truth, when it sat in
the darkness of error and ignorance, is in Scripture styled the East, and
therefore our prayers are directed thither. Contr. Valent c. 3 p^ 251.
For which reason Tertullian calls the East, the figure or the type of Christ:
but whatever the true reason was, I Am sure it is a sober account which
Athanasius gives of it; Vbi supr^ p. 2^4.
we do not (says he) worship toward the East, as if we thought God any ways
shut up in those parts of the world, but because God is in himself, and is so
styled in Scripture, the true light; in turning therefore toward that created
light, we do not worship it, but the great. Creator of it; taking occasion from
that most excellent element, to adore that God who was before all elements and
ages of the world. This was their carriage for prayer; nor were they less
humble and reverent in other parts of Worship, they heard the Scriptures read
and preached with all possible gravity and attention, which that they might the
better do, they were wont to stand all the while the Sermon continued, none
sitting then but the Bishop and Presbyters that were about him; De Schism.
so Optatus expressly tells us, Donatist. l. 4. p. 115.
that the people had no privilege to sit down in the Church: though whether
the custom was universally so in all places, De Catechis. rudib. c. 13. tom. 4.
col. 907.
I much doubt; nay S. Augustine tells us, that in some transmarine (I suppose
he means the Western) Churches it was otherwise, the people having seats placed
for them as well as the Ministers. But generally the people stood, partly to
express the reverence, partly to keep their attentions awake and lively. De
incomparab. Dei nature. Hom. 4* p. 353. tom. 1.
Hence it was part of the Deacons Office (as Chrysostom tells us, and the same
we find in the ancient Greek Liturgies) to call upon the people with an (...),
Let us duly stand upright, respecting the decent posture of their bodies,
though withal principally intending the elevation of their minds, the lifting
up their thoughts from low sordid objects to those spiritual and divine things,
they were then conversant about. But what ever they did in other parts of the
public Service, they constantly stood up at the reading of the Gospel; a
custom generally embraced in all parts of the Christian world. H. Eccl. lib. 7.
c. 19. p. 734.
Therefore Sozomen discoursing of the various rights observed in several
Churches, notes it as an unusual thing in the Bishop of Alexandria, that he did
not rise up when the Gospels were read; a thing (says he) which I never saw nor
heard of in any other place: H. Eccl. l. 3^ number. 5 p. 29.
and Philostorgius tells us of Theophilus the Indian Bishop, that amongst
several irregularities which he corrected in those Churches, he particularly
reformed this, that the people were wont to sit while the Lessons out of the
Gospel were read to them. Nor did the greatest personages think themselves too
high to express this piece of reverence in their attendance upon the King of
Kings. It Is very memorable what we read concerning the great Constantine, that
when upon occasion Eusebius was to make a Panegyric concerning the Sepulcher
of our Savior, De vit.
though it was not in the Church, Constant. lib* 4. c. 33. p. 542.
but in the Palace, yet he refused to sit all the time, and when Eusebius
beseeched him to sit down in his Throne, that was hard by him, he would not,
but attentively heard, judged, and approved those things that were spoken: and
when after a good while, the Sermon having been prolix, Eusebius out of
compliance would have broken off and done, he called to him to go on till he
came to the full end of his discourse; whereupon he was again solicited to sit
down, but refused, affirming it to be unfit to attend upon any discourse
concerning God, and much more at this time, with ease and softness; and that it
was very consonant to piety and religion that discourses about divine things
should be heard standing. So great a reverence had that excellent Prince for
the solemnities of divine Worship. In the discharge of these holy Exercises as
they carried themselves with all seriousness and gravity, so they continued in
them till they were completely finished; there was then no such airiness and
levity as now possesses the minds of men, no snatching at some pieces of the
Worship, tanquam Canis ad Nilum, and gone again, no rude disorderly departing
the Congregation, till the whole Worship and Service of God was over. And
therefore when this warmth and vigor of the first Ages was a little abated,
the Council of Orleans thought good to re-establish the primitive devotion by
this Canon, Can. 22.
That when the people came together for the celebration of divine Service, they
should not depart till the whole Solemnity was over, and the Bishop or
Presbyter had given the blessing.

CHAP. X.
Of Baptism, and the administration of it in the Primitive Church.
Four circumstances considered. Baptism by whom administered. By none usually
without the leave of the Bishop. The great controversy about re-baptizing
those that had been baptized by Heretics. An account of it out of Cyprian.
Laymen how suffered to baptize. The opinion of the absolute necessity of
Baptism. The case of Athanasius his baptizing when but a Child. Women never
permitted to baptize. Persons to be baptized, who. Infants. Sufficient evidence
for Infant Baptism in the ancient Writers of the Church. Some passages out of
Cyprian noted. The baptized most-what adult persons. The stated times of
Baptism, Easter and Whitsuntide, and why. Especially upon Easter Eve, and why.
In cases of necessity at any other time. Clinici, who. Clinic-baptism accounted
less perfect, why. Usual to defer Baptism till a deathbed: and the reason of
it: noted in Constantine and others. Being baptized for the dead, what
(probably.) The usual place of Baptism in or near the Church; always before the
Congregation. The Baptisterium or Font where it stood, and how large. Its
distinct apartments for men and women. A curiosity in many in those times of
being baptized in Jordan, and why. The manner of the Administration. The person
baptized looked toward the West, and why. Their answering as to the profession
of their faith. Their solemn abrenunciation made twice; and the form of it.
Sureties in Baptism. Persons baptized exorcised; what meant by it. Unction upon
what account used; several reasons of it assigned by the Fathers. The sign of
the Cross made in Baptism, evident out of the ancient Fathers. Of immersion, or
putting the person under water: what it shadowed out. Generally in use in those
Countries, not absolutely necessary in others. Trine immersion: different
reasons of it assigned by the Fathers. It obtained not in Spain, and why. A
second Unction. Persons after Baptism clothed in white garments, and why. These
kept in the Church as a testimony of their solemn engagement: a memorable
instance out of Victor Uticensis. A brief account of confirmation: the neglect
of it bewailed.

OUR Lord having instituted Baptism and the Lords Supper as the two great
Sacraments of the Christian Law, they have accordingly been ever accounted
principal parts of public Worship in the Christian Church; we shall treat
first of Baptism, as being the door by which persons enter in, the great and
solemn rite of our initiation into the faith of Christ; concerning which, four
circumstances are chiefly to be enquired into; the persons by and upon whom;
the time when, the place where, the manner how this Sacrament was administered
in the ancient Church.

For the persons by whom this Sacrament was administered, they were the
Ministers of the Gospel, the Stewards of the mysteries of Christ, baptizing and
preaching the Gospel being joined together by our Savior in the same
Commission; usually 'twas done by the Bishop, the (...) in J. Martyr, the
Antistes in Tertullian, the President or chief Minister of the Congregation,
the summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus, as he calls him, without whose leave
and authority neither Presbyters nor Deacons might take upon them to baptize,
Epist. ad Smyrnaeos. p. 6.
as not only Ignatius but Tertullian expressly tells us, and if they did, De
Baptism. c. 17. p. 230.
it was only in case of necessity, as is affirmed by an ancient Author who
lived in or near the time of Cyprian: De non rebaptiz. apud Cypr. p. 138.
the same S. Hierom assures us was the custom in his time, though otherwhiles
we find the Bishop to begin the action, Dial. adv. Lucifer. p. 139.
and the Presbyters to carry it on and finish it. Ambr. de Sacram. l. 3. c. 1.
But as Christianity increased, this became a more familiar part of the
Presbyters and the Deacons office, and doubtless had been more or less executed
by them from the beginning, though out of reverence to the Bishop, and to
preserve the honor of the Church (as Tertullian gives the reason) they did it
not without his leave and deputation, and it is certain that Philip baptized the
Eunuch, who yet was of no higher order than that of Deacon. Nor was it
accounted enough by some in those times, that Baptism was conferred by a person
called to the Ministry, unless he was also orthodox in the Faith. This became
matter of great bustle in the Church; hence sprang that famous controversy
between Cyprian and Stephen Bishop of Rome, concerning the re-baptizing those
that had been baptized by Heretics (of which there is so much in Cyprians
Writings) Cyprian asserting that they ought to be rebaptized, the other as
stiffly maintaining it to be both against the doctrine and practice of the
Church. This begot great heats and feuds between those good men, and engaged a
great part of the whole Christian Church in the quarrel, Cyprian endeavoring
to strengthen his cause not only by arguments from Scripture, but by calling a
Council at Carthage of eighty seven African Bishops, who all concluded for his
opinion. How truly Cyprian maintained this, I am not concerned to enquire; only
I take notice of two things which he and his Followers pleaded by way of
abatement to the rigor of their opinion. Cypr. Ep. ad Quint. de Haeret. bap.
Ep. 71. p. 119. and Council.
First that hereby they did not assert re-baptization to be lawful, this they
expressly deny to receive any patronage from their practice, Carth. apud Cypr.
senten. 35. p. 286.
for they looked upon that baptism that had been conferred by Heretics as null
and invalid (seeing Heretics being out of the Church could not give what they
had not) and therefore when any returned to the union of the Church they could
not properly be said to be rebaptized, seeing they did but receive what
(lawfully) they had not before. Cypr. ibid. and Conc. Carthag. sentent. 8. and
Cyrill. praef. Catech. ad illumin. p. 9.
Secondly, that they did not promiscuously baptize all that came over from
heretical Churches, for where any had been lawfully baptized by Orthodox
Ministers before their going over to them, these they received at their return
without any other Ceremony than imposition of hands; baptizing those only who
never had any other baptism than that which Heretics had conferred upon them.
Cyprian being thus severe against baptism dispensed by heretical Ministers, we
may wonder what he thought of that which was administered by mere lay-unordained
persons, which yet was not uncommon in those times: for that Laymen (provided
they were Christians and baptized themselves) might and did baptize others in
cases of necessity, is so positively asserted by Tertullian, Locis antea citat.
Hierom, and others, that no man can doubt of it. A custom ratified by the
Fathers of the Illiberine Council, Can. 38.
with this proviso, that if the persons so baptized lived, they should receive
confirmation from the Bishop. This without question arose from an opinion they
had of the absolute and indispensable necessity of Baptism, without which they
scarce thought a man's future condition could be safe, and that therefore 'twas
better it should be had from any, than to depart this life without it; for
excepting the case of Martyrs (whom they thought sufficiently qualified for
heaven by being baptized in their own blood, Cyrill. ad Illuminat. Catech. 3.
p. 61.
insisting upon a twofold Baptism, one of water in time of peace, another of
blood in the time of persecution, answerable to the water and blood that flowed
out of our Saviors side: excepting these) they reckoned no man could be saved
without being baptized, and cared not much in cases of necessity, so they had
it, how they came by it. As for that act of Athanasius (mentioned by the Author
of his life in Photius, Cod. 258. col. 1429.
and more largely related by Sozomen) when a Boy playing with the rest of his
Companions, Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 17. p. 467.
they formed themselves into a kind of Church-society; Athanasius was chosen
Bishop, and others personated the Catechumens ready to be baptized, and were
accordingly with all the usual formalities baptized by Athanasius. This
juvenile Ceremony being ended, they were brought before Alexander the then
Bishop of Alexandria (who had himself beheld the whole scene) who enquiring
into the reasons and circumstances of the action, and having consulted with his
Clergy that were about him, concluded that those Children ought not to be
rebaptized, and therefore only added his confirmation to them. But this being
only a particular case, and the like not mentioned that I remember by any
Writer of those times, I only relate it as I find it. But though this power in
cases of necessity was allowed to men (who were capable of having the
ministerial office conferred upon them) yet was it ever denied to women, whom
the Apostle has so expressly forbidden to exercise any ministry in the Church of
God, and accordingly censured in the Apostolical Constitutions, Tert. de. Bap.
c. 17. de vel. virg. c. 9. de praescript. adv. Haeret. c. 41.
to be not only dangerous, but unlawful and impious. Indeed in the Churches of
the Heretics women even in those times took upon them to baptize, Epiph.
haeres. 49. and haeres. 79.
but it was universally condemned and cried out against by the Orthodox, Ritual.
and constantly affixed as a note of dishonor and reproach upon the heretical
parties of those times, Romans de Sacram.
as abundantly appears from Tertullian, Bapt. Rubric. de ministr. bapt. p. 9.
Epiphanius, and others, who records the heretical doctrines and practices of
those first Ages of the Church; however afterward it crept in in some places,
and is allowed and practiced in the Church of Rome at this day: where in cases
of necessity they give leave that it may be administered by any, and in any
language, whether the person administering be a Clergy or a Layman (yea though
under excommunication) whether he be a Believer or an Infidel, a Catholic or
an Heretic, a man or a woman; only taking care, that if it may be, a Priest be
preferred before a Deacon, a Deacon before a Subdeacon, a Clergy man before a
Laic, and a man before a woman; together with some other cases which are there
wisely provided for.

From the persons ministering we proceed to the persons upon whom it was
conferred, and they were of two sorts, Infants and adult persons: how far the
baptizing of Infants is included in our Saviors institution is not my work to
dispute; but certainly if in controverted cases the constant practice of the
Church, and those who immediately succeeded the Apostles be (as no man can deny
it is) the best interpreter of the Laws of Christ, the dispute one would think
should be at an end: for that it always was the custom to receive the Children
of Christian Parents into the Church by Baptism, we have sufficient evidence
from the greatest part of the most early Writers, J. G. Voss. de bapt. disput.
14. p. 178. and seq.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, etc. whose testimonies I do not
produce, because I find them collected by others, Forbes. instruct. Hist.
Theol. lib. 10. c. 5. sect. 14. and seq.
and the argument thence so forcible and conclusive, that the most zealous
opposers of Infant Baptism know not how to evade it; the testimonies being so
clear, Dr. Ham. Defen. of Infant Baptism. c. 4. sect. 2.
and not the least shadow that I know of in those times of any thing to make
against it. There was indeed in Cyprians time a controversy about the
baptizing of Infants, not whether they ought to be baptized (for of that there
was no doubt) but concerning the time when it was to be administered, whether on
the second or third, or whether as Circumcision of old to be deferred till the
eighth day: for the determining of which, Cyprian sitting in Council with sixty
six Bishops, writes a Synodical Epistle to Fidus, Epist. 60. p. 97.
to let him know, that it was not necessary to be deferred so long, and that it
was their universal judgment and resolution that the mercy and grace of God was
not to be denied to any, though as soon as he was born: concluding, that it was
the sentence of the Council, that none ought to be forbidden baptism and the
grace of God; which as it was to be observed and retained toward all men, so
much more toward Infants and newborn Children; Epist. 28. ad Hieronym: tom. 2.
col. 108.
and that this sentence of theirs was no novel doctrine S. Augustine assures
us, where speaking concerning this Synodical determination, he tells us, that
in this Cyprian did not make any new decree, but kept the Faith of the Church
most firm and sure. I shall only taken notice of one place more out of Cyprian,
De lapsis p. 171.
which methinks evidently makes for this purpose, where describing the great
wickedness and miserable condition of the lapsed, such as to avoid persecution
had done sacrifice to the Idols, he urges this as one of the last and highest
aggravations, that by their apostasy their Infants and Children were exposed
to ruin, and had lost that which they had obtained at their first coming into
the world (which whether he means it of their right to Baptism, or their having
been actually baptized, and losing the fruit and benefit of their Baptism, is
all one to my purpose) and therefore he brings them in thus elegantly pleading
against their Parents at the great day. ' It Was no fault of ours, we did not of
our selves forsake the Sacraments of our Lord, and run over to join with
profane impieties; the unfaithfulness of others has undone us, we have found
our Parents to be murderers; they denied us God for our Father, and the Church
for our Mother; for while we alas were little, unable to take any care of our
selves, and ignorant of so great a wickedness, we were ensnared by the
treachery of others, and by them betrayed into a partnership of their impieties.

This was the case of Infants, but those who made up the main body of the
baptized in those days, were adult persons, who flocking over daily in great
numbers to the faith of Christ, were received in at this door: usually they
were for some considerable time catechized, and trained up in the principles of
the Christian Faith, till having given testimony of their proficiency in
knowledge (to the Bishop or Presbyter, Conc. Laodic. Can* 46.
who were appointed to take their examination, and to whom they were to give an
account once a week of what they had learnt) and of a sober and regular
conversation, they then became Candidates for Baptism, and were accordingly
taken in, which brings me to the next circumstance considerable concerning

The Time when Baptism was wont to be administered: at first all times were
alike, and persons were baptized as opportunity and occasion served; but the
discipline of the Church being a little settled, it began to be restrained to
two solemn and stated times of the year, viz. Easter and Whitsontide. Tert. de
Baptism. (...) 19 p. 232
At Easter in memory of Christ's death and resurrection, correspondent unto
which are the two parts of the Christian life represented and shadowed out in
Baptism, dying unto sin, and rising again unto newness of life, Cyrill. praefa^
Ca^^^h. ad ill^minat. p. 6.
in order to which the parties to be baptized were to prepare themselves by a
strict observation of Lent, disposing and fitring themselves for Baptism by
fasting and prayer. In some places, particularly the Churches of Thessaly,
(...). Eccles. lib. ^. c. 22. p 287.
Easter was the only time for Baptism (as Socrates tells us) which was the
reason why many amongst them died unbaptized: but this was an usage peculiar to
them alone. The ancient custom of the Church (as Zonaras tells us) was for
persons to be baptized especially upon the Saturday before Easter Day, ^. Can
45. Conc. Laod.
the reason whereof was, that this being the great or holy Sabbath, and the
mid-time between the day whereon Christ was buried, and that whereon he rose
again, did fitliest correspond with the mystery of Baptism, as it is the type
and representation both of our Lords burial and resurrection. At Whitsontide;
in memory of the Holy Ghosts being shed upon the Apostles, the same being in
some measure represented and conveyed in Baptism. When I say that these were
the two fixed times of Baptism, I do not strictly mean it of the precise days
of Easter and Whitsontide, but also of the whole intermediate space of fifty
days that is between them, which was in a manner accounted Festival, and
Baptism administered during the whole time, as I have formerly noted. (...).
Orat. 40. p. 654.
Besides these, Nazianzen reckons the Feasts of Epiphany as an annual time of
Baptism, probably in memory either of the Birth or Baptism of our Savior, both
which anciently went under that title: this might be the custom in some places,
but I question whether it was universal, besides that afterward it was
prohibited and laid aside. But though persons in health, and the space that was
requisite for the instruction of the Catechumens might well enough comport with
these annual returns, yet if there was a necessity (as in case of sickness and
danger of death) they might be baptized at any other time: for finding
themselves at any time surprised with a dangerous or a mortal sickness, and not
daring to pass into another world without this Badge of their initiation into
Christ, they presently signified their earnest desire to be baptized, which was
accordingly done as well as the circumstances of a sick Bed would permit. These
were called Clinici (of whom there is frequent mention in the ancient Writers
of the Church) because (...), baptized as they lay along in their beds. This
was accounted a less solemn and perfect kind of Baptism, partly because 'twas
done not by immersion, but by sprinkling; partly because persons were supposed
at such a time to desire it, chiefly out of a fear of death, and many times
when not thoroughly Masters of their understandings. For which reason persons so
baptized (if they recovered) are by the Fathers of the Neocaesarean Council
rendered ordinarily incapable of being admitted to the degree of Presbyters in
the Church. Can. 12.
Indeed 'twas very usual in those times (notwithstanding that the Fathers did
solemnly and smartly declaim against it) for persons to defer their being
baptized till they were near their death, out of a kind of Novation principle,
that if they fell into sin after Baptism, there would be no place for
repentance, mistaking that place of the Apostle, where it is said that if they
who have been once enlightened ((...), which the Ancients generally understand
of Baptism) fall away, it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance.
Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 4. c. 61, 62. p. 557.
For some such reason we may suppose it was that Constantine the Great deferred
his Baptism till he lay a dying; Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 47. p. 161.
the same which Socrates relates of his Son Constantius, baptized a little
before his death: and the like he reports of the Emperor Theodosius, Lib. 5.
c. 6. p. 262.
who apprehending himself to be arrested with a mortal sickness, presently
caused himself to be baptized, though he recovered afterward. To this custom
of Clinic Baptism some not improbably think the Apostle has reference in that
famous place, Vid. Voss. These de Baptism. p. 161. and de Resur. These* 18.
where he speaks of those that are baptized for the dead, (...), which they
expound with reference to the state of the dead, and that it is meant of such
who in danger of death would be baptized, Haeres. 28. p. 54. vid. Matthew.
that it might fare well with them after death. This Epiphanius thinks the
truest interpretation, Blast. Syntag. c. 1. lit. B. p. 41.
that it is meant of Catechumens; who being suddenly surprised with death, would
be baptized that so their sins being remitted in Baptism, they might go hence
under the hope of that eternal life which awaits good men after death, and
testify their belief and expectation of their future happy resurrection.
Others think it may refer to the place of Baptism, those who are baptized
(...), over the Graves or Sepulchers of the dead, it being an ancient and
general custom to have their religious meetings, and to perform their public
exercises at the Tombs of Martyrs; Vid. Prudent. Peristeph.
there being numerous instances in the acts of the Martyrs, of such as were
baptized in the Coemeteria, Hymn. 8. p. 110.
over the Monuments of the dead. Which soever of these is most suitable, yet
certainly either of them is far more probable than that which many talk so much
of, Vid. Epiphan. Haeres. 28. contra Cerinth p. 54.
as if the Apostle meant it of a custom common in those primitive times amongst
the Cerinthians, and other Heretics, where when any died without Baptism, they
used to place another under his Bed, who was baptized for him in his stead,
whence Tertullian calls it a vicarious Baptism; De Resur. Carn. c. 48.
it being highly improbable, that the great Apostle would fetch an argument to
confirm so solemn and fundamental a principle of the Christian Faith as the
doctrine of the Resurrection is, from such an absurd and ridiculous rite used
only by the worst of Heretics. But this only by the way.

For the Place where this solemn action was performed it was at first
unlimited, any place where there was water, as Justin Martyr tells us, in
Ponds, or Lakes, at Springs, Apol. 2. p. 93.
or Rivers, as Tertullian speaks; De Baptism. c. 4.
but always as near as might be to the place of their public Assemblies, for
it was seldom done without the presence of the Congregation, and that for very
good reason, both as it is a principal act of religious Worship, and as it is the
initiating of persons into the Church, which therefore ought to be as public
as it could, that so the whole Congregation might be spectators and witnesses
of that profession and engagement which the person baptized then took upon him;
and this they so zealously kept to, that the Trullan Council allows not Baptism
to be administered in a private Chapel, Can. 59.
but only in the public Churches, punishing the persons offending, if Clergy
with deposition, if Laity with excommunication; which yet (as both Zonaras and
Balsamon expound the Canon) is to be understood, unless it be done with the
leave and approbation of the Bishop of the Diocese; for this reason they had
afterward their Baptisteria, or as we call them Fonts, built at first near the
Church, then in the Church Porch, to represent Baptisms being the entrance into
the mystical Church; afterward they were placed in the Church it self: they
were usually very large and capacious, not only that they might comport with
the general custom of those times of persons baptized, being immersed or put
under water, but because the stated times of Baptism returning so seldom, great
multitudes were usually baptized at the same time. In the middle of the Font
there was a partition, the one part for men, the other for women, that to avoid
offense and scandal they might be baptized asunder. Here it was that this great
rite was commonly performed, though in cases of necessity they dispensed with
private Baptism, as in the case of those that were sick, or shut up in prison,
of which there were frequent instances in times of persecution. Many there were
in those days (such especially as lived in the parts near to it) whom nothing
would serve, unless they might be baptized in Jordan, out of a reverence to
that place where our Savior himself had been baptized; De vit.
this Constantine tells us he had a long time resolved upon, Constable. l. 4. c. 62.
to be baptized in Jordan, though God cut him short of his desire: Eusebius. de
loc. Hebr. in voce (...). p. 59.
and Eusebius elsewhere relates, that at Bethabara beyond Jordan where John
baptized, there was a place whither very many even in his time used to resort,
earnestly desiring to obtain their Baptism in that place. This doubtless
proceeded from a very devout and pious mind, though otherwise one place can
contribute nothing more than another, nothing being truer than what Tertullian
has observed in this case, De Baptism. c. 4. p. 225.
that it is no matter whether we be haptized amongst those whom John baptized in
Jordan, or whom Peter baptized in Tyber.

The last circumstance I propounded concerns the manner of the celebration of
this Sacrament, and for this we may observe, that in the Apostles Age Baptism
was administered with great nakedness and simplicity, probably without any more
formality than a short prayer, and repeating the words of institution, and
indeed it could not well be otherwise, considering the vast numbers that many
times were then baptized at once. But after-ages added many rites, differing
very often according to time and place; I shall not undertake to give an
account of all, but only of the most remarkable, and such as did generally
obtain in those times, keeping as near as I can to the order which they
observed in the administration, which usually was thus. Persons having past
through the state of the Catech^mens, and being now ripe for Baptism, made it
their request to the Bishop that they might be baptized, whereupon at the
solemn times they were brought to the entrance of the Baptistery or Font,
Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. mist. 1. p. 506 and seq. vid. Dion.
and standing with their faces toward the West (which being directly opposite
to the East, the place of light, Areop. de Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2. p. 253.
did symbolically represent the Prince of darkness whom they were to renounce
and defy) were commanded to stretch out their hand, as it were in defiance of
him: in this posture they were interrogated by the Bishop, concerning their
breaking of all their former leagues and commerce with sin, and the powers of
Hell, Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 1. c. 2. tom. 4. p. 429.
the Bishop asking, do thou renounce the Devil and all his works, powers, and
service? to which the party answered, I do renounce them: do thou renounce
the world and all its pomps and pleasures? Answer, I do renounce them. This
renunciation was made twice, once before the Congregation (probably at their
obtaining leave to be baptized) and presently after at the Font or place of
Baptism, De Coron. mil. c. 3. p. 102. de Spect. c. 13. p. 79.
as Tertullian witnesses. Next they made an open confession of their Faith, the
Bishop asking Do thou believe in God the Father almighty, Vid. Constit.
Apost. lib. 7. c. 42. p. 993.
etc. in Jesus Christ his only Son, who, etc. do thou believe in the Holy
Ghost; the holy Catholic Church, and in one Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, and life everlasting? to all which the person answered, I do
believe. This form of interrogation seems to have been very ancient in the
Church, and the Apostle is justly thought to refer to it, when he styles
Baptism the answer of a good conscience toward God, which can reasonably refer
to nothing so well as that common custom of answering in Baptism. These answers
and actions in the adult were done by the persons themselves, in children by
their sponsores, De Baptism. c. 18. p. 231.
as Tertullian calls them, their Sureties and undertakers; for that both
Infants and adult persons had those that undertook for them at their Baptism,
is so notoriously known, that it were impertinent to insist upon it. After this
there was a kind of Exorcism, and an insufflation or breathing in the face of
the person baptized (which S. Austine calls a most ancient tradition of the
Church) by which they signified the expelling of the evil spirit, De nupt. and
concup. lib. 2. c. 29. tom. 7. col. 856.
and the breathing in the good Spirit of God: not that they thought that every
one before Baptism was possessed by the Devil, but only that we are by nature
children of wrath, enemies to God, and slaves to Satan. Nor did they lay any
stress upon the bare usage of those Symbolick Rites, but wholly upon the
Churches Prayers, which at the same time were made, that God would deliver
those persons from the power of Satan, and by his Spirit unite them to the
Church. This being done, they were brought to the Font, and were first stripped
of their garments (intimating thereby their putting off the old man which is
corrupt with his deceitful lusts) and that all occasions of scandal and
immodesty might be prevented in so sacred an action, the men and women (as I
observed before) were baptized in their distinct apartments, Constit. Apost.
lib. 3. c. 15 p. 899
the women having Deaconesses to attend them, Epiphan.
to undress and dress them, Haeres. 79* p. 447. ib. l. 7. c. 23. p. 379.
to stand about and overshadow them, that nothing of indecency might appear;
then followed the Unction, Catech. 2. p. 518.
a Ceremony of early date, by which (says S. Cyril) they signified that they
were now cut off from the wild Olive, and were ingraffed into Christ, the true
Olive Tree, Ambros. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 2. tom. 4. p. 429. vid. Dion.
and made partakers of his fruits and benefits, or else to show that now they
were become Champions for Christ, and had entered upon a state of conflict,
Areop. de Eccles. Hierach. c. 2. p. 279.
wherein they must strive and contend with all the snares and allurements of
the world, as the Athletae of old were anointed against their solemn Games,
that they might be more expedite, and that their Antagonists might take less
hold upon them: or rather, probably, to denote their being admitted to the
great Privileges of Christianity, a chosen generation, royal Priesthood, an
noly nation (as the Apostle styles Christians) Offices of which anointing was
an ancient Symbol, both of being designed to them, and invested in them; and
this account Tertullian favors, De Baptis. c. 7. p. 226.
where speaking of this Unction in Baptism, he tells us it is derived from the
ancient, i. e. Jewish Discipline, where the Priests were wont to be anointed
for the Priesthood: for some such purpose they thought it fit that a Christian
(who carries unction in his very name) should be anointed as a spiritual King
and Priest, and that no time was more proper for it, than at his Baptism, when
the name of Christian was conferred upon him. De Spirit.
Together with this we may suppose it was, Sanct. c. 27 tom. 2. p. 351.
that the sign of the Cross was made upon the forehead of the party baptized;
Vid. Tert. adv. Marcion. l. 3. p. 226.
when this Ceremony first began to be used in Baptism, I find not; S. Basil
reckons it (and he puts it too in the first place) amongst those ancient
Customs of the Church that had been derived from the times of the Apostles:
Cyprian. de laps. p. 169. frons cum signo, etc. de unit. ecles. p. 185. ea
part corporis, etc. adv.
that it was generally in use in the times of Tertullian and Cyprian, Demet. p.
202* renati, and signo Christi signati, etc.
we have sufficient evidence from their Writings, and indeed cannot reasonably
suppose they should omit it in this solemn action (where it is so proper) when
they used it in the commonest actions of their lives, Tertullian expressly
assuring us, De Coron.
that upon every motion, Milit. c. 3. p. 102. vid.
at their going out and coming in, Cyr^l. ad illum. Catech. 4. p. 81.
at their going to bath, or to bed, or to meals, or whatever their employment
or occasions called them to, they were wont frontem signaculo terere, to make
the sign of the Cross upon their forehead; and this they did (as he there tells
us) not that it was imposed upon them by any Law of Christ, but brought in by a
pious custom, as that which did very much tend to strengthen and increase their
faith. By this they showed, that they were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ,
nor unwilling to engage in the service of a crucified Master, which yet was so
great a scandal to the Heathen-World, and therefore so often triumphed in this
Symbol and Representation of it. Praefat. in Joh. tom. 3. p. 24.
Thus S. Hierom, though he lived in a time when Christianity had almost quite
prevailed over all other Religions in the World, yet counted this the great
matter of his glory, that I am (says he) a Christian, that I was born of
Christian Parents, and do carry in my forehead the Banner of the Cross. And
indeed so great a respect did they bear to this Representation of our Saviors
death, that (though they did not worship the Cross, yet) they took care that it
should not be put to any mean and trivial uses, be painted or made upon the
ground, or engraven upon Marble Pavements, or any thing where it might be
trampled upon, as is expressly provided by a Law of Theodosius and Valentinian.
Lib. 1. C. Justin. Tit. 8. L. unic.


The action having proceeded thus far, the party to be baptized was wholly
immerged or put under water, which was the almost constant and universal custom
of those times, whereby they did more notably and significantly express the
three great ends and effects of Baptism; for as in immersion there are in a
manner three several acts, the putting the person into water, his abiding there
for a little time, and his rising up again; so by these were represented
Christ's death, burial, and resurrection, and in conformity thereunto our dying
unto sin, the destruction of its power, and our resurrection to a new course of
life; by the persons being put into water was lively represented the putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, and being washed from the filth and
pollution of them: by his abode under it, which was a kind of burial in the
water, his entering into a state of death or mortification, like as Christ
remained for some time under the state or power of death, therefore as many as
are baptized into Christ, are said to be baptized into his death, and to be
buried with him by Baptism into death, that the old man being crucified with
him, the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth he might not serve
sin, for that he that is dead is freed from sin, as the Apostle clearly
explains the meaning of this rite: and then by his emersion, or rising up out
of the water, was signified his entering upon a new course of life, differing
from that which he lived before, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. But though by reason of the more eminent significancy of these things,
immersion was the common practice in those days, and therefore they earnestly
urged it and pleaded for it, yet did they not hold sprinkling to be unlawful,
especially in cases of necessity, as of weakness, danger of death, or where
convenience of immerging could not be had, in these and such like cases Cyprian
does not only allow, Ep. 76. ad Magn. p. 153.
but plead for it, and that in a discourse on purpose, when the question
concerning it was put to him. Upon this account it is that immersion is now
generally disused in these parts of the world, and sprinkling succeeded in its
room, because the tender bodies of most Infants (the only persons now baptized)
could not be put under water in these cold Northern Climates without apparent
prejudice to their health, if not their lives; and therefore in this as in
other cases, God requires mercy rather than sacrifice, especially considering
that the main ends of Baptism are attained this way, and the mystical effects
of it as truly, though not so plainly and significantly represented, by
sprinkling, as by putting the body under water.

This immersion was performed thrice, the person baptized being three several
times put under water, Vbi supra. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 26. p. 673.
a custom which Basil and Sozomon will have derived from the Apostles; Adv.
Prax. c. 26. p. 443 de Cor. mil. c. 3 p 460.
it is certain that it was very early in the Church, being twice mentioned by
Tertullian as the common practice. Dion. Areop. Eccles.
By this trine immersion they signified (say some) their distinct adoring the
three persons in the blessed Trinity, Hierarch. c. 2. p. 254.
and therefore the custom was, Ibid. de Sacram. lib. 2. c. 7. p. 424.
in repeating the words of institution, at the naming of every person, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to plunge the party under water, Athanns.
in dict. and interp. sap.
as Tertullian tells us, Quest. 93.
and S. Ambrose more expressly. 'Twas done (say others) to represent the death,
Cyrill. Catech Mist. 2. p. 518.
burial, and resurrection of our Savior, Greg. Nyss. Orat. Catech. c. 35. tom.
2. p. 530.
together with his three days continuance in the Grave; S. Augustine joins both
these together as the double mystery of this ancient rite, as he is cited by
Gratian to this purpose. De consecrat. Distinct. 4. c. 78.
It cannot be denied but that the Ceremony is very significant and expressive,
and accordingly the Ancients laid great weight upon it, Can 50.
insomuch that the Canons that go under the name of Apostolical command him,
whether Bishop or Presbyter, that baptizes any without the trine immersion, to
be deposed from his Ministry. But though this custom was in a manner universal,
yet in some places (in after times especially) it was otherwise, particularly
in Spain, where they used it but once, lest they should gratify the Arrians,
who made use of the trine immersion to denote the persons in the Trinity to be
three distinct substances, and gloried that the Catholics did, and held the
same with them. Upon this account they were content to immerge but once; and
when differences and controversies did still remain about it, the fourth
Council of Toledo out of a Letter of Gregory the great thus determined the
case, Can. 5.
that they should still use their single immersion, and that this would
sufficiently express the mysteries of Baptism, the diving under water would
denote Christ's death and descending into Hell, the coming out his resurrection:
the single immersion would express the unity of the Godhead; while the Trinity
of persons would be sufficiently denoted by the persons being baptized in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The person baptized being come
out of the water was anointed a second time, as S. Cyril tells us; and indeed
whatever becomes of the unction that was before, De Baptism. c. 7. p. 2^6.
it is certain that that which Tertullian speaks of as a part of the ancient
discipline, Cyrill. Catech. 4 p. ^33.
was after the person was baptized; which being done, Jobius apud Phot.
he had a white Garment put upon him, to denote his having put off the lusts of
the flesh, Cod. 222. c. 18. col. 597.
his being washed from the filth and defilement of his former sins, Ambros. de
iis qui myster. initiant. c. 7. tom. 4. p. 425.
and his resolution to maintain a life of unspotted innocence and purity,
according to that solemn and strict engagement which in Baptism he had taken
upon him. In this they alluded to that of the Apostle, that as many as are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, i. e. have engaged in that strict and
holy course of life, which he both by his doctrine and example has left to the
world: accordingly persons baptized are both by the Apostle, and by the Greek
Fathers frequently called (...), or the enlightened, because they now professed
that they were become the children of the light and of the day, and would not
return to works of darkness any more; and this as they expected mercy from
Christ at the great day; therefore the white Garment was wont to be delivered
to them with such a charge as this, Gregor. Sacramentar. inter Liturgic.
Latinor. tom. 2 p. 269. vid. Eucholog. Graec. in Offic. S. Baptism. p. 357.
Receive the white and immaculate garment, and bring it forth without spot
before the tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may have eternal
life. Amen. From the wearing of these white Vestments (as we have observed
before) Pentecost (which was one of the two annual times for Baptism) came to
be called Whitesunday, as also the Sunday after Easter (which was the other
time) Dominica in Albis, because then they laid this white Robe aside; for it
was the custom for persons baptized to wear this Garment for a whole week after
they were baptized, and then to put it off, and lay it up in the Church, that
it might be kept as an evidence against them, if they violated or denied that
Faith which they had owned in Baptism; whereof we have a memorable instance
under the Arrian persecution in Africa. Victor.
Elpidophorus a Citizen of Carthage had lived a long time in the communion of
the Church, Vtic. de persecut.
but apostatizing afterward to the Arrians, Vand. lib. 3. fol. 43.
became a most bitter and implacable persecutor of the Orthodox party: amongst
others whom he summoned to be put to the Rack, was one Miritas a venerable old
Deacon (who had been the Undertaker for him at his Baptism) who being ready to
be put upon the Rack, plucked out the white Vestment wherewith Elpidophorus had
been clothed at his Baptism, and with tears in his eyes thus openly bespake him
before all the people: These, Elpidophorus, thou minister of error, these are
the Garments that shall accuse thee, when thou shall appear before the majesty
of the great Judge; these I will diligently keep as a testimony of that ruin,
that shall depress thee down into the lake the burns with fire and brimstone;
these are they that were girt upon thee, when thou came pure out of the holy
Font; and these are they that shall bitterly pursue thee when thou shall be
cast into the place of flames; because thou have clothed thy self with cursing,
as with a Garment, and have cast off the sacred obligation of thy Baptism, and
the true faith which thou did then profess and take upon thee. Thesese were
the main and most considerable circumstances wherewith Baptism was administered
in the primitive Church; some whereof were by degrees antiquated and disused,
other rites there were that belonged only to particular Churches, and which, as
they were suddenly taken up, so were as quickly laid aside; others were added
in aftertimes, till they increased so fast, that the usage and the number of
them became absurd and burdensome, as may appear by the office for Baptism in
the Romish Ritual at this day.

As a conclusion to this Chapter, I had once thought to have treated concerning
Confirmation, B. Tailor.
which ever was a constant appendage to Baptism, Dr. Hammond.
and had noted some things to that purpose; Mr. Baxter
but shall supersede that labor, Mr. Hanmer.
finding it so often, Mr. Daille.
and so fully done by others in just discourses, that nothing considerable can
be added to them; only I shall give this brief and general account of it: all
persons baptized in the ancient Church (according to their age and capacity,
persons adult, some little time after Baptism, Children, when arrived to years
of competent ripeness and maturity) were brought to the Bishop, there further
to confirm and ratify that compact which they had made with God in Baptism,
and by some solemn acts of his ministry to be themselves confirmed and
strengthened, by having the grace and blessing of God conferred upon them, to
enable them to discharge that great promise and engagement which they had made
to God. This was usually performed with the Ceremony of Unction, the person
confirmed being anointed by the Bishop, or in his absence by an inferior
Minister; and indeed Unction was an ancient rite used in the Jewish Church to
denote the conferring of gifts or graces upon persons, and thence probably
amongst other reasons (as many other usages were) might be derived into the
Christian Church; Hen. Vales. Annot. ad Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. p. 135. col. 1.
though a learned man is of opinion, that unction was never used in
confirmation, but where the person being in case of necessity baptized by some
of the inferior Clergy had not been before anointed; otherwise those who had
received complete Baptism, were not afterward anointed at their confirmation,
for which the Council of Orange is most express and clear. Can. 1.
And indeed that Confirmation was often administered without this unction, no
man can doubt that knows the state of those times, being done only by solemn
imposition of the Bishops hands, and by devout and pious prayers, that the
persons confirmed might grow in grace and the knowledge of Christ, and be
enabled to perform those vows and purposes, and that profession of Faith which
they had before embraced in Baptism, and then again owned before the whole
Congregation. Till this was done, they were not accounted complete Christians,
nor admitted to the holy Communion, nor could challenge any actual right to
those great privileges of Christianity, whence it is that the Ancients so
often speak of Confirmation as that which did perfect and consummate
Christians, as being a means to confer greater measures of that grace that was
but begun in Baptism; upon all which accounts, and almost exactly according to
the primitive usage, it is still retained and practiced in our own Church at
this day: and happy were it for us, were it kept up in its due power and
vigor; sure I am, it is too plain that many of our unhappy breaches and
controversies in Religion do (if not wholly, in a great measure) owe their
birth and rise to the neglect and contempt of this excellent usage of the
Church.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Lords Supper, and the administration of it in the ancient Church.
The persons dispensing this Ordinance, who. The persons Communicating, the
Baptized or the Faithful: Suspension from this Ordinance according to the
nature of the offense. The Eucharist sent home to them that could not be
present. The case of Serapion. A custom in some places to give the Sacrament to
persons when dead, if they dyed before they could receive it, and why. The
Eucharist kept by persons at home. Sent abroad. This laid aside, and in its
stead Eulogiae or pieces of consecrated Bread sent from one Church to another,
as tokens of communion. The time of its administration: sometimes in the
morning, sometimes at night: varied according to the peace they enjoyed. How
often they received the Eucharist. At first every day. This continued in
Cyprian's time. Four times a week. Afterward less frequented. The usual place
of receiving, the Church: ordinarily, not lawful to consecrate it elsewhere.
Oblations made by persons before their communicating. Their Agapae or
Love Feasts what. Whether before or after the Sacrament. How long continued in
the Church. The manner of celebrating this Sacrament, collected out of the most
ancient Authors. The holy Kiss. The general prayer for the Church, and the
whole world. The consecration of the Sacrament: the form of it out of S.
Ambrose. The Bread common Bread. The sacramental Wine mixed with Water. This no
necessary part of the institution. Why probably used in those Countries. The
posture of receiving not always the same. Singing Psalms during the time of
celebration. Followed with prayer and thanksgiving. The whole action concluded
with the Kiss of peace.

THE holy Eucharist or Supper of our Lord being a rite so solemnly instituted,
and of such great importance in the Christian Religion had place accordingly
amongst the Ancients in their public offices and devotions. In speaking to
which I shall much what observe the same method I did in treating concerning
Baptism, considering the persons, the time, the place, and the manner of its
celebration. The persons administering were the ordinary Pastors and Governors
of the Church, those who were set apart for the ministration of holy offices;
the institution was begun by our Lord himself, and the administration of it by
him committed to his Apostles and to their ordinary successors, to the end of
the world. De Cor. mil c. 3. p. 102.
We find in Tertullian, that they never received it from any but the hand of
the President; which must either be meant of the particular custom of that
Church where he lived, or of consecration only; for otherwise the custom was
when the Bishop or President had by solemn Prayers and blessings consecrated
the sacramental elements, for the Deacons to distribute them to the people, as
well to those that were absent as to them that were present, Apol. 2. p. 97.
as Justin Martyr expressly affirms, and as the custom generally was afterward.
For the persons communicating at this Sacrament, at first the whole Church, or
body of Christians, within such a space, that had embraced the doctrine of the
Gospel, and been baptized into the faith of Christ, used constantly to meet
together at the Lords Table. As Christians multiplied, and a more exact
discipline became necessary, none were admitted to this ordinance till they had
arrived at the degree of the Faithful, for who ever were in the state of the
Catechumens, i. e. under instruction in order to their Baptism, or by reason of
any heinous crime under the censures and suspension of the Church, and not yet
passed through the several stages of the Penitents, might not communicate, and
were therefore commanded to depart the Church, when the rest went to the
celebration of the Sacrament: for looking upon the Lords Supper as the highest
and most solemn act of Religion, they thought they could never take care enough
in the dispensing of it; accordingly who ever was found guilty of any
scandalous fault, was according to the nature of the offense debarred the
Communion a shorter or a longer time, and sometimes all their life, not to be
reconciled and taken into the communion of the Church, till they had continued
their repentance to their deathbed. As for those persons that could not be
present, either through distance of place, sickness, or any other just cause,
the Eucharist was wont to be sent home to them, some little pieces of the
consecrated bread dipped in the sacramental Cup, which were usually carried by
the Deacon or some inferior Officer of the Church, or in cases of necessity by
any other person; as in the case of Serapion, of whom Dionysius of Alexandria
relates, Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 44. p. 246.
that having been all his life a good man, at last lapsed in a time of
persecution, and though he often desired reconciliation, yet none would
communicate with him; not long after he was seized upon by a mortal sickness,
deprived of the use of his speech and senses, but coming to himself after four
days, he sends his Nephew a little Boy late at night for one of the Presbyters
to come to him; the Minister was at that time sick, but considering the
exigence of the case, gives the Boy a little piece of the Eucharist, bids him
to moisten it with a little water, and so give it him in his mouth, which he
did, and immediately the old man cheerfully departed this life. For the better
understanding of which, we are to observe, that those who had lapsed into
Idolatry, were to undergo a very long time of penance, and were not many times
admitted to the Communion, till they were near their death; and because it
sometimes happened that they were overtaken with sudden death, before the
Sacrament could be administered to them, thence a custom sprung up to give it
them after they were dead, which they did doubtless upon this ground, that they
might give some kind of evidence, that those persons died in the peace and
communion of the Church, Vid. Conc. 3. ^arth. Can. 6*
though this usage was afterward by many Councils abrogated and laid aside.
Conc. 6. in Trull. Can. 83.
I take no notice in this place of their giving the Eucharist to new-baptized
Infants, the case being so commonly known and obvious. In those early times
nothing was more common than for Christians either to carry, or to have sent to
them some parts of the Eucharist, which they kept in some decent place in their
houses against all emergent occasions, especially to fortify and strengthen
their faith in times of persecution, and to increase kindness and amity with
one another; Joa. Front. Epist. de (...) Veter. p. 6.
whence one that was well versed in Church-Antiquities, conjectures that when
ever they entertained Friends or Strangers, they used before every meal first
to give them some parts of the holy Eucharist, as being the greatest badge, the
strongest band of true love and friendship in the world. Besides these parcels
of the sacramental Elements, there were wont at the celebration of the
Communion to be pieces of bread (which remained of the Offerings of the people)
which being solemnly blessed by the Bishop, might be given to those who had no
right to be at the Lords Table, as to the Catechumens, and such like, and were
to them instead of the Sacrament: These pieces were properly called Eulogiae,
because set apart by solemn benediction, and were sent up and down the Towns
and Villages round about, to testify and represent their mutual union and
fellowship with one another; nay and sometimes from Churches in one Country to
those that were in another; which was also done by the Eucharist it self: for
so Irenaeus in a Letter to Pope Victor tells us, Eusebius. ^. Eccl^s li^. 5. c.
23. p. 193.
that the Ministers of Churches, though differing in some little circumstances,
did yet use to send the Eucharist to one another. Which custom is also taken
notice of by Zonaras; but because the carrying the Sacramental Elements up and
down the World, was thought not so well to consist with the reverence and
veneration that is due to this solemn Ordinance, therefore it was abolished by
the Laodicean Synod, Can. (...).
and these Eulogiae or pieces of bread appointed at Easter to be sent up and
down in their room.

For the Time, the next circumstance, when they met together for this solemn
Action, it was in general at their public Assemblies, on the Lords day always
or the first day of the week, as we find it in the History of the Apostles
Acts, besides other days, and especially Saturday, on which day all the
Churches in the World (those of Rome only and Alexandria excepted) used to
celebrate this Sacrament, Socrat. lib. 5 c. 22. p. 286.
as the Historian informs us. What time of the day they took to do it, is not
altogether so certain; our blessed Savior and his Apostles celebrated it at
night at the time of the Jewish Passover; but whether the Apostles and their
immediate Successors punctually observed this circumstance may be doubted; it is
probable that the holy Eucharist which S. Paul speaks of in the Church of
Corinth was solemnized in the morning, In Loc.
the Apostles calling it a Supper (as Chrysostom thinks) not because 'twas done
in the evening, but the more effectually to put them in mind of the time when
our Lord did institute those holy Mysteries. De Cor. mil c. 3. p. 102.
Tertullian assures us in his time 'twas done in tempore victus, about
Suppertime (as all understand him) and very often in the morning before day,
when they held their religious Assemblies, of which Pliny also takes notice in
his Letter to the Emperor: Lib 10.
for in those times of Persecution, Ep. 97.
when they were hunted out by the inquisitive malice of their enemies, they
were glad of the remotest corners, the most unseasonable hours when they could
meet to perform the joint offices of Religion. But this communicating at
evening or at night either lasted only during the extreme heats of Persecution,
or at least wore off apace; for Cyprian expressly pleads against it, Ad Caecil.
affirming that it ought to be in the morning, Epist 63. p. 104.
and so indeed in a short time it prevailed over most parts of the World,
except in some places of Egypt, near Alexandria, Vt supr. p. 287.
of which Socrates tells us, that after they had sufficiently feasted
themselves in the evening, they were wont to receive the Sacrament. Under this
circumstance of time we may take occasion to consider, how often in those days
they usually met at this table. And at first (while the Spirit of Christianity
was yet warm and vigorous, and the hearts of men passionately inflamed with the
love of Christ) it is more than probable they communicated every day; or as often
as they came together for public Worship, insomuch that the Canons Apostolical
and the Synod of Antioch threaten every one of the Faithful with
Excommunication, Can. 9. Council. Antioch. Can. 2.
who came to Church to hear the holy Scriptures, but stay not to participate of
the Lords Supper: the eye of their minds was then almost wholly fixed upon the
memory of their crucified Savior, Vid Ep. Cypr. ad Thab^ it.
and the oftener they fed at his table, the stronger and healthier they found
themselves, Ep. 56 circa init. p. 87.
and the more able to encounter with those fierce oppositions that were made
against them. This custom of receiving the Sacrament every day continued some
considerable time in the Church, though in some places longer than in others,
especially in the Western Churches; from Cyprian we are fully assured 'twas so
in his time, De Orat.
We receive the Eucharist every day (says he) as the food that nourishes us to
Salvation. Domin. p. 192.
The like S. Ambrose seems to intimate of Milan, De Sacram. lib. 5. c. 4 p.
449. tom. 4.
whereof he was Bishop, Ad Jovinian. p. 108 tom. 2.
nay and after him S. Hierom tells us, 'twas the custom of the Church of Rome,
and S. Augustine seems pretty clearly to intimate, De Sermon.
that it was not unusual in his time. Dom. in mont. lib 2. tom 4. col. 1147.
and Ep 118. ad Januar. c. 3. col. 557.
In the Churches of the East this custom wore off sooner, though more or less
according as the primitive zeal did abate and decay; S. Basil telling us that
in his time they communicated four times a week, on the Lord's Day, Bas. Ep. 289
ad Caesariam.
Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, Patrit. tom. 3. p. 279.
yea and upon other days too, if the memory or festival of any Martyr fell upon
them. Afterward as the power of Religion began more sensibly to decline, and
the commonness of the thing begat some contempt (Manna it self was slighted,
after once it was rained down every day) this Sacrament was more rarely
frequented, and from once a day it came to once or twice a week, and then fell
to once a month, and after for the most part to thrice a year at the three
great Solemnities, of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide; to so great a
coldness and indifferency did the piety and devotion of Christians grow, after
once the true primitive temper and spirit of the Gospel had left the World.

Concerning the third circumstance, the Place where this holy Supper was kept,
much need not be said, it being a main part of their public Worship always
performed in the place of their religious Assemblies. 'Twas instituted by our
Savior in a private house, because of its Analogy to the Jewish Passover, and
because the necessity of that time would not otherwise admit; by the Apostles
and Christians with them 'twas celebrated in the houses of Believers, generally
in an upper room, set apart by the bounty of some Christian for the uses of the
Church, and which (as I have formerly proved) was the constant separate place
of religious Worship for all the Christians that dwelt thereabouts. Under the
severities of great persecutions they were forced to fly to the mountains, or
to their Cryptae or Vaults under ground, and to celebrate this Sacrament at the
Tombs of Martyrs, and over the Ashes of the dead. Churches growing up into some
beauty and regularity, several parts of the divine offices began to have
several places assigned to them, the Communion-service being removed to the
upper or East end of the Church, and there performed upon a table of wood,
which afterward was changed into one of stone, and both of them not
uncommonly, though metaphorically, by the Fathers styled Altars, and the
Eucharist it self, in later times especially, the Sacrament of the Altar. This
place was called (...), and was fenced in with Rails, within which the Clergy
received the Sacrament, as the Laity did without. Here it was that they all
used to meet at this heavenly Banquet, for out of this place they allowed not
the celebration of the Sacrament (a thing expressly forbidden by the Laodicean
Council) unless in cases of great necessity; Can. 58.
and therefore 'twas one of the principal Articles for which the Synod of
Gangra deposed Eustathius from his Bishopric, Socrat. lib. 2. c. 43 p. ^56.
and Council.
that he kept private Meetings, persuading some that were averse to the public
Assemblies of the Church, Gargr.
that they might communicate and receive the Sacrament at home. Can. 5. 6.


We come last of all to consider the Manner how the Eucharist was celebrated in
the ancient Church; but before we describe that, we are to take notice, that
after the Service of the Catechumens, and before the beginning of that of the
Faithful, at which the Eucharist was administered, the custom was to present
their offerings, every one according to his ability bringing some gift as the
first fruits of his increase, Irenaeus adv Haer. lib. 4. c. 34. p 362.
which was by the Minister laid upon the Altar or Communion Table, J. Martyr.
Ap. 2. p 98.
none of them then thinking it fit to appear before the Lord empty, and
therefore S. Cyprian severely chides a rich Widow of his time, De oper and
eleem^syn. p. 218.
who came without giving any thing to the poor man's Box, and did partake of
their offerings, without bringing any offering of her own. These Obleations
were designed to the uses of the Church, for the maintenance of the Ministry,
and the relief of the Poor, especially out of them were taken the Bread and the
Wine for the Sacramental Elements, the bread being no other than common bread,
such as served for their ordinary uses, there being then no notice taken of
what has for so many hundred years, and still is to this day fiercely disputed
between the Greek and the Latin Church, whether it ought to be leavened or
unleavened bread. Out of these oblations also it is probable they took (at least
sent provisions extraordinary) to furnish the common Feast, which in those days
they constantly had at the celebration of the Sacrament, where the rich and the
poor feasted together at the same Table. These were called Agapae or
Love Feasts (mentioned by S. Jude, and plainly enough intimated by S. Paul)
because hereat they testified and confirmed their mutual love and kindness, a
thing never more proper than at the celebration of the Lords Supper; which is
not only a Seal of our peace with God, but a sign and a pledge of our Communion
and fellowship with one another. Whether this Banquet was before or after the
celebration of the Eucharist, is not easy to determine; it is probable, that in
the Apostles time, and the Age after them, it was before it, in imitation of
our Saviors institution, who celebrated the Sacrament after supper, and S.
Paul taxing the abuses of the Church of Corinth reproves them, ^ Cor. 11.
That when they came together for the Lords Supper, they did not one tarry for
another, but every one took his own supper, i. e. that provision which he had
brought from home for the common feast* which was devoured with great
irregularity and excess, some eating and drinking all they brought, others (the
poor especially that came late) having nothing left, one being hungry and
another drunken; all this, it is plain, was done before the celebration of the
Eucharist, which was never administered till the wole Church met together. That
therefore which the Apostle reproves and corrects, is their indecency and
intemperance, commanding both rich and poor to wait for one another, and to eat
this common meal together, that they might the more orderly and unanimously
pass to the celebration of the Lords Supper. In after Ages this Feast was not
till the Communion was over, when the Congregation feasted together, and so
departed, Homil. 27. in 1. ad Corinth. p. 559.
and so Chrysostom expressly tells us 'twas in his days; besides, nothing is
more obvious, than that it was customary in those times for persons to fast,
till they had received the Communion. I know a very learned man is of opinion,
Albas. de rit. Eccles. obs. 18. p. 135.
that these Love Feasts were not kept at the same time with the celebration of
the Eucharist; but besides that his Arguments are not conclusive, the whole
stream of learned Writers runs full against him. These Feasts continued for
some Ages, till great inconveniences being found in them they were prohibited
to be kept in Churches by the Laodicean Synod, Can. 28.
and after that by the Council of Carthage; which though but Provincial or
National Councils, yet the Decrees were afterward ratified by the sixth
Trullan Council, Can. 74.
and the custom in a short time dwindled into nothing.

These things being premised, the sacramental elements prepared, and all things
ready, they proceeded to the action it self, Catech. mist. 5.
which (following for the main the account that is given us by S. Cyril of
Jerusalem, Cyrill. ib. p. 534.
and taking in what we find in others) was usually managed after this manner:
First the Deacon brought water to the Bishop and the Presbyters that stood
round about the Table to wash their hands, Constit. Apost. lib. 8. c. 11. p.
1013.
signifying the purity that ought to be in those that draw nigh to God,
according to that of the Psalmist, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so
will I compass thine Altar, O Lord; then the Deacon cried out aloud, mutually
embrace and kiss one another; Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 97.
this holy kiss was very ancient, commonly used in the Apostles times, and in
the succeeding Ages of the Church, but especially at the Sacrament, as a sign
of the unfeigned reconciliation of their minds, and that all injuries and
offenses were blotted out, according to our Lords command, When thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee,
leave thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy gift; this being done, they fell to
prayer, the whole Congregation praying together with the Minister (which
therefore Justin Martyr calls the Common Prayer, Ibid.
the form whereof in the Apostolical Constitutions is described at large) for
the universal peace and welfare of the Church, Lib. 8. c. 10. p. 1011.
for the tranquillity and quietness of the world, Tert. Apol. c. 39.
for the prosperity of the age, August. Epist. 118.
for wholesome weather and fruitful seasons, Constit. Apostol. lib. 2. c. 57. p.
881.
for all sorts of persons, for Kings and Emperors, and all in authority, for
Soldiers and Armies, for believers and unbelievers, for friends and
companions, for the sick and distressed, and in short for all that stood in
need of help. This general prayer is frequently mentioned by the ancient
Fathers; as that which was at the beginning of the Communion Service, Ib. p.
538.
though S. Cyrill place it a little later, Cyrill. p. 537.
as doubtless it was in his time. Chrysostom in c. 9. 1. ad Cor. Hom. 36. p. 652.
2. ad Cor. c. 8. Hom. 18* p 873.
After this followed the mutual salutation of the minister and people, the
Minister saying the Lord be with you, to whom the People answered, and with thy
spirit; the Minister cried, lift up your hearts (nothing being more suitable
says S. Cyrill at this time, Cyprian. de Orat. Dom. p. 195.
than that we should shake off all worldly cares, and exalt our hearts to God
in heaven) the people truly assenting and yielding to it, answered, we lift
them up unto the Lord; the Minister proceeded, let us give thanks unto the Lord
(for what more fit than thankfulness to God, and a high resentment of such
favors and blessings) to this the people returned, it is meet and just so to
do: Whereupon the Minister proceeded to the prayer of Consecration (the form
whereof we have in the Apostolical Constitutions) wherein he expressed huge
thankfulness to God for the death, Lib. 7. c. 26 p. 979.
resurrection, and ascension of his Son, for the shedding of his blood for us,
and the celebration of it in this Sacrament; for condescending to admit them to
such mighty benefits, J. Mart. ib. p. 98.
and praying for a closer unity to one another in the same mystical body,
Cyrill. p. 541.
concluding usually with the Lords Prayer, and the hearty and universal
acclamation of Amen, Constit. Apost. lib. 8. c. 13. p. 1022.
by all that were present: this done, the Minister cried out (...) holy things
belong to holy persons; the people answering, there is one holy, one Lord Jesus
Christ; then he exhorted them to a due participation of the holy mysteries,
which Cyrill tells us was done by way of a divine Hymn, singing, Ib. p. 545.
come taste and see that the Lord is good.

After this the Bishop or Presbyter took the sacramental elements, sanctified
then by a solemn benediction: De Sacrament. lib. 4* c. 5. p. 439.
the form of consecration we have in S. Ambrose; Lord, make this oblation now
prepared for us, to become a reasonable and acceptable sacrifice; this, which
is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; who the day
before he suffered took the bread in his sacred hands, looked up to heaven,
giving thanks to thee, O holy Father, almighty and everlasting God; blessed it,
and having broken it gave it to his Apostles and Disciples, saying, Take, eat
all of it, for this is my body which is broken for many: likewise also after
Supper he took the Cup, that very day before he suffered, looked up to heaven,
giving thanks to thee, holy Father, almighty and everlasting God; and having
blessed it, gave it to his Apostles and Disciples, saying, Take and drink ye
all of it, for this is my blood. J. Mart. ubi supr.
After this he first brake the bread, and delivering it to the Deacon, he
distributed it to the Communicants; and after that the Cup, which was likewise
delivered to them, for the custom of communicating under one kind only, as is
used in the Church of Rome, was then unknown to the world, nay and for above a
thousand years after Christ. In some cases it is true they dipped the Bread in the
Wine, as in the case of baptized infants, to whom they administered the
Eucharist in those primitive times, and to very weak dying persons, who would
not otherwise have swallowed the bread; and that by this means they might keep
the Sacrament at home against all emergent occasions; and this probably might
in time make the way easier for introducing the Sacrament under the kind of
Bread only. Their sacramental Wine was generally diluted and mixed with water,
as is evident from Justin Martyr, Vt supr.
Irenaeus, Cyprian, and others; Iren. lib. 4. c. 57. lib. 5. c. 2.
Cyprian in a long Epistle expressly pleads for it, as the only true and
warrantable tradition, Ad Caecil.
derived from Christ and his Apostles, Ep. 63. p. 100.
and endeavors to find out many mystical significations intended by it, and
seems to intimate as if he had been peculiarly warned of God to observe it
according to that manner; Ib p. 105.
an argument which that good man often produces as his warrant to knock down a
controversy, when other arguments were too weak to do it. But although it
should be granted that our Savior did so use it in the institution of the
Supper (the Wines of those Eastern Countries being very strong and generous,
and that our Savior, as all sober and temperate persons, might probably abate
its strength with water, of which nevertheless the History of the Gospel is
wholly silent) yet this being a thing in it self indifferent and accidental,
and no way necessary to the Sacrament, could not be obligatory to the Church,
but might either be done or let alone. The posture wherein they received it was
not always the same; the Apostles at the institution of it by our Savior
received it (according to the custom of the Jews at meals at that time) lying
along on their sides upon Beds round about the Table; how long this way of
receiving lasted, I find not; in the time of Dionysius Alexandrinus the custom
was to stand at the Lords Table, Apud Eusebius. H. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 9. p. 255.
as he intimates in a Letter to Pope Xystus; other gestures being taken in as
the prudence and piety of the Governors of the Church judged most decent and
comely for such a solemn action; the Bread and Wine were delivered into the
hands of those that communicated, and not as the superstition of after-ages
brought in, injected or thrown into their mouths. Page 545.
Cyrill tells us that in his time they used to stretch out their right hand,
putting their left hand under it, either to prevent any of the sacramental
Bread from falling down, Vid. Conc. 6 in Trull.
or as some would have it, hereby to shadow out a kind of figure of a Cross.
Can. 101.


During the time of administration, which in populous Congregations was no
little time, they sung Hymns and Psalms (the compiler of the Apostolical
Constitutions particularly mentions the 33. Psalm) which being done, Lib. 8. c.
13. p. 1023.
the whole action was solemnly concluded with prayer and thanksgiving, Videsis
Dion. Areop. de Eccl.
(the form whereof is likewise set down by the Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions) that God had thought them worthy to participate of such sacred
mysteries, Hierarch. c. 3. p. 284. Lib. 7. c. 27 p. 980. and lib. 8. c. 15.
Cyr. p. 546.
and the people being blessed by the Bishop or the Minister of the Assembly,
and having again saluted each other with a Kiss of Peace, as a testimony of
their hearty love and kindness (whence Tertullian calls this Kiss signaculum
Orationis, De Orat. c. 14.
the Seal of Prayer) the Assembly broke up, and they returned to their own
houses. This for the main was the order wherein the first Christians celebrated
this holy Sacrament; for though I do not pretend to set down every thing in
that precise and punctual order wherein they were always done (and how should
I, when they often varied according to time and place?) yet I doubt not but who
ever examines the usages of those times, will find that it is done as near as
the nature of the thing would bear.

The end of the first Part.
Primitive Christianity; Part 2.
OR, THE RELIGION OF THE Ancient Christians In the first Ages of the Gospel.
PART II.
The Religion of the Primitive Christians as to those Virtues that respect
themselves.
CHAP. I.
Of their Humility.
This second branch of Religion comprehended under the notion of Sobriety, and
discovered in some great instances of it. The proper tendency of the Christian
Religion to beget humility. This divine temper eminently visible in the first
Christians: made good out of their writings. The great humility and selfdenial
of Cyprian. What Nazianzen reports to this purpose of his own Father. Their
modest declining that just commendation that was due to them. Many who
suffered, refused the honorable title of Martyrs. Nazianzen's vindication of
them against the suggestions of Julian the Apostate. The singular meekness and
condescension of Nebridius amidst all his honors and relations at Court. Their
stooping to the vilest Offices, and for the meanest persons: dressing and
ministering to the sick, washing the Saints feet, kissing the Martyrs chains.
The remarkable humility of Placilla the Empress, and the Lady Paula. An
excellent discourse of Gregory Nyssen's against Pride.

NExt to Piety toward God, succeeds that part of Religion that immediately
respects our selves, expressed by the Apostle under the general name of
Sobriety, or the keeping our selves within those bounds and measures which God
has set us, Virtues, for which the Primitive Christians were no less renowned
than for the other: Amongst them I shall take notice of their Humility, their
contempt of the World, their temperance and sobriety, their courage and
constancy, and their exemplary patience under sufferings. To begin with the
first.

Humility is a virtue that seems more proper to the Gospel; for though
Philosophers now and then spoke a few good words concerning it; yet it found no
real entertainment in their lives, being generally animalia gloriae, creatures
pufft up with wind and emptiness, and that sacrificed only to their own praise
and honor: whereas the doctrines of the Gospel immediately tend to level all
proud and swelling apprehensions, to plant the world with mildness and modesty,
and to cloth men with humility, and the ornament of a meek and a quiet spirit:
By these we are taught to dwell at home, and to converse more familiarly with
our selves, to be acquainted with our own deficiencies and imperfections, and
rather to admire others than to advance our selves: for the proper notion of
Humility lies in a low and mean estimation of our selves, and an answerable
carriage toward others, not thinking of our selves more highly than we ought
to think, nor being unwilling that other men should value us at the same rate.
Now that this was the excellent spirit of Primitive Christianity will appear,
if we consider how earnestly they protested against all ambitious and
vainglorious designs, how cheerfully they condescended to the meanest Offices
and Employments, how studiously they declined all advantages of applause and
credit, how ready they were rather to give praise to others than to take it to
themselves, in honor preferring one another. Epist. ad. Corinth. p. 3.
S. Clemens highly commends his Corinthians, that all of them were of an humble
temper, in nothing given to vainglory, subject unto others rather than
subjecting others to themselves, ready to give rather than receive. Page 17.
Accordingly, he exhorts them (especially after they were fallen into a little
faction and disorder) still to be humble-minded, to lay aside all haughtiness
and pride, foolishness and anger; and not to glory in wisdom, Page 20.
strength or riches, but let him that glories, glory in the Lord; and to follow
the example of our Lord the Scepter of the Majesty of God; who came not in the
vain-boasting of arrogance and pride, although able to do whatsoever he
pleased, but in great meekness and humility of mind, appearing in the world
without any form or comeliness, or any beauty that he should be desired,
suffering himself to be despised and rejected of men, who esteemed him not, and
hid as it were their faces from him; who counted himself a worm and no man, and
was accordingly made a reproach of men, and the derision of the people; all
they that saw him, laughing him to scorn, shooting out the lip and shaking the
head at him. Now if our Lord himself was so humble-minded, what should we be,
who are come under the yoke of his grace? This and much more to the same
purpose, has that Venerable and Apostolical man in that admirable Epistle,
wherein he does lively describe and recommend the meek and excellent spirit of
the Gospel.

Justin the Martyr treads in the very same steps; Epist. ad Zen. and Seren p.
505.
He tells us that we are to shun all sinister suspicions of others, and to be
very careful what Opinion we entertain of them: that we are to be of a meek and
unpassionate mind, not envying the good esteem and respect which others have,
nor ambitiously affecting, or putting our selves forwards upon any service or
employment: that we are humbly to submit our selves, not in words only, Ibid.
p. 508, 509.
but in all our actions, so as that we may appear to be not Impostors and
Distemblers, but mild and undesigning persons; for whoever would govern his
life aright must be modest and unpragmatical, not angry and contentious, but
silently consider with himself what is best and fittest to be done: that we are
to account others wise and prudent, and not to think our selves the only
discreet and understanding persons: that we must not despise their admonitions,
but hearken to their counsels, when ever they are just and true. When some in
St. Cyprian's time had made a noble and resolute confession of Christ in the
face of the greatest danger, Epist. 5.
lest they should be exalted above measure in their own thoughts, Presb. and
Diacon. p. 13.
he bids them remember, according to the discipline of the Gospel, to be
humble, and modest and quiet, that they might preserve the honor of their
name, and be as glorious in their actions as they had been in their words and
confessions of Christ: that they should imitate their Lord, who was not more
proud, but more humble at the time of his passion, washing his Apostles feet:
and follow the counsel and pattern of St. Paul, who in his greatest sufferings
continued meek and humble, and did not arrogate any thing to himself, no not
after he had been honored with a translation into Paradise and the third
Heavens. And great reason he had to press this with all possible vehemence at
that time, lest Christians by their turbulent and unquiet carriage should
provoke the Heathen Magistrate to greater severity against them: and indeed who
could better do it than he, who was himself so eminent for humility? For though
some Schismatical persons (whose wildness and insolence he sought to restrain)
endeavored to insinuate that he was not so humble as became a man of his Rank
and Order, and as were our Lord and his Apostles; yet observe how he vindicates
himself in a Letter to Pupianus the Head of the Party; Epist. 69. p. 116.
As for my humility (says he) it is sufficiently known not only to the Brethren,
but the Gentiles themselves do see and respect it, and thou thy self did know
and honor it, whilst thou wast yet in the Church, and did Communicate with
me: but which of us I pray is farthest from humility? I, who daily serve the
Brethren, and receive those who come unto the Church with all joy and kindness;
or Thou, who make thy self a Bishop over thy Bishop; and pretendest to be a
Judge appointed by God over him who is thy Judge? And indeed how far the good
man was from any designs of greatness and domination appeared in this, ^ontius
Diac. in vit. Cyprian. p. 12.
that when the people had universally chosen him to be Bishop, he privately
withdrew and retired himself, reckoning himself unworthy of so great and
honorable an Office, and giving way to others, whose age and experience
rendered them (as he thought) much fitter for it: but the importunity of the
people being heightened into a greater impatiency, and having found where he
was, they beset the house, and blocked up all passages of escape, till they had
found him, and forced it upon him. And with no less humility did he behave
himself in the discharge of it: When consulted by some of his Clergy what they
should do in the case of the lapsed, Ep. 5. p. 13, 14.
he answers, that being now alone he could say nothing to it, for that he had
determined from his first entering upon his Bishopric not to adjudge any thing
by his own private order without the counsel of the Clergy, and the consent of
the People. So meanly did that wise and excellent man think of himself, and so
much did he attribute to the judgment and concurrence of those that were below
him.

Nazianzen reports of his Father (a Bishop too) that amongst other Virtues he
was peculiarly remarkable for Humility; Orat. 19. in Laud. Patr. p. 300.
which he did not express Philosopher-like in little arts of external modes and
carriage, putting on a feigned behavior, like women who having no natural
beauty of their own, fly to the additionals of dresses and paintings, (...),
becoming more deformed by their ascititious beauty. His Humility consisted not
in his dress, but in the constancy of his mind; not in the hanging down of his
head, or the softness of his tone, or the demureness of his look, or the
gravity of his beard, or the shaving of his head [the cropping of his hair] or
the manner of his gate; but in the frame and temper of his soul, being as
humble in his mind, as he was sublime and excellent in his life; and when no
man could arrive at the perfection of his Virtues, yet every one was admitted
to a freedom of converse with him. Both in his garb and diet he equally avoided
pomp and sor^^dness; and though a great restrainer (...) ^ppetite, would yet
seem not to do it, ^est he should be thought plainly to design glory to himself
by being needlessly singular above other men. How industriously do we find them
many times disowning that deserved praise and commendation that was due to
them? How modestly does Justin Martyr decline his adversaries commendation of
the acuteness and elegancy of his reasonings? Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 280.
resolving all into the Grace of God, that enabled him to understand and
expound the Scriptures, of which Grace he there persuades all men freely and
fully to become partakers with him. Of the Confessors in the time of the
persecution under M. Aurelius, Eusebius out of the relation which the Churches
of Vienna and Lions in France sent to the Churches in Asia, Hist. Eccl. lib. 5.
^. 2. p. 166.
tells us, that although they had often born witness to the Truth at the
dearest rate of any thing on this side death, though they had been frequently
thrown to wild Beasts, exposed to the fire, and the remains of wounds and
violence were visible in all parts of their bodies; yet in imitation of the
great humility of the Son of God, they would not after all this (which yet was
not uncommon in those times) either call themselves Martyrs, or suffer others
to call them so: but if any of the brethren either by letter or discourse had
saluted them by that title, they would severely reprove and check them for it;
acknowledging themselves at best but vile and despicable Confessors, and with
tears begging of the Brethren to be instant with God by Prayer, that they might
perfect all by a real Martyrdom. Hence it was, that when Julian the Apostate
refused to proceed against the Christians by open persecution, as his
Predecessors had done, because he envied them the honor of being Martyrs;
Orat. 3. in Julian. 1. p. 73.
Nazianzen answers, that he was greatly mistaken if he supposed they suffered
all this, rather out of a desire of Glory, than a love of Truth: such a foolish
and vainglorious humor might indeed be found amongst his Philosophers, and
the best of his party, many of whom have put themselves upon strange attempts
merely to gain the honor of a name, and the reputation of Divinity: But for
Christians, they had rather dye in the Cause of Religion, although no man
should ever know of it, than to live and flourish amongst others with the
greatest Honor and Esteem; it being our great solicitude not to please Men,
but only to obtain honor from God: Nay, some of us (says he) arrive to that
horoick pitch, as to desire an intimate Union unto God, merely for himself, and
not for the honors and rewards that are laid up for us in the other world.
Memorable the humility of the great Constantine, De Vit. Constant. lib. 4. cap.
48. p. 551.
that when all men's mouths were filled with the honorable mention of his
Virtues, and one took upon him to praise him to his face, telling him how happy
he was whom God had thought worthy of so great an Empire in this world, and for
whom he reserved a much better Kingdom in the next; he was highly offended with
the address, and advised the man that he should not presume to talk so any
more; but rather turn his praises of him, into prayers to God for him, that
both here and hereafter he might be thought worthy to be numbered amongst the
servants of God.

I cannot but take notice of what St. Hierome reports of Nebridius, Ad Salvinam
Nebridii viduam, de viduit. servand. p. 75. tom. 1.
a young Roman Gentleman, Cousin-german to the Empress, by whom he was brought
up in the Palace, Play-fellow and Companion to the young Emperors (to whom he
was very dear) trained up with them in the same Studies, and Arts of Education;
that notwithstanding all this, and that he was then in the prime and vigor of
his Youth, yet he was neither debauched by intemperance amidst the delicacies
and pleasures of the Court, nor swelled with pride, reflecting upon others with
a surly look; but rendered himself amiable unto all: the Princes he loved as
brethren, and revered as Lords: their attendants and Ministers, and all the
Orders of the Palace he had so endeared by kindness and condescension, that
they who were so much below him, did in a manner think themselves equal to him.

I shall give but one instance more of the Humility of those times, and that is
their ready condescending to any Office or Employment, though never so mean,
about the poorest Christian^ they thought it not below them to cook and provide
victuals for them, to visit the imprisoned, to kiss their chains, to dress
their wounds, to wash their feet. And in this our Lord himself went before
them, when a little before his death he rose from table, girt himself, washed
and wiped his Disciples feet, and then told them what influence this ought to
have upon them, That if their Lord and Master had washed their feet, they ought
also to wash one another feet, for that he had given them an example, that
they should do as he had done to them; and good reason, the servant not being
greater than his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him.
Accordingly we find this particular Act of Christian condescension frequently
used in the Primitive Church. 1 Timothy 5. 10.
St. Paul expressly requires it as a qualification in a widow that was to be
taken in as a Deaconess into the Church, that she be one that has used to lodge
strangers, Ad Vxor. l. 2. c. 4. p. 168.
and to wash the Saints feet. Tertullian assures us 'twas usually done by
Christians in his time, to go into the Prisons to kiss and embrace the Martyrs
chains, to harbor and provide for indigent brethren, and to bring water to
wash the Saints feet: No office so low, which they were not content to stoop to.

When Placilla the Empress was checked by some of the Court for her mighty
condescension in visiting the Hospitals, Theodoret H. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 18. p.
161.
and curing the lame and the sick with her own hands, preparing and giving them
their provisions, as a thing too much below her State and Grandeur: She
answered, That to distribute gold became the Emperor; but for her part she
thought her self obliged to do this for God, who had advanced her to that
Honor and Dignity: Often instilling this pious Counsel into her Husband; It
becomes you, Sir, always to remember, what you once were, and what you now are:
by which means you will show your self not to be ungrateful to your great
Benefactor, and will govern the Empire committed to you Justly and Lawfully,
and to the honor of him that gave it.

St. Hierom reckoning up the Virtues of Paula, Epitaph. Paulae ad Eustoch.
filiam.
a Lady of the greatest Descent and Nobility in Rome, but devoting her self
afterward to the solitudes of a Religious Life, Tom. 1. p. 175.
tells us of her, that for humility (the prime and chief Virtue of Christians)
she carried her self with so much lowliness, that whoever had seen and not
known her, could not but have mistaken her for the meanest of the Maids that
waited on her. When ever she appeared in the midst of those devout and pious
Virgins that dwelt with her, she always seemed both in clothes, and voice, and
garb, and gate the least and most contemptible of all the rest. So studious was
the Piety of those days to keep the luster of their own perfections from
sparkling in their eyes, and not fondly to admire the glimmerings of their own
light; being so far from falsely arrogating to themselves those excellencies
which they had not, that they industriously concealed those excellent
perfections which they had.

I cannot better conclude this Chapter, De Beatitudinib. Orat. 1. Tom. 1. p.
768.
than with the excellent reasonings of St. Gregory of Nyssa against priding a
man's self in any external ornaments or advantages, where he thus entertains the
proud man: He that looks to himself, and not to the things that are about him,
will see little reason to be proud: for what is Man? Say the best of him, and
that which may add the greatest honor and veneration to him, that he is born of
Nobles, and yet he that adorns his descent, and speaks highliest of the
splendor and nobility of his house, does but derive his pedigree from the
dirt: and to enquire more narrowly into the manner of his being born into the
world, common with other men, were to uncover what shame and modesty require
should be concealed in the profoundest silence. And do thou not blush, thou
statue of earth, who art shortly to be crumbled into dust, who bubble-like
containest within thee a short-lived humor; do thou not blush to swell with
pride and arrogance, and to have thy mind stuffed with vain idle thoughts? Have
thou no regard to the double term of man's life, how it begun, and where it will
end? Thou pridest thy self in thy juvenile age, and flatterest thy self in the
flower, the beauty and sprightliness of thy youth, that thy hands are ready for
action, and thy feet apt to dance nimble measures; that thy locks are waved by
the wanton motions of the wind, and a soft down overgrows thy cheeks, that thy
purple-robes put the very roses to the blush, and thy silken vestures are
variegated with rich embroidery of of battles, huntings, or pieces of ancient
history; or brought down to the feet, artificially set off with black, and
curiously made fast with strings and buttons. These are the things thou look
at, without any regard to thy self. But let me a little as in a glass show thee
thy own face, who and what thou art: Have thou not seen in a public
Charnel-house the unvailed mysteries of humane nature; bones rudely thrown upon
heaps; naked skulls with hollow eye-holes, yielding a dreadful and deformed
spectacle? Have thou not beheld their grinning mouths, and ghastly looks, and
the rest of their members carelessly dispersed and scattered? If thou have
beheld such sights as these, in them thou have seen thy self. Where then will
be the signs of thy present beauty, that good complexion that adorns thy
cheeks, and the color of thy lips, that frightful Majesty, and supercilious
loftiness that once resided in thine eyes, or thy nose that once beautifully
graced thy cheeks? Where are thy locks that were wont to reach thy shoulders,
the curles that used to adorn thy temples? What are become of those arms that
used to draw the bow, those legs that used to bestride thy horses? Where Is the
purple, the silken garments, the long robe, the belt, the spurs, the horse, the
race, the noise and pransings; and all the rest of those things that now add
fuel to thy pride? Tell me, where then will those things be, upon the account
whereof thou do now so much boast and bear up thy self? Was there ever any
dream so fond and inconstant, any thing more fantastic that ever appeared to
a man asleep? What shadow was ever so thin, so incapable of being grasped
within the hollow of the hand, as this dream of youth, which at once appears,
and immediately vanishes away. Thus the Holy Man treats the young vapouring
gallant, and levels his pride with the sober considerations of mortality: In
his following discourse he deals with persons of riper years, and such as are
in places of authority and power, and shows how absurd and uncomely pride is in
them: which it might not be impertinent to represent, but fearing to be
tedious, I forbear.

CHAP. II.
Of their Heavenly-mindedness, and contempt of the World.
The Soul rightly constituted naturally tends upwards, especially when assisted
with the aids of Religion. The first Christians much above the World. Not
wrought upon by temptations of advantage. They accounted it the greatest honor
to be Christians. Contented with a very mean portion of outward things. The
story of some of our Saviors Kindred brought before Domitian. The Sect of the
Apostolici and Apotactici, the Fathers of the Mendicant Orders in the Church of
Rome. The little care which Christians then had of rich furniture and costly
provisions. Their denying to go to public feasts and sports made for the
pleasure of the people. This charged upon them by the Heathens. The case of the
woman that was seized upon by an evil spirit while she was at the Theater.
Their cheerful parting with any worldly comforts, Estate, Relations, etc. A
strange Heroic speech of Melania at the loss of her Husband and two Sons,
mentioned by St. Hierom. Eager for Martyrdom, as what would presently send them
to Heaven. Their frequent supporting themselves under suffering^s with
discourses of the Kingdom above. Thence accused as treasonable affectors of the
Empire. Their contempt of the world much promoted by the opinion that the day
of judgment was near at hand. Christians in the world like sojourners in a
strange Country.

THe Soul of man being Heaven-born cannot but partake of the nature and
disposition of that Country, and have a Native inclination to that place from
whence it borrows its Original: And though it is true, in this corrupt and
degenerate state it is deeply sunk into matter, clogged and overborn with the
earthly and sensual propensions of the lower appetites, the desires and designs
of men creeping up and down like shadows upon the surface of the earth; yet
does it often, especially when assisted with the aids of Religion, attempt its
own rescue and release. The mind of a good man is acted by manly and generous
impulses, it dwells in the Contemplations of the upper Region, tramples upon
those little projects of profit or pleasure which ensnare and enslave other
men, and makes all its designs subservient to the interests of a better
Country. A temper of mind never more triumphant in any than in the Christians
of old, whose Conversations were in Heaven, and whose spirits breathed in too
free an air to be caught with the charms of the best enjoyments this world
could afford: They looked upon the delights and advantages of this life as
things not worthy to arrest their affections in their journey to a better.
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 308.
Justin Martyr discoursing with Trypho the Jew, tells him, that they were
careful with all fear to converse with men according to the Scriptures, not
greedily desiring to gain Riches, or Glory, or Pleasure to themselves,
concerning any of which no man could lay any thing to their charge; and that
they did not live like the great men of his people, of whom God himself has
left this reproachful character, That their Princes were companions of thieves,
every one loving gifts, and following after rewards.

Nay, Trypho himself bears them this testimony, Ibid. p. 226.
though doubtless he intended it as a reproach to them, that having from a vain
report chosen Christ to be their Master, they did for his sake foolishly
undervalue and throw away all the enjoyments and advantages of this world.
Amongst us (says Tatian) there is no affectation of vainglory, Orat. cont.
Gra. p. 167.
no diversity of sentiments and opinions, but separating our selves from all
vulgar and earthly thoughts and discourses, and having given up our selves to
the commands of God to be governed by his Law, we abandon whatever seems but
akin to humane glory. They never met with opportunities to have advantaged and
enriched themselves, but they declined and turned them off with a noble scorn.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 15. p. 35.
When Abgarus the Toparch of Edessa offered Thaddaeus (one of the Seventy
Disciples) great sums of Gold and Silver for the pains he had taken, and the
great things he had done amongst them, he refused them with this answer, To
what purpose should we receive good things from others, who have freely
forsaken and renounced our own? As indeed in those times friends and relations,
houses and lands were cheerfully parted with, when they stood in competition
with Christ; they could content themselves with the most naked poverty, so it
might but consist with the profession of the Gospel.

When Quintianus the President under Decius the Emperor asked Agatha the
Virgin-Martyr, Martyr. ejus apud Sur. ad diem 5. Feb. tom. 1. ex 5. Metaph.
why being descended of such Rich and Illustrious Parents, she would stoop to
such low and mean Offices as she took upon her; She presently answered him, Our
Glory and Nobility lies in this, that we are the Servants of Christ. To the
same purpose was the answer of Quintinus the Martyr under the Dio^lesian
Persecution, when the President asked him how it came about, Apud Sur. ad 3.
Octo. com. 5.
that he being a Roman Citizen, and the Son of a Senator would truckle under
such a Superstition, and worship him for a God, whom the Jews had Crucified;
the Martyr told him, That it was the highest Honor and Nobility to know and
serve God: that the Christian Religion, which he called Superstition, ought not
to be traduced with so base a name, seeing it immediately guided its followers
to the highest degrees of happiness; for herein in it is that the Omnipotent
God is revealed, the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, by whom all things were made, and who is in all things equal
to his Father.

The simplicity of Christians then kept them from aspiring after honor and
greatness, and if at any time advanced to it, their great care was to keep
themselves unspotted from the world; In Laud.
as Nazianzen reports of his brother Caesarius, Caesar. frat. Orat 10. p. 166.
chief Physician to the Emperor Constantius, that though he was very dear to
him (as he was to the whole Court) and advanced by him every day to greater
honors and dignities, yet this (says he) was the chief of all, that he
suffered not the Nobility of his soul to be corrupted by that Glory, and those
delights that were round about him: but accounted this his chiefest honor that
he was a Christian; in comparison of which all things else were to him but as a
sport and Pageantry; he looked upon other things but as Comic Scenes, soon up
and as soon over; but upon Piety as the most safe and permanent good, and which
we can properly call our own, regarding that Piety especially which is most
inward and unseen to the world.

The like he relates of his Sister Gorgonia, In laud.
as the perfection of her excellent temper, Gorg^^. O^a^. 11. p. 183.
that she did not more seem to be good, than she did really strive to be so;
peculiarly conversant in those secret acts of piety, which are visible only to
him, who sees what is hidden and secret; to the Prince of this world she left
nothing, transferring all into those safe and celestial treasuries that are
above; she left nothing to the earth but her body, changing all things for the
hopes of a better life; bequeathing no other riches to her children but an
excellent pattern, and a desire to follow her example. The truth is, as to
estate, they were not concerned for more than what would supply the necessities
of nature, or the wants of others, not solicitous to get or possess such
revenues as might make them the objects either of men's envy or their fear; as
may appear amongst others by this instance.

Domi^ian the Emperor being informed that there were yet remaining some of
Christ's Kindred according to the flesh (the Nephews of Judas the Brother of our
Lord, Eusebius. lib. ^ 3, (...). p. 89.
of the Race and Posterity of David, which the Emperor sought utterly to
extirpate) he sent for them, enquired of them whether they were of the Line of
David, they answered they were; he asked what possessions and estate they had,
they told him they had between them thirty nine acres of land (to the value of
about nine thousand pence) out of the fruits whereof they both paid him
Tribute, and maintained themselves with their own hard labor, whereto the
hardness and callousness of their hands (which they then showed him) bore
witness: He then asked them concerning Christ and the state of his Kingdom; to
which they answered, that his Empire was not of this world, but Heavenly and
Angelical, and which should finally take place in the end of the world, when he
should come with glory to judge both the quick and the dead, and to reward men
according to their works: which when he heard, despising the men upon the
account of their meanness, he let them go without any severity against them.
Id. lib. 6. c. 3. p. 205.
Of Origin we read, that he was so great a despiser of the world, that when he
might have lived upon the maintenance of others, he would not, but parted with
his Library of Books to one that was to allow him only four oboli a day; the
day he spent in laborious tasks and exercises, and the greatest part of the
night in study; he always remembered that precept of our Savior, Not to have
two coats, not to wear shoes, not anxiously to take care for to morrow, nor
would he accept the kindness of others, when they would freely have given him
some part of their estate to live on.

Not that the Christians of those times thought it unlawful to possess estates,
or to use the blessings of Divine Providence; for though in those times of
persecution they were often forced to quit their estates and habitations, yet
did they preserve their Proprieties entire, and industriously mind the
necessary conveniences of this life, so far as was consistent with their care
of a better. There were indeed a sort of Christians called Apostolici, who in a
fond imitation of the Apostles left all they had, and gave up themselves to a
voluntary poverty, holding it not lawful to possess any thing: hence they were
also called Apotactici, or renouncers, because they quitted and renounced
whatsoever they had; but they were ever accounted infamous Heretics: They
were, Cnot. Apostolic. Haeres. 61. page 220.
as Epiphanius tells us, the descendants of Tatian, part of the old Cathari and
Encratitae: together with whom they are put in a Law of the Emperor
Theodosius, Cod. Theod. lib. 16.
and reckoned amongst the vilest of the Manichaean Heretics: Tit. 5. de
Haeretici^ l. 7.
mentioned also by Julian the Apostate as a branch of the Galilaeans, De Cynic.
Sect. Orat. 7. p. 417.
as he calls the Christians, by him compared to the Cynic Philosophers amongst
the Heathens, for the neglecting of their Country, the abandoning of their
estates and goods, and their loose and rambling course of life; only herein
different, that they did not as those Galilaean Apotactistae run up and down
under a pretense of poverty to beg alms. The truth is, by the account which
both he and Epiphanius give of them, they seem to have been the very Patriarchs
and primitive founders of those Mendicant Orders, and professors of vowed
poverty which swarm so much in the Church of Rome at this day. But to return;
The Christians of those days did not study those Arts of splendour and
gallantry which have since overrun the world, stately Palaces, costly
furniture, rich hangings, fine tables, curious beds, vessels of Gold and
Silver, the very possession of which (as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks) creates
envy; Paedag. lib. 2. c. 3. p. 160, 161.
they are rare to get, hard to keep, and it may be not so accommodate to use.
Will not a knife cut as well (says he) though it have not an Ivory-haft, or be
not garnished with silver? or an earthen basin serve to wash the hands? will
not the table hold our provisions, unless its feet be made of Ivory? or the
Lamp give its light though made by a Potter, as well as if 'twere the work of
the Goldsmith? may not a man sleep as well upon a mean couch, as upon a bed of
Ivory? upon a Goats skin, as well as upon a purple or Phoenician carpet? Our
Lord ate his meat out of a common dish, and made his followers sit upon the
grass, and washed his Disciples feet, without ever fetching down a silver bowl
from Heaven; he took the water which the Samaritaness had drawn in an earthen
pitcher, not requiring one of gold, showing how easy it was to quench his
thirst; for he respected the use, not the vain and superfluous state of things.
This and much more he there urges to this excellent purpose, to let us see how
little a Christian need be beholden to the world, if he be content with what is
enough for the necessary uses of humane life.

To this let me annex some part of that discourse which Gregory Nyssen has upon
this subject: De Orat.
The fluid and transitory condition of man's life (says he) calls for a daily
reparation of the decays of nature: Domin. Orat 5. p. 745. tom. 1.
he therefore that looks no further than to minister to the desires of nature,
Vid. ^ypri* de Orat.
and troubles not himself with vain anxious thoughts for more than's necessary,
Dom. p. 192.
lives little less than the life of Angels, whilst by a mind content with
little he imitates their want of nothing. For this cause we are commanded to
seek only what is enough to keep the body in its due state and temper, and thus
to address our Prayers to God, give us our daily bread: Give us bread, not
delicacies or riches, not splendid and purple vestures, or rich golden
ornaments, not Pearls and Jewels, silver vessels, large fields and great
possessions, not the government of Armies, the conduct of Wars, and disposal of
Nations, not numerous flocks and herds of cattle, or multitudes of slaves and
servants, not splendour and gallantry in public, not marble pillars, or brazen
statues, or silken Carpets, or quires of Music, or any of those things by
which the soul is diverted and drawn from more Noble and Divine thoughts and
cares: But only Bread, which indeed is the true and common staff of man's life.

Nor were they more studious of pleasures and recreations abroad, Minut. F. p.
10. vid. Constit.
than they were of fineness and bravery at home: Apostol. lib. 2. c. 62. p. 886.
They went not to public feasts, nor frequented the shows that were made for
the disport and entertainment of the people: and this was so notorious, that
the Heathens charged it upon them as part of their Crime. Observe how he in
Minutius Foelix draws it up; The Romans (says he) govern and enjoy the world,
while you in the mean time are careful and mopish, abstaining even from lawful
pleasures; you visit not the shows, nor are present at the pomps, nor frequent
the public feasts; you abhor the holy games, the sacrificial meats and drinks,
crown not your heads with Garlands, nor perfume your bodies with sweet odours;
a ghastly, fearful and miserable people! which by that time that Octavius the
Christian comes to answer, Page 30.
he grants it all to be true, and tells him there was very good reason why they
should abstain from their shows, pomps and divertisements, at which they could
not be present without great sin and shame, without affronting their modesty,
and offering a distaste and horror to their minds; and indeed they reckoned
themselves particularly obliged to this by what they had vowed and undertaken
at their baptism, when they solemnly engaged to renounce the Devil and all his
works, pomps and pleasures, i. e. (says St. Cyril) the sights and sports of the
Theater, Catech. Mist. 1. p. 510.
and such like vanities. The truth is, they looked upon the public sports and
pastimes of those days as the Scenes not only of folly and lewdness, but of
great impiety and Idolatry; as places where the Devil eminently ruled, and
reckoned all his Votaries that came thither. De Spect. c. 26. p. 83.
Accordingly Tertullian tells us of a Christian woman who going to the Theater,
was there possessed by the Devil; and when the Evil Spirit at his casting out
was asked, how he durst set upon a Christian; he presently answered, I did but
what was fit and just, for I found her upon my own ground.

Being thus affected toward the world, they could very willingly part with any
thing that was dearest to them, Friends, Estate, Liberty, or Life it self.
Athen. leg. pro Christ. p. 2.
We are not moved (says one of their Apologists) with the loss of our Estates
which our enemies wrest from us, nor with the violence that is offered to our
credit and reputation, or if there be any thing of greater concernment than
these; for although these things are mightily prized and valued amongst men,
yet can we despise and slight them: nay, we cannot only when beaten, refrain
from striking again, and make no resistance against those that invade and spoil
us; but to them that smite one cheek, we can turn the other, and to them that
take away the coat, we can let them take the cloak also. And I remember
Nazianzen tells us, Orat. 1. p. 32.
that of those excellencies and endowments which God had given him, health,
wealth, esteem, and eloquence, he reaped this only benefit, that he had
something which he could contemn, and by which he could show that he infinitely
valued Christ before them. The greatest endearment of this life is Relations,
and yet these too they could quietly resign when God called for them: Memorable
it is what St. Hierom reports of Melania (a Lady of great Piety in his time, Ad
Paul. tom. 1. p. 160.
in whose commendation Paulinus Bishop of Nola spends a very large Epistle,
especially commending her for her generous and heroic mind, tam viriliter
Christiana, Epist lib. 2.
that she was something above a woman, Epist. 2.
and had the Masculine spirit of a Christian: of this Lady St. Hierom tells us)
that her Husband lying dead by her, she lost two of her sons at the same time;
and when every one expected that she should break out into a violent passion,
tear her hair, rent her garments, and burst into tears; she stood still, and at
last falling down as 'twere at the feet of Christ, broke out into this pious
and Christian resentment, Lord, I shall serve thee more nimbly and readily, by
being eased of the weight thou have taken from me. Nay, so little kindness had
they for this world, that they cared not how little they stayed in it, and
therefore readily offered themselves to Martyrdom at every turn. Apol c. 41. p.
33.
Tertullian tells his adversaries, that all those plagues which God sent upon
the world, what damage soever they might do their enemies, could not hurt them,
because they had no other concernment in this world, than as soon as they could
to get out of it. De Spect. c. 1. p. 73.
This he elsewhere tells us, the very Gentiles assigned as one reason, why the
Christians were trained up in a defiance of all the sports and pleasures of
this life, that they might be more willing to dye; and that the cords being cut
by which they were tedder'd to this world, they might be more nimble and
expedite for their passage hence. Their main designs were intent upon the
happiness of another world, and therefore they regarded not what they went
thorough to come sooner to it. Being inflamed (says Justin Martyr) with the
desire of a pure and an eternal l^fe, Apol. 2. p. 57.
we breath after an intimate converse with God the great Parent and Creator of
the world, and make have to seal our confession with our blood; being certainly
persuaded that they shall attain to this state, who by their actions study to
approve themselves to God that they follow after him, and are heartily desirous
of communion with him in that life, where no malice or wickedness shall take
place. This was the mighty support they leaned upon, the great cordial with
which they kept up their spirits in those sad times of suffering and
persecution, the firm belief and expectation which they had of enjoying God in
a better life. They knew, that the more have their enemies made to break open
the cage of their bodies, the sooner their souls would be at liberty to fly to
the regions of blessedness and immortality. And indeed so much were their
thoughts fixed upon this, so often did they use to comfort one another by
discoursing of that Kingdom which they expected hereafter, that some of their
enemies over-hearing and mistaking them, accused them as treasonable affectors
of the Empire: when alas! (as Justin Martyr assures the Emperors) they meant
nothing less; Ibid. p. 58.
which they might know by this, that being brought to trial, they freely
confessed themselves to be Christians, though they certainly knew they must dye
for it: whereas (says he) did we expect an humane Kingdom, we would dissemble
and deny it, to avoid death, and so expect a more convenient season to
accomplish our designs; but since our hopes are not placed in any thing in this
world, we regard not those that take away our lives, well knowing they take
nothing from us, but what we must needs lay down our selves. It was their care
then continually to keep company with dying thoughts, and to dwell within the
prospect of eternity; it being generally true of all what St. Hierom
particularly reports of Marcella, Epitaph. Marcell. ad Princip. p. 119.
that she lived so, as always believing that she should immediately dye, and
never put on her garments, but it put her in mind of her grave, and of the
sheet that should wrap her up in the house of silence.

But besides the influence which the expectation of their particular
dissolutions had upon them, there was one thing which I doubt not did mightily
contribute to their being weaned from the world, and did strongly animate them
to a quick and speedy diligence about the affairs of the other life, and that
was, the Opinion they generally had of the day of judgment being near at hand:
An Opinion started early, as appears by that caution which St. Paul gives the
Thessalonians about it; 2 These. 2, 3, 4.
and it lasted for some Ages after, as is evident from several passages in
Tertullian, Vid. de cult. foemin. lib. 2. c. 9. ad uxor. lib. 1. c. 5.
who always improves it to this purpose, that men should not unnecessarily
encounter themselves with the affairs of this life, but carry themselves as
those that were immediately passing hence. I conclude with that of Justin
Martyr; Christians (says he) dwell in their own countries, Epist. ad Diognet.
p. 497.
but as inmates and foreigners; they have all things common with other men as
fellow-Citizens, and yet suffer all things as strangers and foreigners: every
foreign Region is their Country, and every Country is foreign to them: They
marry like other men, and beget children, but do not expose or neglect their
Offspring; they feast in common, but do not exceed like other men; they are in
the flesh, but do not live after the flesh; dwell upon earth, but their
conversation is in Heaven. Therefore he compares Christians in this world to
the soul in the body, as for other reasons, so especially for this, that as the
soul lives in the body, but is not of the body, so Christians dwell in the
world, but are not of the world; an immortal spirit dwells in a mortal
tabernacle, and Christians, while they sojourn in these corruptible mansions,
expect and look for an incorruptible state in Heaven.

CHAP. III.
Of their sobriety, in respect of their Garb and Apparel.
Much of the temper of the mind shown in the outward garb. The great ends of
clothes, for honesty, necessity, distinction. The Primitive Christians
accommodated themselves to these. Careful to avoid both singularity and
excess. Generally conformable to the sober fashions of the places where they
lived. Whether when they turned Christian they left off the Roman gown, and
took up the Pallium or Cloak; a Toga ad Pallium: the occasion of Tertullians
writings his excellent Book on that subject. the Pallium principally worn by
those that entered upon a life of more than ordinary strictness. Their great
care to keep a medium between costliness and sordidness. This accounted part of
that pomp and vanity which they renounced in baptism. The vanity of excessive
garbs and finery complained of by the Fathers in some of those times.
Especially invective against methods of artificial beauty; what pleaded in
defense of it by some persons in those days, considered and answered out of
the Fathers. That they were rich, no sufficient argument to patronize the doing
of it. Better ways of employing their estates. Nor that they could do it
without violating their chastity. The inconveniences of it with respect to
others. That they did it to please their Husbands, Answered: This needless;
every wise and good man content without it. Such Arts savored too much of lewd
wanton Prostitutes. Painting, and such Arts injurious to God, and disparagement
of his workmanship. This largely prosecuted out of Tertullian and Cyprian. A
memorable story which Theodoret relates of his own Mother. True beauty
accounted to lie in a holy and virtuous mind, and a pure and pious life. Gay
and fantastic persons fitly represented by the Egyptian temples. Nazianzen's
description of his good Sister Gorgonia.

THe Primitive Christians being thus eminent for their contempt of the world,
it is easy to imagine that they were very temperate and abstemious in the use of
all the pleasures and conveniences of humane life, which we shall more
particularly consider in these three instances, their Sobriety in respect of
Garb and Apparel, their Temperance in regard of food and diet, and their
Continence or chastity.

For the first, the care about our Garb and Dress, it is one of those instances
of Sobriety which are to be conducted by the rules of Religion and Reason, and
which very much discover a virtuous or a vicious temper: There are three things
(as the Son of Syrach well observes) that show a man what he is, his Attire,
excessive Laughter, and his Gate: There is not certainly a more open evidence
of a vain mind, than a vain garb and habit. St. Basil discoursing what habit
does best beseem a Christian, Reg. fus. disput. interrog. 22. p. 566. tom. ^.
tells us in general, that it ought to be such as most lively expresses the
meekness and humility of the mind, that good men of old were so attired, and
that we are commanded, having food and raiment to be therewith content; not
studying variety, and which most commonly follows it, softness and elegancy,
which are but instruments to minister to excess and luxury, introduced into
humane life through the idle and unnecessary Arts of looseness and effeminacy.
De cultu foemin. lib. 2. c. 13. p. 160.
It Is not enough (says Tertullian) that a Christian be chaste and modest, but he
must appear to be so; a virtue, of which he should have so great a store and
treasure, that it should flow from his mind upon his habit, and break from the
retirements of his conscience into the superficies of his life, as he there
expresses it. More particularly St. Basil tells us, Ibid. p. 567.
that the habit of a Christian ought to be suitable to the two great ends of
clothing instituted by God, viz. Honesty and Necessity; honesty to hide the
less comely parts of the body, and to cover that shame which sin has brought
upon mankind: in Paradise Innocence was man's only robe, 'twas sin brought in
the fig-leav'd coat, and what should more induce us to be modest in our
apparel, than to remember, that our clothes are Monitors of our apostasy, and
that there is little reason we should pride our selves in that which is only a
cover for our shame? Necessity, and so clothes were designed to keep the body
in convenient warmth, and to defend it from those injuries and extremities of
the air and wether, which would otherwise soon rot down this house of clay. Now
to both these ends (he tells us) we ought to accommodate our garments, Vid.
Cyril. ad Illuminat. Catec. 4. p. 94.
not striving for variety, having some for uses at home, others for oftentation
when we go abroad, but that whatever attains these ends is enough. But besides
these, there is a third Use and end of clothes, noted by Clemens Alexandrinus,
Paedag. lib. 3. c. 11. p. ^45.
and that is for distinction, not only of Sexes, but of different ranks and
degrees of men, such as agree best to men's age, persons, shape, nature, or
their several states and employments; in these respects men may use different
and distinguishing habits: nay, he grants that in some cases men may recede
from the strict rule and discipline of this affair, and that such women as
cannot otherwise gain upon their husbands, may (if they require it) go a little
more trim and neat, provided (as he there limits it) it be done only to please
and gain upon their husbands, and that they do not practice any Artifices of
unlawful beauty.

Now that the ancient Christians governed themselves by these rules in this
affair is plain, in that they avoided both singularity on the one hand, and
excess on the other, generally conforming themselves to the decent and orderly
customs and fashions of the times and places where they lived. Epist. ad
Diogn. p. 496.
Justin Martyr giving his friend an account of the Christians, tells him, that
they differed not from other men either in their Country, or Speech, or the
usages of the civil life; they dwell in their own Cities, use the same language
with other men, nor have they any singular and extraordinary way of life; they
are not in any thing affected or fantastic; but inhabiting partly amongst
Greeks, partly in barbarous Cities, as every ones lot is fallen, they follow
the customs of their Country; and both in clothes and diet, and all other
affairs of outward life, show the excellent and admirable constitution of their
discipline and conversation. I am not ignorant of what some learned men would
have us to believe, that in those times when any turned from Paganism to
Christianity they were wont to change their habit, to leave off the Toga or
Gown (the common habit almost in all parts of the Roman Empire) and to take up
the Pallium or Cloak: and this they think sufficiently countenanced by the
instance of Tertullian, who laying aside the Gown, and putting on the Cloak,
was accused of lightness and inconstancy by the people of Carthage, and
bitterly persecuted with the common sarcasm, a Toga ad Pallium, as one that had
want only skipp'd from the Gown to the Cloak, i. e. from one profession to
another; insomuch that he was forced to write an Apology for himself, which he
did in his book de Pallio, where with a great deal of satirical and sarcastick
wit he retorts upon them, and vindicates himself from their charge and cavils.
But that there was any such change of habit at persons first* coming over to
Christianity I can see no reason to believe; and for the case of Tertullian it
makes nothing to the purpose, unless it could be proved that he left off the
gown at his first entrance upon the Christian Religion, which will be hard to
make out; for I am clearly of the mind of the learned Salmasius, that he
altered his habit, and assumed the cloak not when he first became Christian,
Praefat. in Comment. Tertul. de Pallio.
but when he was made Presbyter of the Church of Carthage; Tertul. de Pall. c.
4.
whence it is called by him according to his dialect Sacerdos habitus (for so
it is in all ancient Manuscripts, Vid. Tertul. ex Edit. B. Rhenani, p. 620.
vid. etiam Salm. in loc.
and in the first Edition of B. Rhenanus, and not sacer habitus, as later
Editions have it) the Priests habit; because the Christian Priests usually wore
it after their entrance upon Holy Orders. For the better understanding of
which, we are to consider a little, that amongst the Greeks the Pallium or
Cloak was not commonly worn, but was the proper habit of Philosophers, who
professed a more severe and accurate course of life. Acordingly amongst the
Christians those who professed themselves to be (...), the more strict and
exact observers of the Christian discipline, whether they were Laity or Clergy,
assumed this habit to themselves; and because the Clergy in those times
generally took upon them this austere and philosophic way of life, this garb
was most peculiar to them; and this probably they did the rather, not only
because this was the most plain and simple garment in it self, but because they
supposed the Apostles (whom they strove to imitate) wrote this habit, as is
plain they did as from other passages in the New Testament so from St. Paul's
sending for the Cloak which he left at Troas: therefore the Author of the
Apostolical History, who shelters himself under the name of Abdios Babylonius,
certainly forgot himself, when describing the habit of St. Bartholomew the
Apostle, he made it so trim and fine. Lib. 8. fol. 96. p. 2.
Vestitus (says he) Color (doubtless it should be Colobio) albo, etc. he was
clothed in a white coat, beset with studs of purple, over which he had a white
Cloak, having purple gems at each corner of it; a piece of gallantry unknown to
the plainness of those times, and unsuitable to the profession of that Holy
man. Indeed, as plenty and prosperity began to flow in upon the Church, this
simple and modest garment was laid aside, and the Clergy took upon them a more
rich and splendid garb; insomuch that when Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia took
upon him to wear the Philosophic Cloak, Socrat.
and persuaded his followers also to use it; Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c 43. p. 156.
vid. Council. Gangr. Can. 12.
he was for this very reason deposed by his own Father Eulalius Bishop of
Caesarea, because wearing a habit unsuitable to the Ministerial Order, which
sentence was not long after ratified by the Synod of Gangra, and a Canon made
against it.

From what has been said it may appear, that although the Clergy, and such as
entered upon a more strict and ascetick course of life had a habit peculiar to
themselves, yet the generality of Christians differed not from the common garb.
They were indeed exceeding careful to avoid all such as savoured of costliness
and finery, choosing such as expressed the greatest lowliness and innocence.
The garment that we should wear (says Clemens of Alexandria) ought to be mean
and frugal, Ib. ubi supr* p. 244*
not curiously wrought with diverse colors (the emblem of craftiness and
deceit) but white, to denote our embracing and professing simplicity and truth;
our outward clothing is an indication of the temper of our manners* that is true
simplicity of habit, which takes away what is vain and superfluous; that the
best and most solid garment, which is furthest from art and curiosity, Pont.
diac. in vit. Cypr^ p. 12.
and most apt to preserve and keep warm the body. S. Cyprian ever observed a
due decorum in his garb as well as his countenance; his aspect was grave and
yet cheerful; neither a frowning severity, nor an over-pleasant merriness, but
such a happy mixture of both, that it was hard to say, whether he was more to
be feared or loved, but that he equally deserved both: and just such was his
garb, sober and moderate, keeping a just distance both from slovenliness and
superfluity; it neither argued him to be swelled with pride, nor infected with
a miserable and sordid mind. Chrysostom amongst other things especially
commends Olympias (a woman of great birth and estate, Ad Olymp. Ep. 2. tom. 4.
p. 617, and 623.
and of no less piety) for the incredible modesty and meanness of her attire,
not much better than that of the poorest beggar; having nothing in her garb or
gate that was feigned or gaudy, nothing elaborate or artificial; which things
(says he) were the colors, the bright and beautiful representations of her
virtue, whereby that wisdom and divine Philosophy that lay hidden in her mind,
was externally painted and shadowed out. So far were they then from the vanity
and affectation of pomp and bravery, of dazzling the eye with rich costly
ornaments, that they thought they could never seem mean enough, and this they
looked upon themselves as especially bound to by the promise which they had
made at Baptism, Hom. 21. ad pop. Antioch. nom* 1. p. 244.
when they renounced the Devil, and his whole pomp and service, as the same
Father elsewhere informs us.

It cannot be denied, but that the Fathers frequently complain of, and smartly
declaim against the vanity and folly of some in those times (women especially,
by the weakness of their sex more propense to the excesses of pride and
superfluity) who gave up themselves to all the arts of fineness and gallantry;
and out of an emulation to the Ladies amongst the Heathens amongst whom they
lived, they affected all manner of pomp and elegancy, De Cult.
striving to be as rich and gaudy, Foem* lib. 1. c. 8. p. 153.
not as they ought, but as they could make themselves; whose excessive
prodigality Tertullian does thus no less elegantly than sarcastically describe;
A great estate (says he) is drawn out of a little pocket; it is nothing to
expend In the Lat. decies sestertium; which in our money is seventy eight
thousand one hundred and twelve pound ten shillings.
many thousand pounds upon one string of pearls, a weak tender neck can make a
shift to carry about whole Woods and Lordships; vast sums of money borrowed of
the Banker, and noted in his account book to be repaid every month with
interest, are weighed at the beam of a thin slender ear; so great is the
strength of pride and ambition, that even the weak feeble body of one woman
shall be able to carry the weight and substance of so many pounds taken up at
Usury. This was looked upon as a very great sin. Clemens Alexandrinus censures
it very deep; Paedog. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 219.
that though gluttony and intemperance be great vices, yet not to be compared
with a nice overcurious study of fineness and bravery: I suppose he means in
respect of its insatiable and unbounded nature. For so he adds; A
well-furnish'd table, and cups that go round may quickly stop the mouth of a
hungry stomach: but where there is a nice affectation of bravery, of Gold,
Purple, or Jewels, there not the treasures of the Creation, not what is above,
or under ground, not the spoils of the Tyrian Sea, not the fraights from
India, or Ethiopia, no nor Pactolus with his golden streams would suffice. Nay,
such persons though as rich as Midas, would not yet think themselves rich or
fine enough. But that which the Fathers do most severely censure and cry out
against, is not only the expense and costliness of their cloths and jewels, but
the arts which they used to add greater beauty and handsomness to themselves,
than God and Nature had bestowed upon them. This it seems the pride and folly
of some Christian women had arrived to, which the zeal and piety of those times
did vehemently condemn and protest against. It may not be amiss to consider,
what the Gallants of those times pleaded for themselves, and what was returned
in answer to them. Sometimes they pleaded that they were rich, and had great
estates, and ought therefore to live like themselves, and to make use of the
estates that God had given them. To this Cyprian answers, De discipl. and
habit. virgin. p. 164.
that they only are truly rich, that are rich in and toward God; that the
world ought to be despised, the pomps and delights whereof we then renounced,
when we happily turned to God, with the love of whom all that is in the world,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life is not
consistent; that the use of riches in this case is to be governed by just and
moderate measures: the Apostle commanding all women how rich soever, to adorn
themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with
broidred hair, or gold or pearls or costly array; but (which becomes women
professing Godliness) with good works. S. Peter also requiring of them not the
outward adorning of gold or fine apparel, but the hidden ornament of the heart;
that though they were rich, yet they were to consult the honor and modesty of
their profession, and might not go to the utmost bounds of what was lawful,
some things being lawful, which were not expedient, especially when by their
wanton and lascivious dress they might be a means to kindle in the breasts of
others the flames of an unchaste and unlawful passion, Vid. Constit. Apost lib*
1. c. 3. p. 804.
and so prove the occasion of their ruin; that if they thought themselves
bound to use the estate that God had given them, God had shown them a more
excellent way, to relieve the hungry, and feed the poor members of Christ, that
this was the best art of improving riches, and the way to lay them up in safe
and unfailing treasuries, where we may be sure to reap the fruit of them
another day, and not to throw them away upon arts of beauty, upon vain and
fantastic dresses. This is the sum of that good man's reasonings in the case.

Sometimes they pleaded, that they might beautify and honor the body without
any danger of violating their chastity, or setting open the casement for luxury
to fly in upon them. Tertullian answers, De cult. foemin. lib. 2* c. 3. p. 155.
Let them that had a mind to it glory in the flesh, that for us we have no
designs of glory, partly as being highly unsuitable to us, who by the law of
God are under the profession of humility; partly because all glory (to us
especially) is vain and swelling, how much more that which arises from the
flesh; if we must glory, it is much fitter for us who follow spiritual things to
please our selves in the excellencies of the spirit than in those of the flesh;
let us rejoice in those things, about which we are employed, and seek glory
from those things, from which we hope for salvation. A Christian may indeed
glory in the flesh, but it is when for the sake of Christ it is torn in pieces,
that the spirit may be crowned, not that it may prove a snare to attract the
eyes and sights of young men's ungovernable passions after it; then, when it is
tormented for confessing the Christian name, when a woman is found stronger
than the men that torment her, when she suffers fires, or crosses, or swords,
or wild-beasts, that she may receive the crown; these (says Cyprian) are the
precious jewels of the flesh, Vt supr. p. 163.
these the much better ornaments of the body. So that (as Tertullian goes on)
beauty being altogether so unuseful to us, ought to be despised by them that
want it, and to be neglected by them that have it: a good woman that is content
with her own native beauty, has not that occasion to betray her to lust and
folly; and if she had, it would become her not to promote, but hinder it. Tert.
ibid. c. 4.
Sometimes again they pretended, they did it only to please their Husbands, and
that they might appear more lovely and acceptable to them: to which Plea, as
being most specious and plausible, I observe especially Three things returned
by way of answer.

First, Id. ibid.
That to design the pleasing of their Husbands by such Arts as these, was
altogether needless, seeing every wise and good man cannot but like his wife
best without them. No wife (says Tertullian) can seem deformed to her own
Husband, who doubtless was well enough pleased with her, either for her temper,
or her beauty when he first made choice of her: Let none fear their Husbands
will more distaste and dislike them for abstaining from artificial compositions,
for every husband is a rigid exacter of his wifes chastity; and consequently
they can be of no advantage to this end, whether he be a believing or an
unbelieving Husband, a Gentile or a Christian: If a Christian, then he will not
require any such foreign beauty, as not being taken with those accomplishments,
which the Gentiles do account so; if a Gentile, then according to that vile
opinion which they have of us Christians, let her do what she can, he will
suspect her to be naught: For whose sake therefore should she so curiously
dress, so delicately nurse and nourish up her beauty; for a believing Husband?
he requires it not; for an Infidel? he will never believe it to be true; why then
should she so much desire to please either one that suspects it, or one that
does not desire it?

Secondly, That these loose delicate Arts came too near the practice of lewd
wanton prostitutes, who made use of these ways and tricks for no other end but
to enveagle men into their embraces: The bravery of Ornaments and Apparel, and
the additional enticements of beauty are chiefly used (as Cyprian tells them)
by Prostitutes and Unchaste women; Vbi supr. p* 165. vid. Tert. de culi. foemin.
lib. 1. c. 4.
and that no women's garb is more rich and gaudy, than theirs, whose modesty is
most vile and cheap. And this he tells us the Scripture shadows out by the
Woman that was arrayed in purple and scarlet-colour, and decked with gold and
precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication: But chaste and modest Virgins
shun the dresses of the defiled, the habit of the shameless, the badges of the
Stews, the Ornaments of light wanton women. Whereas all other Creatures (says
Clemens Alexandrinus) birds and beasts are content with their own natural
beauty and colors; Paedag. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 220.
woman only as if she were inferior to the beasts, thinks her self so deformed
as that there is need to repair the defect by external bought and borrowed
beauty: for while by infinite Arts of curious and costly dresses (some whereof
he there particularly mentions) they seek to ensnare them, who children-like
are apt to admire every thing that is strange and gaudy, they show themselves to
be women that have put off shame and modesty; and whoever (says he) calls them
so, shall do them no wrong, as carrying the signs and representations of it in
their very faces.

Thirdly, De Cult.
They mainly insisted upon this, Foemin lib. 2. c. 5. p. ^56. vid.
that these Arts were injurious to God, and a disparagement to his
workman-ship. Constit. App. lib. 1. c. 8. p* 823.
We are not (says Tertullian) to seek after neatness and finery beyond what is
simple and sufficient, Cl. Alex. Paedag. lib. 3. c. 11. p. 249.
and what pleases God; against whom they offend, who are not satisfied with his
workman-ship: an argument which he there prosecutes with great severity. S.
Cyprian treads in his Masters steps and prosecutes the same argument with a
great deal of zeal and sharpness; De Discipl. and hab. Virg. p. 166.
amongst other things he tells us, that these additional Arts are a bold and
sacrilegious attempt, and an high contempt of God, that it is to reform what
God has formed, to alter and change his work, and as much as they can to
dis-figure that person, which God has made after his own image and likeness:
that such a one has cause to fear, lest when the day of Resurrection comes, he
that made them should not know them, nor receive them when they come for the
promised rewards. Accordingly he brings in the great Censor and Judge of the
world thus speaking to such a person: This is none of my workman-ship, nor is
this our image and likeness; thou have defiled thy skin with false
compositions, changed thy hair into an adulterous color, thy face counterfeit,
thy shape corrupt, thy countenance quite another thing, thou can not behold
God, thine eyes not being the same which God created, but which the Evil Spirit
has infected; thou have imitated the fiery, sparkling and glittering eyes of
the Serpent: of thine enemy have thou learnt to be over-trim and neat, and with
him like to receive thy portion. And are not these (says he) things fit to be
thought of by the servants of God, and to be the daily objects of their care
and fear?

I cannot but in this place set down a passage which Theodoret reports of his
own Mother, Histor. Religios. c. 9. in vit Petr. p. 343.
that in her younger years having a distemper in one of her eyes, which had
baffled all the Arts of Physic, she was at length persuaded to make her
address to one Peter, famous for the gift of Miracles; who lived near Antioch,
a very severe and ascetick course of life: and to render her self (as she
thought) the more considerable in his eye, she put on all her bravery, her
richest robes, her pendants, and chains of pearl, and whatever could render her
fine and splendid. No sooner was she come to him, but the severe and
uncomplemental man at first sight bluntly entertained her with this discourse:
Tell me, Daughter; suppose an excellent Artist having drawn a picture according
to all the laws and rules of Art, should expose and hang it forth to view, and
another rude and unskilful bungler coming by should find fault with this
excellent piece, and attempt to amend it, draw the eyebrows to a greater
length, make the complexion whiter, or add more color to the cheeks; would not
the true Author be justly angry, that his Art was disparaged and undervalued,
and needless additions made to the piece by an unskilful hand? And so it is
here; can we think that the great Artificer of the world, the Maker and Former
of our Nature, is not, and that justly, angry, when you accuse his
incomprehensible Wisdom and Perfection, of Unskilfulness, and want of
Knowledge? for you would not add your reds, whites, or blacks, did you not
think your bodies needed these additions; and while you think so, you condemn
your Creator for weakness and ignorance: But know, that he has Power answerable
to his Will, and as the Psalmist tells us, the Lord has done all things as he
pleased: and he that takes care of what is good for all, would not give what is
evil and hurtful unto any. Corrupt not therefore the Image of God, nor attempt
to add, what he in his infinite wisdom thought not fit to give: study not to
invent this adulterate beauty, which even to chaste persons often proves a cause
of ruin, by becoming a snare to them that look upon it. The Holy Man said no
more, and the Young Lady presently found her self wounded with the force of his
Reasonings, but would not leave him till she had obtained the end of her
errand, which he granted not without great importunity, and an humble and
modest referring all to the Grace of God, and so sent her home with a double
cure, her body cured of its distemper, and her mind of its pride and vanity;
and she ever after led a most humble, sober and pious life.

But it were to transcribe whole Books, to tell you what the Fathers (these
three that I have so often mentioned especially) have said in this case, the
cause being not more copiously than elegantly managed by them; and thither I
refer the capable Reader, who has any further curiosity for these things. The
true beauty of a Christian in those days lay not in external and adventitious
ornaments, but in the goodness and purity of the mind: The beauty of the body
(says Clemens of Alexandria) consists in a good complexion, Paedag. lib. 3. c.
11. p. 248.
and in apt symmetry, and proportion of its parts; but the greatest beauty in
the world is that of the Soul, when it is adorned with the Holy Spirit, and the
excellent Graces of it, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, the love of
Goodness, and Modesty, which is the brightest and most lovely ornament that the
eye of man can behold: Ibid. c. 2. p. 216.
It is not (says he) the exterior aspect of the man that is to be regarded,
but the mind that is to be furnished and adorned with goodness and virtue; and
therefore he wittily compares those women that curiously trick and trim up the
body, but neglect how it is with the soul within, to the Egyptian Temples; look
upon their outside, and they are most splendid and magnificent, encompassed
with delicate Groves, built with large entries, and stately Portico's,
surrounded with several rows of Pillars, the walls both within and without set
off with stones of several Countries, curiously wrought and carved, the Temples
themselves garnished with Gold, Silver, Amber, and all the glittering and
precious stones that India or Ethiopia can afford; but enter within them and
enquire for the Deity that is there worshipped, and you shall be gravely showed
behind a curtain a Cat, or a Crocodile, or a Serpent of that Country, or some
such ill-favored beast, which is the residentiary or tutelar deity of that
place. And just such (says he) do those women seem to me, who trim themselves
with Gold, and are taken up in curling their hair, painting their faces,
blacking their eyes, coloring their locks, and other undue Arts of softness
and luxury, beautifying the outward rail and fence; but if a man look within
the veil and covering of the Temple, what is under all this gayness and finery,
he shall be so far from meeting with what is truly beautiful, that it will
excite his horror and aversation; for he shall not find the Image of God
dwelling there, as might reasonably be expected; but instead thereof some
filthy and treacherous beast that possesses the most inward recesses of the
Soul, a lustful Ape, or that crafty Serpent that devours the understanding of a
man, and turns his Soul into a nest or den, full of most deadly venom, and the
poison of his error and deceit.

I conclude this with the account which S. Gregory gives of his Sister
Gorgonia, Nazian. in Laud. Gor. Or. 11. p. 181.
that she used no Gold to make her fine, no yellow hair, ordered into knots and
curles, nor any other tricks to make her head a Scene and Pageantry, no loose
and transparent garments, no luster of stones and jewels, enlightening the air
round about, and reflecting splendor upon them that wear them, no devices and
arts of painting, no affectation of beauty that may be easily bought, no
counter-working Gods Creation, dishonouring, reproaching, covering his
workman-ship with false and deceitful colors, suffering a spurious and
supposititious beauty to steal away that natural Image, which ought to be kept
entire to God and the future state: all this was far from her; and though she
very well understood the several modes and garbs of bravery amongst women, yet
she thought none so honorable as the manner of her life, and that inward
brightness that was lodged in her mind: the only redness that pleased her, was
that which was the fruit of blushing and modesty; no other whiteness but what
came through fasting and abstinence; leaving fucus's and paintings, and living
pictures, and fading beauty to those that belong to Plays and Theaters, and to
such, for whom to blush and be ashamed is a shame and a disgrace. To which I
add that of Tertullian, ^e cult. foemin. lib. 2. c. 13. ad fin.
who after he had smartly condemned and confuted the Arts of unlawful beauty,
the vanity of going in too curious, costly and excessive dresses, concludes
with this counsel to the women of his time, to cloth themselves with the silks
of honesty, the fine vestures of piety, the purple of modesty; and being thus
beautified and adorned (says he) God himself will be your Lover.

CHAP. IV.
Of their great Temperance and Abstinence.
A vicious curiosity about meats and drinks a great temptation. Severely
forbidden by the Christian Law. The ancient Christians curious only of such
diet as ministered to health. They gratified not ease and delicacy. The great
inconveniences of intemperance either in meats or drinks. Their chief care
about spiritual food. For other things content with any provisions, manifested
in several instances. An over-nice and superstitious abstinence from some kinds
of food, condemned. The instance of Alcibiades the Martyr out of Eusebius.
Christians unjustly accused by the Heathens of excess and prodigality in their
feastings. Thyestean suppers laid to their charge. The charge in both parts of
it denied, and fully refuted by Tertullian, and other Christian Apologists.

AMongst the many temptations that besiege the life of man, there is scarce any
into which we are more easily betrayed, than into a vicious curiosity about
meats and drinks, and the excesses of an unruly appetite; therefore it is that
the Christian Religion does so frequently inculcate upon us the Precepts of
Sobriety and Temperance; to be temperate in all things, to watch and be sober,
to cast off the works of darkness, to walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in excess of
wine, revellings, and banquetings; to take heed that our hearts be not at any
time overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and that we be not as the
men of the old world, brutishly taken up with eating and drinking when the
flood came and swept all away. The Law of Christ commands us to fast often, to
keep under the body, and to make no provision for the flesh; if nature
regularly governed be content with little, Religion will teach us to be content
with less. These Rules the first Christians exactly transcribed into their
lives, being the greatest instances of real abstinence and mortification, which
they both practiced themselves, and pressed upon others: they knew very well
that God had given men a Charter of freedom indifferently to use the Creatures,
and to enjoy them in some degree, not only for necessity but delight; but yet
were afraid to go so far as they might, or to do any thing that might look
toward excess, or argue an irregular and unsober mind; they contented
themselves with such provisions as were conducive to health and strength,
without any studied seeking after those that were more luscious and delightful.
Reg. fus. disput. interrog. 19. tom. 2. p. 560.
It Is very true what S. Basil observes, that by reason of men's different ages
and course of life, their different tempers and constitutions of body, and
other circumstances, no one fixed and certain rule can be prescribed in this
case: but yet our food and diet ought for the main to be regulated by the
general end of it, which is not wantonly to please the palate, but to minister
to health, and to repair the weakness and decays of Nature. Many (says Clemens
Alexandrinus) like brute beasts live only that they may eat; Paedag. l. 2. c.
1. p. 139.
but for us we are commanded to eat that we may live; for food and pleasure is
not the work and design for which we live in the world, our residence here
being in order to an incorruptible life; and therefore our nourishment ought to
be easy and simple, and such as is subservient to the two main ends of life,
health and strength. We ought to choose such food (as Justin Martyr tells his
friends) not as may gratify our ease and delicacy, Epist. ad Z^n. and Seren.
p. 506.
but make our lives useful and serviceable; and if at any time overtaken with
want, we should quietly acquiesce in that state: and therefore a little after
he smartly declaims against all excess. Ibid. p. 512*
Wine (says he) is neither to be drunk daily to excess, nor to be used as
commonly as water: both indeed are Gods Creatures; but water necessary, wine
given only to help and relieve the body; which [immoderately taken] chains up
the tongue, sparkles fire out of the eyes, makes the legs tremble, and the
understanding being gone, readily takes off its cup of deadly poison; contrary
to Gods Ordination it turns the peaceful instruments of Husbandry into Swords
and Spears. It may indeed be necessary sparingly to drink wine both Winter and
Summer; but he that drinks it to excess, as a man that takes overmuch of a
medicine, like a dog or a swine betrays his own shame. But above all men in
the world it least becomes us [Christians] as if we were votaries to luxury, to
abuse the Creatures of God, and to make use of thirst as a pretense to
drunkenness, seeing we ought to drink no more than what will serve to quench
our thirst; not like those who swallowing down wine, as men do drink in a
burning fever, quickly make an end of themselves through their intemperance.
Nor are we less to take heed of Gluttony, contenting our selves with a spare
diet, and such only as is necessary; not giving way to the infinite and
unsatisfied cravings of a nice and intemperate appetite, which will have a
thousand pretenses to defend it self; but ruling our selves according to the
wise sentence of him who said, (...), that we are to eat only to satisfy our
hunger. Thus that ancient Father. To this purpose also Clemens Alexandrinus
discourses at large, Vt supr. Capp. 1, 2. per tot.
representing the great evils and inconveniences of gluttony and excess, that
it wastes the Estate, ruins the Body by impairing its health, debauching the
stomach, deflouring its taste, begetting an ill habitude and temper, and sowing
it with the seeds of all diseases; it dulls the mind, and renders it inept and
sluggish, and prepares it for the entertainment of any vice or wickedness; that
although we are not absolutely bound to abstain from variety of meats, yet we
are not to make them our desire or study, especially such as savor of niceness
and delicacy, and are apt to pamper and excite lust and wantonness; for though
it is true all things were especially made for man's sake, yet is it not
convenient to make use of all, and at some times less than at others; to the
advantageous use of a thing, respect being to be had, not only to the thing it
self, but to the time, occasion, and manner of it: that therefore our meals for
the main should be light and easy, not mixed with variety of dainties, but
such as may prepare for fasting, and the exercises of Religion. Ad Presbyt.
(...) Dia^. Ep. 7. p. 18.
Upon this account S. Cyprian in an Epistle, wherein he gives directions about
Prayer, advises them (and to make the counsel more effectual, tells them, that
he was warned of it by immediate revelation from God) to eat and drink soberly
and sparingly, that outward snares might not enfeeble that heavenly vigor and
sprightliness that was in their breasts, lest their minds being overcharged
with too plentiful meals might be less watchful unto prayer. The same counsel
S. Hierom gives to Laeta about the Education of her Daughter, Ad Laet. tom. 1.
p. 57.
that her diet should be thin and mean, and that she should never eat more,
than she might arise with some appetite, so as that after meals she might be
presently fit either to read or sing Psalms.

When at any time invited to public solemnities, Conc. Laod. Can. 53.
as marriages, and the like, the prudence of the Church thought fit to lay
restraints upon them, and to forbid them light and ludicrous actions, as
leaping or dancing, but that they shoud dine and sup gravely and modestly as
becomes Christians.

The chief care of Christians then was to become partakers (...), Ib. p. 144.
as Clemens Alexandrinus styles it, of that divine food that is from above, and
that only is capable to give real satisfaction, little regarding what
provisions they had (so they had but any) for that part that dwelt here below.
When Julian the Emperor to raise money for his Wars began to squeeze and
oppress the Christians, he sent amongst others to S. Basil (who had formerly
been his fellow-student at Athens) for one thousand pounds; Basil. Ep. 208.
tom. 3. p. 226. confer Socrat. lib. 3. c. 13. p. 185.
the answer he sends him was, that it could not be expected there, where he had
not so much provision beforehand as would serve for one day; that there were no
arts of cookery at his house, nor knives stained with the blood of slaughtered
provisions; that his greatest dainties were a few potherbs, a piece of bread,
and a little sour vapid wine: no such exceedings as to stupifie his senses
with fumes arising from a loaded stomach, and to render them incapable to
discharge their functions through intemperance and excess. Ep. 2. ad Olymp.
tom. 4. p. 616.
Chrysostom commends Olympias not more for the modesty of her Garb, than the
meanness and sobriety of her diet, to which she had so used her self that she
had got the perfect mastery over all undue appetites and inclinations, and had
not only bridled the horse, but tamed and reduced him into an entire
subjection, and taught her stomach to receive only so much meat and drink as
was enough to keep her alive and in health. This indeed was the great end of
their signal abstinence in those days, that by subduing the flesh they might
keep the stricter hand over the inordinate motions of corrupt nature. When
Celsus accused the Jews, Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 5. p. 259. 264.
and in them obliquely the Christians for needlessly abstaining from swines
flesh, and some other sorts of food, affirming this to be no such great matter,
when the Pythagoreans wholly abstained from eating any living creature, who yet
were never thought the better, or the more dear to God for it; Origin answers,
that whatever reason the Jews did it for (God having appointed the difference)
this concerned not Christians, that it is not what enters in at the mouth that
defiles the man, nor does meat commend us to God, nor do we think this
abstinence any such great matter; nor yet do we so indulge the belly, as to
affect or pursue such delights; that there is a vast difference between us and
the Pythagoreans in this affair: they indeed abstain upon the account of their
absurd and fabulous doctrine of the souls transmigration, or passing out of one
body into another, and so forbear to kill or eat any living creature, lest
happily they may destroy and devour their own friends or children: but we in all
our abstinence do it only to keep under the body and to bring it into
subjection, endeavoring to mortify the deeds of the body, to expel and
extinguish our members that are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, and every evil concupiscence and desire: where he fully
vindicates the Christians in their abstemiousness and temperance from doing it
out of any vain and foolish affectation, any nice and singular Opinion, any
base and sordid, morose or unsociable temper; they were careful to keep the
mean, and to avoid sordidness as well as Luxury; nor did they profess
themselves enemies to the provisions of humane life any further, than as they
were inconsistent with the ends of sobriety and religion. As may appear from a
memorable passage related by Eusebius out of the letter of the Churches of
Lions and Vien in France Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 3. p. 167.
to those in Asia. Alcibiades (one of those who shortly after suffered
Martyrdom) had accustomed himself to a very rigid and sordid kind of life,
rejecting all other sorts of food, except only bread and water: and this he did
both before and after he was in prison; which it seems had an ill influence
upon others; whereupon Attalus one of the most eminent of those famous Martyrs,
the day after his first being exposed in the Amphitheatre had it revealed to
him (for as yet, says the Historian, the Divine Grace had not withdrawn it
self, but they had the Holy Spirit as their immediate Counselor to instruct
them; which by the way may give countenance to those frequent visions and
divine condescentions which Cyprian speaks of in his Epistles: To this Attalus
it was revealed) that Alcidades did amiss in refusing to use the Creatures of
God, and in thereby giving a scandal and an offense to others: upon which he
laid aside his singularity, and with all thankfulness to God promiscuously ate
any kind of food.

From the whole of what has been said it is very evident, what little reason the
Heathens had to accuse the Christians (in their agapae or love feasts
especially) of excess and prodigality; for that they did Tertullian expressly
affirms; Apol. c. 39. p. 32.
Our little suppers (says he) besides as being guilty of other wickedness they
traduce as prodigal, Athenag. legate pro. Christian. p. 37.
saying of us as Diogenes did of the people of Megara, that they supped as if
they meant to dye to morrow. Nay, what were infinitely horrid and barbarous,
they commonly charged them with Thyestean suppers, and eating man's flesh. To
the first part of the charge, concerning their prodigality, Ibid.
Tertullian answers, that they could easilier see a mote in another eye, than
a beam in their own; if they looked home they would find that 'twas their own
tribes and precincts, wherein the very air was corrupted with the unsavory
fumes of their loaded tables, and overcharged stomachs; and yet all this was
passed by, and only the poor Christians Triclinium called in question; that if
they had any feast it was a love-feast, and whatever cost was laid out upon
it, was expended not for vainglory, but upon the accounts of Piety and
Religion; not to nourish Parasites and flatterers, but to refresh the Poor:
that the order of the feast was as sober and regular as the cause was honest,
going no further than modesty would admit; they prayed to God before they
ventured upon his Creatures, ate but what sufficed hunger, drank no more than
consisted with sober and modest men; and fed so, as remembering they were to
rise at night to worship God: when they had done, they sung Psalms, either of
their own composure, or out of the Holy Volumes, and as they begun, so they
ended the feast with Prayer, and then departed with the same care to preserve
their modesty and chastity; so that they appeared not so much to have feasted
at supper, as to have fed upon discipline and order. So he. For the other part
of the charge, their feeding upon man's flesh at this common supper, 'twas a
suggestion so savage and barbarous, as could have found belief with nothing but
the very spirit of malice; we shall again meet with this objection in another
place, and shall therefore here only note out of their Apologist, Athenag.
that it was charge never offered to be made good against them, Ibid. p. 38.
nor proved in any of those many thousand trials which the Christians had had
in all parts of the Empire; that it was very unlikely they should be guilty of
eating humane flesh, who did not think it lawful to be present at the
gladiatory-sports where men were slain, or so much as to taste any blood at all.
So Biblias the Martyr told her enemies, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. ubi supr. p. 158.
cap. 1.
when being reproached with this in the midst of her torments, she cried out,
how is it poss^be that we should devour Infants, as you charge us, who think it
not lawful so much as to taste the blood of any Creature. For even till then,
and a long time after they observed that Canon of the first Apostolic Council,
to abstain from things strangled and from blood. So far were they from being
either barbarous or luxurious. No, our feasts (as he says in Minutius Foelix)
are not only chaste, Min. Foel. p. 26.
but sober, we indulge not our selves in banquets nor make our feasts with
wine, but temper our cheerfulness with gravity and seriousness. And indeed
their often watchings and fastings, and their constant observance of the
strictest parts of devotion sufficiently showed how little they pampered or
indulged the flesh, the signs whereof they every where carried in their very
faces; and this was so notorious, that their very enemies reproached them with
their trembling joints, and their pale ghastly looks. Pallidi, trepidi, apud
eundem p 10.
And Lucian giving an account of the Christian Assembly into which he tells us
Critias was brought to be made a Proselyte, ^h^lopatr. tom 2. p. 1007.
describes them to be a company of persons with their heads hanging down, and
pale faces, which certainly did not arise from their fear of suffering (for no
men in the world were ever so willing, nay so desirous of laying down their
lives as they) but from their frequent abstinence and fasting. To which purpose
S. Basils Comment is most apposite; Reg. fuf. disput. (...). p. 559.
where commending temperance, or as he calls it Continence, using the word in
its largest sense; other Virtues (says he) being mainly exercised in secret,
are not altogether so visible to the eyes of men; whereas continence wherever
it is, will at first sight betray it self: for as a good complexion, and an
excellent constitution of body peculiarly design a man to be an Athletes or
Champion; so leanness of body, and that paleness which is the fruit of
continence, evidence a Christian to be a real Champion for the commands of
Christ, vanquishing his enemy in the weakness of his body, and shows how able
he is to contend in the cause of Piety and Virtue: The very sight of such a man
must needs be of great advantage to affect us, to behold him sparingly and
moderately using even those things that are necessary, not paying nature its
tribute without some regret, begrutching the little time that he spends about
it, and therefore making have to get from the table to return to his better
exercises and employments.

CHAP. V.
Of their singular Continence and Chastity.
Their admirable Continence discovered in several particulars. Their abstinence
from marriage. Their marrying only to comply with the end of the institution.
Seldom married more than once. Their continence admired by Heathens. The
Fathers generally severe against second marriages. The moderate judgment of
Clemens Alexandrinus in the case. The Canons of several Councils concerning it.
Three sorts of digamy, or second marriages. Their shunning all occasions and
appearances of lightness and immodesty: abstaining from public meetings,
feasts, plays, etc. Constantine's Law that no widow should be forced to appear
at public Tribunals. Another of Theodosius, that none should marry within
twelve complete months after her husbands decease. The promiscuous use of
Baths, forbidden both by Canon and Civil Laws. Unmarried persons, especially of
Ecclesiastic relation, not familiarly to converse together. Mulieres (...),
who. How brought in: condemned by the Council of Antioch, and that of Nice.
Clandestine marriages dis-allowed. Their abhorring all immodest pictures and
discourses. The great modesty of Gorgonia. Their valuing chastity above life:
submitting to any kind of death rather than violate it: Many choosing to kill
themselves rather than be deflour'd. Several instances of it. Impurity in
Christians bewailed as a great scandal: punished by the Church with very severe
penalties. Several passages out of the Fathers and Councils noted to that
purpose. Christians accused by the Heathens of incest and adultery. The sum
of the charge. Their Answer. The Heathens very unfit to bring in this charge,
being themselves so notoriously guilty: whole Nations, their wisest
Philosophers, their very Gods themselves: this fully proved against them. The
very Gentiles tacitly confessed the Christians innocent, by condemning them to
be forcibly prostituted. A part of their religion not to give way to wanton
looks or unchaste desires. The eminent prevalency of Christianity in converting
persons from uncleanness and debauchery, pleaded and asserted. The original of
the accusation enquired into. Found to arise from the beastly practices of the
Gnostics, etc. who though guilty of the most notorious villainies, and of these
in particular, yet shrouded themselves under the general name of Christians.
Some forced through fear to confess the Christians guilty of these crimes.

A Third considerable instance of that sobriety and moderation for which the
Christians were so renowned of old, was their Continence, and abstaining, from
all manner of uncleanness, which is that Virtue that we properly call Chastity;
a Virtue for which how eminent they were (notwithstanding what their enemies
heavily charged upon them to the contrary, of which afterward) we shall take
notice of in some few particulars.

First, The Christians of those times were so far from breaking in upon any
Unchaste embraces, that they frequently abstained even from lawful pleasures,
and kept themselves even from the honorable and undefiled bed, never marrying
all their life. Minut.
We are (says Octavius) chaste in our speech, Foel. p. 26.
and chaster in our bodies, and very many of us, though we do not boast on it,
do inviolably preserve a perpetual Virginity; and are so far from any
extravagant desires after Incestuous mixtures, that many stand at a distance
from the most chaste and modest embraces. Thus Justin Martyr tells the
Emperors, Apol. 2. p. 62.
that amongst the Christians there were a great many of either Sex, who had
from their childhood been educated in the Christian discipline, who for sixty
or seventy years had kept themselves single and incorrupt, and he wished the
like could be shown in all other sorts of men. To the same purpose another
Apologist; Athenag. leg. pro Christian. p. 37.
it is very easy (says he) to find many amongst us, both men and women, who
remain unmarried even in old age, conceiving that in this state they shall have
fitter opportunities of drawing near to God. Not that they who persever'd in
this course of Celibate did combine themselves into distinct Societies, and
bind themselves under an oath of perpetual Virginity (as the humor was in
after ages) for of this not the least shadow appears in any of the writings of
those times, they lived promiscuosly (till toward the end of the third
Century) applied themselves to the business of their place and station, and
only lived single, that in those troublesome and hazardous times of
persecution, they might be less ensnared with the entanglements of the world,
and be more free for the exercises of Religion.

Secondly, When they did marry, they generally professed they did it only to
comply with the great end of the institution, viz. the propagation of mankind;
not to gratify wanton and brutish desires, but to answer the great end of
nature, that humane society might not fail; Justin Martyr ibid. p. 71.
either (say they) we marry not at all, but keep our selves always continent;
Athenag. ibid.
or if we do marry, it is for no other end but the bringing forth and the
bringing up of children; who ever amongst us takes a Wife, according to the
Laws prescribed us, he reckons he does it only for the begetting of children;
within this his desires are bounded and limited; as the Husbandman concerns
himself no further in tilling his ground and sowing of his corn, than to bring
forth the crop at Harvest. Hence it was that they seldom married more than
once: We willingly contain our selves (as he speaks in M. Foelix) within the
bound of single marriage, Vbi supr.
and either know but one woman (and that merely out of a desire of children) or
none. The first knot being loosed by death, they very rarely tied a second:
which gained great honor and reputation both to them and to their Religion
with the Gentiles amongst whom they lived. Ad vid. junior. tom. 4 p. 458.
Chrysostom tells us that a discourse happening on a time between him and his
Master, who was a Gentile, concerning his Mother, being told that she was a
Widow, and after enquiry concerning her age, being answered that she was forty
years old, and that she had lived twenty years of the time a Widow, the man was
surprised with a strange admiration; and cried out before all the company,
behold (says he) what brave women there are amongst the Christians. The truth
is, such was the heavenly zeal and temper of the first Ages of Christianity,
that they would have no more to do with the World, than they needs must, but
industriously shunned all its burdens and encumbrances, amongst which they
especially reckoned marriage, a state not rashly to be engaged in; for once it
was allowable, but for a second time inexcusable. And indeed it cannot be
denied but that many of the Ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierom, and
others did inveigh against second marriages with too much bitterness and
severity, violently pressing many passages in Scripture to serve the cause,
straining the string many times till it cracked again; and not sticking to
censure and condemn second marriages as little better than adultery. Athenag.
ut supr.
Hear what one of the Apologists says to it: Amongst us every man either
remains as he was born, or engages himself in one only marriage; for as for
second marriages, they are but a more plausible and decorous kind of adultery;
our Lord assuring us, that who-ever puts away his wife and takes another,
commits adultery; which place, as also another of like importance, how
perversely he interprets, and impertinently applies to his purpose, I am not
willing to remember. Stromat. lib. 3. p. 428. vid. Epiphan.
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks in the case with much more modesty and moderation;
Haeres. 48. p. 178. Cyrill. ad Illum. Catech. 4. p. 90.
As for those to whom God has given the gift of absolute continence, we think
them happy: we admire the gravity and stayedness of those that content
themselves with a single marriage: but yet say withal that compassion ought to
be had of others, and that we should bear one another burdens, lest he who
seems to stand fair, do fall himself: and as for second marriages that of the
Apostle is to take place, if they cannot contain, they should marry, for it is
better to marry than to burn. However it is certain the Fathers of old generally
did what they could to discourage second marriages. In Can. 7. Council.
Neocaesar.
The Ancient Canons (as Zonaras tells us) suspended such persons from the
Communion for a whole year; and the Council of Laodicea though it determine not
the time, Can. 1.
yet it requires that they should spend some small time at least in penance, in
fasting and prayer, before they be received to the Communion. Can. 17.
By the Canons that are called Apostolical, who ever after Baptism has engaged
in a second marriage is rendered incapable of any degree in the Ministry:
Haeres. 30. p. 61.
accordingly Epiphanius reports of one Joseph, who he knew, a converted Jew,
and advanced to the dignity of a Count by Constantine the Great, that when the
Arrians would have laid hands upon him to have made him Bishop, he got off by
this wile, by pretending himself to have been twice married. But though the
Fathers and Ancient Councils were thus severe in this case, yet the rigor of
their censure will be much abated, if what some tell us be true, that many of
their passages are not levelled against successive marriages, but against
having two wives at the same time: for as a learned man has observed, there
were three sorts of digamy; Justell. not. in can. 1. Conc. Load.
the first a man's having two wives at once, this was condemned by the Roman
Laws: the second, when the former wife being dead the man married a second
time: a third, when for any slight cause a man put away his wife by a bill of
divorce, and married another, which though then frequently practiced, and
connived at (if not allowed) by the Laws of those Times, was yet prohibited by
the decrees of the Church, and of this last sort (says he) many of the Ancient
Canons are to be understood.

Thirdly, They were infinitely careful to shun all occasions and appearances of
lightness and immodesty, whatever might tend to inveagle their senses, and to
debauch their mind and manners, nay whatever might but give a suspicion of
wantonness and incontinence: They declined as much as might be going to all
Public Meetings, such as Feasts, Plays, Shows, etc. Therefore Cyprian
severely chides with some Virgins for being present at Weddings, De discipl.
and hab. Virgin. p. 167.
where they laughed freely, could not but hear loose discourses, see uncomely
carriages, feed upon luxurious dishes, all which must needs not only kindle,
but add fuel to the fire, and fill their minds with indecent thoughts and
desires. De Virg. servand p. 71. tom. 1.
S. Hierom on the other hand does as much commend some whom he knew, who always
kept at home on festival days to avoid the crowd and gazes of the people, and
would never go abroad at those times, when they could not venture into the
public without the greatest care and custody over themselves. For this reason
Constantine made a Law that Matrons should not be forced upon the account of
debt to come out of their own houses to appear before the public tribunals,
Cod. Theod. lib. 1. Tit. 10. l. 1.
but that the business should be decided in such way, as might not betray the
modesty of that Sex; and when afterward the fervor of Christianity began to
abate apace, and persons had in a great measure lost that huge reverence which
former times had for continence and chastity; Ibid. lib. 3.
Theodosius to restrain them a little within the bounds of decency, Tit. 8. l.
1. vid Gothofred. in loc.
provided by a Law that no woman of what quality or rank soever should marry
again within a year at least (i.e. within twelve full months, whereas under the
old Roman Laws, the time of mourning was but ten, as a Learned Interpreter of
that Law observes) after her husbands death, and this he ratified by a double
penalty, a note of perpetual infamy to be set upon the offending person, and
the loss of her whole dower and whatever estate her husband had bequeathed
her, which was to go to the children she had by him, or if none, to his next of
kin. Can. 30. vid. Conc. in T^ull.
By the Laodicean Council not only Clergymen, and such as have entered upon a
state of continency, Can. 77.
but all Christian men whatsoever are forbidden to use the same common baths
with women. And for very good reason; it being a thing (as Zonaras observes)
both shameful and uncomely in it self, and pernicious in its consequence: for
how easily does an unlawful flame kindle from such a spark? and when humane
nature is of it self so ready to boil over, who would pour oil upon the fire? a
thing ever looked upon as repugnant to all the Laws of modesty, yea even by
them that are without; this being (says the Council) one of the chiefest things
which the very Heathens condemn, and for which they censure and reproach us.
Parallel to this, Photius and his Commentator Balsamon tell us of a Law of the
Emperor Justinian, Nomocan. (...). p. 104.
making it a sufficient cause of divorce, and losing her dowry, for a woman
either to feast or bath in the company of other men without the leave and
consent of her husband. Indeed in the first and purer times they took all
imaginable care, that unmarried persons, especially such as were of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, or had devoted themselves to a severer course of
piety, should not commonly converse together. Epist. 62. p. 98. vid si^ Conc. 1.
Cyprian writing to Pomponius about the Virgins that had taken profession of
continence upon them, but lived too familiarly with some persons that belonged
to the Church, Carthag.
charges him that Men and Virgins should not only not sleep near one another,
Can. 3, 4.
but not dwell together in the same house, lest the infirmity of their Sex, and
the slipperiness of their youth should betray them into the snare of the devil.
Wherefore he commends Pomponius for having suspended the Deacon and the rest
that had kept such familiar correspondence with those Virgins; and ordered that
they should not be absolved, till they had sufficiently testified their
repentance, and made it appear by satisfactory evidence that no unlawful
familiarity had passed between them, and that if ever they returned to the like
co-habitation, greater penalties should be inflicted upon them. The foundation
of which ill custom doubtless sprung, or at least took encouragement from
hence; in those first times of Christianity it was usual for Clergymen, such
especially as were sent up and down to preach the Gospel, to have some grave
and sober woman along with them, who might be helpful and assisting to them,
and who was neither Wife nor Concubine, but taken in either upon the account of
necessary attendance, or the pretense of piety. These women in the writings of
the Church (wherein there is frequent mention of them) are called (...), such
as were brought in, taken into the house as Domestic assistants to
Ecclesiastic persons. But this proving matter of scandal and inconvenience,
was not only cried out against by private Fathers, but by public Synods; the
Council of Antioch held in the Reign of Aurelian the Emperor, Eusebius.
Anno two hundred seventy and two, Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 30. p. 281.
in a Synodical Epistle wherein they censure the doctrines and practices of
Paulus Samosatenus, condemn this among the rest, that he and his Presbyters and
Deacons kept these introduced women, whereby horrible inconveniences did
arise, for besides the snare and temptation of it, although they should keep
themselves innocent, yet they could not avoid the suspicion and scandal that
would arise, and the danger of drawing in others by their bad example. Epist.
ad. Paregor.
For which reason S. Basil writes to an old Presbyter in his Diocese, to
abstain from the company of a woman with whom he was wont to cohabit; Presbyt.
not so much to avoid temptation to incontinence (the man being then seventy
years of age) as that he might not lay a stumbling stone, Epist. 198. p. 216.
and occasion of offense in his brothers way. The same was universally
forbidden by the great Council of Nice, Can. 3. ubi vid. Zonar.
and no man within the Clergy allowed to have any woman near him, unless his
Mother, his Sister, or his Aunt, or such only of whom there could be no
suspicion, as we find it in the third Canon of that Council: in the ancient
version whereof these mulieres (...) are styled extraneae, strangers; by which
name they are also called in a Law of the Emperor Honorius, C. Th. lib. 16
Tit. 2. de Episc. ^. 44.
prohibiting any Clergyman whatsoever to keep company with these
strange-women, limiting their converse and cohabitation within the very same
relations, to which they are restrained by the Nicene Canon, which it is not to
be doubted that Emperor had in his eye when he made that Constitution. Synops.
And because Bishops were the highest order in the Church, Basil. lib. 3.
therefore that their honor might be especially secured, Tit. 1 c. 41. p. 29.
care was taken that no Bishop under penalty of being deposed should entertain
or cohabit with any woman whatsoever, either relation or stranger, that so all
pretense either of temptation or scandal might be cut off. For the same reason
it was that they disallowed all Clandestine marriages, Tertull. de pudi^it. c.
4. p. 557.
which were not openly made in the face of the Church, accounting them no
better than a state of Adultery or Fornication. And as they were careful not to
give offense to others, so they were not willing themselves to come within the
shadow of a temptation, they stood at a distance from whatever was offensive
either to their eyes or ears; their ears they stopped against all loose idle
songs, all filthy and obscene discourses, their eyes they shut against all
uncomely objects, all wanton and lascivious pictures, Admonit. ad Graec. p. 40.
vid.
as Clemens Alexandrinus expressly tells us; not doing any thing that seemed but
to carry an ill color with it. Con^. 6. in T^ull Can. 100. Orat. 11. p. 180.
Nazianzen tells us of his Sister Gorgonia, a virtuous woman whose example we
have often quoted, that for modesty and sobriety she went beyond all other
women; that she reconciled the two opposite states of humane life, celibate and
marriage; the one more sublime and divine, but more dangerous and troublesome,
the other more humble, but withal more safe; that she avoided the
inconveniences of each, and chose what was most excellent out of hoth, the
sublimity of the one, and the security of the other; showing that neither of
these states in it self did wholly tie us up either to God or the World, nor
yet wholly separate us from them, so that the one should be absolutely
rejected, or the other absolutely commended and embraced; but that it is the
mind that admirably presides both over Marriage and Virginity: And withal
further adds concerning her, Ibid. p. 185.
that so great was her bashfulness and modesty, that when she lay under a most
acute and dangerous distemper, yet she refused to have any Physician come near
her, as blushing that any man should either see or touch her.

Fourthly, They valued their innocence and their honor above their lives, and
therefore chose to undergo the greatest dangers, to dye, yea, to kill
themselves rather than any violence should be offered to their chastity. As the
fairest promises could not tempt them, so neither could the fiercest torments
affright them into any unchaste compliance. When Maximinus the Emperor governed
in the Eastern parts, Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib 8. c. 14. p. 312
amongst other effects of his wild and brutish fury and extravagance, he
filled all places whre he came with Adulteries and ravishments, abusing women,
and deflouring Virgins; which succeeded well enough (says the Historian) with
all others, except only Christians, who generously despising death, made light
of the rage and fury of the Tyrant: the men underwent all sorts of punishments
which cruelty could invent; the women bore up with a courage no less manly and
unconquerable, and when any were drawn out to be abused, they rather submitted
their lives to death, than their bodies to dishonor. Of these he tells us of
one especially at Alexandria, a woman of great birth and fortunes, but much
more famous for her Virtues, especially her modesty and chastity, which she
stoutly defended, and preferred before her nobility o her riches, her excellent
parts, or any accomplishments whatsoever. The Emperor had often attempted her by
all Arts of solicitation, but all in vain; till at last, not being able to
prevail, his affection somewhat attempering his fierceness and cruelty, he
would not put her to death, which she was most ready to have undergone, but
spoiled her of her estate, and then sent her into banishment; there being many
hundreds of others at the same time, who not able to bear the violation of
their chastity wherewith the Governors and Commanders threatened them,
willingly subjected themselves to all kinds of racks and tortures, and the
worst capital punishments which their enemies could inflict upon them. Nay,
when the case so happened that they were set upon, and all their resoluteness
could not provoke the cruel kindness of their enemies to dispatch them, they
would rather dispatch themselves, than fall into the rude hands of lust and
wantonness. Thus did that famous Woman and her two Daughters, (mentioned by the
same Author, whose names as Chrysostom in an Oration on purpose in their
commendation tells us, Ib. c. 12 p. 305.
were Domnina the mother, Hom. 51. de S. S. Domn. Ber. Prosd. tom. 1. p. 557.
Bernice and Prosdoce the daughters) eminent as well for the outward beauty and
features of their bodies, as for the inward Virtues of their minds, being
sought for as a prey to lust under the Dioclesian persecution, they fled for
it; but being found out by the Soldiers that were sent to search for them, and
knowing there was no other way to escape, in their return they begged leave of
the Soldiers, that for some private occasions they might step a little out of
the rode; which being granted, fitting themselves for what they had beforehand
agreed on, as well as the time would give them leave, they unanimously threw
themselves into the river, and there perished in the waters. Ibid c. 14. p. 313.
The like he relates of a Noble Woman at Rome, wife to the Prefect or Chief
Governor of the City, (but a Christian) that Maxentius the Emperor being
passionately enflamed with the love of her, sent Officers to fetch her, who
breaking into the house, to the great terror of her husband, would violently
have seized on her; of whom she begged only so much time, as that she might a
little dress and adorn her self; under which pretense, retiring into her
chamber, she caught up a sword, and by a fatal stroke left the Messengers
nothing but a dismal spectacle of amazement and horror. These instances (both
of them highly applauded by Chrysostom and Eusebious) I quote not to justify
a man's violent laying hands upon himself, as either lawful or laudable; whether
in some such cases persons might not be acted by more divine motions,
extraordinary and heroic impulses (the case of Sampson, De Civ. D. lib. ^. c.
26.
etc.) as S. Augustine inclines to believe, Col ^5. ubi de hac ^psa ^e agit.
it is not very pertinent for me to enquire; it being enough to my purpose to
observe, that they were great evidences how highly they prized Chastity and
Integrity, which they were willing to secure at so dear a rate.

And in those cases wherein life was not concerned, they gave the greatest
testimony how much they abhorred all uncleanness. Epiphan. Haeres. 64. p. 228.
None were ever more hearty enemies to Idolatry, and yet Origin at Athens, when
put to this unhappy choice, either to Sacrifice or defile himself, chose rather
to commit idolatry than fornication. Though even that too was rather his
Enemies act than his own, they thrusting the frankincense into his hand, and
haling him up to the Altar.

Fifthly, When ever any was found guilty of the least uncleanness, it was
looked upon and bewailed as a very heinous sin, and a great dishonor to the
Christian name: Ad Rogat. and Confess. Ep. 6. p 15.
What is it that I hear (says Cyprian) how detestable should it be to you, what
with the greatest grief and affliction of my mind I have understood, that there
are some amongst you, who have defiled their bodies, the temples of God, even
after they were sanctified by confession, and cleans'd by baptism, with filthy
and infamous embraces, promiscuously using the beds and lodgings of the women:
When although they should be free from actual adultery, yet even in this
'twould be a fault of a mighty aggravation, that by their scandalous example
others might be seduced into ruin. S. Basil writing to a Monk, who had been
overtaken with this fault, Ad Monac. laps ^om. 3. p. 11.
elegantly bewailes the greatness of his sin, as a dishonor to the strictness
of his former profession; a reproach to those lips which had kissed the mouths
of so many Saints; to those hands which so many devout persons had embraced as
pure and undefiled; to those knees before which so many servants of God had
fallen down; as a being caught in the snare of a crafty Devil, a perfidious
violation of his promises, a being become a sport and scorn to Jews and
Gentiles, a confuting (what in him lay) that triumphant speech of Christ, that
he had overcome the world, filling even to the place where he lived a cup of
infamy and reproach. In the next Epistle he deals with the Woman, and treats
her with the same elegant severity, though in both he so aggravates the case,
as to excite them to repentance, and to a speedy recovery of themselves out of
the snare of the Devil. But because good words and persuasions were not cords
strong enough to restrain some men's irregular lusts and passions, they twisted
with them the Discipline of the Church: And therefore.

Sixthly, They were wont to punish the breach of Chastity by inflicting severe
penalties upon incontinent persons: Amongst all the sins that were most sharply
punished in the ancient Church, Vid. Tert. de Pudicit. c. 7. p. 560. de Haeres.
p. 120.
Adultery was one of the chief; who-ever was convicted of it was immediately
cast out of the Church, and dis-owned as a rotten member; This Tertullian tells
us, first made Marcion turn Heretic, for being found guilty of lying with a
Virgin, and for that thrown out of the Communion of the Church, he betook
himself to one Cerdon a Master Heretic, and espoused his Doctrines and
Opinions. The truth is, in those first times the punishment of Adultery was
very great, perpetual penance all a man's life, and scarce being admitted into
Communion at the very hour of death; till Pope Zephyrinus about the year two
hundred and sixteen, considering the great inconveniences of so much severity,
persons hereby being often driven into despair, and others discouraged from
coming over to the Christian Faith, ordered that Penance in this case should be
limited to a shorter time, which being ended, such persons might be received
again into the bosom of the Church. This Decree gave great offense to the
African Churches, Lib. de Pudicit. c. 1. p. 555.
most whereof stood up for the strictness of the ancient Discipline; Ad
Antonian. Ep. 52. p. 71, 72.
Tertullian more especially inveighs against it with much bitterness and
animosity, as a thing unfit in it self, and an innovation in the Church. The
same, Cyprian also plainly intimates, though he himself was for the more mild
Opinion. By the Ancyran Council, held Anno three hundred and fifteen, Can. 20.
it was Decreed, That whoever was guilty of Adultery, should be punished with a
seven years Penance before they were admitted to the Communion. By the Synod of
Illiberis, Can 7. p. 13
if a man after having done his Penance for the first fault, fell afterward
into the same sin again, he was not to be taken into Communion, no not at the
hour of death. Can. 12. p. 22.
The same punishment they inflicted upon Bawds and such persons as for gain
prostituted the bodies of their Children, by selling them (or themselves
rather, of whom their children were a part) to lust and ruin. Epist. Can. 58,
59. tom. 3. page 36.
S. Basil writing to Amphilochius rules for the conduct of Discipline, and the
measures of repentance, sets Adultery at fifteen years Penance, Fornication at
seven, and then to be admitted to the Holy Sacrament. His Brother Gregory
Bishop of Nyssa treating about the same affairs, Ep. Canon. ad Letoi. Can. 4.
tom. 1. p. 951.
appoints Fornication to be punished with no less than nine years Penance and
suspension from the Sacrament, and Adultery, and all other species of
uncleanness with double that time; though allowing a liberty to the Spiritual
Guide to contract this time, as the circumstances of the Case or Person might
require. But both these last mentioned being but private Bishops, their Canons
could be no further obligatory than to those particular Diocesses, that were
under their charge. And indeed the censures of the Church in this case did much
vary according to time and place, in some more rigid and severe, in others more
laxe and favorable, though in all, such as did abundantly show what hearty
enemies they were to all filthiness and impurity whatsoever.

What has been hitherto said of the Modesty, the chaste and sober carriage of
the Primitive Christians, will receive further light, if we consider how
clearly they vindicated themselves from that malicious charge of Incest and
Adultery, which the Heathens commonly charged upon them; so commonly, that we
scarce find any of the ancient Apologists but takes notice of it and confutes
it. The sum of the charge, as it is more formally drawn up by the Heathen in M.
Foelix, Page 7, 8.
take thus: That the Christians knew one another by certain privy marks and
signs, and were wont to be in love with, almost before they knew one another;
that they exercised lust and filthiness under a pretense of Religion,
promiscuously calling themselves Brothers and Sisters, that by the help of so
sacred a name their common Adulteries might become incestuous; that upon a
solemn day they meet together at a feast [he means their love-feasts] with
their Wives, Children, Sisters, Mothers, persons of every Age and Sex, where
after they have well eaten and drunk, and begun to be warm and merry, heated
with the excess of wine, a piece of meat is thrown for the dogs, who being tied
to the Candlesticks, begin to leap and frisk about till they have run away
with, and put out the lights, and then nothing being left but darkness, the fit
cover and shadow for impudence and villainy, they promiscuously run amongst one
another into filthy and incestuous embraces; and if they be not all alike
guilty of incest, it is not the faults of their will, but the good fortune of
their chance, seeing what actually happens to one, is intentionally the lot of
all. This is the tale; which however absurd and incredible, yet strangely found
belief, or at least was pretended to be believed amongst the enemies of
Christianity. Now, though it be sufficiently refuted by what has been already
said, yet we may observe the Christians of those times further pleading these
Four things in their own vindication.

First, That if the Charge had been true, yet the Heathens had little reason to
object it to the Christians, Tert. Apol. c. 9. p. 10. c. 39. p 31.
being themselves so notoriously guilty in this kind. Min. Foel. p. 26.
For Adultery nothing more common amongst them, and for Incest 'twas a general
indictment of whole Nations, the Persians usually lying with their own Mothers;
the Macedonians and Egyptians marrying with their own Sisters, and this done
even at Athens it self; their Histories full of them, their Plays and Tragedies
which they frequented every day with great applause, represented them as lawful
and commendable. Tert. ib. c. 46. p. 36.
Socrates himself, the great glory of the Heathen world, was condemned at
Athens amongst other things for Sodomy, and the corrupting of Youth; and some
of Plato's School have perished in the very act of Adultery. Nay their very
gods themselves whom they worshipped and adored were highly gulty in this kind;
they feign those things of us (says Athenagoras) which they themselves report
of their own gods; Legate. pro Christian. p. 35.
whose lusts and wantonnesses it is no wonder if they style Mysteries; were they
such hearty enemies to shameful and promiscuous mixtures, they must abhor their
great god Jupiter, who begot children both of Rhea the Mother, and Proserpina
the Daughter, and married with his own Sister. And who was (unless Orpheus
their great Poet lies) more wicked and vile in this kind than Thyestes himself?
Admonit. ad Graec p. 39, 40. Videsis Jul. Firm. de Err. Pros. Relig. p. 8.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells them, that as they had ordered the matter, by the
Marriages, begeting Children, Adulteries, and Banquets of their gods, (which
they set out in their Plays and Poems) they had turned Heaven into a Comic
Scene, and made the Deity a piece of dramatick sport, and by a satyrick wit had
jested Religion, and whatever was most Sacred into scorn and laughter. Nothing
more usual amongst them (as he there observes) than to hang their rooms with
the pictures of their gods drawn in the most lascivious and propudious
postures, engaged in the most filthy and dishonest actions, enough to shame
intemperance it self. These (says he) are the original patterns of your soft
effeminacy; this your beastly and shameful divinity; these the doctrines of
your gods, copartners with you in your uncleanness and adultery. And whereas
they might pretend, that these stories of their gods were only the extravagant
inventions of their Poets, who took a liberty to say any thing to gratify the
people; Athanasius answers, Orat contr. Gent. p. 14. tom. 1.
that hereby they shook the very foundation of their gods, having no other
authority for their existence, than what account their Poets gave them; so that
if they feigned their actions, they might with equal reason be supposed to
feign their very names and persons, there being the same ground of belief for
the one as for the other; and that there was as much reason to believe they
spoke truth in this, as in the relation of any other matters of fact,
concerning Achilles, Ulysses, Nestor, Hector, or any of the rest; all depending
upon the same warrant and authority. This propagated looseness and uncleanness
to them under the notion and shadow of Religion; such as the gods are, such
warrantably may be their Worshippers. Wherever you are (says Tertullian) at
home or abroad, Ibid. c. 9. p. 10.
of beyond the seas, Lust is your companion, which often stumbles upon Incest;
whereas Chastity diligently and faithfully preserved keeps us from any such
event, and we are as far from Incest, as we are from Whoredom, or any excess in
a married state; yea, many prevent all possibility of this charge by containing
themselves within perpetual Virginity. Athenag. ut supr. p 37.
And yet though we are thus (says another Apologist) yet there want not those
who object these things to us, and as it is in the Proverb, (...), the strumpet
reproaches the honest woman; for though they merchandise for lust, and keep
open shop for all manner of uncleanness, not abstaining from the violation and
abuse of Youth, males with males committing that which is unseemly; though
themselves are guilty of these villainies, which they report also of their gods,
and do themselves boast of them as brave achievements, yet have they the face
to accuse us of them. Adulterers and Sodomites as they are, they charge us who
are either always continent, or never marry more than once; themselves in the
mean while living like fishes, where the great ones subdue and swallow up the
less. M. Foel. p. 24. B.
Such infamous filthinesses are done amongst you, which we do not care to hear,
and may much less defend; you laying things to the charge of chaste and modest
men, which we could not believe that there should be such things done in the
world, were not you your selves instances of them. Apol. 1. p. 51.
Thus consideration made Justin Martyr this freely and passionately bespeak the
Senate; It were to be wished that some body getting up into a high place,
should with a loud voice cry out, Be afraid, be afraid to charge those things,
of which you your selves are openly guilty, upon the innocent and undeserving;
to attribute what belongs only to your selves and to your gods, to those, with
whom there is not so much as the shadow of any such thing to be found: Learn to
be more wise and sober, and repent of such injustice.

Secondly, That the Heathens themselves did tacitly confess Christians to be
Innocent in this case, when their great care was how they might debauch them;
'twas a part of their severest punishment to be prostituted, and exposed to
rudeness and violence; a penalty which they would never have inflicted upon
them, had they really been such lewd profligate persons as their enemies
endeavored to represent them. This Plea Tertullian urges in the close of his
Apology; C. ult. p. 40.
Condemn, (says he) crucify, and torment us; your cruelty and injustice is
the evidence of our Innocence, and therefore God suffers it to come upon us:
for while you choose rather to condemn a woman that is a Christian to the Stews
than to the Lions, you plainly confess that the violation of chastity is
accounted by us a heavier penalty than any punishment or kind of death which
you can inflict upon us. Ad Lenonem quam ad Leonem.


An eminent instance hereof (though of the other sex) S. Hierom relates to this
purpose: Vit. Paul. Eremit. tom. 1. p. 237.
In the time of the Decian Persecution a young man a Christian, then in the
flower and beauty of his age, whose constancy had been often attempted by other
means to no purpose, was at last set upon in this manner: He was carried into a
pleasant Garden, and into a part of it beset with Lillies and Roses, hard by
the banks of a Crystal river, whose soft murmurs, together with the music made
by the leaves of the trees waved by the gentle motions of the wind, conspired
to render it a place for pleasure and delight: Here upon a bed of down the
young man was laid, and that he might not be able to help himself or shift his
posture, was tied down with silken cords: the company withdrawing, a beautiful
Strumpet was sent in to him, who began to caresse him with kisses and embraces,
treating him with all the arts of wantonness, not consistent with modesty to
name. How to relieve himself in this case the poor man knew not; but finding
the temptation beginning to prevail, he presently bit off his tongue and spit
it in her face as she attempted to kiss him, by the greatness of his pain
extinguishing those sensual titillations which her wicked artifices began to
kindle in him.

Thirdly, they confidently assured them that amongst Christians it was not only
unlawful to be actually unclean, but to look after a woman with wanton and
unchaste desires; our Lord (says Justin Martyr) has told us that whosoever
looks after a woman to lust after her, Apol. 2 p. 61, 62.
has already committed adultery with her in his heart; and that if our right
eye offend us we must pluck it out; as therefore humane Laws condemn two Wives,
so by the Laws of our Master they are sinners, who look upon a woman with unfit
desires after her; for not only he that really commits adultery is rejected by
him, but even he that has a mind to it; not only our actions, but our very
thoughts being open unto God. Vt supr. p. 36.
So Athenagoras; So far are we from any promiscuous embraces, that we are not
permitted the freedom of an unchaste look; for whoever (says our Lord) looks
after a woman to desire her, has played the adulterer with her in his heart: we
are not therefore allowed to use our eyes to any other purposes, than those for
which God created them, viz. to be lights to the body: to abuse them to
wantonness, is to be guilty of adultery, for as much as they know they were
made for other ends, and cannot but be conscious to themselves of their own
thoughts; and how is it possible for men under such limitations to be otherwise
than chaste and sober? for we have not to deal with humane Laws, under which a
man may be wicked, and yet escape; but our discipline was delivered by God
himself; we have a Law which makes our selves the rule and measure of
righteousness toward others; according therefore to the difference of age we
account some as Sons and Daughters, others as Brethren and Sisters; the more
aged we honor in the place of Parents; those therefore whom we account as
Sisters, or as allied to us in any other relation, we reckon it a matter of
great concernment that they should be chaste and incorrupt.

Fourthly, They pleaded, that this objection would easily vanish, if they would
but consider what a strange change and alteration was in this very case wrought
upon persons at their first conversion to Christianity; immediately becoming
quite of another spirit and temper from what they were before. We who before
time (says Justin Martyr, speaking of the converting power of the Christian
doctrine) did please our selves in fornications and uncleanness, Apol. 2. p.
61, 62.
do now solely embrace temperance and chastity; what an innumerable company
could I name of those who have left their luxury and intemperance, and come
over to this kind of life; for Christ came not to call the chaste and righteous
[they needed it not] but the wicked, Apol. 1 p. 41.
the incontinent, and the unrighteous to repentance. And in his other Apology
he gives an instance of a woman, who having together with her husband lived a
very vicious and debauched course of life, after her conversion to Christianity
became strictly chaste and sober; and not content with this, she urged her
husband also to do the like laying before him the doctrines of Christianity,
and persuading him both by the rewards and punishments of another World: but he
obstinately refusing, it begot a quarrel between them, which still ripened into
a wider breach, till it became matter of public cognizance, and was an
occasion for Justin Martyr to write that excellent Apology for the Christians.
Ad Nation. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 43.
Upon this account Tertullian justly condemns the madness of the Heathens, and
their unreasonable prejudice against Christianity, that they would hate their
nearest relations merely for being Christians, though they saw how much they
were every ways bettered by it in their lives and manners: the Father
dis-inheriting his Son, of whom now he had no cause left to complain, but that
he was a Christian: the Master imprisoning his servant, though now he had found
him useful and necessary to him. But (what is more especially to the purpose) he
tells us of some husbands he knew, who though before so infinitely jealous of
their wives (and possibly not without reason) that a Mouse could not stir in
the room but it must be a Gallant creeping to their bed, yet when upon their
turning Christians they became so eminently reserved, chaste and modest, that
there was not the least foundation for suspicion, their jealousy was converted
into hatred, and they vowed they had rather their wives should be Strumpets
than Christians. So obstinately (says he) do men stand in their own light, and
contend against those advantages which they might reap by Christianity. This
Argument from the powerful and successful influence of the Christian Faith,
Origin frequently makes use of; Ad Cells. lib. 1. p. 21.
They must needs (says he) confess the excellency and divinity of Christ's
doctrine, who-ever do but look into the lives of those that adhere to it,
comparing their former course of life with that which they now lead, and
considering in what impurities, lusts and wickednesses every one of them
wallowed before they embraced this doctrine; but since that they entertained
it, how much more grave, moderate and constant are they become, insomuch that
some of them out of a desire of a more transcendent purity, and that they may
worship God with a chaster mind, deny themselves even the pleasures of a lawful
bed: The same he affirms elsewhere, Lib. 7. p. 365.
that those whom the Gentiles scorned as the most rude and sottish persons,
being once initiated into the faith and discipline of the holy Jesus, were so
far from lasciviousness, filthiness, and all manner of uncleanness, that like
Priests wholly devoted to God, they altogether abstain even from allowed
embraces; that there was no need for them (as some of the best among the
Gentiles have done) to use arts and medicines to keep them chaste; nor
Guardians set over them to preserve their Virginity; the word of God being
sufficient to expel and drive out all irregular appetites and desires. Apol c.
46: p. 36.
This also Tertullian observes as the incomparable excellency of the Christian
Doctrine above that of the best Philosophers, that whenas Democritus was forced
to put out his eyes, because not able to defend himself from the charms of
beauty; a Christian could look upon a woman with chaste unseduced eyes, being
at the same time inwardly blind as to any temptation from his lust; with such a
mighty force did the Gospel come, and captivate men's hearts into the obedience
of the truth. Thence Lactantius makes this triumphant challenge, Lib. 3. de
falls. sapient. c. 26. p. 328.
where discoursing of the prevalency which the commands of God had upon the
minds of men, as daily experience did demonstrate; Give me (says he) a man
that is angry, furious, and passionate; and with a few words from God, I Will
render him as meek and quiet as a Lamb: Give me one that is lustful, filthy and
vicious, and you shall see him sober, chaste and continent: the same he
instances in most other Vices. So great (says he) is the power of the divine
wisdom, that being infused into the breast of a man, it will soon expel that
folly which is the grand parent of all vice and wickedness.

The innocence of Christians standing thus clear from this wicked imputation,
it may not be amiss before we conclude to enquire a little into the rise and
original of this absurd and malicious charge. Contr. Cells. lib. 6. p. 293, 294.
Origin fathers it upon the Jews, as if they had falsely and spitefully invented
it (as they did other things) to disgrace and prejudice Christianity, and he
tells us that in some measure it succeeded accordingly, keeping many at a
distance from the Christian Religion; and that even in his time there were some
who for this very reason would have no discourse or commerce with a Christian.
But though both Jew and Gentile had malice and spite enough against the
Christians, yet I can hardly think that it was a purely invented falsehood, but
that it had some ground of pretense, though ill applied; and so we shall find
it had; for which we are to know that in the most early times of Christianity
there were several sorts of Heretics (who though they had their particular
names, yet all called themselves Christians, accounting that hereby they graced
and honored their party as Epiphanius tells us) the followers of Simon Magus,
Haeres. 29. p. 58.
Menander, Marcion, Marcus, Basilides, etc. who all went under the general name
of Gnostics, and were under the pretense of Religion guilty of the most
prodigious villainies, and particularly those we are speaking of. Adv. Haeres.
lib. 1. c. 1. p. 28. vid etiam c. 9. p 70. etc. 32. p. 132.
Irenaeus reports of them that they gave up themselves to all filthiness and
bestiality, not only privately corrupting the women whom they had inveagled
into their Sect (as some of them returning after to the Church confessed with
shame and sorrow) but openly and with bare face marrying the women whom they
had seduced from their husbands; committing the most execrable wickednesses,
and laughing at the pious and Orthodox Christians, whom the fear of God
restrained from sin either in word or thought, as a company of ignorant and
silly fellows; magnifying themselves, styling themselves perfect and the Seeds
of Election: and much more in other places to the same purpose; where he gives
account of the profane and hellish Rites of their Assemblies. Of the
Carpocratians, another gang of those brutish Heretics, Stromat. lib. 3. p.
430.
Clemens Alexandrinus relates the same both as to their doctrines and
practices, reporting the matter almost in the very same circumstances wherein
it is charged upon the Christians by the Heathen in Min. Foelix, viz. that both
men and women used to meet at supper (which they had in imitation of the true
Christian (...) or Love-feast) where after they had loaded themselves with a
plentiful meal, to prevent all shame, if they had any remained, they put out
the lights, and then promiscuously mixed in filthiness with one another, or
else each sorting as they pleased. And of the Gnostics Epiphanius tells us,
that they had their wives in common, Haeres. 26. p. 42.
and if any stranger of their party came to them, both men and women had this
mark and sign to know one another by; stretching out their hands by way of
salutation, they used to tickle each other in the ball of the hand, by which
they were satisfied, that the stranger really was of their gang and party:
Amongst their brethren the Carpocratians they were wont to mark their Disciples
and Proselytes unde the right ear with a brand, Ib. Haeres. 27. p. 51.
a slit, or a hole, that they might the more readily discern them; (This agrees
exactly with the charge of the Heathens, that they knew one another at the
first sight by privy marks and signs) and having thus owned and received each
other, they went to their luxurious feasts, and to those horrid brutishnesses
that followed after.

Now this being the case with these abominable wretches, who yet had the face
to call themselves Christians, it is no wonder if Jews and Gentiles, who were
greedy of any occasion to bespatter and reproach Christians, and rather than
not find an occasion would make one, charged it upon all Christians, either not
knowing it to be otherwise, or if they did, not willing to distinguish between
true and false. And that this was the true and only rise and ground of the
charge, besides some intimations of it in Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 56* 70.
we have it expressly asserted by Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 7. p. 120.
as that which gave being to that absurd and impious Opinion, which spread so
fast amongst the Heathens, of the Christians being guilty of promiscuous
mixtures, to the great reproach and infamy of the Christian Name. I do not deny
but this malicious report might receive strength and encouragement from the
servants of some Christians, who being racked by the Heathens might confess
what they put into their mouths, and this charge amongst the rest. This the
same Historian relates out of the letters of the Churches in France; Lib. 5 c.
1. p. 156.
Certain Gentiles who were servants to some Christians, being apprehended, and
having seen the exquisite torments which the Christians were put to, for fear
of the like, did at the instance of the Soldiers who urged them to it,
confess, that the Christians had amongst them incestuous mixtures, and suppers
furnished with man's flesh, laying such things to their charge as they held
unlawful to speak or think of, or could believe were ever done by men: which
being once divulged, they every where fell upon the Christians with the
greatest rage and fierceness. So in the persecution under Maximinus, Id. lib.
9. c. 5. p. 350.
one of the Commanders that then resided at Damascus, laid hold of a few light
inconsiderable women in the Market, and threatening them with the Rack, forced
the wretches publicly to confess that they had formerly been Christians, and
that they knew all their Villainies, that in their Religious Meetings they
committed the most beastly actions; and indeed, what ever else he would have
them say that might disgrace Christianity. This Confession of theirs he caused
to be entered into the public Records, and then transmitted it to the Emperor,
by whose Command it was immediately Published in all Cities and Places of the
Empire. So industriously did the malice of Men and Devils bend all the nerves
of their power and subtilty (though in vain) either wholly to suppress, or at
least to dis-hearten and ba^^le out the Christians: Which brings me to the
consideration of another Virtue no less remarkable in the Christians of those
times.

CHAP. VI.
Of their readiness and constancy in professing their Religion.
Their courage and undauntedness in professing the Truth though reproached and
persecuted. Their open and resolute owning it to the face of their enemies, and
in defiance of the greatest dangers. The story of Victorinus the Rhetorician
converted by Simplician. The free and impartial Answers of Maris to Julian, of
Basil to the Arrian Governor. Polycarp's refusing to fly when Officers were
sent to apprehend him. His resolute carriage before the Proconsul. The like of
Cyprian. No torments could make them deny Christ. Women unconquerable. The
excellent instance of Blandina and others. Diverse voluntarily offering
themselves. Others offering to plead the cause of the Christans, though with
the immediate hazard of their lives. This boldness and resolution noted as an
argument of the excellency of their Religion, and the goodness of their cause
above that of the best Philosophers. Aristoteles flying for fear of suffering
for his Opinions. The cowardly silence of Iamblichus his Scholars. This
resolution of theirs confessed by Heathens, Pliny, Apollo's Oracle in the case
of Porphyrie's wife, Galen. The constancy of Christians to their Religion
proverbial.

WHen our blessed Savior sent out his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he
acquainted them with the difficulties that were like to attend their message,
but withal bad them arm themselves with Constancy and Resolution, and not to
regard the scoffs and reproaches, the miseries and sufferings that might fall
upon them, not to fear them that could only kill the body, but to make a free
and bold Confession of his Name before the world, and cheerfully to take up
their Cross and follow him: and S. Paul, though himself then in chains at Rome,
exhorts the Christians to stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving
together for the Faith of the Gospel, being in nothing terrified by their
adversaries, it being given them on the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on him, but also to suffer for his sake; which made it very necessary for them
to have their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. And
certainly, if ever true courage and greatness of mind appeared in any persons
in the world, it was in the Christians of those times, who with such a generous
and unterrified mind defied dangers and torments, owned and gloried in the
profession of Christianity against all the threats, reproaches, and
persecutions which the worst of their adversaries could make against them. We
shall first see what account their Apologists give of it even before their
enemies, and then how they made it good in their lives and actions.

Justin Martyr speaking of the successful propagation of the Gospel, Apol. 2.
p. 83.
immediately upon Christ's resurrection and asc^nsion into Heaven, The Apostles
of Christ (says he) going forth from Jerusalem, preached the powerful Word in
every place; although it were Capital either to preach or to profess the Name
of Christ, which yet we do everywhere embrace and teach: which if you, as
enemies, still go on to obstruct, the worst you can do, is but to kill us,
whereby you will do us no great harm, but will purchase to your selves, and to
all those that unjustly persecute us, and persist impenitent in their
proceedings, the vengeance of eternal flames. And when Trypho the Jew had
charged Christianity for an idle story, Dial. cu^* Tryph. p. 2^6.
and the Christians for no better than fools to quit all the conveniences of
this life upon the account of it; the Martyr answers, that this proceeded from
his ignorance, and an implicit assent to the absurd and malicious insinuations
of their Rabbis, who understood very little of the Scriptures; that would he
but admit the true reasons of Christianity, he would quickly understand how far
they were from being in an error, and how little reason they had to quit their
profession, although men did sufficiently scorn and reproach them for it, and
the powers of the world endeavor to force them to renounce and forsake it:
notwithstanding all which, Ib. p* 3^^. D.
they chose rather to dye, and cheerfully underwent it; being fully assured,
that what God had promised through Christ he would infallibly make good to
them. Ibid. p. 337
And discoursing afterward of the same matter, As for us (says he) that have
entertained the Religion of the Holy Jesus, your selves know very well, that
there is none throughout the world that is able to subdue or affright us out of
our profession; nothing being plainer, than that though our heads be exposed to
Swords and Axes, our bodies fastened to the Cross, though thrown to wild beasts,
harrassed out with chains, fire, and all other instruments of torment, yet do
we not start from our profession; nay, the more these things happen to us, the
faster others flock over to the Name of Jesus, and become pious and devout
followers of Christ; it being with us in this case, as with a Vine, which being
pruned and trimmed, and its luxurious excrescences pared off, brings forth more
fruitful and flourishing branches. Ibid. p. 349
How little he valued any danger in competition with the truth, he tells his
adversary he might know by this, that he would not stifle and conceal it,
although they should immediately tear him in pieces for it; and therefore when
he saw his Countrymen the Samaritans seduced by the Impostures of Simon Magus,
whom they held to be a God above all Principality and Power, he could not but
by an address make his complaint to Caesar, not regarding the hazards and
troubles that might ensue upon it. Tertullian giving the Heathens an account of
that Christ whom they worshipped, Apol. 21. p. 21.
tells them they might well believe it to be true, for that no man might lie
for his Religion, to dissemble in this case being to deny; a thing which could
not be charged upon the Christians, who owned and stood to it with their last
drop of blood. We speak it (says he) and we speak it openly, yea while you are
^earing our flesh, and shedding our blood, we cry aloud, that we worship God
through Christ. So fully were they satisfied in the truth of their Religion, as
to be ready rather a thousand times to dye than to deny it.

Nor were these merely big words with which the Christians vapour'd in the
sight of their enemies, we shall find that they made them good by acting
suitable to these professions and protestations. They did not then think it
enough to espouse the faith of Christ, unless they publicly testified it to
the world; whereof this instance amongst others: August. Confess. lib. 8. c. 2.
tom. 1. col. 136, 137.
Victorinus a Rhetorician of Rome, a man of so great note and fame, that he had
obtained the honor of a public Statue, but a zealous defender of Paganism and
Idolatry, had read the Holy Scriptures, by which being convinced, he came to
Simplician, and privately told him that he was a Christian; which the other
refused to believe unless he saw him testify it in the public Church; to
which Victorinus returned with a little scorn, What, are they then the walls
that make a Christian? This answer he as often returned as the other urged a
public confession, for he was not willing to disoblige his great friends, who
he knew would fall foul upon him: till by reading and meditation he gathered
courage, and fearing that Christ would deny him before the Holy Angels, if he
should refuse to confess him before men, he became sensible of his fault, and
was ashamed of his vanity and folly, and calling to Simplician, Let us go (said
he) into the Church, I will now become a Christian; which when he had done, and
had been thoroughly instructed in the Faith of Christ, he offered himself to
baptism; and being to make the accustomed confession of his Faith, the
Ministers of the Church offered him the liberty of doing it in a more private
way (as they were wont to do for those who were of a fearful and bashful
temper) which he utterly refused, and openly made it before all the people;
affirming it to be unreasonable that he should be ashamed to confess his hopes
of Salvation before the people, who while he taught Rhetoric (wherein he hoped
for no such reward) had publicly professed it every day. An action that begat
great wonder in Rome, as it was no less matter of rejoicing to the Church. No
dangers could then sway good men from doing of their duty. Cyprian highly
commends Cornelius for taking the Bishopric of Rome upon him in so dangerous a
time; Ad Antonian. Epist. 52. p. 68.
for the greatness of his mind, and the unshaken firmness of his Faith, and the
undaunted managery of his place, at a time when Decius the Tyrant threatened
such heavy severities to the Ministers of Christianity, and would sooner endure
a Corrival in the Empire, than a Bishop to sit at Rome. How freely, how
impartially did they speak their minds, even to the face of their bitterest
enemies? When Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, a man blind with age, Socr. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 3. c. 12. p. 183
met Julian the Emperor, he boldly charged him with his Atheism and Apostasy
from the Christian Faith; Julian reproached him with his blindness, and told
him his Galilean God would never cure him; to which the good old man presently
answered, I thank my God, who has taken away my sight, that I might not behold
the face of one that has lapsed into so great impiety.

Were they at any time attempted by arts of flattery and enticement, the charms
would not take place upon them. Nazian. Orat. in Jul. 1. p. 75
So when Julian both by himself and the Officers of his Army set upon the
Soldiers, and by fair promises of preferments and rewards sought to fetch them
off from Christianity, though he prevailed upon some few weak and instable
minds, yet the far greatest part stood off; yea, by many even of the meanest
and most inconsiderable quality his temptations were as resolutely beaten back,
as the blow of an Engine is by a wall of marble. Nor were they any more shaken
by storms and threatenings. When Modestus the Governor under Valens the Arrian
Emperor could not by any means bring over S. Basil to the party, Id. in laud.
Basil. Orat. 20. p. 349, 350.
he threatened him with severity; Do thou not fear this power that I have? Why
should I fear said Basil, what can thou do, or what can I suffer? the other
answered, the loss of thy Estate, Banishnent, Torment, and Death; but threaten
us with something else if thou can (said Basil) for none of these things can
reach us; confiscation of Estate cannot hurt him, that has nothing to lose,
unless thou want these tattered and threadbare garments, and a few Books
wherein all my estate lies; nor can I be properly banished, who am not tied to
any place, wherever I am 'twill be my Country, the whole earth is Gods, in
which I am but a Pilgrim and a stranger: I fear no torments, my body not being
able to hold out beyond the first stroke; and for death, 'twill be a kindness
to me, for 'twill but so much the sooner send me unto God, for whose sake I
live, and am indeed in a great measure already dead, toward which I have been
a long time hastening. And there is no reason to wonder at this freedom of
speech; in other things we are meek and yielding; but when the Cause of God and
Religion is concerned, over-looking all other things, we direct our thoughts
only unto him; and then fire and sword, wild beasts and engines to tear off our
flesh, are so far from being a terror, that they are rather a pleasure and
recreation to us: Reproach and threaten, and use your power to the utmost, yet
let the Emperor know, that you shall never be able to make us assent to your
wicked Doctrine, no, though you should threaten ten thousand times worse than
all this. The Governor was strangely surpised with the spirit and resolution
of the man, and went and told the Emperor, that one poor Bishop was too hard
for them all. And indeed so big were their spirits with a desire to assert and
propagate their Religion, that they would not hide their heads to decline the
greatest dangers. Eus. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 15. p. 130.
When the Officers were sent to apprehend S. Polycarp, and had with great
industry and cruelty found out the place where he was, though he had timely
notice to have escaped by going into another house, yet he refused, saying, the
will of the Lord be done; and coming down out of his Chamber, saluted the
Officers with a cheerful and a pleasant countenance: as they were carrying him
back, two persons of eminency and authority met him in the way, took him up
into their Chariot, labored by all means to persuade him to do sacrifice;
which when he absolutely refused after all their importunities, they turned
their kindness into reproaches, and tumbled him with so much violence out of
the Chariot, that he was sorely bruised with the fall; but nothing daunted, as
if he had received no harm, he cheerfully went on his way, a voice being heard
as he went along, as it were from Heaven, Polycarp, be strong, and quit thy
self like a man. When he came before the Tribunal, the Proconsul asked him
whether he was Polycarp, which he presently confessed; then he attempted by all
arts of persuasion to urge him to deny Christ, or to do but something that
might look like it, but all in vain; These fourscore and six years (says he)
have I served Christ, and he never did me any harm, and how then can I
blaspheme my Master and my Savior? Being urged to swear by the Emperors
Genius, he replied, Forasmuch as thou pressest me to do this, pretending thou
know not who I am, know, I am a Christian; then the Proconsul told him he
would throw him to the wild beasts, unless he altered his Opinion: Call for
them (answered Polycarp) for we have no mind to change from better to worse; as
counting that change only to be honest and laudable, which is from Vice to
Virtue: But if thou make so light of wild beasts (added the Proconsul) I Will
have a fire that shall tame thee; to which the good old man returned, You
threaten, Sir, a fire that will burn for an hour, and presently be
extinguished; but know not that there is a fire of eternal damnation in the
judgment to come, reserved for the punishment of all wicked men: But why delay
you? execute what ever you have a mind to. This and much more to the same
purpose he discoursed of, to the great admiration of the Proconsul; being so
far from being terrified with what was said to him, that he was filled with joy
and cheerfulness, and a certain grace and loveliness overspread his face.

So likewise when Cyprian was brought before the Proconsul; Act. P (...) on
Cyp^^^ vit. e (...) 17.
Thou art (said he) Thascius Cyprian, who have been a ringleader to men of a
wicked mind; the Emperors command thee to do sacrifice, and therefore consult
thy welfare: To which he answered, I am Cyprian, I am a Christian, and I cannot
sacrifice to your gods; do therefore what you are commanded; as for me, in so
just a cause there needs no consultation; and when the sentence was pronounced
against him, he cried out, I heartily thank Almighty God, who is pleased to
free me from the chains of this earthly carcass. Had torments and the very
extremities of cruelty been able to sink their Courage, it had soon been
trodden under foot; but it was triumphant in the midst of torments, and lift up
its head higher, the greater the loads that were laid upon it; whereof there
are instances enough in the Histories of the Church; nay in this triumph even
the weaker Sex bore no inconsiderable part. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5: c. 1. p 157.
Eusebius tells us (among others that suffered in the French persecution under
M. Aurelius) of one Blandina, a good woman, but of whom the Church was afraid
how she would hold out to make a resolute confession, by reason of the weakness
of her body, and the tenderness of her education, that when she came to it, she
bore up with such invincible magnanimity, that her tormentors though they took
their turns from morning to night, and plied her with all kinds of racks and
tortures, were yet forced to give over, and confess themselves overcome; and
wondering that a body so broken and mangled should yet be able to draw its
breath. But this noble Athleta gained strength by suffering, she eased and
refreshed her self, and mitigated the sense of present pain by repeating these
words, I am a Christian; and, No evil is done by us. Nor did they only
generously bear these things for the sake of their Religion, when they were
laid upon them, but many times freely offered themselves, confessing themselves
to be Christians when they knew that their confession would cost their lives.
So did those noble Martyrs whom Eusebius saw at Thebais, Lib. 8 c. 9. p. 301.
multitudes having been executed every day with all imaginable cruelties;
sentence was no sooner passed against one party of them, but others presented
themselves before the Tribunal, and confessed that they were Christians,
receiving the fatal sentence with all possible expressions of cheerfulness and
rejoicing: De Martyr. Palaest. c. 3. p. 321.
The same which he also reports of six young men that suffered in Palestine,
spontaneously addressing themselves to the Governor of the Province, owning
that they were Christians, and ready to undergo the severest punishments. In
the Acts of S. Cyprian's passion we are told, Vbi sup. p. 16.
that the President having caused a mighty furnace to be filled with burning
lime, and fire with heaps of frankincense round about the brim of it, gave the
Christians this choice, either to burn the frankincense in sacrifice to
Jupiter, or to be thrown into the furnace: Whereupon three hundred men being
armed with an unconquerable faith, and confessing Christ to be the Son of God,
leaped into the midst of the fiery furnace, with whose fumes and vapors they
were immediately suffocated and swallowed up.

There wanted not some who in the hottest persecutions durst venture to
undertake the cause of Christians, and to plead it before the face of their
bitterest enemies; Eusebius. lib. c. 5. 1. p. 155.
thus did Vettius Epagathus a man full of zeal and piety, who seeing his
Fellow Christians unjustly dragged before the Judgment Seat, required leave of
the President that he might plead his brethrens cause, and openly show that
they were not guilty of the least wickedness and impiety: but not daring to
grant him so reasonable a request, the Judge took the advantage of asking him
whether he was a Christian, which he publicly owning, was adjudged to the same
Martyrdom with the rest. Ib. lib. 6. c. 3. p. 204.
Of Origin we read that though then but eighteen years of age, yet he was wont
not only to wait upon the Martyrs in prison, but to attend upon them at their
trials, and the times of their execution, kissing and embracing them, and
boldly preaching and professing the faith of Christ, insomuch that had he not
been many times miraculously preserved, the Gentiles had pelted him to death
with stones, for they mortally hated him for his industrious and undaunted
propagation of the Faith: Ib. cap. 2. p. 202.
Nay, when but a Boy, and his Father Leontius was seized upon, he wrote to his
Father, most earnestly pressing him to persevere unto Martyrdom, and not to
concern himself what might become of his wife and children, nor for their sakes
to decline that excellent cause he was engaged in.

By this free and cheerful undergoing the greatest miseries rather than deny or
prejudice their Religion, Christians evidently* demonstrated the goodness of
their Principles, and showed they were no such persons as their enemies
commonly looked upon them; that a Christian (as Ignatius observes) is not the
child of fancy and persuasion, Epist. ad Roman. p. 57.
but of true gallantry and greatness of spirit, having so much hatred of the
World to graple and contend with. Those who are Malefactors (as Tertullian
argues) desire to be concealed, Apol. c. 1. p. 2.
and shun to appear; being apprehended, they tremble; being accused, they deny;
being racked do not easily nor always confess the truth; however being
condemned, they are sad, search into and censure themselves, are unwilling to
acknowledge their wickednesses to be their own, and accordingly impute them
either to their fate or Stars. But what is there like this to be found in
Christians? Amongst them no man is ashamed, none repents him of being a
Christian, unless it be that he was no sooner so; if marked out, he glories; if
accused, he stands not to defend himself; being interrogated, he confesses of
his own accord; being condemned, he gives thanks: what evil then can there be
in this, which is so far from having any shadow of evil, any fear, shame,
tergiversation, repentance, deplorableness to attend it? What evil can that be,
of which he that is guilty rejoices? of which to be accused, is their vote and
desire; and for which to be punished is their happiness and felicity? This
likewise Arnobius lays down as a grand evidence of the divinity of the
Christian faith, Adv gent. lib. 2. p. 21.
that in so short a time it had conquered so much of the world, subdued men of
the greatest parts and learning, made them willing to quit their beloved
opinions, to forfeit their estates, to part with their ease and pleasures, and
to submit to torments rather than violate the faith of Christ, or start from
the station they had entered upon. By this excellent temper and carriage they
admirably triumphed over the best men amongst the Gentiles, none of whom durst
engage so deep for the defense of their dearest sentiments as the Christians
did for theirs; witness Plato who set up the Academy, and brought in an obscure
and ambiguous way of delivering his opinions, lest by speaking out he should
fall under the sentence and the fate of Socrates. Thus Origin puts Celsus in
mind of Aristotle, Cont. Cells. lib. 1. p. 51.
who understanding that the Athenians intended to call him to account for some
of his (as they thought them) un-orthodox opinions, immediately removed his
School, saying to his Friends, Let Us be gone from Athens, lest we give them an
occasion of being guilty of a second wickedness, like to that which they
committed against Socrates, and lest they again offend against the Majesty of
Philosophy: it being alas! not kindness to the Athenians, but cowardice and
fear of punishment made him so hastily pack up and be gone, and leave his
opinions behind him to shift for themselves as well as they could. In vit.
^^desii. p. 33.
Nay, Eunapius himself confesses that in the time of Constantine, when Paganism
began to go down the wind, and Christianity to be advanced and honored, their
best Philosophers, the great Scholars of Iamblichus took sanctuary at a
mysterious secrecy, and wisely kept their dogmata and opinions to themselves,
sealed up under a profound and religious silence. No, they were the Christians
only, the very meanest of whom durst stand by and defend naked truth in the
face of danger and death it self; this being (as Eusebius notes) one of the
most wonderful things in Christian Religion, Hist. lib. 1. c. 3. p. 14.
that they who embrace it, are not only ready to profess it in words, but
entertain it with such a mighty affection and sincerity of soul, as willingly
to prefer the bearing testimony to it even before life it self. And indeed this
piece of right is done them by Pliny himself, Epist. 97. lib. 10.
where speaking of some, who having been accused for Christians, to show how
far they were from it, readily blasphemed Christ and sacrificed to the gods; he
adds, none of which it is said that they who are truly Christians can by any
means be compelled to do. Nay thus much is confessed by the Oracle it self, for
when Porphyry the great Philosopher, and acute enemy of the Christians,
enquired of Apollo's Oracle, what god he should make his address to for the
recovery of his wife back from Christianity, the Oracle returned him this
Answer, Apud August. de Civ. Dei lib. 19. c. 23. col. 1181. de praepar. Evang.
lib. 4* de Curand. Graec. Affect.
(as himself reported it in his Book (...), not (...), as it is corruptly in S.
Augustine; a Book frequently cited both by Eusebius and Theodoret; where by the
way in the Latin Version of Theodoret it is by a strange mistake rendered de
Electorum Philosophia, as if it had been (...): in this Book concerning the
Philosophy draw from Oracles, he tells us he received this answer) that he
might as well, and to better purpose attempt to write upon the surface of the
water, or to fly like a bird in the air, than to reduce his wife from those
wicked sentiments she had taken in. And this was so common and notorious that
it became in a manner proverbial; whence that of Galen, when he would express
how pertinaciously the Philosophers adhered to those sentiments they had once
drunk in, (...). Galen. (...) lib. 3. fol. 18. ^. 2. Tom. 3.
and how very hard and almost impossible it was to convince them, Sooner, says
he, may a man undeceive a Jew or a Christian, and make them renounce the
doctrines of Moses or of Christ, than Philosophers and Physicians that are once
addicted to their several Sects.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Exemplary Patience under Sufferings.
Christianity likely to engage its followers in suffering, and why. Continual
Edicts put forth against Christians. The form of those Imperial orders
exemplified out of the Acts of the Martyrs. The fierce opposition of the Roman
Emperors, and their probable hopes of having destroyed Christianity evidenced
from several Inscriptions to that purpose found in Spain. The greatness of the
torments Christians endured; some of the ordinary kinds of them described. The
Cross; the pain and ignominy of it; Persons crucified with their heads
downwards. The Rack, what. Catasta: ad Pulpitum post Catastam. Ungulae: one of
these kept and adored as a Relic at Rome. The Wheel. Burning. Throwing to
wild beasts. Being condemned to Mines; their treatment there and the case of
such persons. Some of the extraordinary ways of punishment used toward
Christians. Torn asunder by branches of trees: burnt in pitched coats: boiled
in pots of oil or lead, etc. Their carriage under these sufferings sedate and
calm; meek and patient. Their refusing to make use of opportunities to avoid
suffering. Whether they might fly and withdraw in times of persecution: Allowed
and practiced in some cases; two instanced in. Where persons were of more than
ordinary use and eminency. Where they were weak for the present, and not like
to hold out. Proved by particular instances. Their cheerful offering themselves
to the rage and fury of their enemies, confessed by the relation of their
Judges and bitterest Adversaries, Tiberianus, Arrius Antoninus, Lucian. The
earnest desire of Martyrdom in Ignatius, Laurentius, Origin and others. When
unjustly condemned, their Judges thanked for condemning them. Their glorying in
suffering and being crucified. Babylas the Martyr's chains buried with him. No
signs of an impatient mind under their bitterest torments. An account of their
cheerful suffering out of Cyprian. Their patience wondered at by their enemies.
Their grand support under suffering; the hopes and assurance of a reward in
Heaven. The case of the forty Martyrs in S. Basil. Psalms sung at the Funeral
of Christians, and Lights carried before the Corpse, and why. Christianity
vastly increased by the patience and constancy of Christians. Justin Martyr's
account of his conversion by this means. Julian generally refused to put
Christians to death, and why. The testimonies of several Heathens corcerning
the Christians conrage and patience under sufferings.

THat the Christian Religion at its first appearing in the World was likely to
engage its followers in miseries and sufferings, could not be unknown to any
that considered the nature of its doctrine, and the tendency of its design. The
severity of its precepts so directly opposite to the corrupt and vicious
inclinations of men; the purity of its worship so flatly contrary to the loose
and obscene rites and solemnities of the Heathens; its absolute inconsistency
with those Religions which had obtained for so many Ages, which then had such
firm possessions of the minds of men, and all the powers and policies of the
world to secure and back them, could not prophecy to it any kind or welcome
entertainment. This Sect (for so they called it) was every where not only
spoken, but fought against; for since men have a natural veneration for
Antiquity, and especially in matters of Religion, they thought themselves
concerned to defend that way, that had been conveyed to them from their
Ancestors, and to set themselves with might and main against whatever might
oppose it: especially the great ones of those times and the Roman Emperors
made it their masterdesign to oppress and stifle this infant Religion, and to
banish it out of the World. Hence those Imperial orders that were daily sent
abroad into all parts of the Empire, to command and empower their Governors to
ruin and destroy the Christians; of which that we may the better apprehend the
form of them, it may not be amiss to set down one or two of them out of the
acts of the Martyrs. This following was agreed upon both by the Emperors and
the whole Senate of Rome. Decius and Valerian Emperors, Metraphrast. in Martyr.
Triumphers, Conquerours, August, Pious, together with the whole Senate, S.
Mercur. apud Sur. ad 24. November. Tom. 6.
have by common consent decreed thus. Whereas we have received the gifts and
blessings of the gods, by whom we enjoy victory over our enemies, as also
temperate seasons and fruits in great plenty and abundance; since we have found
them our great benefactors, and to supply us with those things that are
universally beneficial to all: We therefore unanimously decree, that all orders
of men, as well children as servants, soldiers as private persons shall offer
sacrifices to the gods, doing reverence and supplication to them. And if any
shall dare to violate our divine order thus unanimously agreed upon, we
command, that he be cast into prison, and afterward exposed to several kinds
of torments; if by this means he be reclaimed, he may expect no mean honors
from us. But if he shall persist contumacious, after many tortures let him be
beheaded, or thrown into the sea, or cast out to be devoured by dogs and birds
of prey. But especially if there be any found of the Religion of the
Christians. As for those that obey our Decrees, they shall receive great
honors and rewards from us. So happily fare ye well.

To this we may add that short Rescript of Valerian. Act. Symphor. apud Sur. ad
22. Aug. Tom. 4.
Valerian the Emperor to the Ministers and Governors of Provinces. We
understand that the precepts of the Laws are violated by those who in these
days call themselves Christians. Wherefore we will, that apprehending them,
unless they sacrifice to our gods, you expose them to diverse kinds of
punishments; that so both justice may have place without delay, and vengeance
in cutting off impieties having attained its end, may proceed no further. This
course they prosecuted with so much vigor and fierceness, that some of them
boasted, that they had absolutely effected their design. Witness those Trophies
and Triumphal Arches that were every where erected to perpetuate the memory of
their Conquest over Christianity: whereof these two Inscriptions found at
Clunia in Spain are a sufficient evidence.

DIOCLETIANUS. Gruter. Inscript. p. 280. Number. 3.
JOVIUS. ET. MAXIMIAN. HERCULEUS. CAES. AUGG. AMPLIFICATO. PER. ORIEN TEM. ET.
OCCIDENTEM. IMP. ROMANS ET NOMINE. CHRISTIANORUM. DELETO. QUI. REMP. EVER TEBANT.

The other,

DIOCLETIAN. Ibid. number. 4.
CAES. AUG. GALERIO. IN. ORI ENTE. ADOPT. SUPERS TITIONE. CHRIST -- UBIQ.
DELETA. ET. CUL TU. DEOR. PROPAGATO.

The meaning of both which is to show, that Diocletian and his Colleague
Maximianus had every were extinguished the wicked Superstition of Christ, so
pernicious to the Commonwealth, and had restored Paganism and the worship of
the gods. But long before them we find Nero (the first Emperor that raised
persecution against the Christians, as Tertullian notes) so active in the
business, as to glory (or some flatterers in his behalf) that he had done the
work. Witness an Inscription found also in Spain.

NERONI. Ibid. Page 238. number. 9.
CL. CAIS. AUG. PONT. MAX. OB. PROVINC. LATRONIB. ET. HIS. QUI. NOVAM. GENERI.
HUM. SUPER STITION. INCULCAB. PURGATAM.

This Inscription was set up in memory of his having purged the Country of
Robbers, and such as had introduced and obtruded a new superstition upon
mankind. The Christians it is true are not particularly named in it (probably
the Gentiles so much detested the very name of Christian, that especially in
public Monuments they would not mention it) yet can it be meant of no other.
For besides that this Character of Inculeating their Superstition admirably
agrees to Christians, who sought by all means to instill their Principles into
the minds of men; besides that superstition was the common Title by which the
Gentiles were wont to denote Christianity; besides this, there was not (as
Baronius observes) any other New Religion at that time, Ad Ann. Chr. 69.
or long before or after, that appeared in the world; to be sure none that
could be the object of Nero's persecution. And how he entertained this,
Tertullian sufficiently intimates, Apol. c. 5. p. 6.
bidding them search their own Records, and they would find. And from this very
Inscription alone it is evident, they thought, that (at least in that part of
the world) they had wholly extirpated and rooted it out. By all which we may
guess, what hot service the Christians had on it under those Primitive
Persecutions. Indeed their sufferings were beyond all imagination great, which
yet did but so much the more exercise and advance their Patience, the
bitterness of their sufferings making their patience more eminent and
illustrious. Of which that we may take the truer measures, 'twill be necessary
to consider these two things, the greatness of those torments and sufferings
which the Christians generally underwent; and then the manner of their carriage
under them.

For the First, the greatness of those torments and sufferings which they
underwent, they were as bad as the wit and malice of either Men or Devils could
invent; in the consideration whereof we shall first take a view of those
punishments which were more standing and ordinary, familiarly used amongst the
Greeks and Romans, and then of such as were extraordinarily made use of toward
the Christians: Amongst their ordinary methods of Execution, these six were
most eminent, the Cross, the Rack, the Wheel, Burning, wild Beasts, condemning
to Mines.

I. The Cross deserves the first place in our account, not only as having been
one of the most ancient and universal ways of punishment amongst the Gentiles,
and from them brought in amongst the Jews, but as being the instrument by which
our Blessed Savior himself was put to death. Omitting the various and
different forms and kinds of it, which were all used toward the Primitive
Christians, I intend here only that that was most common, a straight piece of
wood fixed in the ground, having a transverse beam fastened near the top of it,
not unlike the letter T, though probably it had also a piece of wood arising
above the top of it, and there were two things in this way of punishment, which
rendered it very severe, the pain and ignominy of it. Painful it must needs be,
because the party suffering was fastened to it with nails driven through his
hands and feet, which being the parts where the nerves and sinews terminate and
meet together, must needs be most acutely sensible of wounds and violence: and
because they were pierced only in these parts so far distant from the Vitals,
this made their death very lingering and tedious, doubled and trebled every pain
upon them: Insomuch that some out of a generous compassion have caused
malefactors first to be strangled before they were crucified, Sueton. in vit.
Caes. c. 74. p. 76.
as Julius Caesar did toward the Pirates whom he had sworn to execute upon the
Cross. But no such favor was showed to Christians; they were suffered to
remain in the midst of all those exquisite pangs, Vid. Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 8
c. 8. p. 300.
till mere hunger starved them, or the mercy of wild beasts or birds of prey
dispatched them. Thus S. Andrew the Apostle continued two whole days upon the
Cross, Martyrol. Romans ad diem 30.
teaching the people all the while; Novembr. p. 736.
Timotheus and his wife Maura after many other torments hung upon the Cross
nine days together before they completed their Martyrdom. Ib. ad diem 3. Maii.
p. 272.
Nor was the shame of this way of suffering less than the pain of it,
crucifixion being the peculiar punishment of Slaves, Traitors, and the vilest
Malefactors, insomuch, that for a Freemen to dye thus, Vul. Gallic. in Avid.
was accounted the highest accent of ignominy and reproach; Caes. c. 4. p. 248.
therefore the Roman Historian calls it servile supplicium, Vid. Lact. de ver.
sap. c. 26. p. 436*
a punishment proper to slaves. Sometimes they were crucified with their heads
downwards; Eusebius. lib. 3 c. 1. et lib. 8. ubi supr.
thus S. Peter is said to have been crucified; thus those Egyptian Martyrs, who
hung in this posture, till they were starved out of the world. But this
punishment of the Cross soon after the world was become Christian, Sozom. lib.
1. c. 8. p. 412.
Constantine took away out of reverence to our Savior, not being willing that
that should be the punishment of the vilest malefactors, which had been the
Instrument whereupon the Son of God had purchased Salvation for mankind.

II. The Rack, called in Latin Equuleus, either from the situation of the
offenders body upon the Engine, resembling a man on horseback, or rather from
the horsing or holding of him up to it by ropes and screws. The first design of
it was to torment the guilty, Cicer. pro Deiotar. p. 579. tom. 2.
or the suspected person to make him confess the truth; what the particular
form of it was is not agreed amongst learned men; Vid. Gallon de cruciat.
martyr. c* 3.
but this we may probably conceive, that it was an Engine framed of several
pieces of timber joined together, upon the top whereof upon a long board the
suffering person being laid along upon his back and fastened to it by his hands
and feet, the Engine was so contrived with screws and pullies, that all his
members were distended with the utmost violence, even to a luxation of all the
parts, and this more or less according to the tormentors pleasures. Sometimes
they were hung by the hands and feet under the top-board of the Engine, and
tormented in that posture; This Rack was a punishment which the Christians were
very frequently put to. Much of the same nature was that which they called the
Catasta, being a piece of wood raised up like a little scaffold, upon which
Christians were set, that their torments might be more conspicuous; thence that
proverb in Cyprian, Epist. 33. p. 47.
ad Pulpitum post Catastam venire, speaking of Aurelius a Confessor, who having
been publicly tormented upon this Engine was after ordained a Reader in the
Church, and promoted to read the Scriptures out of the Pulpit, as he had lately
confessed Christ upon the Scaffold: In this, as in that of the Rack, there were
certain additional torments made by instruments called Vngulae, which were a
kind of iron pinsers, made with sharp teeth, with which the flesh was by
piecemeal pulled and torn off their backs.

In the time of Pope Paul the third, Haec ungul^ in sacrarum Sanctuario
reliquiarum ejusde^ Basilicae, religioso cultu, tanquam res omni pretiosior
auro, dignissime asservatur; and Christianoru^ populo videnda ac veneranda
proponitur.
one of these Vngulae, as the author of the Roma Subterranea tells us, was
amongst other things found in the Vatican Coemetery amongst the monuments of
the Martyrs, and laid up amongst the other Relics of that Church as an
inestimable treasure, and a worthy object of Religious worship; being there
kept to be seen and adored by all Christian people. Romans subter. lib. 2. c. 4.
number. 16. page 149.
And another of their writers being about to describe it, Gallon. ib. c. 5. p.
185.
tells us that though altogether unworthy of such a favor, yet he was blessed
with the sight of it, and that as became him, he kissed and embraced it with
great veneration. Which by the way seems to me a little strange, that it should
be accounted an honor and a kindness done to the Martyrs, to adore that which
was the instrument of their torment: Might they not by the same reason as well
worship their executioners, and pay a religious respect to the ashes of those,
who dragged them to the stake, tore off their flesh, and put them to death with
all imaginable pain and torture.

III. The Wheel. This was a round Engine, to which the body of the condemned
person being bound, was not only extremely distended, but whirled about with
the most violent distortion; the pain whereof was unconceivable, especially as
used toward the Primitive Christians, the Wheel to which they were bound naked
being sometimes full of iron pricks, sometimes a board full of sharp-pointed
iron pricks being placed under it, so that every time the body of the Martyr
came to it, they raked off the flesh with inexpressible torment. Thus were
served those three Martyrs, Foelix the Presbyter, Martyr.
Fortunatus and Achilleus the Deacons at Valentia in France, Romans ad diem
April. 23. p. 249.
and hundreds more in other places.

IV. Burning. This was done sometimes by staking them down to a pile of wood,
and setting it on fire; thus suffered Julianus and others in the Persecution at
Alexandria; Eusebius. H. Eccl lib. 6. c. 4. p. 238.
sometimes by laying them to roast at a slow gentle fire, that they might dye
with the greater torment; otherwhiles they were hung up either by the neck,
hands or feet, and a fire made under them, either to burn or choke them; or
burning torches held to several parts of their naked bodies; sometimes they
were placed in an iron chair, or laid upon an iron grate, which was either made
red hot, or had a fire continually burning under it: of all which ways of
execution, and some other near akin to them, were it not too tedious I could
easily give abundant instances. This was accounted one of the prince ways of
capital punishments, and none were adjudged to it but the greatest Villains, L.
28. Praefat. and Sect 11 ff. de poenis.
the meanest and vilest persons.

V. Throwing to wild Beasts. This was a punishment very common amongst the
Romans, Leg. 3. Sect 5. ff. lib. 48. Tit. 8. ad leg. Corn. de Sicar. and ven.
to condemn a man to fight for his life with the most savage beasts, Bears,
Leopards, Lions, etc. and was usually the portion of the vilest and most
despicable offenders; under which notion the Gentiles looking upon the
Christians did most commonly condemn them to this kind of death; a thing so
familiar, that it became in a manner proverbal, Christianos ad Leones, Tert.
Apol. c. 40.
away with the Christians to the Lions: and that they might be devoured with
the more ease, they were many times tied down to a stake; sometimes clothed in
beasts-skins, the more eagerly to provoke the rage and fury of the wild beasts
against them.

VI. Condemning to the Mines. To this the Romans adjudg'd their slaves, and the
most infamous malefactors; and to this too the Christians were often sent: what
their treatment was in those places, besides their continual toil and
drudgery, Epist. 77. p. 155.
Cyprian lets us know in a letter to Nemesian and the rest that labored in the
Mines, viz. that they were cruelly beaten with clubs, bound with chains, forced
to lie upon the hard, cold, damp ground, conflicted with hunger, nakedness, the
deformity of their heads half shaved, after the manner of slaves, and forced to
live in the midst of filth and nastiness; besides which they were wont to be
marked and branded in the face, to have their right eye pulled out, Vid. Leg.
8. Sect 4. ff. qui Test. fac. possunt.
and their left foot disabled by cutting the nerves and sinews of it; not to
say, that being once under this condemnation, all their estate was forfeit to
the public treasury, and themselves for ever reduced into the condition of
slaves. These were some of the more usual ways of punishment amongst the
Romans, though exercised toward the Christians in their utmost rigor and
severity. I omit to speak of Christians being scourged and whipped even to the
tiring of their executioners, especially with rods called plumbatae (whereof
there is frequent mention in the Theodosian Code) which were scourges made of
cords or thongs with leaden bullets at the end of them; of their being stoned
to death, their being beheaded, their being thrust into stinking and nasty
prisons, where they were set in a kind of stocks with five holes, their legs
being stretched asunder to reach from one end to the other.

We shall now consider some few of those unusal torments and punishments which
were inflicted only upon Christians, or if upon any others, only in
extraordinary cases: Such was their being tied to arms of trees bent by great
force and strength by certain Engines, and being suddenly let go, did in a
moment tear the Martyr in pieces, in which way many were put to death in the
persecution at Thebais. Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 8. c. 9. p. 300.
Sometimes they were clad with coats of paper, linen, or such like, daubed in
the inside with pitch and brimstone, which being set on fire, they were burnt
alive. Otherwhiles they were shut into the belly of a brazen Bull, and a fire
being kindled under it, were consumed with a torment beyond imagination.
Sometimes they were put into a great Pot or Caldron full of boiling pitch, oil,
lead, or wax mixed together; or had these fatal liquors by holes made on
purpose poured into their bowels. Some of them were hung up by one or both
hands, with stones of great weight tied to their feet to augment their
sufferings; others were anointed all over their bodies with honey, and at
midday fastened to the top of a pole, that they might be a prey to flies,
wasps, and such little cattle as might by degrees sting and torment them to
death; Thus besides many others it was with Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, Nazianz,
Orat. (...) Jul. p. (...).
a venerable old man who suffered under Julian the Apostate; after infinite
other tortures they daubed him over with honey and jellies, and in a basket
fastened to the top of a pole, exposed him to the hottest beams of the Sun, and
to the fury of such little Insects as would be sure to prey upon him. Sometimes
they were put into a rotten ship, which being turned out to sea was set on
fire; thus they served an Orthodox Presbyter under Valens the Arrian Emperor;
Id. Orat. 20. p* 416. lib. 4. c. 16. p. 227.
the same which Socrates reports of fourscore pious and devout men, who by the
same Emperors command were thrust into a ship, which being brought into open
Sea, was presently fired, that so by this means they might also want the honor
of a burial. And indeed the rage and cruelty of the Gentiles did not only reach
the Christians while alive, but extend to them after death, denying them (what
has been otherwise granted amongst the most barbarous people) the convenience
of burial, exposing them to the ravage and fierceness of dogs and beasts of
prey, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 1. 165. and de Martyr. Pal. c. 9. p. 334.
a thing which we are told the Primitive Christians reckoned as not the least
aggravation of their sufferings. Nay, where they had been quietly buried, they
were not suffered many times (as Tertullian complains) to enjoy the Asylum of
the grave, Apolc. 37. p. 30.
but were plucked out, rent and torn in pieces.

But to what purpose is it any longer to insist upon these things; sooner may a
man tell the stars, than reckon up all those methods of misery and suffering
which the Christians endured. Lib. 8. c. 12* p. 307.
Eusebius, who himself was a sad spectatour of some of the later persecutions,
professes to give over the account, as a thing beyond all possibility of
expression; the manner of their sufferings, and the persons that suffered being
hard, nay impossible to be reckoned up. The truth is (as he there observes, and
Cyprian plainly tells Demetrian of it) their enemies did little else but set
their wits upon the tenters to find out the most exquisite methods of torture
and punishment; Cypr. ad Demetr. p. 200.
they were not content with those old ways of torment which their forefathers
had brought in, but by an ingenious cruelty daily invented new, striving to
excel one another in this piece of hellish art, and accounting those the
wittiest persons that could invent the bitterest and most barbarous engines of
execution; and in this they improved so much, that Vlpian, Master of Records to
Alexander Severus the Emperor, and the great Oracle of those Times for Law,
writing several Books de Officio Proconsulis (many parcels whereof are yet
extant in the body of the Civil Law) in the seventh Book collected together the
several bloody Edicts which the Emperors had put out against the Christians,
that he might show by what ways and methods they ought to be punished and
destroyed, De justit. lib. 5. c. 11. p. 491.
as Lactantius tells us. But this Book as to what concerned Christians is not
now extant, the zeal and piety of the first Christian Emperors having banished
all Books of that nature out of the World, as appears by a Law of the Emperor
Theodosius, L. 3. c. de Sum. Trinit. sect. 1.
where he commands the Writings of Porphyry, and all others that had written
against the Christian Religion to be burned: The reason why we have no more
Books of the Heathens concerning the Christians extant at this day.

Having given this brief specimen of some few of those grievous torments to
which the Primitive Christians were exposed (they that would have more, must
read the Martyrologies of the Church, or such as have purposely witten on this
subject) we come next to consider what was their behavior and carriage under
them; this we shall find to have been most sedate and calm, most constant and
resolute; they neither fainted nor fretted, neither railed at their enemies,
nor sunk under their hands, but bore up under the heaviest torments, under the
bitterest reproaches with a meekness and patience that was invincible, and such
as every way became the mild and yet generous spirit of the Gospel. So Justin
Martyr tells the Jew; Dial. cum. T^^ph. p. 236.
We patiently bear (says he) all the mischiefs which are brought upon us either
by men or devils, even to the extremities of death and torments, praying for
those that thus treat us, that they may find mercy, not desiring to hurt or
revenge our selves upon any that injures us, according as our great Lawgiver
has commanded us. Orat. de laudib.
Thus Eusebius reporting the hard usage which the Christians met with during
the times of persecution, Constant. c. 7. p. 622.
tells us that they were betrayed and butchered by their own friends and
brethren; but they as courageous Champions of the true Religion, accustomed to
prefer an honorable death in defense of the truth before life it self, little
regarded the cruel usage they met with in it: but rather as became true
Soldiers of God, armed with patience, they laughed at all methods of
execution; fire and sword, and the piercings of nails, wild beasts, and the
bottom of the Sea, cutting and burning of limbs, putting out eyes, and
mutilation of the whole body, hunger, and digging in Mines, chains and fetters;
all which for the great love that they had to their Lord and Master they
accounted sweeter than any happiness or pleasure whatsoever. Nay the very women
in this case were as courageous as the men, many of whom undergoing the same
conflicts, reaped the same rewards of their constancy and virtue. But this will
more distinctly appear in a few particular cases.

First, When ever they were sought for in order to their being condemned and
executed, they cared not to make use of opportunities to escape. Polycarp at
his apprehension refused to fly, though going but into the next house might
have saved his life. Epist. ad Mosen and Max. Ep. 15. p. 28.
Cyprian writing to the Confessors, commends them, that when they were often
desired (I suppose he means by their Gentile-friends and relations) to go out
of prison, they chose rather to abide there still, than to make their own
escape; telling them they had made as many confessions, as they had had
opportunities to be gone, and had rejected them. Though it is true he himself
withdrew from Carthage when the Officers were sent to take him and carry him to
Vtica, Epist. 83. p. 161.
yet he did it (as he tells his people) by the advice of some friends, but for
this reason, that when he did suffer, he might suffer at Carthage whereof he
was Bishop, and that those truths which he had preached to them in his life, he
might seal before them with his blood; a thing he earnestly and daily begged of
God, and which was granted to him afterward. And if they did not run away from
suffering much less did they oppose it, and make tumults and parties to defend
themselves; no, they were led as Lambs to the slaughter, and as sheep before
the shearers are dumb; so opened not they their mouth; but committed their
cause to him that judges righteously, and who has said, vengeance is mine, and
I will repay it. Ad Demetrian. p. 202.
None of us (says Cyprian to the Governor) when apprehended makes resistance,
nor (though our party be large and numerous) revenges himself for that unjust
violence, that you offer to us: we patiently acquiesce in the assurance of a
future vengeance; the innocent truckle under the unrighteous; the guiltless
quietly submit to pains and tortures; knowing for certain that whatever we now
suffer shall not remain unpunished, and that the greater the injury that is
done us in these persecutions we endure, the more just and heavy will be that
vengeance that will follow it: never was any wicked attempt made against
Christians, but a divine vengeance was soon at the heels of it. But though they
thus resolutely stood to it, when the honor of their Religon lay at stake, yet
it must not be denied that in some cases they held it lawful and convenient to
fly in times of persecution. Tertullian indeed in a Book purposely written on
this subject maintains it to be simply and absolutely unlawful for Christians
to fly at such a time; Lib. de fug. in persecut.
an assertion which with all the subtilties of his wit, and the flourishes of
his African eloquence he endeavors to render fair and pausible. But besides
the strictness and rigid severity of the man at all times, this Book was
composed after his complying with the Sect of the Montanists, whose peculiar
humor it was to outdo the Orthodox by overstraining the austerities of
Religion, as appears not only in this, but in the case of marriages, fasts,
pennances, and such like. Otherwise before his espousing those opinions he
seems elsewhere to speak more favorably of shunning persecution. De patient.
c. 13. p. 147.
But whatever he thought in the case, it is certain the generality of the
Fathers were of another mind, that Christians might and ought to use prudence
in this affair, and at some times withdraw to avoid the storm when it was a
coming, especially in these two Cases.

I. When persons were of more than ordinary use and eminency, the saving of
whom might be of great advantage to the Church. Thus S. Paul was let down the
wall in a basket, when the Governor of Damascus sought his life. Thus Cyprian
withdrew from Carthage, and lay hid for two years together, during which time
he gave secret orders for governing of the Church. Athan. Apol. de fug. sua
Tom. 1. p 545.
Thus Athanasius, when Syrianus and his Soldiers broke into the Church to
apprehend him, was by the universal cry both of Clergy and people persuaded and
in a manner forced to retire and save himself, in which retirement he continued
so long, that the Arrians charged him with fear and cowardice, insomuch that
for his own vindication he was forced to write an Apology for himself, wherein
he learnedly and eloquently discourses the whole affair, justifying himself
from the instances of the Old Testament of Jacob, Moses, David, Elias; from the
example of Christ himself and his Apostles in the New, from the plain and
positive allowance of the Gospel, when they persecute you in one City, flee
into another, and that when they should see the abomination of desolation
standing in the holy place (i. e. the miseries that were to come upon Jerusalem
by the Roman Army) they should fly unto the mountians, and if upon the house
top, or in the field, not turn back to fetch any thing that was left behind;
that 'twas necessary for the Apostles to shun the storm, because they were the
instruments immediately deputed to propagate and convey the Gospel to the
World; that they were herein imitated by the Primitive Saints and Martyrs, who
wandered about in deserts and mountains and in dens and caves of the earth,
being equally careful to avoid the two extremes of rashness and cowardice, they
would neither thrust themselves upon danger, nor basely run from death, when
called to it, like wise Physicians reserving themselves for the use of those
that needed their assistance. All which and a great deal more he rationally
urges in that Apology.

II. Another case wherein they accounted it lawful for persons to retire under
persecutions was, when being but new Converts and as yet weak in the faith,
they looked upon them as not likely to bear the shock and brunt of the
persecution; in this case they thought it better for them to withdraw for the
present, than to put them under a temptaion of being drawn back to Paganism and
Idolatry. Thus when Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea saw the Decian persecution
grow extreme hot and violent, Nesson. Orat. de vit. Greg. Tha^mat. p. 1001.
tom. 2.
considering the frailty and infirmity of humane nature, and how few would be
able to bear up under those fierce conflicts that must be undergone for the
sake of Religion, persuaded his Church a little to decline that dreadful and
terrible storm, telling them 'twas a great deal better to save their souls by
flying, than by abiding those furious trials to run the hazard of falling from
the faith: and that his counsel might make the deeper impression upon them, and
he might convince them that in thus doing there was no danger or prejudice to
their souls, he resolved to show them the way by his own example, and himself
first retiring out of the reach of danger, retreated to the mountainous parts
there-abouts that were freest from the rage and malice of the enemy. Nor was
this any impeachment of their zeal and readiness for suffering, but only a
prudent gaining a little respite for a time, that they might suffer with
greater advantage afterward. They did not desire to save their heads, when the
honor of their Religion called for it, nor ever by indirect means screwed
themselves out of danger, when once engaged in it, though they did sometimes
prudently prevent it, reserving themselves for a more convenient season. Thus
Cyprian withdrew a little, not out of fear of suffering, but a desire to
prevent his being put to death in an obscure place (which his enemies had
designed) being desirous his Martyrdom should happen in that place, where he so
long lived, and so publicly preached the Christian faith.

Secondly, They were so far from declining suffering, and being terrified with
those miseries which they saw others undergo, that they freely and in great
multitudes offered themselves to the rage and fury of their enemies; embracing
death as the greatest honor that could be done them; they strove (as Sulpitius
Severus observes, Sac. Hist. lib. 2. p. 143.
speaking of the ninth persecution) which should rush first upon those glorious
conflicts; men in those days (as he adds) much more greedily seeking Martyrdom
in the cause of Christ, than in aftertimes they did for Bishoprics and the
preferments of the Church. Lucian who certainly had very little love to
Christians, yet gives this account of them: De mort. Peregr.
The miserable wretches (says he, (...)) do verily persuade them, Tom. 2. p.
763.
i. e. those of their own party, that they shall surely be immortal and live
for ever; upon which account they despise death, and many of them voluntarily
offer themselves to it. Indeed they did ambitiously contend who should be first
crowned with Martyrdom, and that in such multitudes, that their enemies knew
not what to do with them, their very persecutors grew weary of their bloody
offices. Apud Vsser. Appen. Ignat. p 9. ex Jo. Malel. Chron. lib. 11. vid.
Tiberianus the President of Palestine in his relation to the Emperor Trajan,
(recorded by Joannes Matela, mentioned also by Suidas) gives this account of
his proceedings against them; Annot. in Ep. ad Philad. not. 82.
I am quite tired out in punishing and destroying the Galileans (called here by
the name of Christians) according to your commands; In voc. (...).
and yet they cease not to offer themselves to be slain: Nay, though I have
labored both by fair means and threatenings to make them conceal themselves
from being known to be Christians, yet can I not stave them off from
persecution. So little regard had they to sufferings, nay so impatient were
they till they were in the midst of flames. This made Arrius Antoninus the
Proconsul of Asia, Tertual. ad Scap. c. 4. ^. 71.
when at first he severely persecuted the Christians, whereupon all the
Christians in that City like an Army voluntarily presented themselves before
his Tribunal, to be surpised with wonder, and causing only some few of them to
be executed, he cried out to the rest, O unhappy people, if you have a mind to
die, have you not halters, and precipices enough to end your lives with, but
you must come hither for an execution? so fast did they flock to the place of
torment, faster than droves of beasts that are driven to the shambles. They
even longed to be in the arms of suffering. Ignatius though then in his journey
to Rome in order to his execution, Eusebius. H. E. lib. 3. c. 36* p. 107.
yet by the way as he went could not but vent his passionate desire of it: O
that I might come to those wild beasts, that are prepared for me; I heartily
wish that I may presently meet with them; I would invite and encourage them
speedily to devour me, and not be afraid to set upon me as they have been to
others; nay should they refuse it, I would even force them to it: I am
concerned for nothing either seen or unseen more than to enjoy Jesus Christ:
Let fire and the cross, and the rage of wild beasts; the breaking of bones,
distortion of members, bruising of the whole body, yea all the punishments
which the devil can invent, come upon me, so as I may but enjoy Christ. They
even envied the Martyrdom of others, and mourned that any went before, while
they were left behind. When Laurentius the Deacon espied Sixtus the Bishop of
Rome going to his Martyrdom, Ambr. offic. lib. 1. c. 42.
he burst into tears, Tom. 1. p. 26.
and passionately called out, Whither O my Father art thou going without thy
Son? Whither so fast O holy Bishop without thy Deacon? Never did thou use to
offer spiritual sacrifice without thy Minister to attend thee; what have I done
that might displease thee? Have thou found me degenerous and fearful? Make
trial at least, whether thou have chosen a fit Minister to wait upon thee. To
this and more to the same import, the good Bishop replied, Mistake not my Son,
I do not leave thee nor forsake thee: Greater trials belong to thee; I like a
weak old man receive only the first skirmishes of the battle, but thou being
youthful and valiant have a more glorious triumph over the enemy reserved for
thee: Cease to weep, thy turn will be presently, for within three days thou
shall follow me. So pious a contention was there between these ^ood men, which
of them should first suffer for the name of Christ. It Is memorable what we find
concerning Origin though then but a youth, Eusebius. H. Eccl lib. 6. c. 2. p 202.
that when a great persecution was raised at Alexandria, wherein many suffered,
he was so eagerly inflamed with a desire of Martyrdom (especially after his
Father had been seized upon and cast into prison) that he exposed himself to
all dangers, and courted torments to come upon him; and had certainly suffered,
if his Mother after all other entreaties and persuasion to no purpose, had not
stolen away his clothes by night, and for mere shame forced him to stay at home.

To these I shall add but one Example of the weker Sex. When Valens the Arrian
Emperor (who persecuted the Orthodox with as much fury and bitterness as any
of the Heathen Emperors) came to Edessa, Sozom. H. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 18. p. 660.
and found there great numbers of them daily meeting in their public
assemblies, he severely checked the Governor, and commanded him by all means
to rout and ruin them. The Governor though of another persuasion, yet out of
common compassion gave them private notice of the Emperors commands, hoping
they would forbear. But they not at all terrified with the news, met the next
morning in greater numbers, which the Governor understanding went to the place
of their assembly; as he was going, a woman in a careless dress leading a
little child in her hand rushed through the Governors Guard, who commanding
her to be brought before him, asked her why she made so much have? That I may
the sooner come (said she) to the place where the people of the Catholic
Church are met together; Know thou not (said he) that the Governor will be
there to day, and kill all whom he finds there? I know it well (answered the
woman) and therefore make so much have, lest I come too late, and be deprived
of the Crown of Martyrdom. And being asked, why she carried her little Son
along with her, she answered, That he also may partake of the common
sufferings, and share in the same rewards. The Governor admiring the courage
of the woman, turned back to the Palace, and dissuaded the Emperor from his
cruel resolution, as what was neither honorable in it self, nor would conduce
to his purposes and designs.

Thirdly, When they were condemned, though it was by a most unjust sentence,
and to a most horrid death, they were so far from raging or repining, that
instead of bitter and tart reflections, they gave thanks to their enemies for
condemning them. A Christian being condemned (says Tertullian) thanks his
Judges, Apol. c. 46. p. 36.
he takes it for a favor to dye for so good a cause. Strom. lib. 4. p. 505.
That they persecute us (says Clemens of Alexandria) it is not because they
find us to be wicked, but because they think we wrong the world by being
Christians, and by teaching and persuading others to be so; as for us, they do
us no harm, death does but the sooner send us to God; if therefore we be wise,
we shall thank them that are the occasion of our more speedy passage thither.
And elsewhere he tells us of S. Peter, Lib. 7. p. 736.
that seeing his Wife going toward Martyrdom, he exceedingly rejoiced that she
was called to so great an honor, and that she was now returning home;
encouraging and exhorting of her, and calling her by her name, bad her to be
mindful of our Lord: Such (says he) was the wedlock of that blessed couple, and
their perfect disposition and agreement in those things that were dearest to
them.

When Lucius one of the Primitive Martyrs was charged by Vrbicius the Roman
Prefect for being a Christian, Just. Martyr. Apol. 1. p. 43.
only because he offered to speak in behalf of one that had very hard measure,
he immediately confessed it, and being forthwith condemned, he heartily thanked
his Judge for it, that by this means he should be delivered from such
unrighteous Governors and be sooner sent home to his Heavenly Father. No
joyfuller message could be told them, than that they must dye for the sake of
Christ: Though we contend with all your rage and cruelty (as Tertullian tells
the President Scapula) yet we freely offer our selves, Ad Scap c. 1. p. 68.
and rejoice more when we are condemned, than when we are absolved and released
by you. In despite of all the malice of their enemies they accounted the
instruments of their torment, the ensigns of their honor and their happiness:
When the Heathens reproached them for dying such an infamous death as that of
the Cross, and in derision styled them Sarmenticil and Semaxii for being burnt
upon a little stake to which they were bound with twigs; Tertullian answers for
them, Apol. c. 50. p. 39.
This is the habit of our victory, this the embroidered garment of our
conquest, this the triumphant chariot wherein we ride to Heaven. When in
prison, they looked upon their Chains as their Ornaments, Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib.
5. c 1. p. 160. C.
as adding a beauty and a luster to them, with which they were adorned against
the time of their sufferings, as the bride is with fringes of gold and
variegated ornaments against the day of her espousals. Chrysostom. l. de S Babyl.
tom. 1. p. 669.
For this reason Babylas the Martyr commanded that the Chains which he had worn
in prison should be buried with him, to show that those things which seem most
ignominious, are for the sake of Christ most splendid and honorable; imitating
therein the great Apostle, who was so far from being ashamed of, that he took
pleasure in Bonds, Chains, Reproaches, Persecutions, Distresses for Christ's
sake, professing to Glory in nothing but the Cross of Christ.

Fourthly, When ever they were actually under the bitterest torments, they
never discovered the least sign of a furious or impatient mind, but bore up
with a quietness and composure which no sufferings could overcome. Epist. 8. p.
19.
Cyprian exhorting the Martyrs to courage and constancy, tells them this of
those that had gone before them, that in the hottest conflict they never
stirred, but maintained their ground with a free confession, an unshaken mind,
a divine courage, destitute indeed of external weapons, but armed with the
shield of Faith; in torments they stood stronger than their tormentors; their
bruised and mangled limbs proved too hard for the instruments wherewith their
flesh was racked and pulled from them; the blows though never so often repeated
could not conquer their impregnable Faith, although they did not only slice and
tear off the flesh, but rake into their very bowels; and let out blood enough
to extinguish the flames of persecution, and to allay the heats of the
everlasting fire. And in another place speaking of the persecution under Decius
at Rome, Ad Cornel. Epist. 57. p. 91.
he tells us that the Adversary did with an horrible violence break in upon the
Camp of Christ, but was repulsed with a strength as great as that wherewith he
came upon them: that then he craftily attempted the more rude and weak, and
subtly endeavored to set upon them singly, hoping the easilier to circumvent
them; but that he found them like a well-compacted army, sober and vigilant,
and prepared for battle; that they could dye, but could not be overcome; yea
therefore unconquerable because not afraid to dye; that they did not resist
those that rose up against them, being ready not to kill them that assaulted
them, but to lay down their own lives and to lose their blood, that they might
make the more haste to get out of a cruel and malicious world. Indeed so
admirable was their patience and readiness to dye, that their very enemies
stood amazed at it. When Simeon the second Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius. lib. 3.
c. 32. p. 104.
and of our Saviors kindred according to the flesh, had by the command of
Atticus the Governor of Syria been tortured with all the arts of cruelty for
many days together, he bore it with such courage, that the Proconsul himself,
and all that were present greatly wondered that a man of an hundred and twenty
years of age should be able to undergo so many miseries and torments. Of the
Martyrs that suffered together with S. Polycarp, Ib. lib. 4 c. 15. p. 129.
the Church of Smyrna gives this account, That all that were present were
astonished when they saw them whipped till the cords made way to the inmost
veins and arteries, till the bowels and the most hidden parts of the body
appeared. They were raked with shells of fishes, laid all along upon
sharp-pointed stakes driven into the ground, exercised with all sorts of
torments, and at last thrown to be devoured of wild beasts; all which they bore
with a mighty patience and constancy. Nay, as we find it in the first part of
that Epistle (contracted by Eusebius, Append. Ignatian. Part. 2. p. 14.
but published at large by Bishop Usher) so great was their patience and
magnanimity, that in all these sufferings not any of them gave a sigh or a
groan: The holy Martyrs of Christ (says the Epistle) evidently showing us, that
during this sad hour of suffering they were strangers to their own bodies, or
rather that our Lord himself stood by them and familiarly conversed with them,
and that being partaker of his Grace they made light of these temporal
torments, and by one short hour delivered themselves from eternal miseries: The
fire which their tormentors put to them seemed to them but cool and little,
while they had it in their thoughts to avoid the everlasting and
unextinguishable flames of another world; their eyes being fixed upon those
rewards which are prepared for them that endure to the end, such as neither ear
has heard, nor eye has seen, nor has it entered into the heart of man, but
which were shown to them by our Lord, as being now ready to go off from
mortality, and to enter upon the state of Angels.

Thus reasoned those forty Martyrs in S. Basil, Encom. in 40 Martyr. append ad
oper. Greg. Thaum. p. 85.
that suffered at Sebastia in Armenia in the Reign of Licinius, when the
Governor to contrive a new method of Torment, had commanded them to stand
naked all night in cold frosty weather (which in those more Northerly Countries
is extreme sharp and bitter, it being then the depth of winter, and the North
wind blowing very fierce) in a pond of water; they first gave thanks to God
that they put off their clothes and their sins together, and then comforted one
another by balancing their present hardships with their future hopes; Is the
weather sharp? (said they) but Paradise is comfortable and delightful; Is the
frost cold and bitter? the rest that remains is sweet and pleasant; let us but
hold out a little, and Abraham's bosom will refresh us; we shall change this
one night for an eternal age of happiness; let our feet glow with very cold, so
as they may for ever rejoice and triumph with Angels; let our hands sink down,
so as we may have liberty to lift them up to God. How many of our
fellow soldiers have lost their lives to keep faith to their temporal Prince?
And should we be unfaithful to the true King of Heaven? How many have justly
died for their crimes and villainies? And shall we refuse it in the cause of
righteousness and Religion? It Is but the flesh that suffers, let us not spare
it; since we must die, let us die that we may live: Thus generously did they
bear up under this uncomfortable state; their ardent desires of Heaven from
within, extinguishing all sense of cold and hardship from without. Nay, when a
little before their Commander had set upon them both with threatenings and
promises, assuring them, that if they would but deny Christ, Ibid. p. 81.
they should make their own terms for riches and honor; they told him, that he
laid his snares at a wrong door; that he could not give them, what he
endeavored to take from them; nor could they close with his offers, without
being infinitely losers by the bargain; that 'twas to no purpose to profer a
little of the world to them, who despised the whole of it; that all these
visible advantages were nothing to what they had in hope and expectation; all
the beauty and glory of Heaven and Earth not being comparable to that state of
blessedness which is the portion of the righteous; the one being short-lived
and transitory, the other permanent and perpetual; that they were ambitious of
no gift, but the Crown of Righteousness, nor sought after any other Glory but
what was Heavenly; that they feared no torments but those of Hell, and that
fire that was truly terrible; as for those punishments they inflicted, they
accounted them but as the blows of children; and the ill usage that their
bodies met with, the longer 'twas endured, the more way it made for a brighter
crown. Such was the temper, such the support of these Christian Soldiers,
these true Champions of the Christian Faith.

Indeed this consideration was one of the greatest Cordials that kept up their
spirits under the saddest sufferings, that they were assured of a reward in
Heaven: Ad Dem^trian p. 202.
Amongst us (says Cyprian) there flourishes strength of Hope, firmness of
Faith, a mind erect amongst the ruins of a tottering age, an immovable
virtue, a patience serene and cheerful, and a soul always secure and certain of
its God. As for want or danger, what are these to Christians, to the servants
of God, whom Paradise invites, and the favor and plenty of the heavenly
Kingdom expects and waits for? They are always glad, and rejoice in God, and
resolutely bear the evils and miseries of the world, while they look for the
rewards and prosperities of another life. The great Philosophers (as Eusebius
observes) as much as they talked of immortality, Praeparat. Evang. lib. 1. c.
4. p. 13.
yet by their carriage they showed that they looked upon it but as a trifling
and childish fable; whereas (says he) amongst us even girls and children, the
most unlearned and (measured by the eye) the meanest and most despicable
persons, being assisted by the help and strength of our blessed Savior, do
rather by their actions than their words demonstrate and make good this
doctrine of the immortality of the Soul. Fragm. Ep. Oper. Part. 1. p. 528.
This Julian confesses of the Christians, though according to his custom he
gives them bad words, calls them Atheists and irreligious persons, that being
acted by some evil spirits they persuade themselves that death is by all means
to be desired, and that they shall immediately fly to Heaven, as soon as their
souls are freed from the fetters of the body. Hence it was, that in those times
Christians were wont to sing Hymns and Psalms at the Funerals of the dead, to
signify that they had attained their Rest, the end of their labors, the
retribution of their troubles, the reward and the crown of their conflicts and
sufferings, Hom. 51. de SS. Bern. and Prosd. tom. 1. p. 563.
as Chrysostom tells us; part of which Psalms he elsewhere tells us were, Hom.
4. ad Hebr. p. 1785.
Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee;
Psalm. 116.
and, I will fear no evil, because thou art with me; Psalm. 24. 4.
and again, thou art my refuge from the trouble that compasses me about. For
the same reason, as being a sign of joy and cheerfulness, Ib. p. 1784.
he there tells us that they carried lights burning before the corpse: by all
which he tells us they signified, that they carried forth Christians as
Champions to the grave, glorifying God, and giving thanks to him that he had
crowned the deceased person, that he had delivered him from his labors, that
he had taken him to himself, and set him beyond the reach of storms and fears.

But to return; There was scarce any one instance of Religion wherein Primitive
Christianity did more openly approve it self to the world, and more evidently
insult over Paganism, than the generous courage and patience of its professors.
By this they commended both the Truth and Excellency of their Religion, and
conquered their very enemies into an embracing of it. Hear how Lactantius
pleads the argument and triumphs in the goodness of his cause: De justit. lib.
5. c. 13. p. 495.
By reason (says he) of our strange and wonderful courage and strength new
additions are made to us; for when the people see men torn in pieces with
infinite variety of torments, and yet maintain a patience unconquerable, and
able to tire out its tormentors; they begin to think (what the truth is) that
the consent of so many, and the perseverance of dying persons cannot be in
vain; nor that patience it self, were it not from God, could hold out under
such racks and tortures: Thieves, and men of a robust body are not able to bear
such tearing in pieces; they groan and cry out, and are overcome with pain,
because not endued with a divine patience; but our very children and women (to
say nothing of our men) do with silence conquer their tormentors, nor can the
hottest fire force the least groan from them. Let the Romans go now and boast
of their Mutius and Regulus, of the one for delivering himself up to his enemy
to be put to death, because he was ashamed to live a prisoner; of the other for
burning his hand at the command of the enemy to save his life. Behold* with us
the ^^^ker Sex, and the most tender age can suffer all parts of their body to
be torn and burnt, not out of necessity, because they might not escape if they
would, but out of choice, because they believe in God. This is that true
Virtue, which Philosophers indeed vainly boast of, but never really possessed.
This and more to the same purpose that eloquent Apologist there urges to the
great honor of his Religion. By the force of such arguments Justine Martyr
confesses that he was brought over from being a Pla^onick Philosopher to be a
Christian: Apol. 1. p. 50.
for when he saw the Christians whom he had so often heard accused and
traduced, undauntedly going to dye, and embracing the most terrible executions
that were prepared for them; I thought with my self (says he) that it was not
possible such persons should wallow in vice and luxury; it being the interest
of all wicked and voluptuous persons to shun death, to dissemble with Princes
and Magistrates, and to do any thing to save their lives.

This certainly could not but be a huge satisfaction to all prudent and
confiderate men that the Christians were guided by better Principles than
ordinary, and that they were fully assured that theirs was the true Religion,
and that they taught nothing but what they firmly believed to be true. For to
maintain such patience and constancy even unto death (says Origin, speaking of
the Apostles propagating the doctrine of Christ) is not the fashion of those
who feign things of their own heads; Adv. Cells. lib. 2. p. 65.
but is a manifest argument to all candid and ingenuous Readers, that they knew
what they writ to be true, when they so cheerfully endured so many and such
grievous things only for the sake of the Son of God, in whom they had believed.
No dangers could affright them, no threatenings or torments could baffle them
out of their profession: Therefore when Celsus accused the Christians for a
fearful sort of men, Lib. 7. p. 357.
and such as loved their Carcasses well; Origin answers, No such matter, We can
as cheerfully lay down our bodies to suffer for Religion, as the hardiest
Philosopher of you all can put off his coat. And indeed the Gospel did mightily
prosper and triumph in the midst of these dreadful sufferings; men rationally
concluding that there must be something more than humane in that doctrine, for
which so many thus deeply ventured. C. 1. p. 72.
So Tertullian tells Scapula in the conclusion of his Book; It Is to no purpose
to think this Sect will fail, which you will see to be the more built up, the
faster it is pulled down; for who is there, that beholding such eminent
patience, cannot but have some scruples started in his mind, and be desirous to
enquire into the cause of it, and when he once knows the Truth, he himself
moved to close with it and embrace it. Therefore Julian the Apostate out of a
cursed policy refused many times openly to put Christians to death, Naz. in
Jul. Invect. 1. p. 72.
partly because he envied them the honor of being Martyrs, partly because he
saw that they were like new mown grass, the oftener it was cut down, the thicker
it sprang up again.

I shall add no more concerning this subject, but the testimony which the very
enemies of Christians gave them in this case. Julian the Emperor (whom we so
lately mentioned, and who fought against Christians with their own weapons,
making use of those Scriptures which he had studied while he was amongst them)
when the Christians complained to him of those oppressions and injuries which
the Governors of Provinces laid upon them, Niceph.
made light of it, Eccl. Hist. lib. 10. c. 24. tom. 2. p. 53.
and dismissed them with this virulent sarcasm, Your Christ (says he) has given
you a Law, that when you suffer unjustly, you should bear it resolutely, and
when oppressed and injured should not answer again. And so certainly they did,
undergoing all kinds of miseries, Frag. Epist. loc. supr. laudat.
and death it self with so unconcerned a mind, that elsewhere he censures them
for this very reason to be acted by the Spirit of the Devil. Hence Porphyry in
a Book that he wrote against the Christians, calls their Religion (...), Eusebius.
H. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 19. p. 220.
a piece of barbarous boldness; Barbarous, because so different from the way of
worship amongst the Greeks, with whom every thing was barbarous that agreed not
with their principles and institutions: Boldness, because the Christians showed
such an undaunted courage in bearing miseries and torments, choosing to die a
thousand times rather than to deny Christ, and sacrifice to the gods. For this
reason the Heathen in M. M. Foel. p. 7.
Foelix styles the Christians men of an undone, furious, and desperate party;
respecting their fearless and resolute carriage under sufferings, for so he
explains himself presently after; Is it not a strange folly, and an incredible
boldness? they despise torments that are present, and yet fear those that are
future and uncertain; and while they fear to die after death, in the mean time
they are not afraid to die: so sillily do they flatter themselves, and cajole
their fears by a deceitful hope of some unknown comforts that shall arise to
them. Lib 4 c. 7. p. 500.
This Arrian in his Collection of Epictetus his Dissertations confesses to be
true of those, whom according to Julians style he calls the Galileans, that
they underwent torments and death with a mighty courage, but which he makes to
be the effect only of use and a customary bearing sufferings. The Emperor M.
Autoninus confesses also the matter of fact, (...). lib. 11. Sect. 3. p. 106.
that the Christians did thus readily and resolutely die, but ascribes it not
to judgment and a rational consideration, but to mere stubbornness and
obstinacy. And in an Epistle (if that Epistle as now extant be his) that he
wrote to the Common Council of Asia in favor of the Christians, Apud* Eus.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 13. p. 126.
whom his Officers there did grievously vex and oppress, gives them this
testimony, that they could have no greater kindness done them than to be called
in question, and that they had much rather be put to death for their Religion,
than to have their lives spared to them: by which means they became
conquerours, chosing rather to part with their lives, than to do what you
impose upon them. Let me advise you (says he) who are ready to despond with
every earthquake that happens to you, to compare your selves with them; they
in all their dangers are securely confident in their God; while you at such a
time neglect the gods, and have little or no regard, either to other rites, or
to the worship of that immortal deity, but banish the Christians that worship
him, and persecute them unto death. So forcibly did the Majesty of Truth extort
a confession from its greatest enemies.

The End of the Second Part.
Primitive Christianity; Part 3.
OR, THE RELIGION OF THE Ancient Christians In the first Ages of the Gospel.
PART III.
Of their Religion as respecting other men.
CHAP. I.
Of their Justice and Honesty.
Christian Religion admirably provides for moral righteousness. Do as you would
be done by, the great Law of Christ: This rule highly prized by Severus the
Emperor. The first Christians accounted honesty and an upright carriage a main
part of their Religion. Their candor and simplicity in their words: Abhorring
lies and mental reservations, though it might save their lives. Their veracity
such, as no need to be put to their oaths. Some few of the Fathers against all
swearing: Allowed by the greatest part in weighty Cases: That they took oaths
proved from Athanasius, and their taking the Sacramentum militare: The form of
the oath out of Vegetius: The same expressly affirmed of the more ancient
Christians by Tertullian. Why refusing to swear by the Emperors genius. Oaths
wont to be taken at the holy Sacrament, upon the Communion Table, or the holy
Gospels. Some against all oaths only to prevent a possibility of perjury.
Bearing false witness condemned and strictly punished by the ancient Church. A
famous Instance of divine vengeance pursuing three false accusers. Christians
careful in the conduct of their actions. Their integrity in matters of
distributive Justice: In commutative Justice avoiding all fraud and
overreaching. S. Augustin's instance. Nicostratus forced to fly to avoid the
punishment of cheating and sacrilege. The Christians unjustly accused of
Sacrilege by the Heathens: The occasion of it. Pliny's testimony of the
Honesty of Christians. Theft and rapine severely condemned. Christians for
doing all the good they could. Their care to right and relieve the oppressed.
The Gentiles charged Christians with murder and eating mans-flesh. A brief
representation of the several answers returned to it by the Christian
Apologists. The true rise of the charge found to spring from the barbarous and
inhumane practices of the Gnostics mentioned by Irenaeus and Epiphanius.

HAving given some account of the Religion of the ancient Christians, both as
it respected their piety toward God, and their sober and virtuous carriage
toward themselves; we come in the last place to consider it in reference to
their carriage toward others, which the Apostle describes under the title of
righteousness, under which he comprehends all that duty and respect wherein we
stand obliged to others; whereof we shall consider these following instances:
their justice and integrity in matters of commerce and traffic; their mutual
love and charity to one another; their unity and peaceableness; and their
submission and subjection to civil Government.

I begin with the first, their just and upright carriage in their outward
dealings; one great design of the Christian Law is to establish and ratify
that great principle which is one of the prime and fundamental Laws of nature,
to hurt no man, and to render to every one his due, to teach us to carry our
selves as becomes us in our relations toward men. Next to our duty toward
God, the Gospel obliges us to be righteous to men, sincere and upright in all
our dealings, not going beyond, nor defrauding one another in any matter, to
put away lying, and to speak truth to each other as fellow members of the same
Christian brotherhood and society. It settles that golden rule as the
fundamental Law of all just and equitable commerce, that all things whatsoever
we would that men should do to us, we should even do so to them, this being the
sum of the Law and the Prophets; than which as no rule could have been more
equitable in it self, so none could possibly have been contrived more short and
plain, and more accommodate to the common cases of humane life. Upon the
account of these, and such like excellent precepts, Alexander Severus the Roman
Emperor had so great an honor for our Savior, Lamprid. in vit. Alex. Sev. c.
43. p. 568.
that he was resolved to build a Temple to him, and to receive him into the
number of their gods; and though he was overruled in this by some who having
consulted the Oracle, told him, that if it were done, all men would become
Christians, and the Temples of the gods would be left naked and empty; yet in
his most private Chapel he had the Image of Christ amongst those of many Noble
Heroes and deified persons, Ibid c. 29. p. 540.
to whom he paid religious adoration every Morning; and particularly for this
precept, Ibid. c. (...). p. 577.
that what we would not have done to our selves; we should not do to others
(which his own Historian confesses he learnt either from the Jews or
Christians, but most certainly from the Christians, in whose mouths it so often
was, and in whose Gospel it was so plainly written) he so highly valued it,
that in all public punishments he caused it to be proclaimed by a common
Crier; nay, was so hugely fond on it, that he caused it to be written upon the
walls of his Palace, and upon all his public Buildings, that if possible,
every room in his Court, and every place in the City might be a silent Chancery
and Court of Equity.

So vast a reverence had the very enemies of Christianity for the Gospel upon
this account, that it so admirably provides for the advance of civil
righteousness and justice amongst men; which however it has been slighted by
some even amongst Christians under the notion of moral Principles, yet without
it all other Religion is but vain, it being a strange piece of folly for any to
dream of being godly without being honest, or to think of being a disciple of
the first, while a man is an enemy to the second Table. Sure I am, the
Christians of old looked upon honesty and an upright carriage as a considerable
part of their Religion; and, that to speak truth, to keep their words, to
perform oaths and promises, to act sincerely in all their dealings, was as
sacred and as dear to them as their lives and beings. Speech being the great
instrument of mutual commerce and traffic, shall be the first instance of
their integrity; They ever used the greatest candor and simplicity in
expressing their mind to one another, not pretending what was false, nor
concealing what was true; yea, yea, and nay, nay, was the usual measure of
their transactions; a lie they abhorred as bad in all, as monstrous in a
Christian, as directly opposite to that truth, to which they had consigned and
delivered up themselves in baptism, and therefore would not tell one, though it
were to save their lives. Tertul Apol. c. 27. p. 26.
When the Heathens charged them with folly and madness that they would so
resolutely suffer, when a parcel of fair words might make way for them to
escape, telling them 'twas but doing or saying as they were bid; and that they
might secure their consciences by mental reservations; Tertullian lets them
know that they rejected the motion with the highest scorn, as the plain
artifice and invention of the devil. When we are most severely examined (says
Justin Martyr) we never deny our selves, Apol. 1. p. 43.
counting it impious in any thing to dissemble or deny the truth, as we know
the contrary is acceptable unto God: and though we could (as they told the
Emperors) when questioned, Ib. Apol. 2. p. 57.
evade or deny it, yet we scorn to live upon any terms, by which we must be
forced to maintain our lives by lies and falsehood.

This honest and ingenuous simplicity they practiced to that exactness and
accuracy, that for a Christian to be put to his oath was accounted a
disparagement to his fidelity and truth. Stromat. lib. 7. p. 728.
So Clemens Alexandrinus tells us; he that approves himself and is tried (says
he) in this [i.e. the Christian] way of piety and Religion, is far from being
forward either to lie or swear: For an oath is a determinative assertion, with
a calling God to witness for the truth of it: But how shall any one that is
faithful, so far render himself unfaithful or unworthy of belief, as to need an
oath, and not rather make the course of his life a testimony to him as firm and
positive as an oath, and demonstrate the truth of his assertion by the constant
and immutable tenor of his words and actions. It Is enough therefore (as he
presently after adds) for every good man either by way of affirmation or denial
to give this assurance, (...), I speak truly, to satisfy any that apprehend
not the certainty of what he says; for toward those that are without he ought
to have such a conversation as is most worthy of belief, so as no oath should
be required of him; and toward himself and those of his party to preserve such
an even and equitable temper of mind, as is a piece of voluntary Justice. This
and much more he discourses to the same purpose.

For this and some other reasons, but especially from some mis-taken places of
Scripture, where it is said, swear not at all; some of the Ancient Fathers held
all taking of an oath unlawful; but besides that those few that did, were not
herein constant to themselves, the far greatest part were of another mind, and
understood the prohibition either of swearing by creatures (which was the case
of the Jews, and which our Savior and S. James principally aim at) or of
light, rash, and false swearing. For otherwise that the Primitive Christians
did not think it unlawful to take an oath in serious and necessary cases, is
most evident. Apolog. ad (...). 1. p. ^28.
Athanasius speaking of his accusers, whom he desired might be put to their
oath, tells us, that the best way to attest the truth of what is spoken is to
call God to witness; and this (says he) is the form of swearing which we
Christians are wont to use. And indeed though we had no other argument, it
would be plain enough from hence, that they served in the Wars, and frequently
bore arms even under the Heathen Emperors, which it is evident they could not
do without first taking a military oath to be true to their General, and to die
rather than desert their station. De re mili^ar l^b. 1. c. 5* p. 33.
And this, Vegetius an Heathen Author, though living in the time of the
younger Valentinian, expressly reports of them, that when their names were
entered upon the Muster-roll, they were wont to take an oath, the particular
form whereof he there sets down, viz. That they swore by God, Christ, and the
Holy Spirit, and the Majesty of the Emperor, which next to God is to be loved
and honored by mankind: This agrees very well with that account which
Tertullian had long before given of the Christians, Apol. c. 32. p. 28.
when being accused by their enemies of high Treason, amongst other reasons,
because they refused to swear by their Emperors; he answers, that though they
would not swear by the Emperors genius, their genii or tutelar deities being
nothing else but devils, yet they did swear by the Emperors safety, a thing
more august and venerable than all the genii in the World: In the Emperors
they own God's Institution and Authority and would therefore have that to be
safe, which he had appointed, and accordingly accounted it the matter of a
lawful oath; but for the demons or genii (says he) we use adjurare, to adjure
them, so as to cast them out of men; non dejerare, not to swear by them, and
thereby confer the honor of Divinity upon them. For the same reason they
denied to swear by the fortune of the Emperor, because amongst the Heathens
she was accounted a deity, and honored with religious worship.

Thus we see that they refused not to ensure and ratify their faith by the
formality of an oath, to which that they might add the greater reverence and
solemnity, they were wont many times to take it at the receiving of the holy
Sacrament, as we find in the case of Novatus and his followers; Eusebius. H. Eccl.
lib. 6. c. 43. p. 245.
for taking their hands wherein they held the Sacramental Elements within his
own, he caused them to swear by the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
that they would not desert him. But because this may be thought to have been
only the artifice of an Heretic to bind his followers the faster to his party;
Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 15.
S. Chrysostom (though himself no good friend to taking oaths) sufficiently
assures us 'twas customary to come into the Church and to swear upon the
Communion Table, Tom. 1. p. 178, 179.
taking the Book of the Holy Gospels into their hands. The same appears from
the case proposed to Gregory Nazianzen by Theodore Bishop of Tyana, Epist 219.
p. 908.
and by the instance of Evagrius, Sozom. H* Eccl. lib. 6. c. 30. p. 686. vid.
Nazianzen's Archdeacon at Constantinople, who had it revealed to him in a
Vision that some persons lay in wait for him, Annot Hen. Vales. p. 145. co^. 2.
and that therefore he must presently be gone; the person that revealed it
assuring him he would knock off those fetters that were upon him, if he would
swear to him upon the Holy Gospels that he would immediately depart, which was
accordingly done. And as their caution was great in taking of an oath, so their
care was no less in making of it good; they knew that in this solemn
transaction they did in a more peculiar manner call in God as a witness of what
they said, and a revenger in case of falsehood and the violation of it; this
made them greatly afraid of perjury, which they looked upon as a sin of a
deeper and more than ordinary dye; and one reason I conceive why some of the
Ancients were against all swearing (and Clemens Alexandrinus confirms me in it)
was, (...). loc. supr. laudat.
because they would not come so much as within the danger or possibility of
perjury. Such as have sworn rashly, or in unlawful cases, S. Basil earnestly
exhorts to repentance, Epist. Canon. ad Amphil. can. 29. p. 31. tom. 3.
and that they would not persist in an obstinate defense of their impiety; and
for such as are guilty of perjury he appointed that they should be suspended
and banished the Communion for eleven years together. Can. 64. p. 36.


The like severity, though not altogether so great, they used in case of
bearing false witness: If any Christian falsely accused another before the
Church (for in those days they allowed no appeals to Heathen Tribunals) he was
to be punished, i.e. suspended the Communion, the only punishment the Church in
those days could inflict, according to the nature of the crime which he charged
upon the other, according to the decree of the Illiberine Council; Conc.
Illiber. Can. 74. p. 79. ubi vid. not. Albasp.
if he made good his charge, yet if he had concealed it a considerable time
before he revealed it, he was to be suspended for two years; the reason
probably being, because by this delay the criminal person had had opportunity
to infect others, by propagating his vicious example to them. But that they
might not set the door open and give encouragement to busy and malicious
tempers, they ordained, that although the person should be really guilty of the
crimes he was charged with, yet if the accuser did not sufficiently prove it in
conventu Clericorum before the Ecclesiastical Senate, he should be punished
with a five years suspension; and because then they had an honor and
veneration for Ministers above all other men, they ordained, that whosoever
should falsely accuse a Clergyman, Ibid. Can. 75. p. 81.
a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon with any crime, which he could not make good,
should not be received into Communion even at the hour of death. The truth is,
they were exceeding tender of any man's reputation, readier to add to it, than
to detract from it, or to fasten any undue imputation upon him. Ad Cleric.
S. Basil commending Gregory Thaumaturgus, Eccles. Neocaesar. Ep. 63. p. 95.
tom. 3.
has this of him amongst the rest; Out of regard (says he) to the threatening of
our Lord he durst never call his Brother fool: no anger, wrath or bitterness
proceeded out of his mouth: Slandering he hated as a quality greatly opposite
to a state of salvation: pride and envy were strangers to that innocent and
guileless soul: He never approached the altar, till first reconciled to his
brother: All false and artificial speeches, and such as are cunningly contrived
for the slander and detraction of others, he greatly abominated; well knowing,
that every lie is the spawn and issue of the devil, and that God has threatened
to destroy all those that speak lies. And so indeed he oftentimes does even in
this world, not respiting such persons to the tribunals of the other world;
whereof we meet with this memorable example. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem,
Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 9. p. 210.
a man of admirable piety and holiness of life, shined with so glorious a
luster in the place where he lived, that the brightness of his conversation
offended the sore eyes of other men: Three more especially not able to bear the
eminent strictness of his life, and being themselves guilty of very great
enormities, thought to escape themselves by accusing him. Whereupon they laid a
very heinous crime to his charge, and to beget the greater credit with them
that heard it, solemnly ratified it with their oaths: The first imprecating
upon himself that he might be burnt, if it were not true; the second, that his
body might be consumed by some noysom and pestilent disease; the third, that he
might lose his sight. The good man though notwithstanding all this he stood
right in the thoughts of all true Christians, who knew his life to be too clear
and unblameable to be sullied with the breath of such vile fellows, yet not
being able to bear it, withdrew himself to an Eremits life in the wilderness.
But the restless eye of the divine vengeance quickly overtook these perjured
wretches, and caught them in their own snares; the first by a little spark that
casually, and whereof no account could be given, happened in his house, was in
the night himself, family, and house universally burnt to ashes; the second was
from head to foot overrun and consumed by such a disease as he had wished upon
himself; the third that saw all this, and feared the righteous and inevitable
vengeance of God upon himself, confessed the whole plot and combination, and
testified his repentance with so deep a sorrow, that with the multitude of his
tears he lost his sight.

We have seen how exact the Christians were about their words, that they should
be harmless and inoffensive, and the true conveyances of their minds; nor were
they less careful about the conduct of their actions, whether of distributive
or commutative Justice. For matters of distributive Justice, so far as it
concerns a fair hearing, and impartial determining of trials and causes,
rewarding the good, and punishing the bad, they had little opportunity to show
themselves; Christians in the first Ages being seldom invested with any
external Authority and power, till the Empire submitted to Christianity, and
then we find them executing their places with the most unbyassed uprightness
and integrity. Ad Saphron. Magist. Epist. 332. p. 325.
S. Basil speaking of an excellent person (though he names him not) who was
sent to be Governor of Neocaesarea where he was Bishop, but presently
undermined and outed by the accusations of some that could not bear his free
and impartial carriage, and his temper so extremely opposite to flattery, says
this of him, that he was a most rigid observer of Justice, courteous and easy
of access to them that were oppressed, but his presence severe and terrible to
the injurious and transgressors of the Law: He was the same to rich and poor,
equally at leisure for both; of all men he exceedingly abhorred taking bribes,
never favoring any beyond the Equity of his Cause; and which was above all, he
was one that designed to reduce Christianity to its ancient dignity and
perfection. In Laud.
The same Nazianzen reports of his own father, Patr. Orat. 19. p. 290.
and reckons it one of the excellent properties for which he accounted him a
Christian even before he embraced Christianity, that he so exactly observed
justice himself, and so impartially administered it to others; that though he
went through very great offices in the State, yet he made not one farthing's
addition to his own revenue, though he saw some before his eyes, who with
Briareus his hands laid hold upon the public treasures, and therewith filled,
their own Coffers.

In matters of Commutative Justice, and ordinary transaction between man and
man they observed the rule, to deal with others, as they would be dealt with
themselves; they took no advantage of any man's ignorance or unskilfulness, so
as to grasp that commodity at a far under-rate, of which they knew the seller
did not understand the true price and value, and that if he did, he would not
part with it at such a price. To this purpose S. Augustine tells us he knew a
man (probably he means himself, De Trinit. lib. 13. c. 3. tom. 3. col. 407.
though out of modesty he conceals it) who having a Book offered him to be sold
by one that understood not the price of it, at a very small under-rate, took
the Book, but gave him the full price according to its just rate and value,
which was a great deal more than the seller asked for it. And the truth is, in
such cases advantage cannot honestly be taken of men's weakness or mistake,
because no man if he understood the true worth and value of his commodity, can
be supposed willing to part with it at a too-under rate. And if they were thus
far from craftily overreaching, much more from secretly or openly invading of
what was another right and property; no cheating or couzenage, no acts of
dishonesty and deceit were allowed or practiced amongst them; or if any such
were discovered they were immediately protested against by the whole Society of
Christians. Cornelius Bishop of Rome, giving Cyprian an account of Novatus the
Heretic and his companions, Epist* 48. p. 62. vid.
tells him of one Nicostratus, that not only cheated his Lady and Patroness,
Resp. Cyprian. Ep. sequent.
whose estate and revenues he managed, but carried away a great part of the
treasures of the Church (whereof he was Chief Deacon) the portion and
maintenance of poor Widows and Orphans (a crime, says he, reserved for
perpetual punishment, i.e. for the judgment of God in the other world, being
too great for any in this) whereupon he was forced to fly from Rome into Africa
to avoid the shame and prosecution of his rapine and sacrilege; though when he
came there, they did not only refuse to admit him into communion, but openly
exposed the wickedness of him and his confederates to the abhorrency of all
men. By which may appear the falsity of that charge of Sacrilege which the
Gentiles brought against the Christians; to which, though certainly it
primarily respected their declared enmity against the Idolatrous Temples and
worship of the Heathens; yet Tertullian answers; You look upon us (says he) as
Sacrilegious persons* Ad Scap. 2. p. 69.
and yet never found any of us guilty of wrong or injury, of any rapine and
violence, much less of sacrilege and impiety: No, they are your own party that
swear by, and worship your gods, and yet rob their temples; that are no
Christians, and yet are found to be sacrilegious: And afterward, he adds this
further vindication of them; Ibid. c. 4. p. 71.
As for us (says he) we deny not any pledge that is left with us, we adulterate
no man's marriage bed, we piously educate and train up Orphans, and relieve the
necessities of the indigent, and render no man evil for evil: If there be any
that dissemble our Religion, let them look to it, we disown them for being of
our party; why should we be worse thought of for others faults? or why should a
Christian answer for any thing but what concerns his own Religion, which no man
in so long a time has proved to be cruel or incestuous? Nay, when we are burnt,
and most severely dealt with, it is for the greatest Innocence, Honesty,
Justice, Modesty, for our Truth and Faithfulness, and our Piety to the Living
God. And that these were not a parcel of good words which the Christians spoke
in their own behalf, will appear, if we consider the testimony which Pliny (who
was far from being partial to them) gives of them; for being commanded by the
Emperor Trajan to give him an account of the Christians, he tells him, that
after the strictest examination which he could make even of those that had
renounced Christianity, Lib. 10.
he found this to be the greatest fault that they were guilty of, Ep. 97. p.
290.
that they used harmlesly to meet to worship Christ, and at those meetings to
bind themselves by a Sacrament [or an oath] that they would not do any
wickedness, that thy might be firmlier obliged not to commit thefts, robberies,
adulteries, not to falsify their words, or to deny any thing wherewith they
were entrusted, when 'twas required of them.

Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea in a Canonical Epistle, Can 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 119,
120.
which he wrote to rectify several disorders and irregularities which had
happened amongst the Christians of those parts by reason of the inroads and
devastations which the Goths and other barbarous nations had made amongst them,
does amongst other things especially take notice, how uncomely in it self, how
unsuitable to Christians it is to covet, and to grasp what is another man's; how
inhumane, to spoil the oppressed, and to enrich our selves by the blood and
ruins of our miserable brethren: And whereas some might be apt to plead, they
did not steal, but only take up what they found; He tells them, this excuse
would not serve the turn, that whatever they had found of their Neighbors, nay
though it were their enemies, they were bound to restore it, much more to their
brethren, who were fellow sufferers with them in the same condition. Others
thought it warrant enough, to keep what they found, though belonging to others,
having been such deep losers themselves: but this he tells them is to justify
one wickedness with another, and because the Goths had been enemies to them,
they would become Goths and Barbarians unto others. Nor did they only keep
themselves from doing injuries to others, they were ready to do them all the
right, all the kindness that lay in their power, especially to vindicate the
poor and helpless from the power and violence of those that were too mighty for
them. Can. 7, 8.
Therefore when the Fathers of the Synod of Sardis took notice that some
Bishops used to go to Court upon by-errands and private designs of their own,
they ordained, that no Bishop should go to Court, unless either immediately
summoned by the Emperors letters, or that their assistance was required to
help the oppressed, to right Widows and Orphans, and to rescue them from the
unjust grasps of potent and merciless oppressors; and that in these cases they
should be ready (either by themselves, or some deputed by them) to present
their petitions, to plead their cause, and to lend them all the assistance they
were able to afford.

I should not in this place have taken any notice how far the ancient
Christians were from murder, and offering violence to any man's life, but that
it was a common charge brought against them by the Gentiles, that they used to
kill and devour an Infant at their Christian meetings, especially when any was
first to be initiated into their assemblies; the story is thus dressed up by
the acute Heathen in M. Foelix; Min. Foel. p. 8. vid.
An Infant being covered all over with meal, Tertull. Apol. c 9. p. 9.
(the better to deceive the unwary) is set before him that is to be initiated
and taken in; he ignorant of what it really is, is appointed to cut it up,
which he effectually does by many secret and mortal wounds; whereupon they
greedily lick up the blood, and ravenously tear off and snatch away the several
parts of it; and with this sacrifice their confederacy and combination is made,
and by the conscience of so great a villainy they are mutually obliged to
silence: Such sacred rites as these being more horrid and barbarous, than the
highest sacriledges in the world. To this monstrous and horrid charge, the
Christians returned these answers; That they appealed to the common Faith of
mankind, Tert. Apol. c* 9. p. 8.
whether they could really believe them to be guilty of these things, M. Foel*
p. ^5.
so abhorrent to all the principles of Humane Nature, and to the Christians
known Principles and practices in all other things; that they should measure
the Christians by themselves, and if they themselves could not be guilty of
such things, they should not suspect it by the Christians, who were endued with
the same Principles of humanity with other men; that they were so far from
being friends to murder or manslaughter, Athenag. l^g. pro Christian. p ^8. B*
M* Foel. ibid.
that they held it unlawful to be present at the Gladiatory sports, where men's
lives were so want only sacrificed to the pleasure and curiosity of the people;
Athenag. ib. M. Foel. ib. Tert ib. p. 9.
that they accounted it murder for any woman by evil arts to procure abortion,
to stifle the embryo, to kill a child in a manner before it be alive, it being
much at one to hinder life, as to take it away, to kill a man, or destroy what
would be one, seeing he truly destroys the fruit that kills it in the seed; M*
Foel. p. 26. Tertull. ibid. p. 10.
that it was not likely they should delight in man's blood, who never tasted any
blood at all, abstaining from things strangled and from blood: And that the
very Heathens themselves confessed this, when amongst the several arts they
used to discover whether men were Christians, they used to offer them bladders
full of blood, knowing that they held it unlawful to taste any; and therefore
it was mightily improbable they should thirst after humane blood, who abhorred
even the blood of beasts: That they heartily believed the Resurrection of the
dead, Athenag. Ibid.
and therefore would not make themselves the Sepulchers of those bodies which
were to rise again, and feed upon them, as they did upon other bodies which
were to have no resurrection: that the truth was, if this charge was true of
any, it was true only of the Gentiles themselves, amongst whom these things
were daily allowed and practiced: That Saturn one of their chief deities did
not only expose, but eat his own children; to him infants in Africa were
offered in sacrifice by their own parents, a custom that openly continued till
the Proconsul-ship of Tiberius, which though he abolished it, yet it continued
still in corners in Tertullians days: Ibid.
To his Son Jupiter they offered humane sacrifices even in Rome it self, and
that even to the time of M. Foelix as he himself testifies; Ibid.
which is no more than what Porphyry himself (after he had reckoned up in how
many parts of the world Humane sacrifices were in use) confesses was done at
Rome in the Feast of Jupiter Latialis even in his time. De (...) 2. Sect. 56 p.
95.
Many other instances of such barbarous practices are there produced by those
two Apologists, which they urge with great advantage upon their adversaries,
whom they challenged to make any such thing good against them.

And no sooner did discipline begin to be regularly settled, but their
principles herein were every where confirmed by the Canons of the Church,
Basil. Ep. Can Con. 2. p. 22.
either private or public; the woman that industriously made her self miscarry
was adjudged to be guilty of murder, Ib Can 33. p. 3^.
and condemned to the same punishment, Cod. Theod lib. 9. Tit ^4. l. 1.
a ten years penance; which was adjudg'd to be the case of any that brought
forth upon the way, and exposed her Infant. By the law of the State, made by
the Emperor Valentinian, whosoever, whether man or woman, killed an Infant,
was to be subject to the same capital punishment, as if he had killed an adult
person, which may very well be understood even of Infants killed in the womb,
the punishment whereof was formerly for the most part no more than banishment.
He that was guilty of wilful murder was by S. Basil's rule to undergo a twenty
years penance before he was admitted to the Sacrament; Can. 56. p. 36.
though by several passages in Tertullian it appears that Homicides in his time
were more severely treated by the Church, for they were not only bound to a
perpetual penance, but were not absolved at death. But this severity shortly
after began to relax, and such persons though obliged to acts of repentance all
their life, yet at death were absolved, and admitted to Communion, as is
expressly provided by the decree of the Ancyran Council. Can. 22.


Thus clear did the Christians all along stand from any just suspicion of that
gross piece of inhumanity which their enemies so confidently charged upon them.
As for the rise and occasion of this malicious charge, it was doubtless of the
same growth with that of their incestuous mixtures (spoken of before) both
springing from the abominable practices of some filthy Heretics, who sheltred
themselves under the name of Christians, Epiphanius particularly reporting of
the Gnostics, what the Heathens generally charged upon the Christians; for he
tells us of them, Haeres. 26. p. 43. vid. de Phryg. seu Quintilian.
that at their meetings they were wont to take an Infant begotten in their
promiscuous mixtures, and beating it in a mortar, Haeres. 48. p. 181. de
Montanistis Zon. and Balsam. in Can. 7.
to season it with honey and pepper, and some other spices and perfumes, to
make it palatable, and then like swine or dogs to devour it; and then to
conclude all with prayer; Conc. Constant.
and this they accounted their perfect passover. Desid. Herald. Not. ad Min.
Foel. p. 76.
I am not ignorant that a learned man will by no means believe that any of the
ancient Heretics did ever arrive to so much barbarousness and immanity, as to
be guilty of such things, and conceives them to have been feigned merely out of
hatred to those pestilent heretics; but there is little reason to suspect the
truth of it, Epiphanius assuring us, Ibid. p. 48.
that he had the account that he gives, from the mouths of the Gnostics
themselves; and that many of the women who were deceived into those abominable
errors did not only discover these things to him, but that he himself in his
younger years while he was in Egypt had been assaulted by them, and by all the
arts of flattery and persuasion, of wantonness and immdesty had been set upon
to join himself to them. And certainly it is not imaginable that a person so
venerable for learning and piety as Epiphanius was, should impose upon us by
feigning so gross and notorious a falsehood. Besides, whoever reads Irenaeus, in
whose time these heresies were most ri^e and predominant, and considers the
account that he gives of them, which he mainly received from persons of their
own party after they were returned back to the Church, will see little reason
either to think any wickedness too great for them to boggle at, or to doubt of
the truth of what he reports concerning them.

CHAP. II.
Of their admirable Love and Charity.
The excellent temper of the Christian Religion. The Gospel principally enjoins
kindness and charity. The Primitive Christians eminently of this spirit. They
accounted all brethren, but Christians more especially. Their mutual love noted
and recorded by their enemies. Their mighty zeal and charity for the souls of
men, to recover them from vice and error to truth and virtue. This the matter
of their daily prayer, and most serious endeavors, even toward their greatest
enemies. Pamphilus his charity in bestowing Bibles freely upon the poor.
Preachers maintained for converting the Gentile Phenicians to Christianity. The
famous story of S. John's hazarding himself for the regaining a young man
debauched by bad companions. Monica's care and solicitude about S. Augustine.
Some that have sold themselves for slaves, that they might convert their
Heathen or Heretical Masters. Christians not shy of communicating the knowledge
of their Religion. Their Charity as it respected the necessities of the outward
life. This noted in several instances of charity. Their liberal providing for
the poor. The bounty of particular persons. Diverse instances of it. The immense
charity of Epiphanius: exemplary vengeance upon some that abused it. The poor
accounted the Treasure and Ornaments of the Church: represented in the case of
Laurentius the Deacon, and a story related by Palladius. Their visiting and
assisting the sick in their own persons: eminently noted in the Empress
Placilla, and the Lady Fabiola. The Christians care of their brethren in a
great plague at Alexandria. Persons appointed on purpose to cure and attend the
sick. The Parabolani, who. Their office and number. Redemption of Captives.
Great sums contributed by Cyprian and his people for it. Church-plate sold to
redeem Christians, nay, captived enemies. Christians embondaging themselves to
redeem others. The strange charity of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, making himself a
slave to ransom a poor widows son. Their care about the bodies of the dead.
Decent burial very fit and desirable. A piece of piety remarkable in the
Christians of those times. Their abstaining from the common custom of burning
the dead as barbarous. The great cost they laid out upon their funerals, in
embalming, intombing, etc. The Copiatae, who: What their office and order. The
Decani or Deans in the Church of Constantinople; their number, and duty. Their
providing fit places of Sepulture. Their Coemeteria or burying-places in the
fields. Burying in Cities and Churches when brought in, and to whom first
granted. Their Coemeteria under ground. What kind of places they were. The
great number and vast capacities of them. A particular account of one out of
Baronius, discovered in his time. How the Christians were enabled to all these
acts of charity. At first all in common: after, by usual contributions. The
standing stock or treasury of the Church. This charity of Christians largely
attested by Julian and Lucian. Their love and charity universal. Doing good to
enemies. An excellency proper to Christians. This manifested in several
remakable instances. Plainly acknowledged by Julian himself. The whole sum'd up
in an elegant discourse of Lactantius concerning mercy and charity.

THat the Christian Religion was immediately designed to improve and perfect
the principles of humane nature, appears as from many other instances of it, so
especially from this, that it so strictly enjoins, cherishes and promotes that
natural kindness and compassion, which is one of the prime and essential
inclinations of mankind; wherever the Gospel is cordially complied with, it
begets such a sweet and gracious temper of mind as makes us humble, affable,
courteous and charitable, ready and disposed to every good work, prompt to all
offices of humanity and kindness, it files off the ruggedness of men's natures,
banishes a rude, churlish and pharisaical temper, and infuses a more calm and
treatable disposition. It commands us to live and love as brethren, to love
without hypocrisy, to have fervent charity amongst our selves, and to be
kindly affectioned one toward another: It lays the sum of our duty toward
others in this, to love our neighbor as our selves. This our Savior seems to
own as his proper and peculiar law, and has ratified it with his own solemn
sanction, A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another, as I
have loved you, that you also love one another; and then makes this the great
visible badge of all those who are truly Christians, by this shall all men know
that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to another.

And so indeed it was in those first and best ages of Religion, for no sooner
did the Gospel fly abroad into the world, but the love and charity of
Christians became notorious even to a Proverb, the Heathens taking notice of
the Christians of those times with this particular remark, Tertul. Ap. c. 39.
p. 31.
See how these Christians love one another. They were then united in the most
happy fraternity (a word much used by Christians in those days, and objected
against them by the Heathens) they lived as brethren, and accounted themselves
such, not only as being sprung from one common Parent* (for in this respect
that they had Nature for their common Mother, Id. ibid* M. Foel. p. 26.
they acknowledged the very Heathens to be brethren, though otherwise little
deserving the name of men) but upon much higher accounts, viz. that they had
one and the same God for their Father, drank all of the same spirit of
holiness, were brought out of the same womb of darkness and ignorance into the
same light of truth, that they were partakers of the same Faith, and coheirs
of the same hope. This Lucian himself confesses of them, De m^r^. Peregrin. p.
764. tom. 2.
and that it was one of the great Principles that their Master instilled into
them, that they should all become Brethren, after once they had thrown off the
Religion of the Gentiles, and had embraced the worship of their great crucified
Master, and given up themselves to live according to his Laws. The truth is, so
ready, entire, and constant was their kindness and familiarity, that the
Heathens accused them for having privy marks upon their bodies, M. Foel. ib.
and p. 7.
whereby they fell in love with each other at first sight. Indeed they never
met, but they embraced one another with all the demonstrations of a hearty and
sincere affection, saluting each other with a^ holy kiss, not only in their own
houses, but at their Religious Assemblies, as a badge and bond of that
Christian fellowship and communion that was maintained amongst them.

But the love and kindness of those Christians of old did not lie only in a
smooth complemental carriage, or in a parcel of good words, depart in peace, be
you warmed or filled, but in the real exercises of charity and mercy. Now
because the two great objects of Charity are, the good of men's souls, and their
outward and bodily welfare and happiness, we shall find that the Primitive
Christians were highly eminent and exemplary for both these. The soul being of
a much higher and nobler nature, and consequently infinitely more precious and
valuable than the body, they were accordingly infinitely careful and solicitous
to save men's souls, to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, and the
paths of ruin, by making them Christians, and bringing them over to the
knowledge of the truth; for this they prayed daily and earnestly. We Christians
(says Cyprian to the Proconsul) serve the one and true Cod that made Heaven and
earth, Passio Cyprian. vit. ejus annexa p. 17.
and pray to him night and day, not only for our selves, but for all men, and
for the safety of the Emperors themselves. From this no injuries or
unkindnesses could discourage them. Dial cum Tryph. p. 254.
Justin Martyr tells the Jew, that they prayed for them, and all others that
unjustly were their enemies, that repenting of their wickednesses, and ceasing
to blaspheme Christ Jesus, who by the greatness of his works, the
uncontroulableness of the miracles performed in his name, the excellency of his
doctrines, and the clearness of the prophecies fulfilled in him, appeared to be
altogether innocent and unblameable, and that rather believing in him, they
might together with Christians be saved by him at his second glorious coming,
and not be condemned by him to everlasting flames. We pray for you (says he)
that Christ would have mercy upon you, Ib. p. 323.
for he has taught us to Pray for our enemies, to love them and be merciful to
them. And afterward, when he had reckoned up all those wicked and malicious
artifices which the Jews had used both against Christ and Christians, yet
notwithstanding all this (says he) we are so far from hating either you, Ib. p.
333.
or those who at your suggestion believe these things of us, that we pray that
all of you may repent, and obtain mercy from God, the gracious and
compassionate Parent of the world. The Gnostics were the greatest scandal that
ever was to Christianity, and the occasion of many of those persecutions, and
most of those horrible calumnies which the Heathens brought upon the
Christians, and yet see how Irenaeus treats them; Adv. Haeres lib. 3. c. 46. p.
314.
We pray for them (says he) and beg of them not to continue in the pit which
they have dug to themselves* but to depart from their sottish and idle
vanities, to turn to the Church of God, that Christ may be formed in them, and
that they may know the only true God, the Creator of the world: This we beg of
them, loving them to better purpose, than they think they love themselves: for
our love is true and wholesome (if they will receive it) like a sharp plaster
indeed, but it will eat away the proud flesh, take down the swelling and vanity
of their minds, for which cause we will not cease by all means to apply it to
them. The same Origin tells Celsus, Lib. 2. p. 110.
that though both Jews and Gentiles turned their backs upon the doctrine of
Christ, and charged them for being Impostors and deceivers, yet they would not
give over thus honestly to deceive men, to make them of loose persons to become
sober and temperate, or to bring them on toward it; of dishonest to make them
righteous, of unwise to make them prudent, at least to bring them into the way
to these things; of fearful and timorous to render them hearty and courageous,
especially as often as they are to contend for their Religion and Piety toward
God. How earnestly and passionately does Cyprian beg of the Proconsul Demetrian
and the Gentiles to provide for their happiness and safety, Ad Demetrian. p.
204.
to accept of the counsels and assistance which the Christians offered, who
loved them not the worse for all the torments and sufferings they laid upon
them; that they returned kindness for hatred, and by the miseries they endured
showed to them the way to Heaven; that now was the time to make their peace
with God, and to secure salvation; that there was no place for repentance on
the other side the grave, the stations of the other world being fixed and
unchangeable; that therefore they should believe and live, that so they might
eternally rejoice with them, whom they did now so afflict and persecute.

In pursuance of this design they spared neither pains nor cost, that they
might instruct men in the way to Heaven. Hier. adv. Ruffin tom. 2. p. 199. ex
Eusebius.
It Is said of Pamphilus the Martyr, that amongst other instances of his
charity, he used freely and readily to bestow Bibles upon all that were willing
to read; for which purpose he had always great numbers of those holy volumes
by him, that as occasion served, he might distribute and bestow them: By this
means mercifully furnishing those with these divine treasures, whose purses
could not otherwise reach to the price of the Scriptures, far dearer in those
days, than they are since Printing came into the world. Theodoret. H. Eccl.
lib. 5. c. 29. p. ^29.
We find S. Chrysostom so zealous for converting the Gentiles to Christianity,
that for this very end he maintained many Presbyters and Monks in Phoenicia
partly at his own charge, and partly by the assistance of pious and
well-disposed persons, whose only work it was to Catechize and instruct the
Heathens in the Principles of the Christian Faith; and that the business might
succeed more effectually, Lib. 16 Tit, 10. de Page Sacrif and* Temp. l. ^7.
he procured a law from the Emperor Arcadius (yet extant in the Theodosian
Code) directed to Eutychian, Prefect of the East, that the Pagan Temples should
be orderly taken down, that so they being destroyed, the whole matter of the
Gentile superstition might be abolished. Upon the executing of which Law great
mutinies were raised by the Country people, many of the Monks wounded, and some
slain, and the rest wholly disheartened to proceed in the business, (these
doubtless being those very Monks against whom Libanius so severely declaims for
so mercilesly destroying the Pagan Temples:) Orat. de Templis. p. 10.
Whereupon Chrysostom (who who then in banishment) writes to them to bear up
with a Christian and invincible patience, Epist 123. tom. 4. p. 756.
encourages them resolutely to go on in so good a work; tells them that God
would not be wanting to stand by them, and to reward them in this and the other
life, and promises them (though his incomes at this time were very small) that
their former pensions should be paid them, and all things necessary provided
for them. And indeed with how much care and solicitude the good man's mind was
filled about this business, Ad Ruffin.
he sufficiently intimates in a letter written to another person whom he had
employed about this affair. Presbyt.
Nor did they in those times regard case or fafety any more than they did* cost
and charges in this matter, Ep. 126. p. 763.
exposing themselves to any dangers that they might do good to the souls of men.

I might easily show that this consideration had a great influence upon the
sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs, willingly running any hazards, cheerfully
enduring any miseries, that they might gain others to the faith, and prevent
their eternal ruin. But that famous story of S. John the Apostle shall serve
instead of many, Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib 3. c. 23* p 9^.
the sum of which is this; Coming to a place near Ephesus in his visitation of
the Churches, he espied a Youth of a comely shape and pregnant parts, and
taking hold of him delivered him to the Bishop of the place with this charge
(which he repeated once and again) I commend this person to thee to be looked
to with all care and diligence, and that in the presence of Christ and the
Church. The Bishop undertook the charge, received the young man into his house,
instructed him, and at last baptized him. Which being done, he thought he might
remit a little of the strictness of his care; but the young man making an ill
use of his liberty, fell into bad company, by whose arts and snares he was
seduced into ways of riot and wickedness; till despairing of all hope of pardon
from God, he let loose the reins to all manner of exorbitancy, and agreeing
with his confederates, they combined themselves into a society of highway-men,
and made him their Captain, who quickly became as far beyond the rest in
fierceness and cruelty, as he was in power and authority. S. John upon occasion
returning some while after to the same place, after he had dispatched his other
business, required from the Bishop the pledge he had left with him; who
wondering and not knowing what he meant; I mean (said S. John) the young man,
it is the soul of my brother that I require. The old man with a dejected look
and tears in his eyes, answered, he is dead; and being demanded by what kind of
death, answered, he is dead to God; for alas! he is become a villain, and instead
of the Church is fled with his companions to the mountains to be a thief and a
robber. The Apostle renting his clothes, and bewailing that he had so ill
betrusted his brother's soul, immediately called for a horse and a guide, and
made haste to the Mountains; where being taken by those that stood Sentinel, he
begged to be brought before their Captain, who stood ready armed some way off;
but as soon as he perceived 'twas S. John that was coming toward him, he began
to be ashamed and to run as fast as he could. The Apostle not regarding his own
age and weakness followed after with all his might; and when his legs could not
overtake him, he sent these passionate exclamations after him; Why, O my Son,
do thou fly from thy aged and unarmed father? take pity of me, and fear not,
there is yet hope of salvation for thee. I will undertake with Christ for thee;
if need be, I will freely undergo death for thee, as our Lord did for us, and
lay down my own life to ransom thine; only stay and believe me, for I am sent
by Christ. With that he stayed, and with a dejected look throwing away his
Arms, he trembled, and dissolved into tears; he embraced the aged Apostle with
all possible expressions of sorrow and lamentation, as if again baptized with
his own tears. S. John assured him he had obtained his pardon of Christ, and
having fasted and prayed with him and for him, and with all the arts of
consolation refreshed his shattered and disconsolate mind, brought him into,
and restored him to the Church.

This story though somewhat long, I was the willinger to produce, both because
so remarkable in it self, and so great a testimony of that mighty tenderness
and compassion which they had for the souls of men; for whose sake they thought
they could never do, never venture far enough. Confess. lib. 9* c. 9. p. 155.
tom. 1.
S. Augustine tells us what infinite pains his Mother Monica took about the
conversion of her husband Patricius, how unweariedly she sought to endear her
self to him, by all the arts of a meek, prudent and sober carriage, how
submissively she complied with his rigorous and untoward humors, how
diligently she watched the aptest times of insinuation, never leaving till at
last she gained him over to the faith. Nor was her care and solicitude less for
her Son Augustine, who being hurried away with the lewdnesses of youth, and
entangled with the impieties of the Manichean Heresy, was the hourly subject
of her prayers and tears; She plied him with daily counsels and entreaties,
implored the help and assistances of good men, and importuned heaven for the
success of all; not being able to gain any quiet to her mind, till S. Ambrose
(with whom she had often advised about it) sent her away with this assurance,
that it was not possible that a child of so many tears should perish. No sooner
was his conversion wrought, but her spirit was at ease, and she now desired no
more. Ibid. cap. 10.
Himself tells us, that discoursing with her alone some few days before her
death concerning the state of the blessed and the joys of heaven, she at last
broke off with this farewell: For my part, Son, I have now no further hopes or
pleasures in this world; there was but one thing for which I desired to live,
that I might see thee a Catholic Christian before I died: This my good God has
abundantly blessed me with, having let me see thee despising the selicities of
this life, and entered into his family and service; so that what do I make any
longer here? Nay, so great a zeal had they for the good of souls in those days,
that many did not stick to engage themselves in temporal slavery for no other
end but to deliver others from spiritual bondage. Thus Serapion called
Sindonites (because he never wore more than one poor Linen garment) one of the
Primitive Asceticks, Pallad. Histor. Laus. c. 83. in vit. Serap. p. 182.
sold himself to a Gentile-player that served the Theater; with whom he lived
and underwent the meanest offices, till he had converted him, his wife and
whole family to Christianity, who upon their baptism restored him to his
liberty, whereupon he freely returned them back the money which he had received
as the price of his servitude, which by mutual consent was given to the poor.
Coming afterward to Lacedaemon and hearing that a principal person of the
City, a very good man otherwise, was infected with the Manichean Heresy; one
of the first things he did, was to insinuate himself into his Family, selling
himself to be his slave; in which condition he remained for two years together,
till he had brought his Master and his whole Family off from that pernicious
Heresy, and restored them to the Church; who did not only bless God for it,
but treated him not as a servant, but with that kindness and reverence that is
due to a Brother and a Father. This was the good spirit and genius of those
days, they entirely studied and designed the happiness of men, were willing and
desirous freely to impart the treasuries of the Gospel, and wished that in that
respect all mankind were as rich and happy as themselves. So far were they from
that malicious imputation which Celsus fastened upon them, that if all men would
become Christians, Orig. cont.
they would not admit it; to which Origin flatly returns the lie; Cells. lib. 3.
p. 116.
and tells him the falseness of it might appear from this, that Christians as
much as in them lay were not backward to propagate their doctrine through the
whole world; and that some of them had peculiarly undertaken to go up and down
not only in Cities, but in Towns and Villages, to bring over others to the true
Religion: and that they did not this out of any designs of gain or interest to
themselves was plain, because they often refused to receive necessary
accommodations from others; or if they did, they were such only as were barely
and absolutely necessary for the present turn, when as far greater liberalities
have been offered to them. Nay, some of the ancient Canons expressly require,
Council.
that no man, who has either Heretics or Infidels in his Family, Carth. 3.
shall be admitted to the order either of Bishop, Can. 18.
Presbyter or Deacon, who has not first converted those persons to the true
Christian faith.

Having seen what kindness and charity they expressed to men's souls, we come
next to that which respected their bodies, and the necessities of the outward
life; this they showed in several instances, we shall consider some of the most
material. In the first place they took special care to provide for the poor,
and such as were unable to help themselves; Epist. 5. p. 13.
this Cyprian in his retirement gave especially in charge to the Presbyters and
Deacons of his Church, that by all means they should mind the poor, and furnish
them with whatever was necessary for them. Eusebius. H. Ecc. lib. 4. c. 23. p. 145.
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth testifies of the Church of Rome that they did not
only eminently provide for their own poor, but with great liberality administer
to the necessities of other Churches, plentifully relieving whatever indigent
brethren came to them, or wherever they were, though at the greatest distance
from them. And of the Church of Antioch Chrysostom tells us, Homil. 67. in
Matthew. p. 586.
that in his time, though the revenues of it were but small, yet besides its
Clergy, besides strangers, lepers, and such as were in bonds, it daily
maintained above three thousand Widows and Maids. Indeed the bounty of those
times was almost incredible. S. Cyprian upon his turning Christian sold his
estate to relieve the wants of others. Vit. ejus per Paul. Diac. p. 11, 12.
and could not be restrained from it either by the persuasions of others, or
the considerations of what he might be reduced to himself. After his entrance
upon the Ministry his doors were open to all that came, from whom no Widow ever
returned empty; to any that were blind, he would be their guide to direct them;
them that were lame, he was ready to lend his assistance to support them; none
were oppressed by might, but he was ready to defend them. Basil. ad Sophron.
Caesarius, S. Basil's brother, made only this short will when he died, Ep. 84.
p. 156. tom. 3.
I will that all my estate be given to the poor. Nazianzen reports of his
Father, that he was so kind to the poor, Orat. 19. p. 298.
that he did not only bestow the surplusage of his estate upon them, but even
part of what was reserved for necessary uses; Ibid. p. 299.
of his Mother, that an Ocean of wealth would not have filled her unsatisfied
desire of doing good, and that he had often heard her say, that if it were
lawful, she could willingly have sold her self and children, to have expended
the price upon the uses of the poor; and of his Sister Gorgonia, that she was
immensely liberal, Job-like her gate was open to every stranger, she was eyes
to the blind, feet to the lame, and a mother to orphans; her estate was as
common to the poor, and as much at their need, as every ones is to himself,
dispersing and scattering abroad, and according to the counsel of our Savior,
laying up her treasure in heaven.

They gave not only according to, but beyond their ability; trusting to the
goodness and fidelity of heaven to supply what wanted, which many times made
the return with overplus by ways uncommon and extraordinary. Sozomen relates of
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, H. Eccl. lib. 7. c 27 p. 749.
that having spent all his own estate in pious and charitable uses, in
relieving the needy, and such as were by shipwreck and the mercy of the sea
cast upon the coast, he freely dispensed and distributed the goods and
treasures of his Church (which by the bounty of charitable persons from all
parts, who thought they could not better lodge their estates than in the hands
of so good a man, was very rich and wealthy) and that with so liberal a hand,
that the Steward or Guardian of the Church finding its stock begin to grow very
low, with some resentment told him of it, charging him as too profuse and
open-handed; All which notwithstanding he remitted nothing of his accustomed
bounty to the poor. At length all being spent, a stranger on a sudden comes
into the Stewards lodgings, and delivers into his hand a great purse of gold,
without any discovery either who 'twas that brought it, or who 'twas that sent
it. And indeed so vast and universal was the charity of this good man, that it
sometimes made him liable to be imposed upon by crafty and designing persons,
whereof the Historian in the same place gives this remarkable instance. A
couple of beggars meeting Epiphanius, and knowing the charitableness of his
temper, to draw the greater alms from him, agreed to put this trick upon him.
One of them lies along upon the ground, feigning himself to be dead, the other
standing by him passionately bewailed the death of his companion, and his own
poverty, not able to give him burial. Epiphanius pitied the man, persuaded him
to bear his loss patiently, and not to expect that his companion should in this
world rise any more, bid him take care for his burial, and withal gave him what
was sufficient for it. No sooner was he gone out of sight, but the beggar comes
to his companion, jogs him with his foot, and commends him for so ingeniously
acting the cheat: Rise (said he) and with what we have got let us be merry and
jolly to day. But alas! the Comedy was turned into a tragic scene; the man was
really dead, and could not be recovered by all his cries or stirring; which his
companion no sooner perceived, but with all have makes after the Bishop, cries
and tears his hair, confesses the cheat, and begs that his companion might be
restored to life; but all in vain: the Bishop bids him be content, and tells
him that God would not undo what he had done. Leaving a fair warning to men
(says the Historian) that the great God who sees and hears all things, reckons
those ^^^^keries that are put upon his servants as if done to himself. But this
only upon occasion of that great charity which they then upon all occasions
extended to the poor. The truth is, they then looked upon the poor as the
treasure and ornament of the Church, by whom as by bills of Exchange they
returned their estates into the other world. When Decius the Emperor demanded
of Laurentius the Deacon of the Church of Rome the Churches treasures, (...).
he promised after three days to produce them; in which time having gathered
together the blind and the lame, Tom. 1.
the infirm and the maim, at the time appointed he brought them into the
Palace, and when the Emperor asked for the treasures he had promised to bring
with him, he shows him his company, Behold (said he) these are the treasures of
the Church, those eternal treasures, which are never diminished, but increase;
which are dispersed to every one, and yet found in all. This passage brings to
my mind (though it more properly belongs to the next instance of charity) what
Palladius relates of Macarius, Hist. Laus. c. 6 p. 22.
a Presbyter and Governor of the Hospital at Alexandria; There was a Virgin in
that City very rich, but infinitely covetous and uncharitable: She had been often
attempted and set upon by the persuasions of good men, but in vain; at last he
caught her by this piece of pious policy. He comes to her, and tells her that a
parcel of Jewels, Emraulds and Jacinths, of inestimable value, were lodged at
his house, but which the owner was willing to part with for five hundred pieces
of money, and advises her to buy them: She catching at the offer, as hoping to
gain considerably by the bargain, delivered him the money, and entreated him to
buy them for her, knowing him to be a person of great piety and integrity. But
hearing nothing from him a long time after, till meeting him in the Church, she
asked him what were become of the Jewels: He told her he had laid out the money
upon them (for he had expended it upon the uses of the Hospital) and desired
her to come and see them, and if the purchase did not please her, she might
refuse it. She readily came along with him to the Hospital, in the upper rooms
whereof the women were lodged; in the lower the men. He asked her which she
would see first, the Jacinths, or the Emraulds; which she leaving to him, he
brought her first into the upper part, where the lame, blind, and Cripple-women
were disposed, and see, said he, the Jacinths that I spoke of: Then carrying
her down into the lower rooms he showed her the men in the like condition, and
told her, These are the Emraulds that I promised, and Jewels more precious than
these I think are not to be found; and now, said he, if you like not your
bargain, take your money back again. The woman blushed, and was troubled to
think, she should be haled to that, which she ought to have done freely for the
love of God. Afterward she heartily thanked Macarius, and betook her self to a
more charitable and Christian course of life.

Next to this, their charity appeared in visiting and assisting of the sick;
contributing to their necessities, refreshing their tired bodies, curing their
wounds or sores with their own hands. The sick (says the ancient Author of the
Epistle in Justin Martyr, Epist. ad Zen. and Se^en. p. 514.
if it be not Justin himself) are not to be neglected; nor is it enough for any
to say, I have never learnt to serve and give attendance: For he that shall
make his delicacy or tenderness unaccustomed to any hardness to be an excuse in
this case, let him know it may soon be his own; and then he will quickly discern
the unreasonableness of his own judgment, when the same shall happen to him,
that he himself has done to others. But there were no such nice and squeamish
stomachs in the good Christians of those times. S. Hierom tells us of Fabiola a
Roman Lady, Epitaph. Fabiolae ad Ocean. p. 199. tom. 1.
a woman of considerable birth and fortunes, that she sold her estate, and
dedicated the money to the uses of the poor; she built an Hospital (and was the
first that did so) wherein she maintained and cured the infirm and miserable,
or any sick that she met withal in the streets; here was a whole randezvouz of
Cripples, hundreds of diseases and destempers here met together, and her self
at hand to attend them: sometimes carrying the diseased in her arms, or bearing
them on her shoulders; sometimes washing and dressing those filthy and noisome
sores, from which another would have turned his eyes with contempt and horror;
otherwiles preparing them food, or giving them physic with her own hand. The
like we read of Placilla the Empress, Theodor. H. Eccl. lib 5. c. 18 p. 160*
wife to the younger Theodos^us, that she was wont to take all possible care of
the lame or wounded, to go home to their houses, carry them all necessary
conveniences, and to attend, and assist them not by the ministry of her
servants and followers, but with her own hands. She constantly visited the
common Hospitals, attended at sick beds for their cure and recovery, tasted
their broths, prepared their bread, reached them their provisions, washed their
cups with her own hands, and underwent all other offices which the very meanest
of the servants were to undergo. Thus also the Historian reports of Deogratias
the aged Bishop of Carthage under the Vandalic persecution, Vict. Vtic. de
persecu. Vandal lib. 1. fol. 5. p. 2.
that having sold all the plate belonging to the Church to ransom the Captive
Christans, and wanting places conveniently to bestow them, he lodged them in
two large Churches, provided for the needy, took care of the sick, himself
every hour visiting them both by day and night, with Physicians attending him
to superintend their cure, and diet suitable to their several cases, going from
bed to bed to know what every one stood in need of. Nay, how often did they
venture to relieve their brethren when laboring under such distempers as
seemed immediately to breath death in their faces? Thus in that sad and
terrible plague at Alexandria, Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 7. c. 22. p. 269.
which though it principally raged amongst the Gentiles, yet seized also upon
the Christians, Many of the brethren (says the Historian) out of the excessive
abundance of their kindness and charity, without any regard to their own health
and life, boldly ventured into the thickest dangers, daily visiting, attending,
instructing, and comforting their sick and infected brethren, till themselves
expired and died with them: Nay, many of them whom they thus attended recovered
and lived, while they who had looked to them died themselves; as if by a
strange and prodigious charity they had willingly taken their diseases upon
them, and died themselves to save them from death. Thus 'twas with the
Christians, while the Gentiles in the mean time put off all sense of humanity,
when any began to fall sick amongst them, they presently cast them out, shunned
their dearest friends and relations, left them half-dead in the highways, and
took no care of them either alive or dead.

And that this work of charity might be the better managed amongst Christians,
they had in many places (and particularly in this of Alexandria) certain
persons whose proper office it was to attend and administer to the sick: They
were called Parabolani, Cod. Theod. lib. 16. Tit. 2. de Episcopis etc. (...).
42, 43.
(because especially in pestilential and infectious distempers they did (...)
cast themselves into an immediate hazard of their lives) and were peculiarly
deputed ad curanda debilium aegra corpora, (as the law of the younger
Theodosius expresses it) to attend and cure the bodies of the infirm and sick.
Their numbers it seems were very great, insomuch that upon any tumultuary
occasions they became formidable even to the Courts of Civil Judicature; upon
complaint whereof made to the Emperor, Theodosius reduced their number to five
hundred; which being found too little, by a second Constitution he enlarged it
to six hundred. The truth is, these Parabolani were a kind of
Clergy-Physicians, for that they were under an Ecclesiastical cognizance is
plain, being reckoned up with the Clergy, and accordingly by the latter
Constitution of Theodosius are appointed to be chosen by, and to be immediately
subject to the Bishop of the place.

A third instance of their Love and Charity (and which S. Ambrose calls the
highest piece of liberality) was their care of those that were in captivity,
Offic. lib. 2. c. 15* p* 42.
groaning under the merciless tyranny and oppression of their enemies, to
relieve them under, to redeem them out of their bondage and slavery. Cyprian in
a letter to the Bishops of Numidia about this very thing, Epist 60. p. 96.
the redemption of those Christians amongst them that had been taken captive by
the Barbarians, elegantly bewails their misery, and earnestly presses their
redemption, and as a help toward it sent them Sestertium centum millia nummum;
Rigalt. in loc.
which Rigaltius computes to twenty five thousand pounds French, Gronov. de
pecun. vet. lib. 2. c. 2. p. 131.
though others more truly reduce it to a much lower sum, viz. seven thousand
five hundred, or two thousand five hundred Crowns; which he and his people had
liberally contributed to it. Of Acacius Bishop of Amida we read in Socrates, H.
Eccl. lib. 7. c. 21. p. 360.
that when the Roman Army had taken seven thousand Persians captive, and would
neither release them without a ransom, nor yet give them food to keep them
alive; this good Bishop, with the consent of the Clergy of his Church, caused
all the Gold and Silver Plate and vessels that belonged to their Church to be
melted down, ransomed the wretches, fed them, and then freely sent them home to
their own Prince: with which generous Charity the King of Persia (as he well
might) was strangely amazed, finding that the Romans knew how to conquer an
enemy by kindness, no less than by force of arms. The like S. Ambrose relates
of himself, Ibid. c. 28. p. 50.
that he caused the Communion Plate of his Church to be broke in pieces to
redeem Christians taken captive by the enemy; for which though he was blamed by
the Arrian party, yet he elegantly defends the fact, as not only a justifiable,
Phot. Nomocan. (...). p. 43.
but a proper and eminent act of charity. And indeed it is the only case wherein
the Imperial Constitutions make it lawful to sell or pawn the Plate and gifts
belonging to the Church, it being otherwise made sacrilege to receive them,
and the things absolutely forfeited by those that bought them. This was very
great, but yet we meet with a stranger Charity than this in the Primitive
Church, some that have parted with their own liberty to purchase freedom unto
others; So S. Clemens assures us in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians, Page
70.
We have known many amongst our selves (says he) who have delivered themselves
into bonds and slavery, that they might restore others to their liberty; many
who have hired out themselves servants unto others, that by their wages they
might feed and sustain them that wanted. Of which this one strange instance
shall suffice. Under the Vandalic persecution many Christians were carried
slaves out of Italy into Africa, Greg. Mag. dial. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 98.
for whose redemption Paulinus then Bishop of Nola had expended his whole
estate; Edit. Col. 1610.
at last a widow comes to him, entreats him to give her as much as would
ransom her only Son then slave to the King of the Vandals Son-in-law; he told
her he had not one penny left, nothing but his own person, and that he would
freely give her to make her best of, and to procure her sons ransom; this the
woman looked upon from a person of his quality as rather a deriding her
calamity, than a pitying of her case: but he assured her he was in earnest,
and at last induced her to believe him; whereupon they both took shipping for
Africa, whither they were no sooner come, but the good Bishop addressed himself
to the Prince, begged the release of the widows Son, and offered himself in his
room. The issue was, the woman had her Son restored her, and Paulinus became
the Princes slave, who employed him in the dressing and keeping of his Garden.
How he afterward ingratiated himself into the favor of his Master, and came
to be discovered to him who he was, how the Prince set him at liberty, and gave
him leave to ask what he would, which he made no further use of than to beg the
release of all his Country men then in bondage, which was accordingly granted,
and all joyfully sent home with their ships laden with Corn and Provisions, I
omit as not pertinent to my purpose; they that are desirous to know more of it
may read it in the Dialogues of S. Gregory, from whence I have borrowed the
story. This certainly was Charity with a witness, an act that will find more to
admire and commend it, than to imitate and follow it.

A fourth instance of Primitive Charity, was the great care they took about the
bodies of the dead, in giving them decent, and where they could, honorable
burial; all men naturally have a kindness for their bodies, and therefore
desire, that what has so long been the mansion of an immortal tenant, may upon
its dis-lodging be orderly taken down, and the ruins of it laid up with honor
and safety. Man's body besides that it is the cabinet of an invaluable jewel, is
a curious piece of artifice, fearfully and wonderfully made, the excellent
contrivance of the divine omniscience, and in that respect challenges not to be
carelessly thrown aside, or rudely trampled in the dirt. This seems to be the
common sense of mankind, it being the care and practice of almost all Nations
in the world religiously to enshrine the remains of their deceased friends in
Tombs and Sepulchers; thinking it but reasonable to testify so much kindness
to their departed friends, as to honor their memories, and to secure from rude
barbarous violence what they left behind them when they put off mortality. Sure
I am this was eminently the care of Christians, no dangers or threatenings could
affright them from doing this last office to their deceased brethren,
especially such as had been Martyrs and Champions for the Truth. Epist. 2.
inter Ep. Cyp. p. 9.
The Roman Clergy in an Epistle to them of Carthage reckons it as one of the
greatest instances of Charity, above that of relieving the poor, ministering to
the sick, or the rest which they there enumerate and reckon up; tells them that
it could not be neglected without great danger, and that fidelity in this
matter would be highly acceptable to God, and rewarded by him. Dionysius Bishop
of Alexandria speaking of the Plague that raged there (which we mentioned but
now) commends the Christians for assisting their sick dying brethren, Ibid. ubi
supr.
that they closed their eyes, laid them out, washed their bodies, dressed and
adorned them up for burial, and carried them out upon their own shoulders,
which they cheerfully did, notwithstanding the imminent danger that attended
it, and that it was not long before others were called to do the same offices
for them. Their bodies they decently committed to the ground, for they abhorred
the custom so common amongst the Gentiles of burning the bodies of the dead;
which they did, not (as the Heathens objected) because they thought that their
bodies once burnt to ashes would be difficultly brought to a Resurrection (a
doctrine which they strenuously asserted, Min. Foel. p. 9. -- 28.
and held fast as the main pillar of their comfort and confidence) but because
they looked upon it as inhumane and barbarous, and contrary to the more ancient
and better usage of mankind in this matter. Tertullian calls this way of burial
by inhumation a piece of piety, De Anim. c. 51. p. 301.
and tells us they abstained from burning the Corpse, not as some did, because
they thought that some part of the soul remained in the body after death, but
because it savored of savageness and cruelty. Therefore their enemies to do
them the greater spite, did not only put them to death, but very often burn
their dead bodies, and sprinkle their ashes into the Sea, partly to hinder them
from a decent burial, Amm. Marcellin. lib. 22. p. 1627.
and partly (as in that tumult at Alexandria under Julian) that nothing might
be left of them to be honored as the remains of Martyrs. As Christianity got
ground, this more civil way of inhumation did not only take place, but rooted
out the contrary custom even amongst the Gentiles themselves. For though the
Emperor Theodosius the Great gives some intimation of it as remaining in his
time, C. Theod. l. 6. Tit. 17. de Sep. viol. Lib. 9.
yet not long after it wholly ceased, Saturnal. lib. 7. c. 7. page 514.
as is expressly acknowledged by Macrobius, who lived in the time of the younger
Theodosius.

Nor did they ordinarily content themselves with a bare interrment, but
prepared the body for its funeral with costly Spices, and rich odours and
perfumes, not sparing the best drugs and ointments which the Sabeans could
afford, Apol. l. 42. p. 34.
as Tertullian plainly testifies. They who while alive generally abstained from
whatever was curious and costly, when dead were embalmed and entombed with
great art and curiosity. Whence Eunapius (much such a friend to Christianity as
Julian or Porphyry) derides the Monks and Christians of Egypt for honoring the
seasoned and embalmed bones and heads of Martyrs, De vit. Philos in vit. Aedes.
p. 65.
such (says he) as the Courts of Justice had condemned, and put to death for
their innumerable villainies. This cost the Christians doubtless bestowed upon
the bodies of their dead, because they looked upon death as the entrance into a
better life, and laid up the body as the candidate and expectant of a joyful
and happy resurrection. Besides, hereby they gave some encouragement to
suffering, when men saw how much care was taken to honor and secure the
relics of their mortality, and that their bodies should not be persecuted
after death.

This their enemies knew very well, and therefore many times denied them the
civility and humanity of burial, to strike the greater dread into them. Thus
Maximus the President threatened Tharacus the Martyr, Act. SS. Tharac. Prob and
Andron. apud Baron. ad An. 299. tom. 2.
that although he bore up his head so high upon the confidence, that after his
death his body should be wound up and embalmed with ointments and odoriferous
spices, yet he would defeat his hopes by causing his body to be burnt, and
sprinkling his ashes before the wind.

Thus after they had put Polycarp to death, Eusebius. H. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 15. p.
135*
they burnt his body out of spite to the Christians who had begged it of the
Proconsul, only to give it a solemn interrment; whereupon gathering his bones
which the mercy of the fire had spared, they decently committed them to the
earth, and there used to meet to celebrate the memory of that pious and holy
man.

During those times of persecution they were very careful to bury the bodies of
the Martyrs, some making it their particular business by stealth to interr
those in the night, who had suffered in the day; this they did with great
hazard and danger, many of them (as appears from the ancient Martyrologies)
suffering Martyrdom upon this very account. Afterward when the Church was
settled, there was a particular Order of men called Copiatae, (either (...) from
the pains they took, or else (...), because they committed the bodies of the
dead to the grave the place of ease and rest) appointed for this purpose, Cod
Theod. lib. 13* Tit. 1. de Lustr. Conl. l. 1.
about the time of Constantine, or to be sure his Son Constantius, in two of
whose Laws they are expressly mentioned, Lib. 16. Tit. 2. de Episc. l. 15. (...)
p. ^65.
and in the latter said to be lately instituted. Their office (as Epiphanius
tells) was to wrap up and bury the bodies of the dead, to prepare their graves,
and to interr them: and because inhumation and giving burial to the dead was
ever accounted in a more peculiar manner, a work of piety and religion;
therefore these persons were reckoned if not strictly Clergymen, at least in a
Clergy-relation, being in both Laws of Constantius enumerated with, and
invested in the same immunities with the Clergy. By the Author in S. Hierom
they are styled Fossarii, De Sept. Ordin. Ecc. tom. 4. p. 81.
grave-maker, and by him placed in the first and lowest order of the Clerici,
and exhorted to be like good old Tobit in Faith, Holiness, Knowledge and
Virtue. In the great Church of Constantinople they were called Decani, or Deans
(but quite distinct from the Palatin Deans spoken of in the Theodosian Code,
Lib. 6. Tit. de Decanis. l. 1.
and freequently elsewhere; who were a military order, and chiefly belonged to
the Emperors Palace) they were one of the Collegia or Corporations of the
City. Their number was very great; Constantine is said to have appointed no
less than M. C. of them: But by a Law of Honorius and Theodosius they were
reduced to DCCCCL; Lib. 1. C. tit. 2. de SS. Eccles. l. 4.
till afterward Anastasius brought them back to their former number, which was
also ratified and confirmed by Justinian, their particular duties and offices
both as relating to the dead, and all other things are largely described in two
Novell Constitutions of his to that purpose. Novel. Justin. 43* p. 114. and 59.
p. 134.


Nor did they only take care that the body might be prepared for its funeral,
but to provide it of a decent and convenient Sepulcher, wherein it might be
honorably and securely laid up; a thing which had been always practiced by the
more sober and civilized part of mankind. Their burying-places (called
Polyandria, Cryptae, Arenaria, but most commonly Coemeteria or Dormitories,
because according to the notion which the Scripture gives us of the death of
the Righteous, Christians are not so properly said to dye as to sleep in the
Lord, and their bodies to rest in the grave in expectation of a joyful
resurrection) were generally in the fields or gardens, it being prohibited by
the Roman Laws, Apud Cicer. de leg. lib. ^. p. 8^. vol. 4.
and especially an ancient Law of the XII Tables to bury within the City walls.
This held for some Centuries after Christianity appeared in the world, and
longer it was before they buried within Churches; within the out-parts whereof
to be interred, was a privilege at first granted only to Princes and persons
of the greatest rank and quality. Hom. 26. in Cap 12. 2* ad Cor. p. 929.
Chrysostom assures us that Constantius the Emperor reckoned he did his
Father Constantine the Great a peculiar honor, when he obtained to have him
buried in the Porch of the Church which he had built at Constantinople to the
memory of the Apostles, and wherein he had earnestly desired to be buried, De
Vit. Constable lib. 4. c. 71* p. 562*
as Eusebius tells us; and in the same many of his Successors were interred; it
not being in use then, nor some hundreds of years after for persons to be
buried in the body of the Church, as appears from the Capitula of Charles the
Great, Lib. 1. Cap. 159. fol. 27. p. 1.
where burying in the Church, which then it seems had crept into some places,
is strictly forbidden.

During the first ages of Christianity, while the malice of their enemies
persecuted them both alive and dead, their Coemeteria were ordinarily under
ground, imitating herein the custom of the Jews, whose Sepulchers were in
Caverns and holes of rocks, though doubtless the Christians did it to avoid the
rage and fury of their enemies; not so much upon the account of secrecy; for
their frequent retiring to those places was so notorious, as could not escape
the observation of their enemies, and therefore we sometimes find the Emperors
Officers readily coming thither; but it was upon the account of that Sacredness
and Religion that was reckoned to be due to places of this nature, it being
accounted by all Nations a piece of great impiety, Manes temerare Sepultos, to
disturb and violate the ashes of the dead. They were large vaults dug in dry
sandy places, and arched over, and separated into many little apartments,
wherein on either side the bodies of the Martyrs lay in distinct Cells, each
having an Inscription upon Marble, Prudent.
whereon his Name, Peri Steph.
Quality, and probably the time and manner of his death were engraven: Pass
Hippol. Mart.
Though in the heats of Persecution they were forced to bury great numbers
together in one common grave (LX Prudentius tells us he observed) and then not
the names, but only the number of the interred was written upon the Tomb. Him.
11. p. ^39.
Indeed the multitudes of Martyrs that then suffered required very large
conveniences of interrment. And so they had, insomuch that the last publisher
of the Roma Subterranea assures us, that though those Coemeteria were
underground, Lib. 1. c. 2. number. 9. p. 4.
yet were they many times double and sometimes treble, two or three stories one
still under another.

By reason hereof they must needs be very dark, having no light from without,
but what peeped in from a few little cranies, which filled the place with a
kind of sacred horror, Comment. in c. 40.
as S. Hierom informs us, Ezekiel. tom. 5. p. 521.
who while a youth, when he went to School at Rome, used upon the Lords day to
visit these solemn places. Built they were by pious and charitable persons,
(thence called after their names) for the interrment of Martyrs, and other uses
of the Church; for in these places Christians in times of persecution were wont
to hide themselves, and to hold their Religious Assemblies, when banished from
their public Churches, as I have formerly noted. Ad An: 226. tom. 2.
Of these about Rome only Baronius out of the Records in the Vatican reckons up
XLIII, and others to the number of threescore. We may take an estimate of the
rest by the account which Baronius gives of one, Ad an. 130 vid. ad an* 57.
tom. 1. number. 112.
called the Cemeterie of Priscilla, discovered in his time, An. 1578, in the
Via Salaria about three miles from Rome, which he often viewed and searched: It
is (says he) strange to report, the place by reason of its vastness and variety
of apartments appearing like a City under ground. At the entrance into it there
was a principal way or street much larger than the rest, which on either hand
opened into diverse other ways, and those again divided into many lesser ways
and turnings, like lanes and allies within one another. And as in Cities there
are void open places for the Markets; so here there were some larger spaces for
the holding (as occasion was) of their Religious Meetings, wherein were placed
the Effigies and Representations of Martyrs, with places in the top to let in
light, long since stopped up. The discovery of this place caused great wonder in
Rome, being the most exact and perfect Cemeterie that had been yet found out.
Thus much I thought good to add upon occasion of that singular care, which
Christians then took about the bodies of their dead. If any desire to know more
of these venerable Antiquities, they may consult onuphrius de Coemeteriis, and
especially the Latin Edition of the Roma Subterranea, Edit. a Paul. Aringhio*
where their largest curiosity may be fully satisfied in these things. Romans
1651 and Col. 1659.


Many other instances of their Charity might be mentioned, their ready
entertaining strangers, providing for those that labored in the Mines,
marrying poor Virgins, and the like, of which to treat particularly would be
too vast and tedious. To enable them to do these charitable offices, they had
not only the extraordinary contributions of particular persons, but a common
stock and treasury of the Church. At the first going abroad of the Gospel into
the world, so great was the Piety and Charity of the Christians, That the
multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul, neither said
any of them, that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, but they
had all things common; neither was there any among them that lacked; for as
many as were possessors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the prices
of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. But this
community of goods lasted not long in the Church; we find S. Paul giving order
to the Churches of Galatia and Corinth for weekly offerings for the Saints, 1
Cor. 16. 1, 2.
that upon the first day of week (when they never failed to receive the
Sacrament) they should every one of them lay by him in store according as God
had prospered him. Apol. 2. p. 98, 99.
This custom Justin Martyr assures us still continued in his time; for
describing the manner of their assemblies on the Lords day, he tells us that
those who were able and willing contributed what they saw good; and the
collection was lodged in the hands of the Bishop or President, and by him
distributed for the relief of Widows and Orphans, the sick or indigent, the
imprisoned or strangers, or any that were in need. In the next age they were
reduced to monthly offerings, as appears from Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
who gives us this account of them in his time, That at their Religious
Assemblies upon a monthly day (or oftener if a man will, and be able) every one
according to his ability laid by somewhat for charitable uses (they put it into
a kind of poor man's box called Arca, that stood in the Church) this they did
freely, no man being forced or compelled to it; leaving it behind them as a
stock to maintain piety and religion; for it is not spent (says he) upon feasts
or drinking-bouts, or to gratify gluttony and intemperance, but laid out in
relieving the needy, burying the dead, providing for Orphans, supporting the
aged, recruiting the spoiled, supplying the imprisoned, and those that were in
mines, bonds, or slavery for the profession of Christianity.

This was the fruit of Primitive devotion. Palladius tell us of two Brother,
Histor.
Paesius and Esaias, Lausiac. c. 15. p. 41.
Sons of a wealthy Merchant, that their Father being dead, and resolving upon a
more strict and religious course of life, they could not agree upon settling
their Estates in the same way; at last dividing their Estates, they disposed
them thus. The one gave away his whole Estate at once, settling it upon
Monasteries, Churches, and Prisons for the relief of such as were in bonds, and
betaking himself to a Trade for a small maintenance for himself, gave himself
up to prayer and the severer exercises of Religion. The other kept his Estate
in his own possession, but built a Monastery, and taking a few Companions to
dwell with him, entertained all strangers that came that way, took care of the
sick, entertained the aged, gave to those that needed, and every Saturday and
Lords day caused two or three tables to be spread for the refreshment and
entertainment of the poor; and in this excellent way spent their life.

Now that this account that we have given of the admirable bounty and charity
of the ancient Christians is not precarious, and merely what the Christians
tell us of themselves, we have the testimony of two open enemies of
Christianity, Julian and Lucian, both bitter enemies to Christians, and the
fiercer, because both, as it is supposed, apostates from them, and their
testimony is considerable upon a double account, partly because having lived
amongst the Christians they exactly knew their ways and manners; and partly
because being enemies to them they would be sure to speak no more in their
commendation than what was true. Julian speaking of the Galileans, Misapog. p.
99.
tells us that by their charity to the poor they begot (...), the greatest
admiration of their Religion in the minds of men. And in an Epistle to the
Highpriests of Galatia, Epist. 49. ad Arsac. oper. par. 2. p. 203.
bewailing the desolate state of the heathen-world, the ruin of their Temples,
and the great declension of Paganism at that time, notwitstanding all his
endeavors to make it succeed under the influences of his Government; he
advises the High Priest to promote the Gentile-interest by the same method,
which the wicked Religion of the Christians did thrive by, i. e. by their
bounty to strangers, their care in burying of the dead, and their holiness of
life; and elsewhere, The poor (says he) having no care taken of them, Fragm.
Epist. par. 1. p. 557.
the wicked Galileans know very well how to make their advantage of it, for
they give themselves up to humanity and charity, and by these plausible and
insinuative ways strengthen and increase their wicked and pernicious party;
just as men cheat little children with a cake, by two or three of which they
tempt them to go along with them, till having got them from home, they clap
them under hatches, transport and sell them, and so for a little seeming
pleasure they are condemned to bitterness all their life; and no otherwise
(says he) ' it is with them, they first inveagle honest minded men with what they
call their feasts of Love, banquets, ministry and attendance upon tables, and
then seduce them into their wickedness and impiety. This as at once it shows
his venom and malice according to the humor of the man, so it openly bears
witness out of the mouth of an emeny to the most excellent and generous spirit
of the Gospel. The other testimony is that of Lucian, (who if not a Christian
himself, for Suidas his (...) does no way intimate him to have been a Christian
Preacher, In voc. (...).
notwithstanding what the generality of Writers have inferred thence; was yet
however intimately acquainted with the affairs of Christians) who bringing in
his Philosopher Peregrinus amongst other Sects joining himself to the
Christians, De mort: Peregrin. p. 762, 763. tom. 2.
tells us what care they took of him, when cast into prison they improved all
their interest to have him released: But when this could not be granted, they
officiously used all possible service and respect toward him; in the morning
old women, widows, and children flocked early to the prison-doors; and the
better sort got leave of the Keepers to sleep with him in the prison all night;
then they had several sorts of banquets, and their sacred discourses: Nay, some
were sent in the name of the rest even from the Cities of Asia to assist, and
encourage him; who brought him great sums of money under pretense of his
imprisonment; it being incredible what readiness they show, when any such
matter is once noys'd abroad, and how little they spare any cost in it. After
which he tells us of them in general, Ibid. p. 764.
that they equally contemn all the advantages of this life, and account them
common, foolishly taking up their principles about these things without any
accurate search into them; insomuch that if any subtle and crafty fellow, that
knows how to improve his advantage, come amongst them, he grows very rich in a
little time, by making a prey of that simple and credulous people.

There Is one circumstance yet behind concerning the love and charity of those
times very worthy to be taken notice of, and that is the universal extent of
it, they did good to all, though more especially to them of the household of
faith, i.e. to Christians; they did not confine their bounty merely within the
narrow limits of a party, this or that sect of men, but embraced an object of
love and pity wherever they met it. They were kind to all men, yea to their
bitterest enemies, and that with a charity as large as the circles of the Sun
that visits all parts of the World, and shines as well upon a stinking
dung-hil, as upon a pleasant Garden. It Is certainly the strange and
supernatural doctrine of our Savior, you have heard that it has been said,
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray
for them which despitefully use you and persecute you. This indeed is the
proper goodness and excellency of Christianity, as Tertullian observes, it
being common to all men to love their friends, Ad Scap. c. 1. p. 69.
but peculiar only to Christians to love their enemies. Legate. pro Christian.
p. 11.
And Athenagoras I remember principally makes use of this Argument to prove the
Divinity of the Christian Religion, and challenges all the great Masters of
Reason and Learning amongst the Heathens to produce any, either of themselves
or their Disciples, of so pure and refined a temper, as could instead of
hating, love their enemies, bear curses and revilings with an undisturbed mind,
and instead of reviling again, to bless and speak well of them, and to pray for
them who lay in wait to take away their lives. And yet this did Christians,
they embraced their enemies, pardoned and prayed for them, according to the
Apostles rule, when their enemy hungered they fed him, when he thirsted they
gave him drink, and would not be overcome of evil, but overcame evil with good.
Vit. ejus per Greg. Presbyt.
When Nazianzen (then Bishop of Constantinople) lay sick, a young man came to
his beds feet, and taking hold of his feet, with tears and great lamentation
passionately begged pardon of him for his wickedness; the Bishop asking what he
meant by it, he was told that this was the person that had been suborned by a
wicked party to have murdered him, and now being stricken with the conscience
of so great a wickedness, came to bewail his sin: The good man immediately
prayed to Christ to forgive him, desiring no other satisfaction from him than
that henceforth he would forsake that Heretical party, and sincerely serve God
as became a Christian. Eusebius. de Martyr. Palestin. c. 8. p. 332.
Thus when Paul the Martyr was hastening to his execution, he only begged so
much respite, till he might pray (which accordingly he did) not only for the
peace and happiness of Christians, but for the conversion of Jews and
Samaritans, for the Gentiles that they might be brought out of error and
ignorance to the knowledge of God and the true Religion; he prayed for the
people that attended his execution; nay, (such his vast goodness and charity)
for the very Judge that condemned him; for the Emperors, and the very
Executioner that stood ready to cut off his head, earnestly begging of God not
to lay that great wickedness to their charge. Nay, they did not think it enough
not to return evil for evil, or barely to forgive their enemies, unless they
did them all the kindness that lay in their power. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 15. p. 130.
Polycarp plentifully feasted the very Officers, that were sent to apprehend
him; the same which S. Mamas the Martyr is also said to have done, Martyr. ejus
apud Sur. ad 17. Aug. Tom. 4. ex. S. Metraph.
treating the Soldiers with the best supper he had, when sent by Alexander the
cruel President of Cappadocia to seize upon him. And we read of one Pachomius
an Heathen Soldier in the first times of Constantine, that the Army being well
near starved for want of necessary provisions, Metaphrast in vit. Pachomii apud
Sur. ad diem 14. Maii tom. 3.
and coming to a City that was most inhabited by Christians, they freely and
speedily gave them whatever they wanted for the accommodation of the Army.
Amazed with this strange and unwonted charity, and being told that the people
that had done it were Christians whom they generally preyed upon, and whose
profession it was to hurt no man, and to do good to every man, he threw away
his arms, became an Anchoret, and gave up himself to the strictest severities
of Religion. This also Julian the Emperor plainly confesses; Vbi prius.
for urging Arsacius the chief Priest of Galatia, to take care of the poor, and
to build Hospitals in every City for the entertaining of poor strangers and
travelers, both of their own and other Religions; he adds, for it is a shame
(says he) that when the Jews suffer none of theirs to beg, and the wicked
Galileans relieve not only their own, but also those of our party, that we only
should be wanting in so necessary a duty: So prevalent is truth as to extort a
confession from its most bitter and virulent opposers. Of this I shall only add
one instance or two more, proper enough to be inserted here. H. Ecclesiast.
lib. 9. c. 8. p. 357.
Eusebius speaking of that dreadful plague and famine that happened in the
Eastern Parts under the Emperor Maximinus, wherein so many whole Families
miserably perished, and were swept away at once; he adds, that at this time the
care and piety of the Christians toward all evidently approved it self to all
the Gentiles that were about them; they being the only persons that during this
sad and calamitous state of things performed the real offices of mercy and
humanity; partly in ordering and burying of the dead (thousands dying every
day, of whom no care was taken) partly in gathering together all the poor that
were ready to starve, and distributing bread to every one of them. The fame
whereof filled the ears and mouths of all men who extolled the God of the
Christians, and confessed that they had showed themselves to be the only truly
pious and religious persons. And indeed the charity was the more remarkable, in
that the Christians at this very time were under a most heavy persecution. Thus
in the terrible plague that in the times of Gallus and Volusian raged so much
through the whole world (and that more or less for fifteen years to gether)
especially at Carthage, when innumerable multitudes were swept away every day,
and the streets filled with the carcases of the dead, which seemed to implore
the help of the living, and to challenge it as their right by the common Laws
of humane nature; but all in vain, every one trembling, flying, and shifting
for themselves, deserting their nearest friends and kindred, none staying
unless it was to make a prey. In this sad and miserable case Cyprian then
Bishop of the place, Pont. in vit. Cyprian p. 13.
calls the Christians together, instructs them in the duties of mercy and
charity, puts them in mind, that it was no great wonder if their charity
extended to their own party; the way to be perfect, was to do something more
than Heathens and Publicans, to overcome evil with good, to imitate the divine
benignity, to love our enemies, and according to our Lords advice to pray for
the happiness of them that persecute us; that God continually made his Sun to
rise, and his rain to fall not only for the advantage of his own children, but
for all other men's; and that therefore they should imitate the example of such
a father, who professed themselves to be his children. Immediately upon this
they unanimously agreed to assist their common enemies, every one lending help
according to his rank and quality. Those who by reason of their poverity could
contribute nothing to the charge, did what was more, they personally wrought
and labored, an assistance beyond all other contributions: By which large and
abundant charity great advantage redounded not to themselves only of the
household of faith, but universally unto all.

I shall sum up what has been said upon this Argument in that elegant
Discourse which Lactantius has concerning works of mercy and charity. Lact.
Epitom. c. 7. p. 746.
Since humane nature (says he) is weaker than that of other creatures, who come
into the world armed with offensive and defensive powers, therefore our wise
Creator has given us a tender and merciful disposition, that we might place
the safeguard of our lives in the mutual assistances of one another. For being
all created by one God, and sprung from one common parent, we should reckon our
selves akin, and obliged to love all mankind; and (that our innocence may be
perfect) not only not to do an injury to another, but not to revenge one when
done to our selves; for which reason also we are commanded to pray for our very
enemies. We ought therefore to be kind and sociable, that we may help and
assist each other. For being our selves obnoxious to misery, we may the more
comfortably hope for that help, in case we need it, which our selves have given
unto others. And what can more effectually induce us to relieve the indigent,
than to put our selves into their stead, who beg help from us? If any be
hungry, let us feed him; is he naked, let us cloth him; if wronged by a
powerful oppressor, let us rescue and receive him. Let our doors be open to
strangers, and such who have not where to lay their head. Let not our
assistance be wanting to Widows and Orphans: And (which is a mighty instance of
charity) let us redeem the captived, visit and assist the sick, who are able to
take no care of themselves; and for strangers and the poor (in case they die)
let us not suffer them to want the convenience of a Grave. These are the
offices and the works of mercy, which who-ever does, offers up a true and
grateful sacrifice to God; who is not pleased with the blood of beasts, but the
charity of men; whom therefore he treats upon their own terms, has mercy on
them whom he sees merciful, and is inexorable to those who shut up their bowels
against them that ask them. In order therefore to our thus pleasing God, let us
make light of money, and transmit it into the heavenly treasures, where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal, nor Tyrants
are able to seize and take it from us, but where it shall be kept to our
eternal advantage under the custody of God himself.

CHAP. III.
Of their Unity and Peaceableness.
The Laws of Christ tend to beget a peaceable disposition. This seen in our
Savior himself, in his Apostles and the whole body of Christians. The account
Justin Martyr gives of them. The world overrun with quarrels before Christ's
coming: The happy alteration that succeeded upon his appearance in it. This
particularly urged by Eusebius. How much Christians contributed to the peace
and quietness of the world. Their unity among themselves. Canonical Epistles;
the several sorts of them, (...)* What their nature and tendency. Differences
presently endeavored to be healed. The great care and solicitude of
Constantine that way. An eminent instance of condescension and self-denial in
Gregory Nazianzen for the peace of the Church. Difference in Rituals and lesser
matters no hinderance of peace and Christian Communion; manifested in the case
of Polycarp and Anicetus Bishop of Rome. Christians not provoked by every
trifling quarrel. The difference in this respect between them, and the best
Philosophers.

THE primitive Christians being of such a meek, compassionate and benevolent
temper as we have represented them, it cannot be thought but that they were of
a very quiet disposition and peaceable conversation; and the having been so
large in that, will excuse me for being shorter in this. When our blessed
Savior came to establish his religion in the world, he gave a Law suitable to
his nature, and to the design of his coming into the world, and to the exercise
of his Government as he is Prince of peace, a Law of mildness and gentleness,
of submission and forbearance toward one another; we are commanded to follow
peace with all men, to follow after the things that make for peace, as much as
in us lies to live peaceably with all men; we are forbidden all feuds and
quarrels, enjoined not to revenge our selves, but to give place unto wrath, to
let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from us, with all malice, to be kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgives us. These are the
Laws of Christianity, which whenever they are duly entertained produce the most
gentle and good natured principles, the most innocent and quiet carriage. This
eminently appeared in the life of our blessed Savior, who was the most
incomparable instance of kindness and civility, of peace and quietness; we
never find him all his life treating any with sharpness and severity but the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were a pack of surly, malicious, ill-natured
fellows, and could be wrought upon by no other methods; otherwise his mildness
and humility, the affablity and obligingness of his conversation, and his
remarkable kindness to his greatest enemies were sufficiently obvious both in
his life and death; and such was the temper of his Disciples and followers,
this excellent spirit like leaven spreading it self over the whole mass of
Christians, turning the brier into a myrtle-^ree, and the Vultur into a Dove.
See the account which Justin the Martyr gives of them. Apol. 2. p. 61.
We who formerly valued our money and estates before all things else, do now put
them into a common stock, and distribute them to those that are in need: We who
once hated each other and delighted in mutal quarrels and slaughters, and
according to the custom refused to sit at the same fire with those who were not
of our own tribe and party; now since the appearance of Christ in the world
live familiarly with them, pray for our enemies, and endeavor to persuade
those that unjustly hate us to order their live according to the excellent
precepts of Christ, that so they may have good hope to obtain the same rewards
with us from the great Lord and Judge of all things.

But for the better understanding of this it may be useful to observe, what a
remarkable alteration in this respect the Christian Religion made in the world.
Before Christ's coming the word was generally overrun with feuds and quarrels,
mighty and almost implacable animosities and divisions reigning amongst Jews
and Gentiles; the Jews looked upon the Gentiles, as dogs and outcasts, refused
all dealings with them, even to the denial of courtesies of common charity and
civility, such as to tell a man the way or to give him a draught of water; Joh.
4. 9.
they reproached them as the vilest and most profligate part of mankind,
Juvenal.
sinners of the Gentiles, Satyr. 14. p. 439.
as the Apostle calls them according to the usual style and title. Gal. 2. 15.
Nor did the Gentiles less scorn and deride the Jews, as a pitiful and
contemptible generation, stopping their noses, and abhorring the very sight of
them if by chance they met them; Histor. lib. 5* c. 4* 5. p. 535. (...).
they looked upon them as an unsociable people, as enemies of all Nations, that
did not so much as wish well to any; nay, as haters even of mankind, as Tacitus
and their enemies in Josephus represent them. The effect of all which was, that
they oppressed and persecuted them in every place, trod them as dirt under
their feet, till at last the Romans came and finally took away both their place
and Nation. Thus stood the case between them till the arrival of the Prince of
peace; Jos. Antiquit. Judaica^ lib. 11. c. 6. vid. Esther. 3. 8. vid. Cicpro
Flac. p. ^68. Tom. 2.
who partly by his death, whereby he broke down the partition wall between Jew
and Gentile, partly by the healing nature and tendency of his doctrine, partly
by the quiet and peaceable carriage of his followers, did quickly extirpate and
remove those mutual feuds and animosities, and silence those passionate and
quarrelsome divisions, that were amongst men.

This Argument Eusebius particularly prosecutes, Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 1. c.
4. p. 10, 11.
and shows that while the Nations were under Paganism and Idolatry, they were
filled with wars and troubles, Vid. Athanas. de verb. in^arnat. p. 78. tom. 1.
and all the effects of barbarous rage and fury; but that after the divine and
peaceable doctrine of our Savior came abroad, those differences and calamities
began to cease, according to the predictions that were of him, that there
should be righteousness and abundance of peace in his days; that men should
beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks; that
Nation should not lift up sword against Nation, nor learn war any more; that
this must needs be in some measure the effect of his appearance, his doctrine
being so fitly calculated to soften the rough and brutish manners of men, and
to train them up in milder and more humane institutions. And a little after he
makes it an uncontrollable argument of the truth and excellency of the
Christian doctrine, that it teaches men to bear the reproaches and provocations
of enemies with a generous and unshaken mind, and to be able not to revenge our
selves, by falling foul upon them with the like indignities and affronts; to be
above anger and passion, and every inordinate and unruly appetite; to
administer to the wants and necessities of the helpless, and to embrace every
man as our kindred and countryman, and though reputed a stranger to us, yet
to own him as if by the law of Nature he were our nearest friend and brother.
How much their Religion contributed to the public tranquillity by forbiding
Pride, Passion, Covetousness and such sins as are the great springs of
confusion and disturbance, Apol. 2. p* 59.
Justin Martyr tells the Emperors, As for peace (says he) we above all men in
the world promote and further it, forasmuch as we teach that no wicked man, no
covetous or treacherous person, no good or virtuous man can lie hid from the
eye of God, but that every man is traveling either toward an eternal
happiness or misery according to the desert and nature of his works: and did
all men know and believe this, no man would dare for a few moments to deliver
up himself to vice and wickedness, knowing 'twould lead him on to the
condemnation of everlasting fire; but would rather by all means restrain
himself, and keep within the bounds of virtue, that he might obtain the rewards
that are dispensed by God, and avoid the punishments that are inflicted by him.
The truth is, our blessed Lord came not to inspire men with principles of
revenge and passion, to teach them to return evil for evil, but to encourage
love and gentleness, to teach men to overcome by suffering, and to obtain the
reward by meekness and patience. Epist. 127. lib. 3. p. 269.
Isidore the Pelusiote treating of that place, to him that smites thee on the
right cheek turn the other also, has this short discourse upon it. The great
King of Heaven came down from above, to deliver to the world the laws of an
heavenly conversation; which he has proposed in a way of conflict and striving,
quite contrary to that of the Olympic games. There he that fights and gets the
better receives the Crown; here he that is stricken and bears it meekly, has
the honor and applause: there he that returns blow for blow, here he that
turns the other cheek, is celebrated in the Theater of Angels; for the victory
is measured not by revenge, but by a wise and generous patience: this is the
New Law of Crowns, this the new way of conflicts and contentions.

Such was the temper, such the carriage of Christians toward their enemies,
and them that were without; within themselves they maintained the most
admirable peace and harmony, and were in a manner of one heart and soul. They
lived in the strictest amity, and abhorred all division as a plague and
firebrand. But because men's understandings not being all of one size, nor all
truths alike plain and evident, differences in men's Judgments and Opinions must
needs arise; no Schism ever arose in the Church about any of the more
considerable principles of Religion, but it was presently bewailed with the
universal resentment of all pious and good men, and the breach endeavored to
be made up; no ways left unattempted, no methods of persuasion omitted that
might contribute to it.

When Novatus, [or rather Novatian] had made some disturbance in the Church of
Rome concerning the receiving the lapsed into Communion, Dionysius the good
Bishop of Alexandria writes to him to extinguish the Schism, Eusebius. H. Eccl.
lib. 6. c. 45. p. 247.
tells him it is better to suffer any thing than that the Church of God should
be rent in pieces; that it is no less glorious, and probably more illustrious to
suffer Martyrdom to keep division out of the Church, than to dye for not
sacrificing to Idols; for in the one case a man suffers martyrdom only upon his
own account, but in the other he suffers for the advantage and benefit of the
whole Church. De Unit. Eccl. p. 184*
And Cyprian positively asserts (according to the Apostles resolution of the
case) that without this unity and charity a man cannot enter into Heaven; and
that although he should deliver up himself to the flames, or cast his body to
wild beasts, yet this would not be the crown of his Faith, but the punishment
of his falsehood, not the glorious exit of a religious virtue, but the issue of
despair; such a one may be killed, but he cannot be crowned. -- He that rents
the Unity of the Church, destroys the Faith, disturbs the Peace, dissolves
Charity, and profanes the Holy Sacrament. How severely they branded all schism
and division in the Church, how industriously they labored to take up all
controversies amongst Christians, and to reconcile dissenting brethren, (...)
to maintain concord and agreement amongst themselves, and to prevent all
occasions of quarrel and dissension, might be easily made to appear out of the
Writers of those times. Hence those Canonical Epistles (as they called them)
wherewith persons were wont to be furnished when going from one place to
another; of which there were especially three sorts. First, (...) or
Commendatory Epistles, mentioned by S. Paul, and were in use amongst the
Heathens. They were granted to Clergymen going into another Diocese by the
Bishop that ordained them, testifying their ordination, their soundness and
orthodoxy in the Faith, the innocence and unblameableness of their lives: To
those that had been under, or had been suspected of Excommunication, declaring
their absolution, and recommending them to be received in the number of the
faithful: Lastly, they were granted to all, whether Clergy or Laity, that were
to travel, as Tickets of Hospitality, that wherever they came, upon the
producing these letters they might be known to be Catholic and Orthodox, and
as such received and entertained by them. A piece of prudence which Julian the
Apostate admired in the Christian constitution, Sozom, H. Eccl* lib. 5. c. 16*
p* 617, Naz. in Jul. 1. p. 102.
the like whereto he endeavored to establish in his Pagan reformation. The
Second sort were (...), Letters Dimissory, whereby leave was given to persons
going into another Diocese, either to be Ordained by the Bishop of that place,
or if ordained already, to be admitted and incorporated into the Clergy of that
Church. Upon which account the ancient Councils every where provide that no
stranger shall either receive ordination at the hands of another Bishop, or
exercise any ministerial act in another Diocese, without the consent and
dimissory Letters of the Bishop of that place from whence he comes. The third
were (...), letters of Peace, granted by the Bishop to the poor that were
oppressed, and such as fled to the Church for its protection and assistance:
but esp;ecially to such of the Clergy as were to go out of one Diocese into
another, it being directed to the Bishop of that Diocese, that he would receive
him, that so he might take no offense, but that peaceable concord and agreement
might be maintained between them. By these arts the prudence of those times
sought to secure the peace of the Church, and as much as might be, prevent all
dissentions that might arise. And where matters of any greater moment fell out,
how quickly did they flock together to compose and heal them?

Hence those many Synods and Councils that were convened to umpire differences,
to explain or define Articles of Faith, to condemn and suppress the disturbers
of the Church, and innovators in Religion. What infinite care did the good
Emperor Constantine take for composing the Arrian controversies which then
began first to infect and overrun the world? How much his heart was set upon
it, his sollicitous thoughts taken up about it, how many troublesome days and
restless nights it cost him, with what strong and nervous arguments, what
affectionate entreaties he presses it, De Vit. Constant. lib. 2. c. 64. and
seqq. p. 473.
may be seen in that excellent Letter (yet extant in his Life) which he wrote
to the Authors of those impious and unhappy controversies. But when this would
not do, he summoned the great Council of Nice, consisting of three hundred and
eighteen Bishops, and in his Speech at the opening of that Council conjured
them by all that was dear and sacred to agree, Ibid. lib. 3. c. 12. p. 489.
and to compose those dissentions which were risen in the Church, which he
seriously protested he looked upon as more grievous and dangerous than any war
whatsoever, and that they created greater trouble and inquietude to his mind,
than all the other affairs of his Empire. And when several of the Bishops then
in Council had preferred Libells and Accusations one against another, Theod. H.
Eccl. lib. 1* c. 11. p. 25.
without ever reading them, he bundled and sealed them all up together, and
having reconciled and made them friends, produced the papers, and immediately
threw them into the fire before their faces. So passionately desirous was that
good Prince to extinguish the flames, and to redeem the peace of the Church at
any rate. Were any ejected and thrown out of the Church, of which there might
be a suspicion of private grudges or designs, Can. ^.
the Nicene Council wisely provided, That in every Province a Synod should be
held twice a year, where all the Bishops meeting together might discuss the
case, and compose the difference. Or, as Joseph the Egyptian in his Arabic
version of that Canon tells us, an Arbitrator was to be appointed between the
differing parties, to take up the quarrel, that it might not be a scandal to
Religion.

Nor did there want meek and peaceable-minded men who valued the public
welfare before any private and personal advantage, and could make their own
particular concerns strike sail, when the peace and interest of the Church
called for it. When great contests and confusions were raised by some perverse
and unquiet persons about the Sea of Constantinople (then possessed by Gregory
Nazianzen) he himself stood up in the midst of the Assembly and told the
Bishops, Vit. Greg. Naz. per Gregor. Presbyt.
how unfit it was that they who were preachers of peace to others, should fall
out amongst themselves, begged of them even by the Sacred Trinity to manage
their affairs calmly and peaceably; and if I (says he) be the Jonas that raises
the storm, throw me into the Sea, and let these storm and tempests cease. I am
willing to undergo what ever you have a mind to; and though innocent and
unblameable, yet for your peace and quiet sake, am content to be banished the
throne, and to be cast out of the City; only according to the Prophets counsel,
be careful to love truth and peace: And therewith freely resigned his
Bishopric, though legally settled in it by the express command and warrant of
the Emperor, and the universal desires and acclamations of the people.

The same excellent temper ruled in S. Chrysostom one of his successors in
that See; when having elegantly pressed the unity of the Church, and refuted
those petty cavils which his adversaries had against himself; But if you (says
he to his people) suspect these things of us, Homil. 11. in Ep. ad Ephesians. p.
1110.
we are ready to deliver up our place and power to whomsoever you will; only
let the Church be preserved in peace and unity. This was the brave and noble
disposition of mind, to which S. Clemens sought to reduce the Corinthians,
after they had fallen into a little Schism and disorder: Who is there among you
(says he) of that generous temper, Epist. ad Cor. p. 69.
that compassionate and charitable disposition? Let him say, if this Sedition,
these Schisms and contentions have arisen through my means, or upon my account,
i will depart and be gone whithersoever you please, and will do what the people
shall command; only let Christ's sheepfold together with the Elders that are
placed over it, be kept in peace.

Nay, when good men were most zealous about the main and foundation-articles of
Faith, so as sometimes rather to hazard Peace, than to betray the Truth, yet in
matters of indifferency, and such as only concerned the rituals of Religion,
they mutually bore with one another, without any violation of that Charity
which is the great law of Christianity. Thus in that famous controversy about
the keeping of Easter, so much agitated between the Eastern and Western
Churches, Irenaeus in a Letter to Pope Victor (who of all that ever sat in that
chair had raised the greatest stirs about it) tells him that Bishops in former
times, Eusebius. ^ Eccl. lib. 5. c. 24. p. 193.
however they differed about the observation of it, yet always maintained an
entire concord and fellowship with one another, the Churches being careful to
maintain a peaceable communion, though differing in some particular Rites and
Ceremonies, yea even when their rites and customs seemed to clash by meeting
together at the same place. Thus when Polycarp came to Rome from the Churches
of the East to treat with Pope Anicetus about this and some other affairs,
though they could not satisfy each other to yield the controversy, yet they
kissed and embraced one another with mutual endearments, received the Holy
Communion together; and Anicetus to do the greater honor to Polycarp gave him
leave to celebrate and consecrate the Eucharist in his Church, and at last they
parted in great peace and friendship; the difference of the observotion not at
all hindering the agreement and harmony of the Churches, it being agreed
amongst them by common consent (says Sozomen speaking of this passage) that in
keeping this festival they should each follow their own custom, H. Eccl. lib.
7. c. 19. p. 734.
but by no means break the peace and communion that was between them; for they
reckoned it (says he) a very foolish and unreasonable thing, that they should
fall out for a few rites and customs, who agreed in the main Principles of
Religion.

The Christians of those times had too deeply imbibed that precept of our
Savior, love one another, as I have loved you, to fall out about every nice
and trifling circumstance; no, when highliest provoked and affronted they could
forbear and forgive their enemies, much more their brethren, and were not like
the waspish Philosophers amongst the Heathens, who were ready to fall foul upon
one another for every petty and inconsiderable difference of opinion that was
amongst them. So Origin tells Celsus, Lib. 5. p. 273.
Both amongst your Philosophers and Physicians (say he) there are Sects that
have perpetual feuds and quarrels with each other, whereas we who have
entertained the Laws of the blessed Jesus, and have learnt both to speak and to
do accordding to his doctrine, bless them that revile us, being persecuted, we
suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; nor do we speak dire and dreadful things
against those that differ from us in opinion, and do not presently embrace
those things, which we have entertained: But as much as in us lies we leave
nothing unattempted that may persuade them to change for the better, and to
give up themselves only to the service of the great Creator, and to do all
things as those that must give an account of their actions. In short,
Christians were careful not to offend either God or men, but to keep and
maintain peace with both; thence that excellent saying of Ephraem Syrus the
famous Deacon of Edessae when he came to die; Vit. Ephraem Syrper Gregor. Nyss.
tom. 2. p. 1033.
In my whole life (said he) I never reproached my Lord and Master, nor suffered
any foolish talk to come out of my lips, nor did I ever curse or revile any
man, or maintain the least difference or controversy with any Christian in all
my life.

CHAP. IV.
Of their Obedience and Subjection to Civil Government.
Magistracy the great hand of public peace. This highly secured by
Christianity. The Laws of Christ that way express and positive. Made good in
his own practice, and the practice of his Apostles. The same spirit in
succeeding Ages, manifested out of Justin Martyr, Polycarp, Tertullian and
Origin. Praying for Rulers and Emperors a solemn part of their public
worship. Their ready payment of all Customs and Tributes, and their
faithfulness in doing it. Christians such, even under the heaviest oppressions
and persecutions, and that when they had power to have righted and revenged
themselves. An excellent passage in Tertullian to that purpose. The temper of
the Christian Soldiers in Julian's Army. The famous Story of Mauricius, and
the Thebaean Legion under Maximinianus reported at large out of Eucherius
Lugdunensis. The injustice of the charge brought against them by the Heathens,
of being enemies to Civil Government. Accused of Treason. Of their refusing to
swear by the Emperors genius. Their denying to sacrifice for the Emperors
safety, and why they did so. Their refusing to own the Emperors for gods, and
why. Their not observing the solemn Festivals of the Emperors, and the reasons
of it. Accused of Sedition and holding unlawful Combinations. An account of the
Collegia and Societies in the Roman Empire. Christianity forbidden upon that
account. The Christian Assemblies no unlawful Conventions. A vast difference
between them and the unlawful factions forbidden by the Roman Laws. Their
confident challenging their enemies to make good one charge of disturbance or
rebellion against them. Their Laws and principles quite contrary. The Heathens
them selves guilty of rebellions and factions, not the Christians. The
Testimony given them by Julian the Emperor. A reflection upon the Church of
Rome for corrupting the doctrine and practice of Christianity in this affair.
Their principles and policies in this matter. Bellarmin's position, that it is
lawful to depose infidel and heretical Princes, and that the Primitive
Christians did it not to Nero, Dioclesian, etc. only because they wanted power,
censured and refuted. This contrary to the avowed principles of honest Heathens.

HOw much Christian Religion transcribed into the lives of its professors
contributes to the happiness of men not only in their single and private
capacities, but as to the public welfare of humane societies, and to the
common interests and conveniences of mankind, we have already discovered in
several instances; now because Magistracy and Civil Government is the great
support and instrument of external peace and happiness, we shall in the last
place consider how eminent the first Christians were for their Submission and
Subjection to Civil Government. And certainly there is scarce any particular
instance wherein Primitive Christianity did more triumph in the world, than in
their exemplary obedience to the Powers and Magistrates, under which they
lived; honoring their persons, revering their power, paying their tribute,
obeying their Laws, where they were not evidently contrary to the Laws of
Christ, and where they were, submitting to the most cruel penalties they laid
upon them with the greatest calmness and serenity of soul. The truth is, one
great design of the Christian Law is to secure the interests of civil
Authority; our Savior has expressly taught us, that we are to give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, as well as unto God the things that are Gods: And
his Apostles spoke as plainly as words could speak it; Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers; for there is no power but of God, the powers that
be are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation:
Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake; for, for this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods
Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing: Render therefore to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, honor to whom honor: Where we may take notice both of the strictness
and universality of the charge, and (what is mainly material to observe) this
charge given the Romans at that time when Nero was their Emperor, who was not
only an Heathen Magistrate, but the first persecutor of Christians, a man so
prodigiously brutish and tyrannical, that the world scarce ever brought forth
such another monster, Themist. Orat. 5. p. 134.
(...), as the Orator truly styles him, a beast in the shape of a man. The same
Apostle amongst other directions given to Titus for the discharge of his
office, bids him put the people in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, and to obey Magistrates. S. Peter delivers the same doctrine to a
tittle, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governers as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well; for so is the will of God, that with well-doing you may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men.

Such are the commands; and such was the practice of Christ and his Apostles.
When a tax was demanded of him, though he was the Son of God, he refused not to
pay tribute unto Caesar, even when it put him to the expense and charges of a
miracle: When arraigned for his life at Pilat's bar, he freely owned his
authority, and cheerfully submitted to that wicked and unrighteous sentence,
though able to command more than twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue and
deliverance. The Apostles though unjustly scourged before the Council, yet made
no tart reflections, but went away rejoicing. When Herod had cut off S. James
his head, and consigned Peter in prison to the same butchery and execution,
what arms did the Christians use, rise up and put him out of the throne,
scatter libels, raise tumults or factions in the City? Oh no, the Churches
weapons were prayers and tears, their only refuge in those evil times.

Nor did this excellent spirit die with the Apostles; we find the same temper
ruling in the succeeding Ages of Christianity: The Christians (says one of the
Ancients) obey the Laws that are made, J. Mart. Epist. ad Diogn. p. 497.
and by the exactness of their lives go beyond that accuracy which the Law
requires of them; they love all men, though all men study to afflict and
persecute them. Are there any (as Athenagoras concludes his address to the
Emperors) more devoted to you than we? Leg. pro Christian. p. 39.
who pray for the happiness of your Government, that according to right and
equity the Son may succeed his Father in the Empire, that your dominions may be
enlarged, and that all things may prosper that you take in hand; and this we
do, as that which turns both to yours and our own advantage, that so under you
leading a quiet and peaceable life, we may chearfuly obey all those commands
which you lay upon us. Apud Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 36. p. 108.
S. Polycarp a little before his Martyrdom wrote to the Christians at Philippi,
earnestly exhorting them all to obey their Rulers, and to exercise all patience
and long-suffering toward them; and when he stood before the Proconsul, Ibid.
lib. 4. c. 15. p. 132.
he told him, that this was the great Law of Christianity, that we are
commanded by God to give all due honor and obedience to Princes and
Potentates, such as is not prejudicial to us i.e. (for so doubtless he means)
such as is not contrary to the principles of our Religion. Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
Tertullian tells us 'twas a solemn part of the Church Service in his time to
pray for the happiness and prosperity of the Princes under whom they lived: We
pray (says he) for the Emperors, for the Grandees and Ministers of State, for
the prosperity of the Age, for the quietness of affairs, for the continuance of
their lives and Government; that God would give them a long life, a secure
reign, and undisturbed house, powerful Armies, faithful Senators, honest
Subjects, a quiet people, and indeed whatever they can wish for, either as men
or Emperors. They that think (says he) that we are not sollicitous about the
safety of Princes, Ibid. c. 31.
let them look into the commands of God recorded in our Scriptures, which we
freely expose to the view of all; there they will find that we are enjoined to
pray for the happiness of our very enemies and persecutors; and who are so much
such as they? And yet we are plainly and particularly commanded to pray for
Kings, for Princes, and all that are in authority, that the state of things may
be quiet and peaceable; a Christian being an enemy to no man, is much less so
to his Prince. Lib 8. p. 426.
Thus when Celsus seemed to object as if the Christians refused to help the
Emperors in their wars, Origin answers that they did really assist and help
him, and that rather with divine than humane weapons, according to the command
of the Apostle, I exhort that first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that
are in authority: And he tells him that the more eminent any man is for piety
and Religion, he will be able to afford greater assistance to his Prince, than
a great many armed Soldiers, that stand ready to fight for him, and to destroy
his enemies.

For all customs and tributes none ever paid them more freely than they. For
your taxes and tributes (says Justin Martyr to the Emperors) we are above all
other men every where ready to bring them in to your Collectors and Officers,
Apol. 2. p. 64.
being taught so to do by our great Master, who bad those that asked the
question whether they might pay tribute unto Caesar, To give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods: For which
reason we worship none but God; and as for you in all other things we
cheerfully serve you, acknowledging you to be Emperors and Governors of men,
and praying, that together with your Imperial Power you may have a wise and
discerning judgment and understanding. If the Emperor command me to pay
tribute (says another of their Apologists) I am ready to do it; Tatian. Orat.
contr. Graec. p. 144.
if my Lord command me to serve and obey him, I confess my obligation to it:
Man is to be served with that respect that is due to man: but God only who is
invisible and incomprehensible is to be religiously feared and honored: if
commanded to deny him, I must dis-obey, and die rather than be found perfidions
and ungrateful to him. Apol. c. 42. p 34.
So Tertullian tells them, that although they refused to pay the taxes rated
upon them for maintenance of the Heathen-temples, yet for all other tributes
they had cause to give the Christians thanks for so faithfully paying what was
due, it being their principle to abstain from defrauding of others; insomuch,
that should they examine their accounts how much of the assessments was lost by
the fraud and couzenage of them of their own party, they would easily find that
the Christians denial to pay that one tax was abundantly compensated and made
up in their honest payment of all the rest. The truth is, they were admirably
exact and conscientious as in all their actions, so especially in those that
related to the public, and concerned their duty and obedience to their rulers
and governors.

Nor were they thus only in Prosperous times but under the heaviest
persecutions, as indeed the rod was seldom off their backs: The last mentioned
Apologist bids their Judges go on to butcher them, Cap. 30. p. 27.
and tells them they did but force those Souls out of their Bodies, which were
praying to God for the Emperors happiness, even while their Officers were
doing of it. Ad. Demetrian. p. 202.
And Cyprian tells the Proconsul, that as badly as they were used, yet they
ceased not to pray for the overthrow and expulsion of the common enemies, for
seasonable showers, and either for the removing or mitigating public evils,
begging of God day and night with the greatest instance and importunity for the
peace and safety of their persecutors, endeavoring to pacify and propitiate
God who was angry with the iniquities of the age. Nor were they thus kind and
good natured, thus submissive and patient for want of power, and because they
knew not how to help it: Apol. c. 37. p. 30.
Tertullian answers in this case, that if they thought it lawful to return evil
for evil, they could in one night with a few firebrands plentifully revenge
themselves; that they were no small and inconsiderable party, and that they
needed not betake themselves to the little arts of skulking revenges, being
able to appear in the capacity of open enemies; that though but of yesterdays
standing, yet they had filled all places, all Offices of the Empire; and what
wars were not they able to manage, who could so willingly give up themselves to
be slain? did not the law of Christianity oblige them to be killed rather than
to kill; nay, that they need not take up arms and rebel, for their party was so
numerous, that should they but agree together to leave the Roman Empire, and to
go into some remote corner of the world, the loss of so many members would
utterly ruin it, and they would stand amazed and affrighted at that solitude
and desolation that would ensue upon it, and have more enemies than loyal
Subjects left amongst them; whereas now they had the fewer enemies for having
so many Christians.

The Christians then opposed not their enemies with the points of their swords,
but with solid Arguments, and mild entreaties. Nag. invect. 1. in Julian. p. 94.
Thus when Julian the Emperor urged his army, which was almost wholly made up
of Christians, to wicked counsels, and the practices of idolatry, they
withstood him only with prayers and tears, accounting this (says my Author) to
be the only remedy against persecution. So far were they from resisting or
rebelling, that they could quietly dye at the Emperors command, even when they
had power lying at their foot. I cannot in this place omit the memorable
instance of the Thebaean Legion, being so exceedingly apposite and pertinent to
my purpose, Martyr. SS. Mauricii and socior. ab Eucher. Lugdunens. conscript.
apud Suriumad diem 22. Sept. p. 220 etc.
and so remarkable as no age can furnish out such another instance; I shall set
down the story entirely out of the Author himself, the account of their
martyrdom written by Eucherius Bishop of Lions, who assures us he received the
relation from very credible hands; Edit. Colon. 1618.
and it is thus:

Maximianus Caesar (whom Dioclesian had lately taken to be his Colleague in the
Empire) a bad man, and a bitter persecutor of the Christians, was sent into
France to suppress a mutiny and rebellion risen there; to strengthen his Army
there was added to it a band of Christians called the Thebaean Legion,
consisting according to the manner of the Romans of Six thousand six hundred
sixty six faithful, expert and resolute Soldiers. Coming to Octodurus (a place
in Savoy) and being ready to offer sacrifice to the gods, he causes his Army to
come together, and commands them under a great penalty to swear by the Altars
of their gods, that they would unanimously fight against their enemies, and
persecute the Christians as enemies to the gods; which the Thebaean Legion no
sooner understood, but they presently withdrew to Agaunum (a place eight miles
off, called at this day S. Mauritzs, from Mauricius the Commander of the
Legion; a place equally pleasant and strong, being encompassed about with
craggy and inaccessible rocks) to avoid if it might be the wicked and
sacrilegious command, and to refresh themselves, tired with so long a march;
but the Emperor taking notice of the Army as they came to swear, quickly
missed the Legion, and being angry, sent Officers to them to require them
forthwith to do it; who enquiring what it was that they were commanded to do,
were told by the messengers, that all the Soldiers had offered sacrifices, and
had taken the forementioned oath, and that Caesar commanded them to return
presently and do the like: To whom the heads of the Legion mildly answered,
That for this reason they left Octodurus, because they had heard they should be
forced to sacrifice, that being Christians, and that they might not be defiled
with the Altars of Devils, they thought themselves obliged to worship the
living God, and to keep that Religion which they had entertained in the East,
to the last hour of their life: that as they were a Legion they were ready to
any service of the war; but to return to him to commit sacrilege as he
commanded, they could not yield.

With this Answer the messengers returned, and told the Emperor, that they
were resolved not to obey his Commands, who being transported with anger, began
thus to vent his passion: Do my Soldiers think thus to slight my Royal
Orders, and the holy Rites of my Religion? Had they only despised the Imperial
Majesty it would have called for public vengeance, but together with the
contempt of me, an affront is offered to Heaven, and the Roman Religion is as
much despised as I am. Let the obstinate Soldiers know, that I am not only
able to vindicate my self, but to revenge the quarrel of my gods. Let my
faithful Servants make haste, and dispatch every tenth man according as the
fatal lot shall fall upon him: By this equal death let those whose lot it shall
be to die first, know, how able Maximian is severely to revenge both himself
and his gods. With that the command is given, the Executioners sent, the
Emperors pleasure made known, and every tenth man is put to death; who
cheerfully offered their necks to the Executioners, and the only contention
amongst them was, who should first undergo that glorious death. This done, the
Legion is commanded to return to the rest of the Army. Whereupon Mauritius the
General of the Legion, calling it a little aside, thus bespake them; I
congratulate (most excellent fellow soldiers) your courage and valor, that
for the love of Religion, the command of Caesar has made no impression upon
you; you have seen your fellow soldiers, with minds full of joy, undergoing a
glorious death: how much afraid was I, lest being armed (and how easy is it
for such to do so) you should under a pretense of defending them have
endeavored to hinder their happy funerals: -- See, I am encompassed round with
the bodies of my fellow soldiers, whom the dismal Executioner has torn from my
side; I am besprinkled with the blood of the Saints, my clothes died with the
relics of their sacred blood; and shall I doubt to follow their death, whose
example I so much congratulate and admire? Shall I concern my self to think
what the Emperor commands, who is equally subject to the same law of mortality
with my self? -- I remember we once took this Military Oath, that with the
utmost hazard of our lives we would defend the Commonwealth; this we then
engaged to the Emperors, though no Heavenly Kingdom was promised to us; and if
we could promise this out of devotion to a Military service, what then is to be
done, when Christ promises so much to them that engage with him? Let us
willingly expose our lives to this most precious death; let us show a masculine
courage, and an unviolated faith. Methinks I see those blessed souls standing
before Christ's tribunal, whom the Emperors Officer just now banished out of
their bodies: that is the true glory which will recompense the shortness of this
life with a blessed eternity: Let us by the Messengers unanimously return this
Answer to the Emperor; We acknowledge, Caesar, that we are your Soldiers, and
took up Arms for defense of the Empire; nor did we ever basely betray our
trust, or forsake our station, or deser'd that the brand either of fear or
cowardice should be set upon us; nor should we stick now to obey your Commands,
did not the Laws of Christianity, wherein we have been instructed, forbid us to
worship devils, and to approach the polluted altars of the gods. We understand
you are resolved either to defile us with sacrilegious worship, or to terrify
us with a decimation: Spare any further search concerning us, know we are all
Christians, our bodies we yield subject to your Power, but our souls we reserve
entire for Christ the Author and the Savior of them.

This was no sooner spoken, and universally agreed to by the Legion, but it was
carried to the Emperor, who exasperated with such a generous resolution,
commanded a second decimation, which was immediately executed, and the rest as
before commanded to return to Octodurus; hereupon Exuperius the Ensign catching
up his colors, thus addressed himself to them; You see me, most excellent
fellow soldiers, holding these Ensigns of secular warfare; but these are not
the arms that I call you to, these are not the wars to which I excite your
courage and valor; it is another kind of fighting that we are to choose; they
are not these swords that must make our way into the Heavenly Kingdom; we stand
in need of an undaunted mind, an invincible defense, a maintaining the Faith
which we have given to God, to the very last. -- Let the dismal Executioner go
and carry this message to his bloody Master, and tell him thus: We are, O
Emperor, your Soldiers, but withal (which we freely confess) the Servants of
God; to you we owe military service, to him innocence; from you we have
received wages for our labors, from him we had our very lives and beings: we
cannot herein obey the Emperor, so as to deny God, the author of our lives,
yea and of yours too, whether you will or no. Nor is it, Sir, any despair
(which is always stoutest in greatest straits) that makes us thus resolute
against you; we have, you see, arms, and yet make no resistance, choosing
rather to dye than to overcome, and desirous rather to perish innocent, than to
live rebellious and revengeful: If you have a mind to appoint us to any greater
and severer torments, we are ready for them. Christians we are, and therefore
cannot persecute those that are so. You must needs acknowledge the
unconquerable courage of this Legion; we throw down our arms, your officer will
find our right hands naked, but our breast armed with a true Catholic Faith:
kill us, and trample on us, we undauntedly yield our necks to the Executioners
sword; these things are the more pleasant to us, while setting light by your
sacrilegious attempts, we hasten apace to the Heavenly Crown.

Maximianus being told this, and despairing now to break their constancy,
commands his whole Army to fall upon them and cut them off, which they did
accordingly without any difference of age or person, mangling their bodies, and
then taking the spoils, the Emperor having so appointed, that whoever killed
any of the Legion, should have the spoils of him whom he killed. And thus they
died with their swords in their hands, when they might have preserved their
lives (especially in a place so advantageous) by force of arms, or to be sure
have sold them at the dearest rate. This story I have been willing to set down
the more at large, because so remarkable in all its circumstances, and
containing the most unparalled instance of Christian Piety and submission
(next to that of our blessed Savior) that I think was ever known to the world.
Menol.


This is the account of those Noble Martyrs; Graec. (...). sub lit. (...).
only to prevent mistakes we are to take notice, that there was another
Mauritius Commander of a Legion in the East (mentioned in the Greek Menologies)
who together with seventy of his Soldiers were condemned by, and suffered
under his self same Emperor Maximianus, Apud Sur. ad diem 18 Jul. tom. 4.
for refusing to do sacrifice; their Martyrdom being recorded by Simeon
Metaphrastes; but the account quite different both as to persons and things
from that which is here related.

By what has been said we may see the injustice of that charge which the
Heathens sometimes laid upon the Christians, that they were disturbers of the
Peace, and enemies to Civil Government; an indictment so purely false, and
without any shadow of a real pretense to cover it, that the ingenious Heathen
in Minutius Foelix (though raking up all the calumnies he could find, and
putting the deepest die upon every charge which wit and eloquence could put upon
it, yet) had not the face so much as once to mention it. But however, as
groundless as it was, they were frequently charged with it. Sometimes they were
accused of dis-loyalty and treason, either because they would not swear by the
Emperous Genius, or not sacrifice for his safety, or not worship the Emperors
as Divi, or gods, or not celebrate their festivals in the same way with others.
For the first, their refusing to swear by the Emperors Genius, we have heard
before what Tertullian answers to it, That it was in effect to give divine
honor to devils. To the second, their not sacrificing for the Emperors
safety, the answers, That none sacrificed to so good purpose as they, Apol. c.
30. p. 27.
for that they offered up prayers to the True, Living and Eternal God for the
safety of the Emperors, that God whom the Emperors themselves did above all
others desire should be propitious and favorable to them, as from whom they
knew they derived their government. For the third, their refusing to own the
Emperors for gods, Ibid. c. 33. p. 28 Vid.
he tells them, they could not do it, partly because they would not lie in
saying so, Theopb. Antioch. lib. 1. p. 76.
partly because they durst not by doing it mock and deride the Emperor, nay,
that he himself would not be willing to be styled God, if he remembered that he
was a Man, it being man's interest to yield to God; that the title of Emperor
was great enough, and that he could not be called God, without being denied to
be Emperor; Ibid. c. 30.
that he was therefore great, because less than Heaven; and that if he would
needs be a deity, he must first conquer Heaven, lead God in triumph, set Guards
in Heaven, and impose tribute upon that place. For the last, their not
observing the solemn festivals of the Emperors, Ibid. c. 35. p. 28.
for which they were accounted enemies to the public, they pleaded that their
religion and their conscience could not comply with that vanity, that luxury,
and debauchery, and all manner of excess and wickedness that was committed at
those times; that the public joy was expressed by that which was a public
disgrace, and those things accounted honorable upon the solemn days of
Emperors, which were unfit and uncomely to be done upon any days; and that
there was little reason they should be accused for not observing that, where
looseness of manners (...) accounted loyalty, and the occasion of luxury a part
of Religion.

Otherwhiles they were accused of sedition, and holding unlawful combinations,
which arose upon the account of their religious Assemblies, which their enemies
beheld as societies erected contrary to the Roman Laws. That we may the better
apprehend what these societies were (in the number whereof they reckoned the
Christian meetings) and how condemned by the Roman Laws, we are to know, that
in the infancy of the Roman Commonwealth, ^^ut. in vit. Number. p. 71.
Numa Pompilius, to take away the difference between the Sabines and the
Romans, divided the people into Colleges and little Corporations (answerable
to which are our City-Companies) according to their several trades and
occupations, Goldsmiths, Dyers, Potters, Curriers, etc. which together with the
City increased to a great number; Append. ad Notit. Imper. fol. 197.
(Panciroll out of both Codes gives us an account of thirty six) to these he
assigned their several Halls, times of meeting, and sacred rites, and such
immunities as were most proper for them. But besides these appointed by Law,
several Colleges in imitation of them were erected in most parts of the
Empire, partly for the more convenient dispatch of business, but principally
for the maintenance of mutual love and friendship. All these Societies had
their solemn meetings, and customary feasts, which in time degenerated into
great excess and luxury, Collegiorum coenae immutabiles intendunt annonam. Var.
apud Jac. Goth^fr. in (...). Th. lib. 1^. Tit. 10. l. 20.
insomuch that Verra in his time complained that the excess and prodigality of
their suppers made provisions dear; and much more reason had Apol. c. 39. p. 32.
Tertullian to complain of it in his time. Answerable to these Colleges
amongst the Romans, were the (...) or societies amongst the Grecians, who also
had their stated and common feasts, such were the (...) amongst the Cretians,
the (...) at Lacedaemon, and so in other States of Greece. But these meetings
(those of them especially that were not settled either by the decree of the
Senate, or the constitution of the Prince) partly by reason of their number,
and the great confluence to them, partly by reason of their luxurious feasting,
began to be looked upon by the State with a jealous eye, especially after that
the Commonwealth was turned into a Monarchy, the Emperors beholding them as
fit Nurseries to plant and breed up treasonable and rebellious designs, Vid lib
47. ff. Tit 22. de Colleg. and Corporib.
and therefore frequently forbad them under very severe penalties. Thus Julius
Caesar, who first laid the foundation of the Empire, reduced these Colleges to
the ancient standard, Sueton. in vit. Jul. Caes. c. 42. p. 50. in August. c.
32. p. 155.
putting down all that were supernumerary and illegal; wherein he was also
followed by his Successor Augustus; and the succeeding Emperors very often
put out strict Edicts against them, prohibiting them as dangerous and unlawful
combinations.

Under the notions of these societies, it was, that the Christian Congregations
came to be forbidden; several persons confederated into a combination, and
constantly meeting at a common feast rendering them suspicious to their enemies.
Lib. 10.
Hence Pliny giving the Emperor an account of the Christians, Epist 97.
and especially of their assembling at their solemn feasts of love, tells him,
that they had forborne ever since according to his command, he had published an
Edict to forbid the hetaeriae or societies. And indeed the Christian
Assemblies, whereat they usually had the Lords Supper and their Love Feasts,
looking somewhat like those illegal meetings (especially as beheld with the eye
of an enemy) it was the less wonder, if the Heathens accused them of hatching
treason, and the Magistrates proceeded against them as contemners and violaters
of the Law.

But to this the Christians answered, that their meetings could not be
accounted amongst the unlawful factions, Tertull. Apol. c. 38. p. 30.
having nothing common with them; that indeed the wisdom and providence of the
State had justly prohibited such factions to prevent seditions, which might
thence easily overrun and disquiet all Councils, Courts, pleadings, and all
meetings whatsoever. But no such thing could be suspected of the Christian
Assemblies, who were frozen as to any ambitious designs of honor or dignity,
strangers to nothing more than public affairs, and had renounced all pretenses
to external pomps and pleasures: That if the Christian Assemblies were like
others, Ibid. c. 39. p. 32.
there would be some reason to condemn them under the notion of factions; but
to whose prejudice (say they) did we ever meet together? we are the same when
together, that we are when asunder; the same united, as is every single person,
hurting no man, grieving no man; and therefore that when such honest, good,
pious, and chaste men met together, it was rather to be called a Council than a
Faction. To which Origin adds, Contr. Cells. lib. 1. p. 5.
That seeing in all their meetings they sought nothing but truth, they could
not be said to conspire against the Laws, seeing they designed nothing but to
get from under the power and tyranny of the devil; who had procured those Laws
only to establish his Empire faster in the world. For elsewhere he bids Celsus
or any of his party show any thing that was seditious amongst the Christians:
Lib. 3. p. 115.
that their Religion arose not at first (as he falsely charged it) out of
sedition, might appear in that their Legislator had so severely forbidden
killing and murder, and that the Christians would never have entertained such
mild Laws, as gave their enemies opportunity to kill them like sheep delivered
to the slaughter without making the least resistance. Adv. Gent. lib. 2. p. 20.
Thus Arnobius confidently challenges the Heathens whether they could reject
Christianity upon the account of its raising wars, tumults, and seditions in
the world. No, those were things which they might find nearer home: Ad Scap c.
2. p. 69.
You defame us (says Tertullian) with treason against the Emperor, and yet
never could any Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians [persons that had mutinied and
rebelled against the Emperours] be found amongst the Christians; they are those
that swear by the Emperors genii, that have offered sacrifices for their
safety, that have often condemned Christians, these are the men that are found
traitors to the Emperors: A Christian is no man's enemy, much less his
Princes; knowing him to be constituted by God, he cannot but love, revere, and
honor him, and desire that he and the whole Roman Empire may be safe, as long
as the world lasts. We worship the Emperor as much as is either lawful or
expedient, as one that is next to God; we sacrifice for his safety, but it is to
his and our God; and so as he has commanded, only by holy prayer; for the great
God needs no blood or sweet perfumes, these are the banquets and repast of
devils, which we do not only reject, but expel at every turn. But to say more
concerning this, were to light a candle to the Sun. Julian the Emperor though
no good friend to Christians, (...). Julian. Fragm. Epist. Oper. p. 1. p. 528.
yet thus far does them right, that if they see any one mutinying against his
Prince, they presently punish him with great severities.

And here we may with just reason reflect upon the iniquity of the Church of
Rome, which in this instance of Religion has so abominably debauched the purity
and simplicity of the Christian faith: For they not only exempt the Clergy
where they can, from the authority and judgment of the secular powers, whereby
horrible enormities do arise, but generally teach, that a Prince once
excommunicate, his Subjects are absolved from all fealty and allegiance, and he
may with impunity be deposed or made away. How shall such a Prince be thundered
against with curses and deprivations, every bold and treacherous Priest be
authorized to brand his sacred person with the odious names of Infidel,
Heretic and Apostate, and be Apostolically licensed to slander and belibel
him, and furnished with Commissions to free his Subjects from their duty and
allegiance, and to allure them to take up arms against him? And if these
courses fail, and men still continue loyal, they have disciples ready by secret
or sudden arts to send him out of the world. And if any man's conscience be so
nice as to boggle at it, his scruples shall be removed, at worst it shall pass
for a venial crime, and the Pope perhaps (with the help of a limitation that it
be done for the interest of the Catholic cause) by his omnipotence shall
create it meritorious.

Cardinal Bellarmine (whose wit and learning were employed to uphold a
tottering cause) maintains it stiffly, De Romans Pontif. lib. 5. c. 7. Col. 891.
and in express terms, that if a King be an Heretic or an Infidel (and we know
what they mean by that, nay he particularly names the reformed Princes of
England amongst his instances) and seeks to draw his Dominions unto his Sect;
it is not only lawful, but necessary to deprive him of his Kingdom. And
although he knew that the whole course of antiquity would fly in the face of so
bold an assertion, yet he goes on to assert, that the reason why the Primitive
Christians did not attempt this upon Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate and
the like, was not out of conscience, or that they boggled out of a sense of
duty, but because they wanted means and power to effect it. A bold piece of
falsehood this, and how contrary to the plain and positive Laws of Christ, to
the meek and primitive spirit of the Gospel! But by the Cardinals leave it
could not be for want of power, for if, as Seneca observes, he may be Master of
any man's life that undervalues his own, Epist. 4. page 9.
it was then as easy for a Christian to have slain Nero or Dioclesian, as it
was of later times for Gerard to pistol the Prince of Orange, or Ravillac to
stab the King of France. Nay, take one of his own instances, Julian the
Apostate, a Prince bad enough, and that left no method unattempted to seduce
his Subjects to Paganism and Idolatry, yet though the greatest part of his Army
were Christians, they never so much as whispered a treasonable design against
him, using no other arms (as we noted out of Nazianzen) but prayers and tears.
Had S. Paul been of their mind, he would have told the Christian Romans quite
another story, and instead of bidding them be subject to Nero not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake, would have instructed them to take all
opportunities to have murdered or deposed him. But I shall not reckon up the
villainies they have been guilty of in this kind, nor pursue the odious and
pernicious consequences of their doctrine and practice; thus much I could not
but take notice of, being so immediately opposite to the whole tenor of the
Gospel, and so great a scandal to Christianity. And I verily believe that had
the Primitive Christians been no better Subjects, than their Emperors were
Princes, had they practiced on them those bloody artifices which have been
common amongst those that call themselves the only Catholics, that barbarous
dealing would have been a greater curb to the flourishing of the Gospel, than
all the ten persecutions. For how could an impartial Heathen ever have believed
their doctrine to have been of God, had their actions been so contrary to all
principles of natural Divinity. Sure I am Pagan Rome was in this case more
Orthodox, and their Pontifices far better Doctors of Divinity: Lib. 7. de
offic. Procons. in l. 1. ff. ad leg. Jul. maj.
Their Lex Julia (as Vlpian their great Lawyer tells us) allotted the same
penalty to sacrilege and treason; placing the one the very next step to the
other; thereby teaching us that they looked upon treason against the Prince as
an affront next to that which was immediately done against the Majesty of
Heaven. And Marcellus the great Statesman in Tacitus lays it down for a Maxim,
that Subjects may wish for good Princes, but ought to bear with any. And shame
it is that any should call themselves Christians, and yet be found worse than
they, their principles and practices more opposite to the known Laws of God and
nature, Histor. lib. 4. c. 8. p. 489.
more destructive to the peace and welfare of mankind.

CHAP. V.
Of their Penance, and the Discipline of the Ancient Church.
This why last treated of. The Church as a Society founded by Christ has its
distinct Laws and Privileges. What the usual offenses that came under the
Churches discipline. All immorality open, or confessed. Lapsing into Idolatry
the great sin of those times. How many ways usually committed. The Traditores
who, what their crime. What penalties inflicted upon delinquent persons.
Delivering over to Satan, what: this extraordinary coercive power why vested in
the Church. The common and standing penalty by Excommunication. This practiced
amongst the ancient Gauls: an account of it out of Caesar. In use amongst the
Jews. Thence derived to the Christians. This punishment how expressed by
Church-writers: Managed according to the nature of the fault. The rigor of it
sometimes mitigated. Delinquent Clergymen degraded, and never admitted but to
Lay-communion; instances of it. An account of the rise of Novatianism, and the
severity of its principles; styled Cathari; condemned by the Synod at Rome.
Offenders in what manner dealt with. The Procedure of the action described by
Tertullian. Penitents how behaving themselves during their suspension. The
greatest not spared; the case of Philippus and Theodosius. This severity why
used. Penances called satisfactions, and why. The use of the word,
satisfaction, in the ancient Fathers. Penitents how absolved. After what time.
In the power of Bishops to extend or shorten these penitentiary humiliations.
Four particular cases observed wherein the time of penance might be shortened.
In what sense communion is denied by some ancient Canons to penitents at the
hour of death. This discipline administered primarily by Bishops. By his leave
Presbyters and (in necessity) Deacons might absolve. The public penitentiary
when and why instituted; when and why laid aside. Penitents taken into
communion by Martyrs and Confessors. This power abused to excess. Cyprian's
complaint of the excessive numbers of Libells of peace granted by the Martyrs
to the lapsed, without the knowledge of the Bishop. The form of these Pacifick
Libells exemplified out of Cyprian; other sorts of Libells. The Libellatici
who. Thurificati. Several sorts of Libellatici. The Libellatici properly so
called. Their manner of address to the Heathen Magistrate to procure their
exemption from sacrificing. That they did not privately deny Christ, proved
against Baronius. The piety and purity of the Primitive Church matter of just
admiration.

HAving traveled through the several stages of the subject I had undertaken; I
should here have ended my journey, but that there one thing remains, which was
not properly reducible under any particular head, being of a general relation
to the whole; and that is to consider what Discipline was used toward
offenders in the ancient Church; only premising this, that the Christian Church
being founded and established by Christ as a Society and Corporation distinct
from that of the Commonwealth, is by the very nature of its constitution
(besides what positive ground and warrant there may be for it in Scripture)
invested with an inherent power (besides what is borrowed from the Civil
Magistrate) of censuring and punishing its members that offend against the Laws
of it, and this in order to the maintaining its peace and purity. For without
such a fundamental power as this, it is impossible that as a Society it should
be able to subsist, the very nature of a community necessarily implying such a
right inherent in it. Now for the better understanding what this power was, and
how exercised in the first Ages of the Church, we shall consider these four
things: What were the usual crimes that came under the discipline of the
ancient Church; what penalties were inflicted upon delinquent persons; in what
manner offenders were dealt with; and by whom this discipline was administered.

First, What the usual crimes and offenses were which came under the discipline
of the ancient Church; in the general they were any offenses against the
Christian Law, any vice or immorality that was either public in it self, or
made known and made good to the Church. For the holy and good Christians of
those times were infinitely careful to keep the honor of their Religion
unspotted, to stifle every sin in its birth, and by bringing offenders to
public shame and penalty to keep them from propagating the malignant influence
of a bad example. For this reason they watched over one another, told them
privately of their faults and failures, and when that would not do, brought
them before the cognizance of the Church. It Is needless to reckon up particular
crimes, when none were spared. Only because in those days by reason of the
violent heats of persecution the great temptation which the weaker and more
unsettled Christians were exposed to, was to deny their profession, and to
offer sacrifice to the Heathen-gods, therefore lapsing into Idolatry was the
most common sin that came before them, and of this they had very frequent
instances, it being that which for some Ages mainly exercised the Discipline of
the Church. This sin of Idolatry or denying Christ in those times was usually
committed these three ways: Sometimes by exposing the Scriptures to the rage
and malice of their enemies, which was accounted a virtual renouncing
Christianity: This was especially remarkable under the Diocletian persecution
in the African Churches. For Diocletian had put forth an Edict that Christians
should deliver up their Scriptures and the Writings of the Church to be burnt.
This command was prosecuted with great rigor and fierceness, and many
Christians to avoid the storm delivered up their Bibles to the scorn and fury
of their enemies. Hence they were styled Traditores (of whom there is frequent
mention in Optatus and S. Augustine) with whom the Orthodox refusing to join
after the persecution was over, the difference broke out into Schism and
faction, and gave birth to that unhappy Sect of the Donatists which so much
exercised the Christian Church. Otherwhiles Christians became guilty of
Idolatry by actual sacrificing, or worshipping Idols; these were called
Thurificati, from their burning incense upon the altars of the Heathen Deities,
and were the grossest and vilest sort of Idolaters. Others again fell into this
sin by basely corrupting the Heathen Magistrate, and purchasing a warrant of
security from him to exempt them from the penalty of the Law, and the necessity
of sacrificing and denying Christ: These were called Libellatici, of whom we
shall speak more afterward.

Secondly, What penalties and punishments were inflicted upon delinquent
persons, and they could be no other than such as were agreeable to the nature
and constitution of the Church, which as it transacts only in spiritual
matters, so it could inflict no other than spiritual censures and
chastisements. It Is true indeed that in the first Age especially, the Apostles
had a power to inflict bodily punishments upon offenders, which they sometimes
made use of upon great occasions, as S. Peter did toward Ananias and Saphira,
striking them dead upon the place for their notorious couzenage and gross
hypocrisy: And S. Paul punished Elymas with blindness for his perverse and
malicious opposition of the Gospel; and this doubtless he primarily intends by
his delivering over persons unto Satan, for no sooner were they excommunicated
and cut off from the body of the faithful, but Satan as the common Sergeant and
Jailer seized upon them, and either by actual possessing, or some other sign
upon their bodies made it appear that they were delivered over into his power.
This could not but strike a mighty terror into men, and make them stand in awe
of the censures of the Church; and questionless the main design of the divine
providence in affording this extraordinary gift was to supply the defect of
civil and coercive power, of which the Church was then wholly destitute, and
therefore needed some more than ordinary assistance especially at its first
constitution, some visible and sensible punishments to keep its sentence and
determinations from being slighted by bold and contumacious offenders. How
long this miraculous power lasted in the Church, I know not, or whether at all
beyond the Apostles age. The common and standing penalty they made use of was
Excommunication or suspension from communion with the Church; the cutting off
and casting out an offending person as a rotten and infected member, till by
repentance and wholesome discipline he was cured and restored, and then he was
readmitted into Church-society, and to a participation of the ordinances and
privileges of Christianity.

This way of punishing by excommunication was not originally instituted by our
Lord or his Apostles, but had been anciently practiced both amongst Jews and
Gentiles. 'Twas commonly practiced by the Druids (as Caesar who lived amongst
them informs us) who, De Bell. Gall. lib. 6. p. 135.
when any of the people became irregular and disorderly, presently suspended
them from their sacrifices. And the persons thus suspended were accounted in
the number of the most impious and exercrable persons: All men stood off from
them, shunned their company and converse as an infection and a plague: they had
no benefit of Law, nor any honor or respect shown to them; and of all
punishments this they accounted most extreme and severe. So far he; giving an
account of this Discipline amongst the ancient Gauls. In the Jewish Church
nothing was more familiar; their three famous degrees of Excommunication (...)
Niddui, (...) Cherem, (...) Shammatha, are so commonly known, that 'twere
impertinent to insist upon them. From the usage of the Jewish it was amongst
other rites adopted into the Christian Church, practiced by the Apostles, and
the Churches founded by them (whereof we have instances in the New Testament)
but brought to greater perfection in succeeding times. It Is variously expressed
by the ancient Writers, though much to the same purpose. Such persons are said
Abstineri, to be kept back, a word much used by Cyprian, and the Synod of
Illiberis; (...) to be separated, or be separated from the body of Christ, as
S. Augustine often expresses it, (...), to be wholly cut off from Communion, Can.
28.
as it is in the Apostolic Canons. Sometimes (...), Can. 28.
as the Laodicean Synod calls it, to be thrown out of the Church; to be
anathematized, and without the Communion and pale of the Church, Epist. ad
Armen. Episc. praefix. Conc. Gaugr.
as the Fathers of the Council of Gaugra have it.

This suspension and the penance that accompanied it was greater or less,
longer or shorter according to the nature of the crime, sometimes two, three,
ten, fifteen, twenty or thirty years, and sometimes for the whole life; nay, in
some cases it was not taken off at death, but persons were left to the judgment
of God, without any testimony of their reconciliation to the Church. Though
herein the severity was mitigated, not only by private Bishops, but by the
great Council of Nice, which ordained that penitent persons should not be
denied the Communion at the hour of death: of all which cases, or the most
material of them, we have in the foregoing discourse produced particular
instances in their proper places. If the person offending happened to be in
Orders, he forfeited his Ministry; and though upon his repentance he was
restored to Communion, yet it was only as a lay-person, never recovering the
honor and dignity of his office. Thus Cornelius Bishop of Rome giving Fabius
of Antioch an account of the clancular and Schismatical Ordination of Novatian,
Apud Eusebius. H. Ecc. lib 6. c. 43. p. 243.
tells him, that one of the Bishops that ordained him returned after to the
Church, with tears bewailing his offense, whom at the instance of the people he
received unto Lay-communion. The same Cyprian writing about this very case
relates of Trophimus (who was either the very Bishop mentioned by Cornelius,
Epist* 52. p. 69.
or one of his Colleagues) that returning to the Church with great
demonstrations of repentance, he was readmitted, but no otherwise than in the
capacity of a Layman: Epist. 68. p. 114.
and speaking elsewhere of Basilides his repentance, he tells us he had no
thoughts of retaining his Bishopric, Epist. Can. ad Amphil. Can. 3. p. 22. vid
Zonar. and Balsam. in Can. 10. Conc. Nicen.
making account he was very well dealt with, if upon his repentance he might
but communicate as a Laick, and be received amongst the number of the Faithful.
This S. Basil tells us was an ancient Canon and practice of the Church, and
accordingly ordains, that a Deacon guilty of fornication should be deposed from
his office, and being thrust down into the rank of the Laity, should in that
quality be admitted to Communion.

Indeed they strove by all ways imaginable to discourage sin, never thinking
the curb strong enough, so they might but keep persons within the bounds of
order and regularity; insomuch that by some the string was stretched too far,
and all pardon denied to them that had sinned. This uncomfortable doctrine was
if not first coined, yet mainly vended by the Novatian party. For Novatus S.
Cyprians Presbyter being suspended by him for his vile enormities fled over to
Rome, and there joined himself to Novatian a Presbyter of that Church (these
two names are frequently confounded by the Greek Writers) who ambitiously
sought to make himself Bishop, and to thrust out Cornelius newly elected into
that See; Eusebius. ubi supr. p. 242. Epiphan. Haeres. 59. contr. Catharos, p. 214.
but not being able to compass his design, between them they started this
amongst other heretical opinions, that the lapsed who through fear of suffering
had fallen in the time of persecution were not to be admitted to repentance,
and that though they should never so often confess their sins, and never so
sincerely forsake them, yet there was no hope of salvation for them, at
leastwise (for so I incline to understand them) that it was not in the power
of the Church to absolve or give them any hopes of pardon, leaving them to the
judgment of God; styling themselves (and not only as Balsamon affirms, In Can.
8. Conc. Nicen.
ironically styled by others) by the name of Cathari, the pure and undefiled
party. But they were herein presently condemned by a Synod of sixty Bishops,
and more than as many Presbyters and Deacons gathered at Rome (and the Decree
consented to and published by the rest of the Bishops in their several
Provinces) concluding that Novatus and his party, and all that had subscribed
to his most inhumane and merciless Opinion, should be cast out of the Church;
and that the brethren who in that sad calamity had fallen from their
profession, should be healed and restored by the arts and methods of
repentance. Which brings us to consider, (...)

Thirdly, How and in what manner offenders were dealt with, both as to their
suspension and penance, and as to their absolution. This affair was usually
managed after this order; At their public assemblies (as we find in
Tertullian) amongst other parts of their holy exercises, Apol. c. 39. p. 31.
there were exhortations, reproofs, and a divine censure; for the judgment is
given with great weight, as amongst those that are sure that God beholds what
they do; and this is one of the highest praeludiums and forerunners of the
judgment to come, when the delinquent person is banished from the Communion of
Prayers, Assemblies, and all holy Commerce. By this passage we clearly see,
that the first thing in this solemn action was to make reproofs and
exhortations, thereby to bring the offender to the sight and acknowledgement of
his faults; then the sentence or censure was passed upon him, whereby he was
suspended, not only from the Communion of the Holy Eucharist, but from all holy
commerce in any (especially public) duty of religion. We cannot imagine, that
in every person that stood under this capacity, a formal sentence was always
denounced against him, it being many times sufficient that the fact he had done
was evident and notorious, as in the case of the lapsed that had offered
sacrifice, for in this case the offender was looked upon as ipso facto
excommunicate, and all religious commerce forborne toward him. It Is true, that
in some cases the Martyrs (as we shall see more anon) finding such lapsed
persons truly penitent did receive them into private Communion, Eusebius. H.
so did those Martyrs Dionysius Alexandrinus speaks of in his Letter to Fabius
Bishop of Antioch, Eccl. lib. 6. c. 42. p. 241.
they took the penitents that had fallen into idolatry into their company, and
Communicated with them both at Prayers and Meals; but to public Communion they
were never admitted till they had exactly fulfilled the discipline of the
Church, which principally consisted in many severe acts of repentance and
mortification, more or less according to the nature of the offense.

During this space of penance they appeared in all the formalities of sorrow
and mourning, Tert. de poenitent. c. 9. p. 127.
in a sordid and squalid habit, Vid. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 28. p. 197.
with a sad countenance, and a head hung down, with tears in their eyes,
standing without at the Church doors, (for they were not suffered to enter in)
falling down upon their knees to the Ministers as they went in, and begging the
prayers of all good Christians for themselves, with all the expressions and
demonstrations of a sorrowful and dejected mind; reckoning the lower they lay
in repentance, the higher it would exalt them; the more sordid they appeared,
the more they should be cleansed and purified; the less they spared themselves,
the more God would spare them: at these times also they made open confession of
their faults, this being accounted the very spring of repentance, and without
which they concluded it could not be real, Ibid.
Out of confession (says Tertullian) is born repentance, and by repentance God
is pacified; and therefore without this neither riches nor honor would procure
any admission into the Church. Thus Eusebius reports, Ibid. lib. 6. c. 34. p.
232.
that when Philippus the Emperor would have gone in with the rest of the
Christians upon Easter-eve to have partaked of the prayers of the Church, the
Bishop of the place would by no means suffer it, unless he first made
confession of his sins, and passed through the order of the Penitents, being
guilty of very great and enormous sins; which it is said he very willingly
submitted to, testifying by his actions his real and religious fear of the
Divine Majesty. This story, though as to the main of it, it might be true, yet
as fastened upon Philip the Emperor, I have formerly showed it to be false,
and that it is rather meant of one Philippus who was Governor in Egypt, and
professed himself a Christian; but however this was, it is certain that a person
as great as he, Theodosius the Great, for his bloody and barbarous slaughter of
the Thessalonians was by S. Ambrose Bishop of Millain suspended, brought to
public confession, and forced to undergo a severe course of penance for eight
months together; when after great demonstrations of a hearty sorrow, and
sincere repentance, not more rigidly imposed upon him, than readily and
willingly received by him, after his usual prostrations in the Church (as if
unworthy either to stand or kneel) crying out in the words of David, My soul
cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according to thy word, after having often
torn his hair, beat his forehead, watered his cheeks with tears, and humbly
begged peace and pardon, he was absolved, and restored to Communion with the
Church; of which passage they who would know more, may find the story largely
related by Theodoret. H. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 15.


This severity was used toward offenders, partly to make them more sensible of
their sins, partly to affright and deterr others, but principally to give
satisfaction both to God and his Church concerning the reality and sincerity of
their repentance. Hence it is that these Penances, in the Writings of those
times are so often called satisfactions; for whenever those Fathers use the
word, it is either with respect to men or God; if to men, then the meaning is,
that by these external acts of sorrow and mortification they satisfy the
Church of their repentance, Aug. Euchirid. c. 65. tom. 3.
and make reparation for those offenses and scandals which they had given by
their sins: If to God, then it is taken for the acknowledgement of a man's fault,
and the begging of pardon and remission: De Laps* p. 177.
Thus Cyprian speaking of the state of impenitent sinners, aggravates it by
this, that they do peccare, nec satisfacere, sin, but make no satisfaction,
i.e. (as in the very next words he explains it) they do not peccata deflere,
confess and bewail their sins; Ibid* p. 173*
and before, discoursing about Gods being the only object of tears and sorrow
for sin, which is to be addressed to God and not man, he tells us it is God that
is to be appeased by satisfaction, that he being greatly offended is to be
entreated by a long and full repentance, as being alone able to pardon those
sins that are committed against him. So that the satisfaction which they
reckoned they made to God consisted in seeking to avert his displeasure, and to
regain his forfeited favor by a deep contrition and sorrow for sin, by a real
acknowledgement and forsaking of their faults, and by an humble giving to God
the glory both of his mercy and his justice. Tert. de poenitent. c. 8. p. 126,
127*
Thence confession is called by Tertullian the Counsel or Intendment of
satisfaction: And a little after he describes it thus; Confession (says he) is
that whereby we acknowledge our offense to God, not as if he were ignorant of
it, but inasmuch as by confession satisfaction is forwarded, by confession
repentance is produced, and by repentance God is appeased. The same both he,
Cyprian and others, frequently use in the same sense; which I note the rather,
because of that absurd and impious doctrine, so current amongst the Papists,
and which they pretend to derive from these very Fathers, that by works of
penance compensation is made to God for the debt of punishment that was
contracted, whereby at least the temporal penalties due to sin are
meritoriously expiated and done away. But this besides that it is flatly
repugnant to the doctrine of antiquity, how much it is derogatory to the honor
of divine grace, and the infinite satisfaction of the Son of God, I shall not
now stand to dispute. To return therefore; This term of penance was usually
exacted with great rigor, and seldom dispensed with, no indulgence or
admission being granted till the full time was completed. Therefore Cyprian
smartly chides with some Presbyters who had taken upon them to absolve the
lapsed before their time, Epist. 9. p. 21.
and that whereas in lesser offenses men were obliged to the just time of
penance, and to observe the order of discipline, they in a crime of so heinous
a nature had hand over head admitted them to Communion before they had gone
through their penance and confession, and fulfilled the regular customs and
orders of the Church.

The time of penance being ended, they addressed themselves to the Governors
of the Church for Absolution, Cypr. Epist. 11. p. 24.
hereupon their repentance was taken into examination, and being found to be
sincere and real, they were openly readmitted into the Church by the
imposition of the hands of the Clergy, the party to be absolved kneeling down
between the knees of the Bishop, or in his absence of the Presbyter, who laying
his hand upon his head solemnly blessed and absolved him, whence doubtless
sprang that absurd and senceless calumny which the Heathens laid upon the
Christians, that they were wont Sacerdotis colere genitalia; so forward were
they to catch at any reproach which the most crooked and malicious invention
could insinuate and suggest: The penitent being absolved, was received with the
universal joy and acclamation of the people, as one returned from the state of
the dead (for such it is plain they accounted them while under a state of guilt,
especially the lapsed, as Cyprian positively affirms them to be) being embraced
by his brethren, Id. Epist. 27. p. 39.
who blessed God for his return, Vid. Epist. 46. p. 60.
and many times wept for the joy of his recovery, who upon his absolution was
now restored to a participation of the Lords Supper, and to all other acts of
Church Communion, which by his crimes he had forfeited, and from which he had
been suspended, till he had given satisfactory evidence of his repentance, and
purpose to persevere under the exact discipline of Christianity. This was the
ordinary way wherein they treated criminals in the Primitive Church; but in
cases of necessity (such as that of danger of death) they did not rigidly exact
the set time of penance, but absolved the person, that so he might dye in the
peace and communion of the Church. The story of Serapion at Alexandria we have
formerly mentioned, Eusebius. H.
who being suddenly surpised with death while he was under the state of
penance, Eccl. lib. 6. c. 44. p. 246.
and not being able to dye till he had received absolution, sent for the
Presbyter to testify his repentance and absolve him; but he being also at that
time sick, sent him a part of the Consecrated elements, which he had by him,
upon the receiving whereof he breathed out his soul with great comfort and
satisfaction that he now died in Communion with the Church.

The truth is, the time of these Penitentiary humiliations often varied
according to the circumstances of the case, it being much in the power of the
Bishops and Governors of the Church to shorten the time, and sooner to absolve
and take them into Communion, the Medicinal virtue of repentance lying not in
the duration, Can. 2. ad Amphil.
but the manner of it, as S. Basil speaks in this very case. A learned man has
observed to my hand four particular cases wherein they were wont to anticipate
the usual time of absolution: Forbes. instruct. Hist.
The first was (what I observed but now) when persons were in danger of death;
Th. lib. 12. c* 7. p. 674.
this was agreed to by Cyprian, Epist. 52. ad Antonian. p. 67.
and the Martyrs, and the Roman Clergy, and the Letters (as he tells us) sent
through the whole World to all the Churches; this also was provided for by the
great Council of Nice, Can. 13.
That as for those that were at the point of death, the ancient and Canonical
rule should be observed still, that when any were at the point of death they
should by no means be deprived of the last and necessary Viaticum, i.e. the
Holy Sacrament, which was their great Symbol of Communion. And here for the
better understanding some passages it may not be unuseful once for all to add
this note, that whereas many of the ancient Canons (of the Illiberine Council
especially) positively deny communion to some sorts of penitents even at the
hour of death, they are not to be understood, as if the Church mercilesly
denied all indulgence and absolution to any penitent at such a time, but only
that it was thought fit to deny them the use of the Eucharist, which was the
great pledge and testimony of their communion with the Church.

The second case was in time of eminent persecution, conceiving it but fit at
such times to dispense with the rigor of the discipline, that so Penitents
being received to the Grace of Christ, and to the communion of the Church,
might be the better armed and enabled to contend earnestly for the Faith. This
was resolved and agreed upon by Cyprian, Epist. 54. p. 76.
and a whole Council of African Bishops, whereof they give an account to
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, that in regard persecution was drawing on, they held
it convenient and necessary, that communion and reconciliation should be
granted to the lapsed, not only to those that were a dying, but even to the
living, that they might not be left naked and unarmed in the time of battle,
but be able to defend themselves with the shield of Christ's body and blood. For
how (say they) shall we teach and persuade them to shed their blood in the
Cause of Christ, if we deny them the benefit of his blood? How shall we make
them fit to drink the cup of martyrdom, unless we first admit them in the
Church to a right of communication to drink of the cup of the blood of Christ?
A third case wherein they relaxed the severity of this discipline was, when
great multitudes were concerned, or such persons as were likely to draw great
numbers after them; in this case they thought it prudent and reasonable to deal
with persons by somewhat milder and gentler methods, lest by holding them to
terms of rigor and austerity, they should provoke them to fly off either to
Heathens or to Heretics. This course Cyprian tells us he took, he complied
with the necessity of the times, Epist. 52. ubi prius.
and like a wise Physician yielded a little to the humor of the patient, to
provide for his health, and to cure his wounds; and quotes herein the example
of Cornelius of Rome, who dealt just so with Trophimus and his party; Epist.
55. p. 85.
and elsewhere, that out of an earnest desire to regain and resettle the
brethren, he was ready to connive at many things, and to forgive any thing, and
did not examine and exact the greatest crimes with that full power and severity
that he might, insomuch that he thought he did almost offend himself in an
overliberal remitting other men's offenses. Lastly, in absolving penitents, and
mitigating the rigours of their repentance, they used to have respect to the
person of the penitent, to his Dignity, or Age, or Infirmity, or the course of
his past life; sometimes to the greatness of his Humility, and the impression
which his present condition made upon him. Thus the Ancyran Council impowers
Bishops to examine the manner of men's Conversion and Repentance, Can. 5. vid.
and accordingly either to moderate, Conc. Nicen. Can. 12.
or enlarge their time of penance, but especially that regard be had to their
Conversation both before and since their offense, that so clemency and
indulgence may be extended to them. So for the case of persons of more than
ordinary rank and dignity, or of a more tender and delicate Constitution, De
sacerdot. lib. 2. c. 4. p. 18.
Chrysostom determines, that in chastising and punishing their offenses they
be dealt withal in a more peculiar manner than other men, Tom. 4.
lest by holding them under over-rigorous penalties they should be tempted to
fly out into despair, and so throwing off the reins of modesty, and the care of
their own happiness and salvation, should run headlong into all manner of vice
and wickedness. So wisely did the prudence and piety of those times deal with
offenders, neither letting the reins so loose as to patronize presumption, or
encourage any man to sin, nor yet holding them so strait, as to drive men into
despair.

The fourth and last circumstance concerns the Persons by whom this discipline
was administered; now though it is true that this affair was managed in the
Public Congregation, and seldom or never done without the consent and
approbation of the people (as Cyprian more than once and again expressly tells
us) yet was it ever accounted a ministerial act, and properly belonged to them.
Apol. c. 39.
Tertullian speaking of Church censures, adds, that the Elders that are
approved, and have attained that honor, not by purchase but testimony, preside
therein; Inter Epist. Cyprian. p. 146.
and Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia in a Letter to S. Cyprian speaking
of the Majores natu, the Seniors that preside in the Church, tells us, that to
them belongs the power of baptizing, imposing hands, (viz. in penance) and
ordination. By the Bishop it was primarily and usually administered, the
determining the time and manner of repentance, and the conferring pardon upon
the penitent sinner, being acts of the highest power and jurisdiction, and
therefore reckoned to appertain to the highest order in the Church. Therefore
it is provided by the Illiberine Council, Can. 32. p. 40.
that penance shall be prescribed by none but the Bishop; only in case of
necessity, such as sickness, and danger of death, by leave and command from the
Bishop, the Presbyter or Deacon might impose penance and absolve. Accordingly
we find Cyprian amongst other directions to his Clergy how to carry themselves
toward the lapsed, Epist. 12. p. 25. Vid. Conc. 2.
giving them this, that if any were over-taken with sickness, Carthag.
or present danger, Can. 4.
they should not stay for his coming, but the sick person should make
confession of his sins to the next Presbyter, or, if a Presbyter could not be
met with, to a Deacon, that so laying hands upon him he might depart in the
peace of the Church.

But though while the number of Christians was small, and the bounds of
particular Churches little, Bishops were able to manage these and other parts
of their office in their own persons, yet soon after the task began to grow too
great for them; and therefore about the time of the Decian persecution, when
Christians were very much multiplied, and the number of the lapsed great, it
seemed good to the prudence of the Church partly for the ease of the Bishop,
and partly to provide for the modesty of persons in being brought before the
whole Church to confess every crime, to appoint a public penitentiary (some
holy, grave, and prudent Presbyter) whose office it was to take the confession
of those sins which persons had committed after baptism, and by prayers,
fastings, and other exercises of mortification to prepare them for absolution.
He was a kind of Censor morum, to enquire into the lives of Christians, to take
an account of their failures, and to direct and dispose them to repentance.
This Office continued for some hundreds of years, till it was abrogated by
Nectarius (S. Chrysostomes predecessor in the Sea of Constantinople) upon the
occasion of a notorious scandal that arose about it. Socrat. H. Eccl. lib* 5.
c. 19. p. 278. Confer. Sozom. lib. 7. c. 16. p. 726.
A woman of good rank and quality had been with the Penitentiary, and confessed
all her sins committed since baptism; he enjoined her to give up her self to
fasting and prayer; but not long after she came to him, and confessed, that
while she was conversant in the Church to attend upon those holy exercises, she
had been tempted to commit folly and leudness with a Deacon of the Church,
whereupon the Deacon was immediately cast out; but the people being excedingly
troubled at the scandal, and the Holy Order hereby exposed to the scorn and
derision of the Gentiles, Nectarius by the advice of Eudaemon a Presbyter of
that Church wholly took away the Office of the public Penitentiary, leaving
every one to the care and liberty of his own conscience to prepare himself for
the Holy Sacrament. This account Socrates assures us he had from Eudaemon's own
mouth; and Sozomen adds, that almost all Bishops followed Nectarius his example
in abrogating this Office.

But besides the ordinary and standing office of the Clergy, we find even some
of the Laity, the Martyrs and Confessors, that had a considerable hand in
absolving penitents, and restoring them to the communion of the Church. For the
understanding of which we are to know, that as the Christians of those times
had a mighty reverence for Martyrs and Confessors as the great Champions of
Religion, so the Martyrs took upon them to dispense in extraordinary cases; for
it was very customary in times of persecution for those who through fear of
suffering had lapsed into Idolatry to make their address to the Martyrs in
prison, and to beg peace of them, that they might be restored to the Church;
who considering their petitions, and weighing the circumstances of their case
did frequently grant their requests, mitigate their penance, and by a note
signed under their hands signify what they had done to the Bishop, who taking
an account of their condition, absolved and admitted them to communion. Of
these Libelli, or Books granted by the Martyrs to the lapsed, there is mention
in Cyprian at every turn, who complains they were come to that excessive
number, Epist. 10. 11, 12. and alibi.
that thousands were granted almost every day; Epist. 14. p. 27.
this many of them took upon them to do with great smartness and authority, and
without that respect that was due to the Bishops, as appears from the note
written to Cyprian by Lucian in the name of the Confessors; Epist. 16. p. 29.
which because it is but short, and withal shows the form and manners of those
pacifick Libells, it may not be amiss to set it down; and thus it runs; All the
Confessors to Cyprian the Bishop, Greeting: Know that we have granted peace to
all those, of whom you have had an account what they have done, how they have
behaved themselves since the commission of their crimes; and we would that
these presents should by you be imparted to the rest of the Bishops: We wish
you to maintain peace with the holy Martyrs: Written by Lucian; of the Clergy,
the Exorcist and Reader being present. This was looked upon as very peremptory
and magisterial, and therefore of this confidence and presumption, and
carelessness in promiscuously granting these letters of peace, Epist. 22. p. 34.
Cyprian not without reason complains in an Epistle to the Clergy of Rome.

Besides these Libells granted by the Martyrs, there were other Libelli granted
by Heathen-Magistrates (of which it may not be impertinent to speak a little)
whence the lapsed that had had them were commonly called Libellatici, and they
were of several sorts; some writing their names in Libellis in Books, and
professing themselves to worship Jupiter, Mars, and the rest of the Heathen
Gods, presented them to the Magistrate; and these did really sacrifice, and
pollute not their souls only but their hands and their lips with unlawful
sacrifices, as the Clergy of Rome expresses it in a letter to S. Cyprian;
Epist. 31. p. 44.
these were called Thurificati, Ad Antonian. Epist. 52. p. 66, 67.
and Sacrificati, from their having offered incense and sacrifices. Somewhat of
this nature was that Libell that Pliny speaks of in his Epistle to the Emperor
Trajan, Epist. 97. lib. 10.
presented to him while he was Proconsul of Bithynia, containing a Catalogue of
the names of many, some whereof had been accused to be Christians and denied
it, others confessed they had been so some years since but had renounced it;
all of them adoring the Images of the gods, and the Emperors Statue, offering
sacrifice, and blaspheming Christ; and were accordingly dismissed and released
by him. Others there were who did not themselves sign or present any such
Libells, Epist. 31. p. 44.
but some Heathen-friends for them (and sometimes out of kindness they were
encouraged to it by the Magistrates themselves) and were hereupon released out
of prison, and had the favor not to be urged to sacrifice. Can. 7. Synodic.
Tom. 2. pa. 1. p. 12.
Nay, Dionysius of Alexandria speaks of some Masters, who to escape themselves
compelled their servants to do sacrifice for them, to whom he appoints a three
years penance for that sinful compliance and dissimulation. A third sort there
was, who finding the edge and keenness of their Judges was to be taken off with
a sum of money, freely confessed to them that they were Christians and could
not sacrifice, prayed them to give them a Libell of dismission, for which they
would give them a suitable reward: These were most properly called Libellatici
and Libellati. Cyprian acquaints us with the manner of their address to the
Heathen Magistrate, bringing in such a person thus speaking for himself: I had
both read and learnt from the Sermons of the Bishop, that the servant of God is
not to sacrifice to Idols, nor to worship Images; wherefore that I might not do
what was unlawful, having an opportunity of getting a Libell offered, (which
yet I would not have accepted had it not offered it self) I went to the
Magistrate, or caused another to go in my name and tell him, that I was a
Christian, and that it was not lawful for me to sacrifice, nor to approach the
altars of the Devils, that therefore I would give him a reward to excuse me,
that I might not be urged to what was unlawful. These though not altogether so
bad as the Sacrificati, yet Cyprian charges as guilty of implicit Idolatry,
having defiled their consciences with the purchase of these Books, and done
that by consent, which others had actually done.

I know Baronius will needs have it (and boasts that all that had written
before him were mistaken in the case) that these Libellatici were not exempted
from denying Christ, Annal. Eccl. ad Ann. CCLIII Number. XX. and seqq. tom. 2.
nor gave money to that end; that they only requested of the Magistrate, that
they might not be compelled to offer sacrifice, that they were ready to deny
Christ, and were willing to give him a reward to dispense with them only so
far, and to furnish them with a Libell of security, and that they did really
deny him before they obtained their Libell. But nothing can be more plain both
from this and several other passages in Cyprian, than that they did not either
publicly or privately sacrifice to Idols, or actually deny Christ; and
therefore bribed the Magistrate, that they might not be forced to do what was
unlawful. And hence Cyprian argues them as guilty by their wills and consent,
and that they had implicitly denied Christ, how? De Lapsis, p. 176.
by actually doing it? No, but by pretending they had done what others were
really guilty of. Certainly the Cardinals mistake arose from a not right
understanding the several sorts of the Libellatici, the first whereof of (as we
have shown) did actually sacrifice and deny Christ.

And now having taken this view of the severity of discipline in the ancient
Church, nothing remains but to admire and imitate their piety and integrity,
their infinite hatred of sin, their care and zeal to keep up that strictness
and purity of manners that had rendered their Religion so renowned and
triumphant in the world: A discipline; which how happy were it for the
Christian world, were it again resetled in its due power and vigor, which
particularly is the Judgment and desire of our own Church concerning the solemn
Quadragesimal Penances and Humiliations; In the Primitive Church (say the
Preface to the Commination) there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning
of Lent, such persons as stood convicted of notorious sin were put to open
penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day
of the Lord; and that others admonished by their example, might be the more
afraid to offend: Which said Discipline it is much to be wished might be
restored again.

FINIS.
A Chronological Index OF THE AUTHORS Cited in this BOOK, According to the
Vulgar Computation; with an account of the Editions of their Works.
Christian or Ecclesiastical Writers Flourished An. Dom. Books Editions
Apostoloru^ Canones Par. 1618 Apostoloru^ Constitutiones Clemens Romanus 70
Epist. ad Cor. Oxon. 1633 Dionysius Areopagita Opera. Antw. 1634 Ignatius
Antiochenus 101 Epistolae. Amster. 1646 Append. Usher. Land. 1647 Polycarpus
130 Epistol. apud Eusebius. Abdias Babylonius Histor. Apostol. Par. 1566 Justinus
Martyr 155 Opera. Par. 1636 Smyrnensi, Ecclesia 168 Epistol. apud Eusebius. Melito
Sardensis 170 Orat. Apolog. apud Eusebius. Athenagoras 170 Legate. pro Christ. Par.
1636 Dionysius Corinth. Episc. 172 Epistolae. apud Eusebius. Theophilus Antioch.
180 Lib. 3. ad Autolyc. Par. 1636 Tatianus 180 Orat. ad Graecos. Ibid.
Hegesippus 180 Commentar. apud Eusebius. Irenaeus 184 adv. Haereses. Par. 1639
Polycrates Ephesians. Episc. 197 Epistol. apud Eusebius. Tertullianus 198 Opera. Par.
1664 Clemens Alexandrinus 204 Opera. Par. 1641 Minutius Foelix 230 Octavius.
Par. 1668 Origenes 230 Opera Lat. Par. 1522 Contr. Cells. Cantab. 1658 Gregorius
Neocaesar. 250 Opera. Mogun. 1604 Cyprianus 250 Opera. Par. 1668 Cornelius Papa
250 Epist. apud Cypri. (...) 250 Epist. apud Cypri. (...) Diaconus 258 Vit.
Cyprian. apud Cypri. Dionysius Alexandrinus 260 Epist. apud Eusebius. Arnobius 297
adv. Gentes. Par. 1668 Lactantius 3^0 Opera. L. Bat. 1660 Commodianus 320
Instructiones. Par. 1668 Constantinus M. 325 Orat. ad SS. apud Eusebius. Eusebius
Caesariensis 329 (de praep. Evang. Par. 1628 Eusebius Caesariensis 329 Histor.
Eccles. Par. 1659 Eusebius Caesariensis 329 de locis Hebrai. Par. 1631 Eusebius
Caesariensis 329 Chronic. Amster. 1658 Athanasius 350 Opera. Heidel. 1601
Julius Firmicus 350 de Error. prof. Rel. Par. 1668. Optatus Milevitanus 365 de
Schism. Donat. Land. 1633 Ephraem Syrus 370 Ambrosius 370 Opera. Basil. 1567
Basilius M. 370 Opera. Par. 1637 Gregorius Nazianzenus 370 Opera. Par. 1609
Gregorius Nyssenus 380 Opera. Par. 1615 Epiphanius 390 Opera Edit. Graec.
Basil. 1544 Palladius 390 Histor. Lausiac. Par. 1555 Theophilus Alexandr. 390
Edict de Theophan. apud Balsam. Jo. Chrysostomus 400 Opera Par. 1636 in N. T.
Heidelb. 1603 Hieronymus 400 Opera. Bas. 1553 Asterius Amasenus 400 Homil. apud
Phot. Prudentlus 405 Hymni. Am^. 1631 Augustinus 410 Opera. Bas. 1569
Innocentius Papa 416 Epist. Decret. Par. 1535 Paulinus Nolanus 420 Epistol.
inter Orthod. Paulinus Presbyter 420 Vit. Ambros. apud Ambros. Severus
Sulpitius 420 Histor. Sacr. L. Bat. 1635 Maximus Taurinensis 420 Homil. Lugd.
1633 Philostorgius 425 Hist. Eccles. Genev. 1643 Orosius 425 adv. Paganos. Col.
1561 Possidius 430 Vit. Augustine. apud August. Isidorus Pelusiota 430
Epistolae. Heidelb. 1605 Jo. Cassianus 440 De Instit. Monach. Lugd. 1574
Socrates 440 Histor. Eccles. Par. 1668 Sozomenus 440 Histor. Eccles. Par. 1668
Theodoretus 440 Hist. Eccles. Genev. 1612 Theodoretus 440 Hist. Religios. Par.
1555 Theodoretus 440 de Cur. Graec. Aff. Heidelb. 1592 Eucherius Lugdunensis
440 Martyr. Theb. Leg. apud Sur. Sidonius Apollinaris 485 Epistolae. Hanov.
1617 Victor Uticensis 490 de Persec. Vand. Par. 1569 Jo. Malela 600 Chronic.
apud Usser. Gregorius M. 600 Dialogi. Col. 1610 Photius 858 Bibliothec. Rothom.
1653 Photius 858 Nomocan. Par. 1615 Ado Viennensis 870 Martyrolog. apud Sur.
Suidas 880 Lexic. Genesis 1618 Gregorius Presbyter 940 Vit. Nazianzeni. apud
Nazian. Simeon Metaphrastes 1030 Vitae Sanctorum. apud Sur. Jo. Zonaras 1118
Schol. in Can. Par. 1618 Constable. Harmenopulus 1150 Epitom. Can. ap. Jus. Gr. To.
Alexius Aristenus 1166 Schol. in Can. in Synodic. Theodorus Balsamon 1191
Schol. in Can. in Synodic. Nicephorus Callistus 1310 Histor. Eccles. Par. 1630
Mathaeus Blastares 1335 Nomocan. Alphab. Oxon. 1672 Josephus Aegyptius 1390
Paraphras. Arab. Oxon. 1672 Conciliorum. Oxon. 1672 Josephus the Jew 70
Antiquit. Jud. Gevev. 1611. Heathen Writers Flourished An. Chr. Books Editions
M. Varro. ante Chr. N. M. T. Cicero. ante Chr. N. Jul. Caesar. ante Chr. N. C.
Tacitus 98 Amst. 1649 Plinius Secundus 100 Epistol. L. Bat. 1653 Suetonius 110
Vitae Caesar. L. Bat. 1651 Brutius, Chronograph. apud Eusebius. Plutarchus 110
Opera. Par. 1624 Celsus Epicureus 110 Sermon. Verus. apud Orig. Lucianus 110
Opera. Salm. 1618 Galenus 150 Oper. Edit. Graec. Ven. 1525 Arrianus 150 in
Epictet. Cant. 1655 M. Antoninus Imp. 161 de rebus suis. Cant. 1652. Dion.
Cassius 224 Hist. Romans Hanov. 1606 Ulpianus J. C. 230 de Offic. Procon. in
Digest. Porphyrius 280 de Abstinent. Cant. 1655 Lampridius 290 Vit. Alex. Sev.
Hist. August. Vulcatius Gallicanus 290 Vit. Avid. Coss. L. Bat. 1661 Julianus
Imper. 361 Opera. Par. 1630 Eutropius 364 Hist. Romans inter Script. H. Aug. 1568
Eunapius 370 de Vit. Philosoph. Genesis 1616 Libanius 370 Orationes. Par. 1627
Amianus Marcellinus 370 Hist. Romans inter H. August. Script. 1568 Vegetius 370
de re milit. Wesel. 1670 Symmachus 380 Epistolae. Lugd. 1598 Zosimus 410 Histor
Nov. ad Calc. Herod. Lugd. 1611 Macrobius 422 Saturnal. L. Bat. 1628 Simplicius
530 Com. in Epict. L. Bat. 1640 Councils Holden A. D. Concilium. Africanum sub
Cypriano Constantinopolitanu^ Genesis II. 381 contra Novatum 250 Carthaginense. 1
390 Aliud sub Cypriano de Haeret. Carthaginense. 2. 397 Baptiz. 260
Carthaginense. 3. 398 Aliud sub Cypriano 263 Carthaginense. 4. 400 Antiochenu^
cont. Paul. Sa^. 267 Ephesinum. Gener. III. 431 Illiberinum 305 Arausicanum 441
Neocaesariense 314 Chalcedonense. Genesis IV. 451 Ancyranum 315 Aurelianense 502
Nicaenum Generale I. 325 Agathense 505 Arelatense 1. 326 Toletanum. 4 633
Gangrense 340 Sextum in Trulla. 680 Antiochenum 341 Martyrologium Romanum.
Sardicense 347 Rituale. Romanum. Laodicenum 365 Maenologium Graecorum.
Euchologium Graecorum. Roman Emperors whose Laws and Edicts are cited in this
Book.
Began their Reigns Ant. Chr. Nero 54 Trajan 98 Adrian 118 Antoninus Pius 138
M. Antonius 161 Alexander Severus 222 Decius 251 Valerianus 255 Diocletianus
284 Maximianus 286 Constantius Chlorus 304 Galerius 304 Maximinus 304 Licinius
304 Constantinus M. 306 Constantius 337 Julianus 361 Jovinian 363 Valentinianus
364 Valens 364 Gratianus 375 Theodosius M. 379 Arcadius 383 Honorius 395
Theodosius jun. 408 Anastasius 491 Justinianus 527 Carolus Magnus 802 Late
Writers.
R. Bellarminus. Caes. Baronius. Ant. Galonius. Gabr. Albaspinus. Jan.
Gruterus. Is. Casaubonus. Nic Fuller. Jos. Mede. Nic Rigaltius Onuphrius
Panvinius. Desid. Heraldus. Edw. Breerwood. Joan. Gronovius. Cl. Salmasius. J.
G. Vossius. Jac. Gothofredus. Leo Allatius. Paulus Aringhius. Joan Fronto. Joan
Frobes. Arch-b. Usher B. Tailor. Dr. Hammond. Herb. Thorndike. Mr. Daille.


FINIS.
Books to be sold by Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1675.
FOLIO's.
COsins Tabulae Politiae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 3 s. Buxtorfii Concordant. Heb.
1 l. 10 s. Kircheri China illustrata cum Figuris. Morini Astrologia Gallica,
1661. 1 l. Cotgrave's French and English Dictionary Corrected and enlarged,
1673. 24 s. Twiss de Scientia Media, 12 s. Riccioli Almagestum novum, 2 Vol.
Scapulae Lexicon, Graeco-Latinum, 1 l. 10 s. Dr. Heylin's Cosmography, 1 l. 4
s. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, 18 s. The Life of Archbishop Laud; by Dr.
Heylin, 10 s. Schroders Complete Chemical Dispensatory, in English, 10. s. Lord
Cook's four Institutes of the Laws of England, viz. -- 1. His Comment on
Littleton, 1 l. -- 2. His Comment on Magna Charta, the largest paper, 16 s. --
3. Pleas of the Crown, 6 s. -- 4. Jurisdiction of Courts, 8 s. Lord Dyer's
Reports, with three Tables, 1672. 18 s. Blunt' s Law-Dictionary, 9 s. Mr. Anth.
Farindon's Sermons in 3 Vol. 40 s. Doctor Mark Frank's Course of Sermons, 1672.
16 s. Lord Bacon's Natural History, 8 s. God's Revenge against Murder, 8 s. The
Works of Dr. Thomas Jackson, in three Volumes, with many Additions, and a large
Table, 1672. 3 l. 10 s. Cambridge Concordance (second Edition) 1672. 16 s.
House of Mourning, being a Collection of Funeral Sermons, 16 s. Mr. Joseph
Mede' s Works, 1 l. 15 s. Bp Jeremy Taylor' s Sermons, 1 l. The Jesuits Morals,
10 s. Bartholinus's Anatomy, English, with Figures, 12 s. Cressey' s
Church History of Britain, 1668. 1 l. 10 s. Dr. Allestree's Sermons, 8 s. John
Speed's Exact Geography of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, with
the Shires, Hundreds, Cities and Shire towns therein divided and described, to
which is added His Prospect of the most Famous Kingdoms and Ports of the World;
all in one entire Volume. The Particular Maps of the World, or of any of the
four quarters thereof, or any of the said Kingdoms, or of any Shire and County
in the Kingdoms of Great Britain, and Ireland, may be had by themselves
without the description. Price of each, 6 d. Boccalin's Advertisements from
Parnassus, 8 s. Ld. Bacons Advancement of Learning, 10 s. Sir Richard Bakers
Chronicle of England, 1674. 24 s. The Book of Fortune, 2 s. Illustrious Bassa,
10 s. Isaac Ambroses Works, 1674. 26 s. Chillingworths Protestant Religion a
safe way to salvation, to which is added His Apostolical institution of
Episcopacy, and Nine Sermons, the fourth Edition, 1674. 12 s. Judge Jones his
Reports, 1675. 16 s.
QUARTO's.
MAlpighii Dissertatio Epistolica de Bombyce, 5 s. Gual. Char^toni Onomasticon
Zoicon, and Mantissa Anatomica, 6 s. Prideaux Fasciculus Controversiarum, 3 s.
6 d. Hobbs's Leviathan, Lat. 5 s. Duport Gnomologicon Homericum, 6 s. Seneca de
Vita Beata, and de Brevitate Vitae, 1 s. 6 d. Chimentellii Marmor Pisanum de
honor Bisellii, de veterum Sellis, and re Donastica antiquorum. Buxtorfii
Lexicon Chaldaicum and Syriacum. Davissoni Comment. in Severini Dani Ideam
Medicinae Philosophicae. Doctor Mainwaringe his Method of Cure, 6 d. Caryl on
Job complete, twelve parts, 4 pounds. Description and History of the Future
State of Europe, 1 s. The Jesuits Intrigues, 1 s. Burrough' s Jewel of
Contentment, 2 s. 6 d. The Works of John Gregory of Christ's Church Oxon, 6 s.
Dr. Thomas Pierces Sermons, 6 s. -- Sinner impleaded in his own Court, 6 s. --
Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, 1 s. -- All his other
Controversies. Fowlers Defense of the Design of Christianity against John
Bunyan, 1 s. The Converted Presbyterian. Goldmans Dictionary with large
additions, 18 s. Bp. Jer. Taylor's Disswasive from Popery, first Part, 2 s.
Lyford's Discovery of Errors and Heresies of the Times, 4 s. Dr. Barwick's Life
of Bp. Morton, and Sermon at his Funeral, 3 s. Dr. Sherlock's Visitation Sermon
at Warrington, 1659. 6d. Dr. Wests Assize-Sermon at Dorchester, 1671. 6 d. Mr.
Dobson's Sermon at Lady^ Farmors Funeral, 1670. 8 d. Directions for Improvement
of Barren Land, 6 d. Culverwel's Discourse of the Light of Nature, 3 s. 6d. Dr.
Meric Casaubons Letter to Dr. Du Moulin, about Experimental Philosophy, 6 d.
Doctor Thomas Jacomb' s Sermons on Romans 8. 1672. 9 s. Lord Hollis's Relation of
the Unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen charged with a Robbery, 1671.
6 d. The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon preached at the Cathedral
in Norwich, 1672. by Ja. Paston, M. A. 6 d. French' s Art of Distillation, 3 s.
6 d.
OCTAVO's.
GVal. Needham de Formato Foetu, 3 s. 6 d. Nomenclatura brevis, Grae. Lat.
Angl. 6 d. Morisoni Praeludia Botanica, 4 s. Gregorii Etymologicon Parvum.
Eugalenus de Scorbuto. Hottingeri Cippi Hebraici. Pasoris Lexicon Grae. Novi
Testamenti, 5 s. -- Gammatica Grae. Novi Testamenti, 4 s. Lower de Cord,
editio secunda, 3 s. Syntaxis Erasmiana constrictior, 2 d. Lucae de Linda
Descriptio Orbis, 1665. Ross Gnomologicon Poeticum, 4 d. Comenii Vestibuli
Linguarum Auctuarium, Lat. Eng. 4 d. Dionysius de situ Orbis, Graece, 4 d.
Vossii Elementa Rhetorica, 4 d. Markham' s Perfect Horsman enlarged by
Thetford, 1 s. 6 d. Gouge's word to Saints and Sinners, with his Prayers and
Catechism, 2 s. Dr. Simsons Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; With a
Discourse of the Original of Hot-Springs and other Fountains; and a Vindication
of Chemical Physic, 3 s. -- His Hydrological Essays; with an Account of the
Allom-Works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice, 1 s. 6 d.
Doctor Cox's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient, in reference to Physic
and Physicians, and Detection of the Abuses practiced by the Apothecaries, 1 s.
6 d. Organon Salutis: Or, an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach; With diverse New
Experiments of the Virtue of Tobacco and Coffee: To which is prefixed a Preface
of Sir Henry Blunt, 1 shilling. The English Rogue, all 4 parts, 12 s.
Aristotle's Problems, 8 d. bound. Young Clerks Tutor, 1 s. 6 d. Doctor Cave's
Primitive Christianity, in 3 Parts, the second Edition, 6 s. Dr. Brian's
Interest and Duty of Believers, in 8 Sermons, 2 s. 6 d. A Discourse of the
Nature, Ends, and Difference of the Two Covenants, 1672. 2. s. Powel's
Concordance to the Bible, 2 s. 6 d. Dr. Mainwaring's Complete Physician, 2 s.
The Assemblies Confession of Faith and Catechisms, Lat. 2 s. -- The shorter
Catechism, Grae. Lat. by Harmar. 1 s. Shelton' s Shorthand, 1 s. Sir Thomas
Overbury' s Characters, 2 s. Leyborn's Carpenters Rule, 2 s. Barton's Sermon
before the Lord Mayor, 6 d. Langley' s Rhetoric, 2 d. Lord Hollis Judicature
of the House of Peers Asserted, 10 s. Sir Hen. Wottons Remains, 6 s. Ignatius
Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d. Lipsius' s Discourse of
Constancy, 2 s. 6 d. Dr. Worthington's Scripture-Catechism. 6 d. Dr. Sherlocks
Exposition of the Church-Catechism. 6 d. Wiseman's Cure of Wounds. Bp. Taylor's
Holy Living and Dying, 6 s. Dr. Hammonds Practical Catechism, 4 s. Willis
Anglicisms Latiniz'd, 3 s. 6 d. Walkers English and Latin Proverbs, 9 d. --
Whole Duty of Man, Welsh, 5 s. Buckler of State and Justice, against France's
Design of Universal Monarchy, 1673. 2 s. 6 d. A Free Conference touching the
Present State of England at home and abroad in order to the Designs of France,
1673. 1 s. Bp. Tailor of Confirmation, 1 s. 6 d. The Parsons Law, 2 s. Mystery
of Jesuitism, 3d and 4th Part. 3 s. 6 d. Lord Berkly' s Historical
Applications, 1 s. 6 d. Sandersons Judicium Academ. Oxoniens. de Solenni Liga.
6 d. Friendly Debate betwixt a Conformist and a Nonconformist, first and second
Parts, 3 s. 6 d. Dr. Samways Unreasonableness of the Romanists, 1 s. 6 d. --
His Vindication of the Liturgy. Record of Urines, 1 s. Blinmans Defense of
Infant Baptism against Danvers, 1674. 1 s. 6 d. Hodges Apolgy for
Nonconformists, 1 s. 6 d. Rolls answer to the Friendly Debate, 3 s. 6 d. New
Light of Alchymy, 1674. 3 s. Crows Catalogue of English Writers on the Old and
new Testament, 3 s. Hardcastles Christian Geography and Arithmetic, 1 s. 6 d.
Speeds Epitome of his Geographical description of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and Foreign Countries, 6 s. Duporti Versio Psalmorum Davidis, Grae.
Lat. in usum Seholarum 4 s. -- Eadem Graeca, separatim, 3 s. Aesops Fables
Paraphrased in Verse, adorned with Sculptures, and illustrated with
Annotations, by John Ogilby Esquire in two Vol. 1674. 16 s.
DUODECIMO's.
REusneri Symbola. 2 s. 6 d. Burgersdicii Ethica, 1 s. 6 d. Pemble de Origin
formarum, 1 s. Johnstoni Thaumatographia* Redii Experimenta de Insectorum
Generatione, 1671. Molinaei Characteres Ethici, 1 s. 6 d. Oweni Epigrammata, 1
s. Powel's Concordance to the Bible, 2 s. Dyer' s Works, 2 s. Hool' s
Vocabulary, 4 d. Lambard's Duty of Constables, 1 s. Meriton' s Duty of
Constables, 1 s. 6 d. Drexelius of Eternity, 2 s. New help to Discourse, 1 s. 6
d. Abbot's Young Man's Warning-piece, 8 pence. Bp. Cosen's Devotions, 2 s. Lord
Hatton's Psalter, 2 s. Bp. Taylor's Guide to Infant Devotion, 1 s. 6 d. --
Discourse of Friendship, 1 s. 6 d. Wits Commonwealth, 1 s. 6 d. Bp. Hackets
Christian Consolations, 1 s. 6 d. Dr. Sherlocks Practical Christian, 2 s. Dr.
Patrick's Christian Sacrifice. -- Devout Dhristian. Brugis Vade-mecum or
companion for a Surgeon, 1 s. 6 d. Meriton of Wills and Testaments, 1 s. 6 d.
16 and 24.
LVcius Florus, French, 1 s. Luc. Florus, Lat. 1 s. Pharmacopoeia Londinensis,
2 s. Quintus Curtius, Lat. 1 s. 6 d. Suetonius, Lat. 1 s. 6 d. Plauti
Comoediae, 2 s. 6 d. Bicaissii manuale Medicorum, 1 s. 6 d. Clark' s Companion,
1 s. Crumbs of Comfort, 1 s. Valentines Devotions, 1. s. Warwick's Spare
Minutes, 6 d. Crimston's Christian New-Years-Gift, 6 d. Childs-Book and
Youths-Book, 6 d. Bp. Mortons Devotions, 10 d.

