A Caveat to the City of London, in Reference to the King's Writ for Electing
Representatives for that City, to Meet and Consult with him in Parliament, the
Fifteenth Day of January next Ensuing.
YOU all know the Miserable Distractions and Confusions unto which you have of
late Years been brought, by Blind and Slavish Compliances with the Arbitrary
Powers Assumed by the King: You have had neither Lawful Mayors nor Sheriffs,
nor other Officers of Justice, nor any of those Legal Courts of Law or Equity,
which your Ancient Customs, and the Common Law, had Established for your Just
and Honorable Government. You cannot be Ignorant the Impending Dangers over
very many of your Lives and Estates are Infinite; if the Rigor of the Laws
should be now Executed against all that exercised Illegal Powers, and have in
several manners been partakers therein, and thereby now hold several Interests;
and there is no means under Heaven left to Re-establish your lawful Government,
and secure your Persons and Estates, but the Authority of the whole Kingdom in
Parliament.

This being your Case, you ought to be cautious and studious how you proceed to
constitute such a full and free Common Council of the Kingdom in Parliament, as
may consult about necessary Provisions for your Peace, Security and Freedom,
without fear of Force, without promises or hopes from any man of Preferment, or
Honors, without entering into any New Oaths or Obligations inconsistent with
the present state of Him and the Kingdom, and such a Council as may proceed
with Impartial Justice, and true sense of the Ancient Rights and Freedom now
justly demanded by the Kingdom, under the Shelter of the Arms of the Most Noble
Prince of ORANGE.

You ought to consider that the King seeing himself Unable to Impose Popery,
and maintain his Arbitrary despotick Power over you, has Deserted and
Abandoned the Administration of the Government, and refused all care to Protect
you; which together with his Destruction of the Laws, and Governing by his Will
and Force, have by the Laws of God and man, Absolved you from all duties of
Subjection to him.

You must neither forget that you, with the rest of the Kingdom, have now
joined with His Highness the Prince of ORANGE in his Declaration that the
Government is subverted; See the Stat. of the 5. E. and Law for Test.
nor that the K. still continues without any Revocation, and persists in His
Proclamations and Declarations, that you and all that have Concurred with, or
Abetted his H. are Rebels and Traitors, and thereby most certainly incapable of
Legally Consulting with him in Parliament.

You ought to remember, that it is the Import and Intent of the Writ now sent
you to choose Citizens to Represent you in Parliament, that you by them should
meet the King at Westminster, to consult with Him concerning all the great
Affairs of the Kingdom: And that the express Statute-Laws require, That your
Representatives that shall be chosen by His Writ, shall first Renew their
Acknowledgment of Him, and Obligation to Him; by Swearing Obedience and
Allegiance to him, and those Laws make Null and Void all the Elections of those
that shall either refuse, or Neglect to Take such an Oath.

This being your present State and Case, it is Humbly Offered to you all, to
Consider whether you can Legally, with Honesty or Honor, proceed upon the
Kings present Writ, to Elect your Deputies to meet him in Parliament?

Do you think your selves free in a legal manner, to Consult with the King in
Parliament, by your Representatives, whilst you stand Declared Traitors and
Rebels?

Do you intend now you have Cast off and Renounced your Obligation of Obedience
to the Kings Usurped enslaving Powers over you, to acknowledge Him as if He
were Innocent, and to Swear a New Obedience to him, before his Renunciation of
any of those Powers, or the least Security against them in Futurity?

Do you intend to Entangle your selves and the Kingdom in need, less and
endless Disputes with him; And in the Interim, by want of Settlement, Trade and
Commerce, to be Destroyed; the Kingdom Endangered, Wasted and Devoured with
Vast Numerous Armies; and time given to Him to procure French Armies, to
Involve the Kingdom in Blood and Confusion?

If you have Wisdom to Understand the things of your Peace, and to avoid the
present dangerous Snare of Electing for Parliament by his Writ, you shall have
suddenly shown you the only Lawful means of providing for your Safety, Peace
and Freedom, wherein you may justly hope for the Divine Blessing.

So GOD Bless the City
LONDON: Printed in the Year. 1689.


