THE TABLET OF CEBES THE THEBAN PHILOSOPHER; OR A TRUE EMBLEM Of Human Life:
Done out of Greek into English.

With an Additional Treatise Concerning TRANQVILLITY of MIND, Written by
HIPPARCHUS.

And Translated By ROBERT WARREN, Student of CHRIST'S College in CAMBRIDGE.

Quicquid agunt Homines, Votum, Timor, Ira, Voluptas,
^audia, Discursus, nostri est Farrago Libelli.
Juven. Sat. 1. CAMBRIDGE, (...)for John Pindar, Bookseller (...), 1699.

Imprimatur.

WILL: DAWES, Vice-Chanc:

S. BLITHE.

JA: JOHNSON.

GABR: QUADRING.

TO The REVEREND, WORTHY, and TRULY LEARNED, Mr JOSHUA BARNES, Batchelour of
Divinity, Senior Fellow of EMMANUEL College in CAMBRIDGE, AND The KING's GREEK
PROFESSOR in that UNIVERSITY.
LEARNED SIR,
DEDICATIONS are now a days so much in fashion, so frequently made use of, to
recommend all manner of Books to the World; that should any Manual, though
never so small, appear barefaced without one, our Nice and Critical Age would
be apt to cast severe Reflections upon it; to condemn it, as mean and
contemptible; and its Author as Friendless, and a Person of no Account.

To avoid these misfortunes, I have made choice of so Eminent a PATRON for this
following Tractate; whose Merit cannot be controverted, but by those, who have
none: and whose Candor renders Him Gracious to all, but those who are
prejudiced with Envy and Ill Nature.

The Principal end of prefixing Your Great Name to it, is to give a public
Testimony of that deep obligation, which Your repeated Favors have laid upon
me. Particularly, Your Diligent Perusal of this very Manual; by whose
warrantable Recommendation it was brought to the Press. Should I therefore have
Dedicated it to any other, I am sensible, I had done quite contrary to the Laws
of Justice, and Gratitude.

Sir, without any Formal Compliments, or Fawning Addresses, I acknowledge my
self to be highly obliged to You; and upon that Account You might justly
challenge either this, or any other of my best Performances.

To You therefore, I with all Modesty and Humility recommend this TABLET, as a
Gem of great Value, being Composed by so Elegant an Author; Beseeching You to
Shelter it under the Umbrage of Your most safe Protection. And then I shall be
inclined to think, it must necessarily flourish under Your PATRONAGE: which
will therefore more strictly engage,

SIR, Your Faithfully Devoted Servant, R. W.

AN ADMONITION To the READER.
IN a certain Dialogue of Plato's, which is called Phoedo, there is mention
made amongst others of one CEBES, who is supposed the Author of this Excellent
TABLET, by Caselius; who has put Notes upon it. But Wolfius, who had made a
little Comment upon it, long before Caselius, seems to question it. Yet
Diogenes Laertius, in his Lives of the Philosophers, and Chalcidius do
peremptorily assert, that CEBES was the Author. Tertullian, Julius Pollux,
Suidas, and Lucian, with many other Renowned Writers unanimously agree in the
same; that there was one CEBES, a Philosopher, who lived Four Hundred and Sixty
Years before the Birth of our Blessed Lord and Savior: that He was Born at
Thebes in Boeotia, and was the Disciple of Socrates; and, according to the
Testimony of Laertius, He wrote Three Dialogues; two whereof are lost, only
This remaining.

But now, it is no great matter, who is the Author, since the TABLET is very
Elegant, and generally approved of by the most Eminent Writers. But here, I
desire to insert one Caution, which shall be this. Let none, before they look
into it, seem to slight or contemn it, by reason of its smallness; for the
Excellent Doctrine, that is in it, will easily compensate, and make a
sufficient Apology, for its deficiency in that respect. And mere Reason, and
daily Experience, have long since Taught us this Lesson, That a little Gold is
of more value than much Lead; and that there is more Excellency in a small
Diamond, or Ruby, than in some Quarries of Freestone. That it is Quality, not
Quantity, that for the most part sets price and esteem upon things. And if so,
as we all are ready to acknowledge; I may most safely infer, that this Book,
though small in Bulk, yet is great in Worth: and I am very confident, you may
find richer Furniture in this little Room, than in more capacious Edifices.

Accept it then, as the Product of my Tender Years, and the pleasing
Entertainment of a few spare Hours: and (if you dare take my word) most
assuredly great will be the Profit, and Pleasure, which will accrue to thee,
from thy diligent and frequent perusal of it. For here thou have a fair
Prospect and View of the Life of Man, even from the Cradle to the Grave. In
these few sheets thou may plainly perceive, with what Joys, and Trophies, a
Religious Man is Crowned; and on the contrary, with what scorn and derision,
infamy and punishment, a Foolish, and Wicked Man is most deservedly treated.

Would thou then hear the true Encomium of this TABLET in one word? It will
at once delight thy Mind, excite thy Thoughts, conduct thee into the Right Way,
by True Instruction; and at length, after thou have continued there some space
of Time, it will Crown thee with Everlasting Life and Prosperity.

Read it then attentively, Meditate on it seriously, and Follow the good Advice
contained in it industriously. Farewell.

THE TABLET OF CEBES THE THEBAN PHILOSOPHER.
AS we were walking in the Temple of Saturn, and looking upon the diverse Gifts
of many Devout Persons; amongst the rest we happened upon a large Painted Table
which was hung in the Porch of the Temple, containing very many strange and
uncouth resemblances, the meaning of which we could not possibly conjecture:
For the Picture represented neither the form of a City nor Camp, but it
consisted of three Enclosures (as it were) one a pretty large one, and within
that Two other; a greater and a lesser. In the biggest Enclosure of all, there
was a Gate, about which stood a great number of People, and within we saw many
Women. In the first entrance stood a grave old Man, who seemed to speak, and to
give some directions to the Persons, as they went in. We had much discourse
amongst our selves, what should be the meaning of this Pourtraicture, but none
could conceive, what it really intended. At last, as we were in this doubt, an
Ancient Man, that stood by, stepped up and told us, Strangers (quoth He) it is no
wonder, if this Picture trouble you to understand the true signification of it;
for there are but few of our own Citizens, that can give the true
Interpretation, as the first Donor designed. For it was none of this City that
gave it, but a Stranger, a Worthy Man, and a true follower of Pythagoras and
Parmenides, both in Life and Doctrine; who coming to this City Dedicated both
the Temple and the Table unto the service of the GOD SATURN. Did ye know the
Man, pray Sir, quoth I? Yes, very well, says He, and was an Auditour of his
admired Doctrine a long time, even when I was but a Youth. He discoursed
exceeding well, and I have often heard him Expound the Mysteries of this Table.

Strange. Sir, we beseech you, if your Business be not very urgent, be pleased
to Expound the meaning of it to us, for in truth, we have an ardent desire to
know.


Expositor. Truly, Friends, I have leisure enough, and shall be very willing to
serve you; but you must take one caveat along with you, more than you are aware
of, and that is this: That the Exposition is but dangerous.


Strange. Why, Sir?


Expos. I Will tell you; if you give good attention unto the Discourse, that you
shall hear, and understand what will be suggested to you, it will make you both
wise and happy; if not, it will make you ignorant, heedless, and most
miserable. For this Explanation much resembles the Riddle of Sphinx a Fair
Sorcererss, that used to delude Passengers with Aenigmatical Questions; He that
could apprehend them, past by safe, but he that did not, was sure to pay for
his ignorance with his Life. Just so it is here. For Ignorance is a Sphinx unto
Man. And this obscure Picture contains a description of all the Good and
Evil, that attends the Life of Man, and of that, which is neither Good nor
Evil. Now if a Man understands not this aright, it will not dispatch him at
once; as the rapacious Sphinx did those that fell into her claws; but it will
infect his whole Life with a continual remorse, and such a torment, as those
seek, who being condemned to dye, do every moment expect the hand of the
Executioner. But contrariwise, if any one clearly apprehends it, ignorance is
quite undone, and the Man is safe and completely happy. Mark my words well
therefore, and let them not go in at one Ear, and out at another.


Strange. Good God, what a vehement desire have you inflamed us with to hear
this Table Expounded, if all be thus!


Exp. Yes infallibly, it is thus.


Strange. Proceed then, Sir, we beseech you, as quick as you please; for we'll
be no negligent Hearers in a matter of so great importance.

Now the Old Man up with his Staff, and pointing to the Picture, see you this
Enclosure? says He.


Strange. Yes, very well.


Expos. Then mind me. This is called LIFE, and the great multitude, you see
flock about the Gate, are such as are to enter in. And that old Father, which
you see with a Paper in one hand, and seeming to point out something therein
with the other, is called LIFE'S GENIUS. He instructs those, that enter, what
method to observe in the course of their Life, and informs them, what they
must follow, upon peril of their utter destruction.


Strange. I Pray you, what kind of Life does he Teach them to follow? or how
would he have them begin?


Expos. See you not a Throne hard by the Gate, as the People go in, and a Woman
sitting thereon, with a Vizor on her Face, and a Cup in her hand?


Strange. Yes, that I do; what is she?


Expos. It is IMPOSTURE, that seduceth all the World.


Strange. What does she?


Expos. She reaches forth to drink of her own brewing unto all men that enter
into Life.


Strange. What drink is it?


Expos. It is ERROR and IGNORANCE.


Strange. How then?


Expos. Why when they have tasted of this Cup, then enter they the course of
Life.


Strange. But tell us, Sir, do all then drink of ERROR?


Expos. All of a certain; but some more and some less. But Prithee, look
yonder, see you not an whole Tribe of Women, dressed like Courtisans, there
within the Gate?


Strange. Yes Sir.


Expos. Why, some of those are called OPINIONS, some DESIRES, and others
PLEASURES, and as soon as any come in at the Gate, these presently (Forsooth)
run dancing to them, fall to courting them, and so lead them, whither they list.


Strange. Whither do they lead them?


Expos. Some to Security, and some to Ruin, as they had drank more or less of
IMPOSTURE'S Beverage.


Strange. Oh! Worthy Sir, how dangerous a drink have you told us of?


Expos. But observe further, when they first come unto men, then (marry) they
make them great Promises of all dainties and delights; of perpetual Safety and
perfect Happiness. Now the Guests being well drunk with the ERROR and
IGNORANCE, that IMPOSTURE presented them with, cannot for their hearts find the
right way to that good course of Life, but go wandering about they know not
whither, as you see them Painted in the Picture it self. And you now see them
that were entered just before, go round about, as these Women direct them?


Strange. We do so, but what Woman is that, that stands upon that round Stone,
seeming as if she were blind and mad by her carriage and gesture?


Expos. That same is the Lady, which you hear so much talk of, MADAM FORTUNE;
she is indeed not only blind but mad and deaf too.


Strange. What does she there then? (I wonder.)


Expos. She rambles about, taking from one, and giving to another, and by and
by takes that away, which she gave but even now, and makes a Present of it to
a third, without all reason or constancy: And therefore this Representation
sets her forth to the Life.


Strange. Which is that?


Expos. Her standing upon that round Stone.


Strange. What is the meaning of that?


Expos. That her Gifts are never certain, nor secure; for he that builds his
Trust upon them, shall be sure one day to pay dear enough, for his Faith and
Confidence.


Strange. What means that great multitude which stands about her? What do they
beg, and under what Name do they go, we Pray you?


Expos. Why, every one of them begs those things, which Fortune casts from her,
and (to deal ingenuously and plainly with you) they are called Fools for their
Pains.


Strange. How chances it, that some of them weep, and some laugh? Why do they
not all keep the same countenance?


Expos. You must understand, they that laugh and rejoice, are FORTUNE'S
Favorites, and Salute her by the Title of Prosperous. But they that wring
their hands and lament, are such as she has turned her back upon, having
deprived them of that, which she had given them before, and they call her
ADVERSE FORTUNE.


Strange. What are her mighty Gifts then, that they should make the Losers
lament and the Receivers rejoice at such a rate?


Expos. Her Gifts, I Will assure you, are reputed goods.


Strange. Pray tell us what they are.


Expos. In short, they are RICHES, NOBILITY, CHILDREN, GLORY, SOVEREIGNTY,
EMPIRE, and the like.


Strange. And, Pray Sir, do you not hold these for goods?


Expos. Of that hereafter, let us now make an end of the Table's Exposition.


Strange. With all our heart, Sir.


Expos. You see now, that past that Gate, there is another Enclosure, lying
higher up, and certain Women dressed after the same sort, standing at the door.


Strange. We see.


Expos. Well, one of these is called INCONTINENCY, another LUXURY, another
AVARICE, another FLATTERY.


Strange. And upon what account do they stand there?


Expos. They watch, when FORTUNE bestows any thing upon any Man.


Strange. How then?


Expos. Then they rejoice and embrace him, and flatter him, and entreat him to
stay with them, promising him a Life replenisht with all the delight and
pleasures imaginable, without any allay of pain, grief or sorrow. If any one do
but like this, he is tickled (in an instant) with vain delight, that he
imagines an Heaven upon Earth; when in the main it is quite otherwise. For
when he is come to his right understanding, then he will immediately perceive,
that he has not eaten at their charges, but that they have devoured up him,
and when they had so done, dismissed him with scorn and derision. And now all
FORTUNE'S donatives proving just nothing at the end, he must turn a new course,
and let himself drudge to those drabs, suffer all their imperious injuries, and
undergo all servile offices, for their pleasures, as (for instance) Cousenage,
Sacrilege, Treachery, Thievery, and all the rest of that forlorn and ungrateful
Company; and when all those wicked Trades fail, then is he turned over into the
hands of PUNISHMENT.


Strange. PUNISHMENT, which is she?


Expos. Do you not perceive a little grate in the Picture, behind those Women,
and within that a dark Dungeon, as it were?


Strange. Yes.


Expos. And a great many Women all in tattered rags and forlorn shapes?


Strange. We see them also.


Expos. Why, that same that holds the Scourge, is called PUNISHMENT. She that
leans her head upon her knee is SORROW; she that teareth her hair DISTRACTION.


Strange. There stands a Man also behind them, all deformed, meager, and naked,
and a Woman with him, his very Picture (methinks) who be they?


Expos. The Man's Name is ANGUISH and the Woman's is DESPERATION; unto these is
the Ruined Man passed over and confined to live in doleful extremity. From
thence they drive him farther into the Goal of infelicity, and there he shall
be ever imprisoned, unless released by REPENTANCE.


Strange. Why, what can REPENTANCE do in such a Case?


Expos. Marry, she can deliver him out of this Pit of destruction and bring him
acquainted with another OPINION, and DESIRE, who will either conduct him safe
unto true INSTRUCTION, or else unto that falsely so called.


Strange. How then?


Expos. If he embrace that OPINION, that gives him directions in the way of
true INSTRUCTION, he shall thereby be Purified and Reformed, and pass the rest
of his Life in the fullness of Perfection, above the reach of all future
calamities: otherwise if he do not so, FALSE INSTRUCTION will subvert him with
a new deceit.


Strange. O GOD! How dreadful is this last danger you have acquainted us with;
but what kind of Creature is this FALSE INSTRUCTION you speak of?


Expos. Behold yonder other Enclosure.


Strange. So we do, Sir.


Expos. At the Gate sits a Woman in neat and decent Apparel: the vulgar and
foolish sort of People call her INSTRUCTION, but falsely. Now they that mean to
pass unto TRUE INSTRUCTION, do all first come unto this Woman.


Strange. Why, is there no other way but this to carry us to TRUE INSTRUCTION?


Expos. Yes, there is.


Strange. Who are they, that walk about within that Enclosure?


Expos. They are the followers of FALSE INSTRUCTION, imagining in themselves
(but altogether erroneously) that they enjoy the Company of TRUE INSTRUCTION.


Strange. And what are their Professions?


Expos. Some of them profess Poetry, some Oratory, some Logic, some Music,
some Rhetoric, some Arithmetic, some Critic, Geometry, Astrology,
Philosophy, and all other Professions have their Followers within this Ring,
nay here are professed Voluptuaries also.


Strange. But who are those Women, that gad about like the former, amongst whom
you reckoned INCONTINENCY, and their Fellows?


Expos. These are they.


Strange. But do they come hither also?


Expos. That they do, but seldom; and not as in the first Enclosure.


Strange. And do the OPINIONS come thus far also?


Expos. Yes verily do they. For the draught that IMPOSTURE gives them at the
first, is not yet out of their heads; they do as yet smell of the dregs of
ERROR and IGNORANCE. Nor shall they ever be quit of their Opinions, or other
Vices, which they imbibed, till they bid adieu to FALSE INSTRUCTION, and betake
themselves to a new course, and taking a Potion, by Name ERROUR'S Purgation,
thereby Vomit up all the Evils, that offended their minds, as their OPINIONS,
their IGNORANCE, and all their other Exorbitances; for so shall their
Consciences be absolutely cured. But as long as they keep Company with FALSE
INSTRUCTION, they shall never be sound, nor shall their Learning help them away
with one inconvenience.


Strange. Which is the way then, that leads unto TRUE INSTRUCTION?


Expos. Why, look you here, see you this high place, as desert and uninhabited?


Strange. Well Sir, how then?


Expos. Then you see that little Gate, and the way there before that Gate,
which seems to be but little trodden, lying in such a deep descent of that
craggy rock?


Strange. That we see also.


Expos. And that Hill too, that is compassed on both sides with inaccessible
Cliffs, having only one narrow Path, whereby to ascend it?


Strange. Yes, Sir.


Expos. That very Path is all the way we have to TRUE INSTRUCTION.


Strange. But truly, Sir, it seems to us almost impossible to get up to the top
of it.


Expos. See that steep Rock by that other Hill.


Strange. We see it.


Expos. Don't you perceive two lusty and comely Virago's, standing thereupon,
and reaching forth their hands, as it were, to invite one?


Strange. We perceive them well, but what are their Names?


Expos. One of them is called CONTINENCY and the other TOLERANCE, and they are
Sisters.


Strange. Why do they reach forth their hands?


Expos. They encourage the Travelers, that pass by that way, to be of good
cheer, and to despise DESPERATION, the Daughter of Sloth; assuring them, that
after a little toil, the remainder of their Life shall be crowned with blessed
Tranquillity; and that if they will climb but a little, all the way will be
more easy and passable.


Strange. But when they are got as far as the Rock, what course must they take
to get up? We see no means they can use to mount so steep a Cliff.


Expos. You say right; but the two Sisters do come down themselves from the
top, and lending them their helping hands, pull them up by degrees: after they
have drawn them up a little way, they let them rest a while, and then they
fetch FORTITUDE and CONFIDENCE unto them, and pass their words to bring them to
the Presence of TRUE INSTRUCTION, showing them how plain and pleasant the Path
is, now, that they have conquered the first and greatest difficulty; and how
pure and clea^ it is from crags and encumbrances, as you see there in the Table.


Strange. One would think so in good earnest.


Expos. See you not that wood, and before it, as it were a curious piece of
Land or Mead all full of light and delight?


Strange. It is so.


Expos. There is another Enclosure in the midst of that with a Gate into it.
See you that?


Strange. Yes; but how call you that Enclosure?


Expos. It is called, I promise you, the Seat and Habitation of the Blessed;
for there dwell all the VIRTUES and BEATITUDE her self.


Strange. To the Eye it seems an Heavenly Place.


Expos. You see that goodly Gentlewoman, that stands by the Gate, with a fixed
Eye, of a middle and just Age, in a plain and ordinary Habit, and standing upon
a Stone, not round, but exactly square; if you observe there stand two other
Women just by her, that seem to be her Daughters.


Strange. So they do.


Expos. She, that stands in the middle, goes under the Name of INSTRUCTION, she
on the right hand, TRUTH, and she on the left, PERSUASION.


Strange. But pray resolve us, why INSTRUCTION stands upon a square Stone.


Exp. To show, that the Path, which leads unto her, is fair and square, as we
say, and firm; and that her Gifts do bless the Receiver with Fruits of Security.


Strange. What are her Gifts?


Expos. Why, COURAGE, SECURITY, and ACQUITTANCE from troubles.


Strange. And what Benefit by these?


Expos. By these Man perceives, that his Life is now to continue void of all
perturbation.


Strange. O Rich! O Glorious! O Blessed Gifts! But why does she stand without
the Enclosure?


Expos. To cure the Travelers, and give them their cleansing Draught, before
they enter, and then when they are thoroughly cleansed to introduce them unto
these VIRTUES.


Strange. How can this be, dear Sir! In truth, we don't understand you.


Expos. You shall though. It is in this case, as it is in a sick and diseased
person's, who has presently recourse to an Eminent Physician. Now to make a
Cure the Physician first of all purges away the Causes, and Nutriment of the
Malady, and then plys him with some strengthening Cordials, and finally (through
GOD) makes him safe and sound. But suppose the person had neglected the
Doctor's advice, the disease would quickly have rooted in his Body, and when
once it had gotten the upperhand, might have killed him; and whom might he
thank then but himself?


Strange. I marry, Sir, this is intelligible indeed.


Expos. Well, in this manner do Men approach the Station of INSTRUCTION, which
as soon as they arrive at, she presently takes them in hand, prescribes them a
Medicine of her own making, that so they may purge out all their ingulph'd
Evils, and cast them forth as by Vomit or Ejection.


Strange. What are the Evils, they cast up?


Expos. ERROR and IGNORANCE, both of which they drank from the Cup of
IMPOSTURE; ARROGANCE also, AVARICE, LUST, INTEMPERANCE, WRATH, and all the
Poisons, which they swallowed down, while they were in the first Enclosure.


Strange. But when they are well purged, whither sends she them?


Expos. She admits them in unto KNOWLEDGE and the other VIRTUES.


Strange. Which are they?


Expos. Why, see you not a company of comely and modest Ladies there within the
Gate, amongst whom there is not one, that seems painted or extravagantly
dressed, as others were all before?


Strange. We see them; how call you them?


Expos. The foremost of them KNOWLEDGE, the rest are her Sisters, and they are
called FORTITUDE, JUSTICE, INTEGRITY of Life, MODESTY, LIBERALITY, CONTINENCY,
and CLEMENCY.


Strange. Oh! goodly consort! how great expectation have you raised in us!


Expos. Complete will your hopes be, if you rightly apprehend this Relation,
and seriously apply it to your course of Life in this vain and wicked World.


Strange. Truly, Sir, there shall be nothing wanting on our side.


Expos. Well, make your words good, do but as you say, and (believe me) Peace
and Tranquillity shall crown your Victory.


Strange. But (if we may be so bold) whither do these VIRTUES lead a Man, when
once they have received him?


Expos. Unto their Mother.


Strange. What do they call her?


Expos. BEATITUDE.


Strange. What is she?


Expos. See you not a way, that ascends that height there, whereupon the
Tower of the three Enclosures is founded? Behold there a fair and flourishing
Matron, enthroned in State, sat at the Porch of the said Tower, in decent
Apparel, and without any thing of Vanity or affectation, and most delicately
crowned with a flowery Chaplet?


Strange. You say right? Sir; what is she?


Expos. The very Person, that is called BEATITUDE.


Strange. And when one comes at her, what does she?


Expos. She crowns him with her own Essence, and so do all the other Virtues,
as they crown those, that come off Conquerours in This Dialogue alludes very
much to the Olympic Games in various places.
the Olympic Games.


Strange. What conflicts has he been engaged in?


Expos. In many sore ones, and has conquered many a Salvage Beast, that before
even dedevour'd him, and tormented him, and made him a mere Slave: All these he
has conquered and beat off, and has even overcome himself, being now rendered
his own Man again; so that now they serve him, as he was made to serve them
before.


Strange. What Beasts are they you speak of, Sir? we have an earnest desire to
know.


Expos. Why, Sirs, first I speak of IGNORANCE and ERROR, are not they Beasts?


Strange. Yes, and cruel ones too, we think.


Expos. Then I speak of ANGUISH, SORROW, AVARICE, INTEMPERANCE, and all other
kind of Vices; all these has he subjugated, and has now at his command,
whereas before he was at theirs.


Strange. O most Triumphant Victory, and worthy to be Eternally kept in mind!
but tell us this, Sir, we beseech you, what mighty Power is there in the Crown,
she gives him?


Expos. A mighty Strength and Power (young Men) there is in that Crown. He, who
is crowned with it, shall be really happy, and exalted above all misery; nor
shall his happiness depend upon others, but be fully Established in himself.


Strange. O what a brave Victory is there! But what does he that is honored
with this Crown? Whither does he march then?


Expos. Then do the VIRTUES conduct him back the same way that he came, and
show him those, that are below, how miserable and deplorable their condition
is, and what a shipwreck they make of their Life following no exact course, but
are enslaved to their foes, some to ARROGANCE, some to AVARICE, some to
AMBITION and VAINGLORY, some to one kind of Ruin and some to another; from
which Bonds, wherein they are enslaved, they can by no means extricate
themselves, so as to be saved and arrive unto this place: but are confounded
and troubled all their Life long: And this they suffer, because they cannot
find the way hither, for they forgot the Instructions of the GENIUS.


Strange. You seem to say well, Sir, but here again we are at a loss; why should
the VIRTUES bring him to the place and danger, that he has already escaped?


Expos. I Will tell you; when he made his first escape, he did not conceive half
the matter, nor did he apprehend the actions, that were done there, scarce any
thing at all; but was altogether pestered with slavish doubts and fears,
because of the drink of ERROR and IGNORANCE, which he had tasted, which made
him look upon that for good, which in the main had nothing of goodness in it,
and on evil after the same fashion; whereby he was thrust into a depraved
Estate, as well as the rest that tarry there. But now having attained the
knowledge of things convenient and conducible to him, he both contemplates the
misery of others, and enjoys true felicity himself.


Strange. But when he has observed and considered the infelicity of these Men,
what does he then, or whither does he go?


Expos. Verily, even what he lists, and whither he pleases. For he is as safe
and secure, as if he were sheltered in the Corycian Cave, or in the Muses lap;
and let him live, where he will, he shall pass his time in Peace and Piety, and
free from all manner of trouble and vexation. All Men shall be as fond of his
company and conversation, as the Patient is of the Physician's.


Strange. Why, but shall he never more be afraid of those Women, you lately
termed Beasts? Shall they have no more power to hurt him?


Expos. No, not to touch or come nigh him. He shall bid defiance to SORROW,
TROUBLE, INCONTINENCE, AVARICE, NEED, and all other the worst of Enemies; he
shall curb and keep them under now, at his pleasure, who before molested him;
like This Passage was before mistook by Interpreters, (...), a People like the
Marsians.
the Marsians, who familiarly converse with Vipers. For those Creatures, who
are fatal to all others, do these no harm; because they bear in themselves a
present Remedy; so likewise shall no evil approach this happy Man, because in
himself he has a quick Preservative against all their infections.


Strange. Very well, but pray, Sir, be pleased to give us your thoughts
concerning yonder place; for we see a vast number of People coming down the
Hill, as it were, some with Crowns on their heads, seeming to rejoice and leap
for joy, and others bare-headed looking like Men in extreme Despair, with their
heads and legs all bruised; and several Women seem to detain them, what are
these?


Exp. They, that wear Crowns, are newly created the Children of INSTRUCTION,
and rejoice at their Adoption; those, that are without Crowns, are some of them
rejected by her, and so fallen into a desperate condition; others made weak
through sloth, when they had gotten up as far as TOLERANCE, went back again, and
so run a wandering they knew not whither.


Strange. But who are the Women that follow them?


Expos. There Is SORROW, TROUBLE, DESPERATION, IGNOMINY and IGNORANCE.


Strange. Why then (be like) all the evils imaginable follow them at their heels?


Expos. So they do, and when they return into the first Enclosure, unto LUXURY
and INCONTINENCE, they never blame themselves, but fall a cursing INSTRUCTION,
and all that are in the way to her, as wretches and miserable fools, that leave
the Path, which these now tread in, and the Pleasure of the first Enclosure, to
go seek and haunt out a course of such unhappiness; denying to stay and share
with them in their delightful goods.


Strange. And what are their goods?


Expos. Shall I tell you in a word? they are PRODIGALITY, and INTEMPERANCE. For
just like Beasts they are all for the Belly, and conclude that then they are
entirely happy, when that is full.


Strange. But what call you the other Women, that come down there laughing and
singing?


Expos. They are OPINIONS; they carry Men up unto INSTRUCTION, and when they
have done, come back and tell the rest, how welcome those were, whom they
presented, and how they are now in a blessed Estate.


Strange. Why, but do these OPINIONS go in unto the VIRTUES?


Expos. No, by no means; it is never allowed for OPINION to come within view of
KNOWLEDGE. They only convey the Men to INSTRUCTION, whom as soon as ever she
has accepted of, they go their ways to fetch more and more, like as Ships
that having unladen their Freight, set out presently for a new Voyage, taking
in other Commodities.


Strange. In truth, Sir, your Comparison is very witty and ingenious; but you
have not told us yet, what it is, that LIFE'S GENIUS says unto those that are
to enter this course of Life?


Expos. He bids them be of good cheer; and I pray, be you of good cheer
likewise; for I will not keep a Letter of the Exposition from you.


Strange. We thank you heartily, Sir, said we all.

Then He reaching forth his Staff again, pointed up, saying, see you that blind
Woman upon the round Stone there, who is called FORTUNE, as I told you before?


Strange. Yes.


Expos. The GENIUS bid^ them never to give heed unto her, never to imagine any
solidity in her Bounties, never to think her Gifts their proper Goods: for even
when she list, she will take them from one, and bestow them upon another maugre
all Contradiction; it is her common Practice. And for this Reason he forewarns
them not to be delighted with her Beneficence, nor dejected at her inconstancy
and frowardness, never to be vanquished by her fickle pleasant smiles or morose
frownings; in a word, neither to curse nor applaud her, seeing that all her
doings are without discretion, and she hurleth all about at six and seven, as I
hinted to you just now. Therefore does this GENIUS bid them never to wonder at
her odd Vagaries, nor to be concerned at any thing, she does, or be like
foolish Bankers. For they, when they receive any Money of Men, are jocund, as
if 'twas their own. But when they are asked to refund, they are vexed, as if
you did 'em an injury; never remembering, that they at first received the sums,
on this very condition, that he that lent them might at his pleasure recall
them in. Thus our GENIUS commands us to behave our selves, as to what she lends
us; and to remember that this is the natural disposition of FORTUNE; to give
and take, to give one at first a pretty deal, and then presently to require all
back again. He bids us upon this account receive her Gifts with indifferency,
and when we have them, to make haste to that firm and stable kind of Bounty.


Strange. Which is that?


Exp. That which INSTRUCTION gives to those that come safe to her Tower to ask
it.


Strange. And what does she give?


Expos. She gives the true knowledge of profitable things, a Gift of immutable
goodness and security. To her therefore he wishes them all to quicken their
pace, and when they come to LUXURY and INCONTINENCE, the two Women aforenam'd,
to pass by them speedily, and to stop their Ears unto their enveigling
persuasions, and so to hasten on, till they come to FALSE INSTRUCTION. There he
advises them to make a little stay, and take what they like of her as their
Viaticum for the rest of their Journey, and then to scowre away with all speed
unto the Palace of TRUE INSTRUCTION. This is the charge, that LIFE'S GENIUS
lays upon all, that are just making entrance into the first Enclosure. He,
that either refuses it, or misapplyeth it, comes home by Unhappiness and Ruin.
This (my good Friends) is the whole Exposition of this Table; if you want any
farther satisfaction in any particular, let me know, and I shall be ready to
resolve you.


Strange. A Thousand thanks to you, Sir, for what you have already made easy to
us: and you will lay an infinite obligation upon us, if you will be pleased to
inform us, what it is that the GENIUS wishes them to take at the station of
FALSE INSTRUCTION.


Expos. Such things, as will be requisite and beneficial.


Strange. And what are those?


Expos. Letters, Languages, and Discipline, which Plato calls the Bridle of
Youth, curbing them in, and keeping them out of worse Exercise and Employments.


Strange. Must he, that will hasten to TRUE INSTRUCTION, needs take these here,
or may he let them alone at his pleasure?


Expos. He need not, unless he will, there is no compulsion in the case. They
are convenient, but not of any necessity to Virtue.


Strange. No? Are they not necessary for the bettering of our Understandings?


Expos. Yes; but however our Goodness may increase without them; yet are they
not altogether useless. For as on occasion we may understand what is said by an
Interpreter; though it would not be amiss, if we understood the very Language our
selves, however otherwise we do apprehend the matter: even so without these
sorts of Learning, nothing hinders, but we may attain unto Virtue.


Strange. I, but does not the understanding of these Arts and Sciences qualify
and enable Men to have goodness better infused into them, than others, that
have not these Disciplines?


Expos. No; how should that be, when they have as bad a Notion of the True
Nature of Good and Evil, and are as black with the pitchy touch of viciousness,
as others? It is an easy thing, for one to be a pretty good Scholar, and Master
of all the Arts, and for all that be a Sot; to be Lewd, Stingy, Injurious,
Perfidious, and in short, as mere an Idiot, as he that never knew what belonged
to a School. Of such there are numerous Instances and Examples; we need not go
far to fetch them: and now then what Prerogative so great has Learning in the
Reformation of Men's Extravagancies?


Strange. Why, none methinks, if things go thus. But why then are Scholars in
the second Enclosure, as nearer neighbors to TRUE INSTRUCTION than the rest?


Expos. Alas! what good do they get by that? When we may often behold many,
that pass out of the first Enclosure from INCONTINENCE, and the other train of
Vices, unto TRUE INSTRUCTION, without once resting amongst these great
Scholars. What Man then can avouch their Estate better because of the place?
They are either more dull, or (at least) more idle, than others.


Strange. Why, said we, how comes that to pass?


Expos. Because, though those of the second Enclosure were clear from all faults
else, yet this alone would stick by them for ever, to profess they know what
they do not: which indeed is a great obstacle and impediment to them in the
acquiring of TRUE INSTRUCTION. Again, do you not see, how the OPINIONS come
thick and threefold out of the first Enclosure unto them? These are the causes,
why their condition is not a rush better than the others, unless REPENTANCE and
they fall once acquainted, and they be verily persuaded, that they dwell not
with TRUE INSTRUCTION, but with her Counterfeit, which leads them into ERROR,
and obstructeth all the means of their Reformation, and Passage to SECURITY.
Wherefore, my Friends, unless you take this course, and often meditate on my
words, and always keep in mind some of these Admonitions, I leave with you,
all that I have said will be in vain, and you will not be a Farthing the better
for the Exposition of this Table.


Strange. Upon our Faith and honest Word, we'll do our very best; but Pray, Sir,
do us the favor, as to resolve us this Question; why are not the Gifts, that
FORTUNE bestows upon Men, worthy to be accounted Goods? As Life, Health,
Riches, Honors, Children, Success, and such other her Bounties? And why are
not their contraries Evils? This Assertion seems strange, and almost incredible
unto us.


Expos. Well, be sure then, that you answer directly unto what I shall Propound.


Strange. We will, Sir.


Expos. What think you? Whether is it good for him, that is an Evil Liver, to
Live, or not?


Strange. It is not good for him, in our opinion, to Live, but rather bad.


Expos. How then can Life be a Good, if it be Bad for him?


Strange. Because, as to a Bad Man Life is Bad, so to a Good Man Life is Good.


Expos. So, then I find, you suppose Life to be both good and bad.


Strange. So in good earnest we do.


Expos. O! mark, what you say; for, that one thing should be both good and bad,
implies a flat contradiction. For then at that rate, it would be both
profitable and hurtful; and likewise always to be loved and desired, and hated
and avoided at the same time.


Strange. This is something absurd, we must confess. But if he that lives
badly, have a badness by living so; how can Life but be bad unto that Man?


Expos. I, but remember, that it is one thing to live, and another to live
badly.


Strange. That is true.


Expos. So that LIFE is not bad in it self. For were it so, it would be so to
the best liver as well as to the worst: for all would be possessed of a LIFE,
that would be badness in its very self; and then Bad would be the Best.


Strange. Right in truth.


Expos. Well then LIFE being communicated both to the good Liver and to the
bad; to Live of it self is neither good nor bad, no more than cutting or
burning is; both which are good in some Diseases, but prejudicial to all found
Constitutions. Just so is this Life. And therefore put the case to your selves,
whether had you rather live badly, or die honorably?


Strange. I Would make choice of the latter.


Expos. So then Death in it self is no bad thing belike, for it is oftentimes
to be preferred before Life.


Strange. Right again.


Expos. Well then Health and Sickness have one and the same respect. For
occasion may so happen, that the sick Man may not recover.


Strange. Not unlikely.


Expos. Weigh Riches then in the same Balance; recollect that, which we often
see. A Man has plenty of Riches, and puts them to no good use, but lives a
Miser. Not a few of this sort.


Strange. In troth, too many.


Expos. So then his Riches don't augment his happiness any way.


Strange. Not, in our Judgment, by reason of his own badness.


Expos. Therefore you see, it is not Riches, but good Instruction, that makes a
Man both Good and Happy.


Strange. Surely so it seems.


Expos. How then can Riches be good, when they have no Power to better those,
that enjoy them?


Strange. They cannot be indeed.


Expos. Well, then it is highly expedient, that some should not be rich at all,
because they know not how to make a good use of Riches.


Strange. In that we agree.


Expos. How then can that be any way conducive to goodness, which oftentimes
must be kept from the use of diverse Persons? So that he, that can use wealth,
as wealth should be used, may live well; and he that cannot, very ill.


Strange. All you say is exceeding true, Sir.


Expos. In fine, it is the esteem for those, as goods, or the contempt of them,
as evils, that molest and disturb the thoughts of Man; when they that are vile
Earth and MORTALITY, prize them as things of such excellent worth, and think,
that their whole happiness merely depends on them. This makes them to undergo
all actions, even of how black a die soever. And these things happen unto all
such, as admire outward appearances, and can in no wise attain to the true
knowledge of good; they are so blinded and overwhelmed with IGNORANCE; neither
have they learnt, that it is impossible for good to be brought out of evil; and
you may see very many, who have heaped up Riches by evil means, and filthy
deeds, such as Treachery, Spoils, Manslaughters, Calumnies, Rapines, and other
sad and outrageous Vices.


Strange. There is nothing to be objected against what you say, Worthy Sir.


Exp. Well, observe but this, and I shall dismiss you presently. If so be no
good can proceed from that which is evil, (as not unlikely) and Riches may be
gotten by vicious courses; it follows consequently, that Riches cannot be
accounted good.


Strange. It is evidently manifest from what you say.


Expos. Again, Wisdom and Piety can never have their rise from evil actions,
neither on the contrary, can Vice or Folly proceed from good actions; for these
are in their very nature contraries; and so can never be consistent one with
the other. But now Riches, and Honor, and Victory, and such like may possibly
be gotten by evil means, and nothing hinder. Wherefore let us determine them
neither good nor bad of themselves; for of a certain, Wisdom is the only good,
and Folly the only evil.


Strange. Now, Sir, we return you our hearty thanks for all your favors; and we
will trouble you no longer: for what you have already acquainted us with gives
us great satisfaction.


The End of CEBES his TABLET.
An Excellent TREATISE Concerning PEACE OF CONSCIENCE,

Written by HIPPARCHUS, A Pythagorean Philosopher.

And Translated into English By ROBERT WARREN, Student of CHRIST'S College in
CAMBRIDGE.

Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Pectora pro Facto spemque
metumque suo.

Ovid. Lib. Fastorum. 111. A TREATISE OF Peace of Conscience.
WHereas the Life of Man is very short, if compared with Eternity, Men would do
very wisely, to pass it, as if in a pleasant Journey or Pilgrimage, remembering
that by doing so, they would make their lives both easy and happy; and the best
and only means, to attain to this Perfection, would be truly to know
themselves, and to consider, that they are but vile dust and ashes; that they
are created with a Body obnoxious, both to sorrow, danger, and at last to
death; and are exposed to the worst of calamities, even to their last gasp of
Breath.

Now let us make a few Remarks of those Evils, which are the general attendants
of this Body. As first, the Pleurisy, Consumption, the Phrenzy, the Gout, the
Stone, the Bloody Flux, the Lethargy, the Falling Sickness, Putrefying Ulcers,
and an infinite number of other Diseases. These are all contingent to the Body.
But the Mind is infested with much worse Maladies, than any of these. For
whatsoever Folly, Vice, Sin, or Impurity Men are actually guilty of, takes its
Rise from some Indisposition of the Mind: many through immoderate and unnatural
Lusts, have broken out into notorious actions, and have even satisfied their
brutish Appetites upon their Mothers or Daughters. How many Parents are there,
that have cut their Childrens throats? Not to omit some Evils of a strange and
different sort; as Deluges, Extremity of Drought, Heat and Cold, so that
sometimes from the unseasonableness of the Air, the Plague, Famine and many
dangerous Evils happen, and whole Cities are laid Desolate. Since then we are
in continual dangers, and such a many Evils hang over our heads, let us not
trust to the goods of the Body, which are presently destroyed by one fit of
sickness; neither let us be pufft up with outward Prosperity, since that it
sooner goes away than comes: for we are made sensible from the infinite variety
of strange changes and alterations, which are daily wrought in the World, that
there is no sure, constant, certain, or permanent Possession in this transitory
Life.

Wherefore let us always revolve in our thoughts, that those things, which we
now are possessed of, will endure but for a moment; and remember, that if we
bear all things patiently and courageously, we shall most assuredly acquire
that Rich and Noble Blessing, Serenity and PEACE of CONSCIENCE. But now very
many, who enjoy both the Gifts of Nature and Fortune, when they have supposed
them very good, and have esteemed them better, than indeed they are, however
they seem to be, being quickly deprived of them, are extremely cast down at
their dismal and almost insupportable losses. And by this means it comes to
pass, that their whole Life is perfect Labor and Sorrow to them. Now the
general cause and occasion of this dejection, is either loss of Riches, or
death of Children and Relations, or parting with our dearest Possessions; then
they fall a howling and crying, and curse the day of their Birth, and foolishly
declare, that they only are the most unfortunate Wretches in the whole World.
When alas! poor hearts, they do not consider, what storms of affliction Men in
former times have waded through, neither have they the patience to make a few
serious Reflections upon other Men's Lives; and to recollect, what an infinite
of losses others have had, and (which is much worse) may now live in sorrow and
torment.

Now would we but consider, and believe, what History gives us an exact Account
of, how many have saved their Carcasses for the bare loss of their fading
Riches, when it might have been their Fortune to have light upon Tyrants or
Highwaymen: and how many again, who were formerly adored and sought after by
many fawning Courtiers; when once their Riches were gone, all the pretended
Friendship dropped off; and proved downright hatred and contempt at the bottom.
And how many have been murdered by their Children and Relations, and all these
Evils, and a great deal more, purely occasioned by flitting and frothy
Treasures? Now would we, I say, but compare our Lives with other Men's, who
have fared much worse than our selves, and be willing to hold all human
misfortunes in common; (I warrant you) we should live much easier, and better
to our content. For none indeed, who are true Men (and would gladly be thought
so) ought to think other Men happy, and themselves miserable, other Men's Evils
light and easy, and their own sad and intolerable; when this Life, to the very
Eye, is both bitter and miserable. And now, besides all this, Men's howling and
outcries will avail nothing toward the Redeeming a lost Estate, or the
Recovering Life of one that is dead. They only add to their own misery, and
foolishly disturb their Minds to no purpose. Wherefore we ought by all means to
wash and purge away these filthy blemishes by True Philosophy. And this we may
easily do, if we will be prudent and temperate, and take all in good part; that
is, be thankful for what we have, and covet no more. For they, who heap up such
an abundance of Riches, never consider, that they are to meet with another Life
elsewhere, after this is ended: for which they make no manner of preparation;
but rather bestow all their Labor and Endeavors to provide for a Life of a
few moments, to their extreme hazard and shame. But because these things will
be no otherwise, let us, who know better things, let us, I say, live wisely,
and make much of what we have; earnestly contending for the Saving Philosophy,
which will free our Minds, and take off our roving thoughts from all inordinate
Love of this wicked World; and especially of those things, which are infamous
and destructive to us.

(...).

THE END.
APELLES HIS TABLE Being A PICTURE of humane Life Now Rendered into English.
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci
Lectorem delectando pariterque monendo.
Horatius de Art Poetica, APELLES HIS First PICTURE.
THere was a spacious Garden with a very pleasant Arbor in it, all as
Beautiful with Walks, Flowers, Herbs, Trees, and the like, as Heart can wish,
or Fancy can imagine. On the right Hand, there was a great Gate for the chief
Entrance, the Way and Passage being all along extremely delectable, beset with
fine tall Trees on each side, whereon were curious and wonderful Birds,
Chirping, Dancing, and Carolling, as it were to invite Passengers to this their
Earthly Paradise. And indeed the Way was all full of People of all sorts, Ages,
and Sexes; who thronging from all parts were hasting thitherward. On the left
Hand of the said Garden, was a lesser Door, or Wicket, which seemed only
contrived for a Passage out of the Garden now and then; for as there was no
Manner of Path to it on the one side, so there was but a very small Passage
toward it on the Inside, and that in a manner unfrequented, and therefore much
overgrown with Thorns, Bushes and Brambles.

But before the first Gate on the right Hand there were goodly Tents erected,
with delightful Seats and Lodgings; there were also large, and fair Tables
spread, ready furnished with all sorts of viands, necessary for the Life of
Man, disposed in very good order, and all Comers were freely welcome to sit
down, where they Banquetted very jocundly.

The Lady Hostess or Mistress of the place called her self Sobriety, who had
her Chamber-Maids waiting about her with all diligence and in exceeding good
order. One was Cheerfulness, the other Modesty, the third Honesty, and the
fourth Temperance. They were assisted with three Lovely Sisters, who were
called the Graces. Some other Servants or Attendants there were, as Industry,
Honesty, Labor, Frugality, Health, and Good Humor, who were all of Sobriety's
Household in this Place of Pleasure; where while some refreshed themselves with
Eating and Drinking, others were walking or wrestling, or conferring together,
or spending their time in Reading, or Writing, or Working on some easy and
honest Work, or playing on Musical Instruments, while others sang sweet and
chaste Songs unto them. And all this was done without any the least disorder,
debate, or coffeehouse. In short, they had among them all kinds of Decent
Pastime both to exercise and to recreate their minds and bodies, as well
before, as after, this Repast, as was Judged most requisite for the maintenance
and support of Health. After a sufficient Refection one part of them retired
homeward very merrily and in good order having first thanked, and taken leave
of their Lady Hostess, Madam Sobriety.

But the rest, that remained, being a far greater number, not content with the
good Fare and Pastime, they had recieved in this Place, would needs pass on
farther, and entered into the Garden at the great Gate without taking the least
notice of their first. Hostess Sobriety, or yielding Her any Thankful Requital.

Here, at the Entrance of the Arbor there sat a Woman gazing about her on all
sides, being very gross and fat, her Cheeks swollen and puffed up, her Lips
blubberly and red, and her Face like a Platter. However she showed her self
very serviceable, calling to the new Comers, making unto then courteous signs
with her Head, and showing them with both her Hands the Entrance. Her Name was,
it seems, Gourmondise, or Gluttony.

In the midst of this Arbor sat another Woman, dressed like a Queen, and
indeed she governed there, and was chief Lady of the Lodging, but she was
drunk, having a Crown of young Vine-Sprouts on her Head, and a great Cup in
both her Hands, as one that was always ready to drink, for her Name was
Drunkenness. She also had her Ladies and Waiting-Maids attending on her every
one with a Cup in her Hand, and one with wilder looks then the other, still
looking wilder and wilder, as they stood behind the first; Whose Name was
Merriment; next to her was Heedlessness, then Vanity, then Folly, then Luxury,
then Revelling and Excess, and lastly Madness; all of them in Garments suitable
to their Conditions.

There were diverse other Attendants, as Forgetfulness, who stood in manner of
one Astonished; Slothfulness sat on the Ground with her Arms folded, her Sister
Idleness and her Daughter Carelessness lying half naked and asleep by her. She
her self was scarce dressed and hardly well awake; yet she held in her Hand a
Cup of Wine, but so neglectfully as that she spilled much on the Ground. Hard
by was Scurrility and Scoffing with Taunting their Brother, and Brabling their
Sister, who took her Kinsman Debate by the Hand, and they all sat closely
together, though in no quiet but boisterous manner, conferring and carousing with
Infamy, Rage, and Fury; who had terrible Looks and fiery Faces. In a close
corner there was the Queen's Daughter Intemperance, dallying and wantoning with
her own Brother Lust, her Gentlewomen Immodesty and Shamelessness standing by
and looking on.

This comely company were in a manner hedged about with a strong Guard of
Bears, Bulls, Goats, great Asses, Horses, huge Mastives, Wolves, Swine, Hares,
Bucks, Apes, Baboons, Marmosets, Monkeys, and Satyrs, and other kind of Beasts,
that it seems had formerly all been Men, but after long tarrying with the
Queen, and drinking too liberal Draughts of her Wine, had been metamorphos'd
and changed into such Creatures. But verily it was an horror to behold their
Countenances; how terrible, and fiery, and to observe, what a dismal life they
lead, crying and howling and roaring together with a most discordant Harmony;
for by the clashing of their Teeth, the shaking of their Chains, and the gaping
of their Throats, their Picture seemed to affect the Ear as well as the Eye.

On one side you might see some of these Beasts discharging their Stomachs of
Wine, which those, that were turned into Dogs, immediately licked up again. The
Swine wallow'd in filthy Puddles and mire, vomiting up horrible Serpents and
Lizzards. The Bulls and Kine cast up Frogs and Flies; the Bucks Pearls, the
Asses Books, the Bears Swords and Hangers; the Wolves Cats, Mice, and Rats; But
the Apes, Marmosets, and Satyrs skipped and frisked and danced about very
pleasantly. On the contrary the Bears and Wolves bit and fought very cruelly,
one against the other; so that a great deal of Fur was scattered on the Ground,
and here an Ear, and there a piece of a Tail, and Teeth, and Horns; and Blood
ran all about.

On the left Hand, toward the little Wicket, which we observed to be a place
in a manner unfrequented; there lay at a good distance the Bodies of Beasts
stretched out along, sleeping, as it seemed, very soundly, though in their own
dung and vomiting. All were wounded with Wine, but many had other hurts, and
there they lay heaped one on another, like a Pile of dead Bodies. Yet some now
and then made shift to rise up, though faintly, after they had, I suppose,
digested their Wine, and immediately returned to their former behavior, having
still on them the skins of salvage Beasts. Others finding themselves well
wearied with these immoderate Entertainments, went staggering forth of the
Arbor, seeking to get away by the narrow Passage; but many of these at their
returning were found hurt and lame of the Limbs, some being only half Men and
half Beasts, as Mermen, Centaurs, Satyrs and Savages. These, being with much a
do gotten by degrees out of the little Door, met there with certain old rough
and tough Fellows, who came toward them with Chains, and Shackles, wherewith
they bound them Hand and Foot, and afterward beat them, very soundly. If any
one offered to rebel, they gave him many severe blows with a Bastinado, and
they hardly suffered any to escape them, without making some account of this
Nature with them.

The most dangerous old Fellow of all, who gave the greatest blows, and indeed
was most cruel, was called the Gout, clothed indeed in Silk and Satin, but of
an ill-favored shape and very hideous to behold. His Limbs were lank and
loose, his Joints gross, his Legs swelled, his Face bloached, and his Hands and
Fingers full of great Nodes and Crooked. The next to him had a Countenance
partly pale, and partly red as any Fire; and his Name was Feaver-Ague. The
Third was Dropsy, very hugely swollen with a Color like Lead and Sulphur; and he
was also a shrewd smiter, and tormented very cruelly. For in some he blew their
Bellies like Bladders, 'till they were hard and distended like Drums; others
Legs he puffed up; others their Breast and Face; and others their whole Body,
till he had brought them to such a condition, that they could never be
satisfied with Drink, but, the more they drank, they were still the more
thirsty and insatiable. Hard at his Heels followed the Palsy, who seemed to be
wholly Impotent, and that he had not any Nerves or Sinews, that were not
utterly broken; but for all that, such as he could once lay hold on, he made
them sure, rendering them quite Numb and Dead in half their Body, or crooked and
bent in the middle, or weak and helpless and shaking in all their parts. Next
him there was Apoplexy, or the Dead-Palsy, who took some strictly by the
collar, and so beat them about the Head, that they remained as dead without any
understanding or moving; and some indeed with two or three Knocks he killed
outright. Among these were the Itch and Scab, followed by their Sister Leprosy,
who so handled these poor Creatures, that their Bodies became like an hard
crust, their Faces being adorned with goodly Sapphires. But their Noses cost
more in Painting, than if they had been limn'd in Gold, or Silver; for they
were all covered over with rich Carbuncles. And yet for all they were so
handled by these old Fellows, they could not forbear quarrelling among
themselves; for they fell a tugging and lugging one another by the Ears, and
fought so cruelly, that you might easily guess few of them would be left alive.
Thus grew a great number of Diseases among Men at first, which being entered
into the Blood and Marrow, came propagated down to late Posterity; but all of
them had their Original from Intemperance. But we must not forget the
Falling Sickness, who lay all along beating his Head against the Ground, and
upon the hard Stones, that many times it brake, that the Blood gushed out; he
foaming at the Mouth all the while like an angry Boar. But woe to him, whom he
could fasten on; For he would fling him down, and then fall upon him, and never
leave, till he had made him in as bad a case as himself. Yet he was not so
cruel, as his Kinsman Apoplexy; for although he took away all understanding, yet
he left some Motions and Signs of Life. There was also Catarrhe, or Rheumatism,
who continually aimed at the Head and Eyes, and Chest; he had a gross Head
himself, so heavy, (to ones Eye) and withal so sleepy, as if he could hardly
support himself. His Gorge was like a Sink; ever Bilching forth unsavory
fumes; his Eyes always sore; his Nose like a Limbeck continually Distilling;
but not Rosewater, you may swear; for it was plainly Glaunders and Snivel,
which together with large quantitys of Water, that came forth of his Head, as
if sufficient to quench the heat of Wine, gave a smell, that annoyed all; but
almost stifled them, that were near. Among all these old Wretches, there was
one, that had well nigh five thousand Pieces and Patches on his Garment, and
yet himself in a manner naked and barefoot; his Face was covered very thick
with Dirt and Filth, and he looked very meager and hideous, which made all the
Rest, seeing him so like a poor snake, and even unworthy to hold rank with
them, to beat and bruise him, 'till the Blood issued forth. Only Headache, and
Nastiness, and Lowsiness were content to keep him company. This very Picture of
Misery was called Poverty.

Last of all came old decrepit Age with a Staff in his Hand and mounted in a
Chariot made all of dead Men's bones, with his Neighbor Death sitting in
Triumph over him. The Chariot Wheels went over both Young and Old, breaking
them in pieces, as it went a long.

And this is the Substance of this Picture of Apelles, wherein that Ingenious
Painter gives us a lively and graphical Description of Sobriety, and
Drunkenness, setting forth apparently, to every Eye, both the Good and Evil,
that happens to Men, as they choose either this or that.

The END of the first TABLE.
ENVY Unmasked And INNOCENCE Rewarded.

An Excellent Example To all KINGS, and MAGISTRATES.

Being A PREFACE to the following PICTVRE.

ENVY Unmasked And INNOCENCE Rewarded.
KING Ptolemy, the Son of Lagus, had a Lieutenant named Theodotas whom he set
over Phoenicia; this Man entered into a conspiracy against his Lord and Master
in Tire; so that the City and Island revolted from Ptolemy and Pelusium, which
was the Key of Egypt on the side of Syria, was betrayed. At this juncture one
Antiphilus a Villainous Rascal, a Painter, who envied Apelles mortally for his
greater Skill and Favor with King Ptolemy, took occasion privately to go to
the King, and to tell him, as a great Secret, that he understood for certain
the Author and chief Adviser of this whole Treason, that it was Apelles, who
was a sworn Creature of Theodotas, the Prince of the Faction, with whom he was
often seen in great familiarity at Tire; that particularly the Day before the
Treason broke out, he was publicly at Dinner with him, often whispering in his
Ear at Dinner Time. That immediately thereupon Tire revolted from the King, and
Pelusium was surpised all by the Advice and Artifice of Apelles. Now King
Ptolemy, as he was always very hasty, being accustomed to Flattery, which
blinds the Judgment of Princes, and puffs them up, took fire immediately at
this, and exclaimed on Apelles, calling him a perfidious and ungrateful
Traitor, and vowed his Death without mercy. And had there not been among the
Conspirators, who were taken, a Man, who disdained the foul villainy of
Antiphilus, and justified the injured Innocence of Apelles, he had without
doubt, lost his Head immediately. But the Man made it appear to the King, that
Apelles was never by any Man seen at Tire, that he had no Manner of
Acquaintance, with Theodotas, and that all this was but a malicious Slander of
a Pitiful Rascally Painter, who envied the Glory of Apelles. Thus the King was
cured of his Jealousy; he gave Apelles an hundred Talents of Gold to atone for
the Injury he had done him by his Credulity, and withal gave him Antiphilus
for his Slave, to do with him as he would, either as to Life, or Death. To him
Apelles did no harm, but in Memory of his great Danger, and to warn others of
the Nature of Detraction, he Drew and presented to the King this following
Picture.

APPELLES HIS PICTURE OF CALUMNY.
ON the right Hand sits a Man having huge large Ears, very little different
from those of King Midas, reaching forth his Hand to a Lady, as yet a good way
off, but coming toward him. About him stand two Women, Ignorance, as it should
seem, and Suspicion. On the other side, the Lady aforementioned comes forward
apace; a Woman exceeding fair, and well dressed, but something chased and
stirred up, as expressing Rage and Anger, having in her left Hand a burning
Firebrand, and with the other, dragging a young Man by the Hair of the Head,
who held up his Hands to Heaven, calling God, to witness. There goes before her
a Man pale and ill favored, looking as if he resolved to find fault, very
severely, and like those that are almost pined away with long sickness. One
would guess this to be Envy, as the Lady, that came after him was Calumny, who
dragged Innocence before, the Throne of Credulity. But yet there were two other
Women, accompanying Calumny, who were continually egging her on, dressing and
adorning her; and these, as I was informed by him that explained the Picture,
were the one Conspiracy and the other Treachery. But behind them all there came
a miserable, dejected, lamenting Woman, all composed to sorrow, and clad in
black, and her Name was Repentance, who looking back with Tears and Shame,
recieved Truth, that just then came unto her.

Thus far APELLES his Picture of Calumny, or Detraction.

(...),

Hesiod The MORAL of APELLES HIS PICTURE.
COncerning this Picture of Apelles, we must first consider, that it expresses
two several kinds of life, and two manners of living which are among Men. That
is to say, the one, of Abstinence and Sobriety; the other of Gourmandise,
Gluttony, and Drunkenness. The first is reputed necessary for all Men; for, as
we cannot live without eating and drinking, considering we are not Angels, but
Mortal Men, even so as needful is it to govern our life by the rule of
Sobriety. Therefore we should all enter into the House of Sobriety, without
desiring to pass any further: for we live not to eat, but eat to live. And
because tasting is one of the senses, which we have most in common with other
Creatures, it is very requisite, that Man should moderate and temper the same,
both by Abstinence and Sobriety, as also reason which is only given him; if he
will not show himself to be a beast, but that which is more than a beast. For
this cause, Apelles figured the dwelling of Sobriety, without the Garden or
Orchard, to let us understand thereby, that we are not (...) pass any further
to venture on excess; but to rest contented with receiving our refection
honestly, for satisfying the necessities of Nature. In like manner, he gave no
other abiding to Sobriety than Tents, Pavilions, and Tabernacles, to signify,
that we should make no long Sitting at the Table, no more than Passengers do in
their Inns; who enter not to remain there always, but only to content nature,
and then to pass on upon their Journey.

If Apelles, who was no other than a Pagan, could take knowledge hereof: much
more ought we to consider the same than he, considering, that we have the
testimony of the holy Scripture, which admonishes us, that we have here no
permanent City, that we dwell in this body, as in a Tabernacle, until such
time as it shall please the Lord, that gave us such lodging, to dislodge us
hence. I think also, that Moses gave us admonishment herein, by the Feast of
Tabernacles, and the life which the ancient Israelites led in the Wilderness.
Because our life is so short, and as we feed but to lengthen and continue the
same, we should therefore be fearful of diminishing and curtaling our time, in
spending the most part of our time at the Table, where many cracks and flaws
are made by excess.

Therefore they may well be counted wise, and worthy to bear the Name of Man,
that would go on no further: but returned honestly to their own affairs, after
they had soberly received their sustenance.

By the Sports, Pastimes, and Music, and Songs, which were exercised in this
Meadow of Sobriety, I think he purposed to demonstrate, that the life of Man
has some honest Pleasures and Recreations allowed it. For God does not
prohibit us to use such good gifts, as he has bestowed on us, living in
moderate joy, when the time so requires. It is written: That there is a time
to laugh, and a time to mourn, a time for joy, and a time for sadness. And
therefore a Christian Man may learn to use both the one and the other well, and
all to the glory of God.

Most certain it is, that God has permitted us honest Pleasures and delight,
which he has not forbidden, or are to his dishonor, or any occasion of evil.
All honest and virtuous Exercise are permitted unto us, in rendering thanks to
God forthem, and acknowledging his benifits by them, provided also, that we
keep our selves always within the rules of Sobriety, Modesty, and Honesty.
Thus we see one manner of Life, and that which most conveniently beseems man.

The other is more brutish, than humane, the sense and description whereof
takes it self thus. First, for the large and common beaten way, whereby men
entered into the Garden, and concerning the unbridled multitude that made use
thereof; I must understand his Meaning thus, that every Man affects ease,
idleness and voluptuous Pleasures.

Some knew how to give a Mean to their desires, and took not so much Meat and
Wine as should trouble their understandings: but could well return to their
ordinary businesses and use Reason in all things. Now, there were others that
knew not any Mean or Measure, neither had regard to Time or Place; but would
needs venture further, and fell into such extremity of folly, as they lost
their senses, understanding and memory. So that thereby they became brute
beasts, and could no way retire from this disorderly battle; till diseases,
poverty, and necessity admonished them of their duty. For they are the last
Companions of Drunkenness and Ways of all Carowsers, that do her the greatest
Honor.

By Handmaids or Waiting-Women to Drunkenness, I understand those several
vices, as their apt Names do signify; and they are the meetest for her Company.
And by the Drinks, which she gave to her. Quaffers, he means the venom and
poison of voluptuous excess, which makes such a Transport of men's
Understandings, that they grow like unto brute beast, according as they take
less or more, and according to the complections they are of; representing even
those very beasts, whose Nature and Manners they cone nearest unto; and
refusing all friendly counsel and advice, do delight more in such barbarous
and uncivil courses, than any other manners that should show them to be Men.

The CONCLUSION. An Admonition concerning the Shortness of Life.
MAny men complain that Nature is very unkind to them in allotting them so
little time to live, and often cry out, that no sooner are they born, but they
must die, before they can take their full Draught of the Pleasures of this
Life. Neither is this the complaint of the Illiterate and Vulgar sort of People
only, but even of the most Valiant and Learned Men. We not often meet with any
that are desirous to relinquish the enjoyments of this Life, and to enter upon
another state, But too many that cry out with Aristotele, Life is short, but
Art is long. We find many bemoaning their condition with sighs and tears, and
such dismal expressions as these: Nature is more bountiful to the very beasts
and savages then to Man: They can live for five or ten Ages; but as for Man
(who is born to greater and nobler ends) is not allowed half their time, though
he entreats and strives never so vehemently. But to these Persons, we may find,
Seneca does give a severe Reprimand. How comes it to pass that we loose and
squander away so much of our time, if we complain, we have not Enough? When we
can spend whole Days and Months, and Years in doing Evil, or else in doing
nothing, or in doing things besides our real business. Infinite are the hours
which we bestow upon Ceremony and servile Attendances, in Hopes and Fears; Love
and Revenge; Balls and Entertainment, Ambition: Coust flatteries; Rambling
voyages; Impertinent Studies and Unaccountable Amors. Life is long enough, and
the time allotted us, if it were well employed, were abundantly enough to
answer all the Ends and Purposes of Mankind. But we never remember our End, nor
seek the means and so it comes to pass, that when Death makes a visit to us, we
are damped and dejected in our Spirits, and are extremly loath to depart. In a
word, we live as if we were never to die, without any Reflection upon our
Lives, which may be taken from us in a Moments time. For would we live, as if
we were always in expectation of Death, and set our Accounts right, every day
that passes over our Heads; Would we, I say, seriously consider, and put in
practice Pythagoras his excellent Advice to his Disciples. Namely, daily to
call our selves to a strict Account, what we have omitted, or what we have
committed, we should never set our Affections upon this Life, nor be the least
a fraid of Death; which would free us from this troublesome habitation, and
invert us with a Blessed Eternity.

The CONTEMPT OF DEATH.
THat all Men must die is most certain, and that Death which we so much dread
and decline, is not a Determination, but the Intermission of a Life which will
return again is as certain. What is it then, I wonder, that makes men afraid:
Oh! it is an hard thing to die will some say: Who can without very great
reluctance enter into an ruknewn state, and quit the gaudy pleasures of this
varnished Earth? Thus do they fear and tremble, and cannot endure to think of an
after separation; For they represent Death to their thoughts as a strange and
hideous Monster, and (with Aristotle) are willing to conclude it the most
Terrible of all Terribles. But alas! would they consider, that to die it is but
a moments work, and that no sooner is the pure Soul stripped of its gross Body,
but our Pain and all the Miseries of this wicked life are at an end.

Again, let them remember that the World it self stands condemned to a
Dissolution, that every man must submit to the Prince of Death. He that will
not voluntarily follow in the great and beaten Road must be drawn by force, for
our fate is fixed and the Decree is immutable. And besides what Reason have men
to murmur or be afraid of Death, when that which we call Death is the Gate and
Door of Eternal Life, and who is not willing to exchange a Life of Mourning and
Sorrow, for an Eternity of Happiness? Death in a word is a Debt to Providence
and Nature, and this Life was never designed but for a Journey to another
Place. O! therefore, let us comply with that cheerfully, which Providence has
made necessary.

The END

