CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON THE TRIAL Of Leiut. Col, JOHN LILBVRNE.
IN Page 154. after an Appendex annexed by the Publisher, read thus.

Judicious Reader, It appears in the first impression of Mr. Lilburnes Trial,
that in the Appendix the Penman professes, he has been very indifferent in
transcribing his notes, without maliciously wronging either the Court or the
Prisoner; yet if any thing be amiss, he hopes the second Edition may mend it,
if more exacter Copies then his can be got, desiring that some man that
understands the Law, will take some pains to write some Observations in Law
upon it, and truly being at that Trial, I have done something in the
particulars desired, and here must add a little more (leaving the absolute
completing of it to abler pens and heads) in case Mr. Lilburn had been found
guilty by the Jury as to matter of fact; and thereupon they had delivered up to
the Judges a special Verdict; this or the like at the Bar, might have been a
good Plea for him, after the Court had asked him what he would say for himself,
why Judgment should not have past upon him, he might have answered (...)

1. That Sheriff Wilson is a Member of the Parliament and Council of State,
and thereby a party, in which regard the return of his Grand Jury by him or his
dependant Officers is null and void in Law, and so by consequence is also their
Verdict.

(...)ugh Justices of Gaole-Delivery, and Justices of the (...) reform and
amend in open Sessions the Pannell re(...) inquire for the King by the Statute
of the 3. Hen. 8. (...) 12. yet this was a private or special Court of Oyer
and ^^rminer, not an ordinary and open Sessions; and therefore to put by Capt.
Sweeting that was summoned by the Sheriff, and in his stead put in Thomas
Smith who was not legally summoned, but accidentally taken up in the Hall, is
expressly against the Statute of the 11. Hen. 4. Chap. 9. and the Indictment
thereby, is null and void to all intents and purposes, as clearly appears by
the Statute it self.

3. He ought to enquire whether any one of the Jury be outlawed, and if any one
of them were; it totally nulls and makes void the Indictment and all things
depending upon, as is clear by 13. Hen. 4. Chap. 9.

4. He might allege, that he conceived the Indictment was insufficient in
Law, and that he never heard nor saw it, it being in Lattine, and whether that
he heard read to him in English be rightly translated he knows not, for that
he knows the Lattine tongue cannot be rendered word for word in English; and
therefore in Arrest or stop of Judgment he might press, that Council learned
in the Law might be assigned him, and a Copy of the Indictment given them to
peruse; for that first there does to him further appear these errors in the
Indictment.

1. That he was Indicted in London, for pretended crimes done in Surrey and
Middlesex; and therefore the Trial or Jury not coming out of the right place,
the Indictment is void in Law. See Arundels Case.

2. He might allege, that he was Indicted upon a mistaken Statute, which bears
date after the pretended facts, and therefore void in Law.

3. He might allege, that the offense in the Indictment, is not certainly
alleged as to matter, time, and place, and that he had not a right addition
or title, all which in Law ought to be.

4. Allege that the Statute whereupon the Indictment of treason is grounded,
is insufficient in Law to ground a Judgment upon, for that it says, that
whosoever does such an act shall suffer the pains of death, etc. as in case of
High Treason has been used, now the pains of death were not used in cases of
treason at the making of that act, nor for diverse years before, read the
margent before in page 91.

5. Allege that in the Indictment it is not alleged against whom this
Treason is committed, only against the Government (and there may be several
sorts of Governments) or the Keepers of the Liberties of England, but who they
are, or where they are to be found, is not named, and it is impossible he can
owe Allegiance to those unknown individua vaga, and where there is no
Allegiance due, there no Treason can be committed in Law; for no man can owe
Allegiance to an unknown man, or unknown number of men, or to an Vtopian
Commonwealth.

6. He might allege, that there was not two plain and evident Testimonies to
each of those facts, upon which the Grand Inquest found the Bill, and therefore
their Verdict is void in Law.

7. He might allege, the Inquest in Law could not return billa vera, a true
Bill, unless they had found all the parts of the Bill to be true; which they
never did, nor possibly could do, in regard there was not one amongst all the
Grand Inquest, that could exactly read and English, or understand the Bill: so
there was errors enough in the finding of it.

8. He might allege that in the body of the Indictment it is said, fight no
more for the men in present Power (and the next words says) meaning the
present Government; this cannot be good in Law, for that men are Governors and
not Government, neither does he name the men in present power, and there are
several kinds of Powers; yea, the Army as properly as the Parliament may be
called present Power.

9. He might allege, that Treason signifies a breach of Trust, and comes from
Trahit, which is treacherously to betray, now his trust, which was his liberty,
his freedom and his protection by the Law, was by his imprisonment (in March
last for treason) taken off or taken away from him; and therefore having then
no trust upon him (as in his imprisonment he had not) he could not in that
condition commit Treason, but all the things laid unto his charge by Mr.
Prideaux the Attorney General in the Indictment, are facts done, or pretended
to be done after his commitment to prison for Treason; which facts or actions
are all void in Law, and cannot in the least in the eye of the Law, come within
the compass of Treason, which is treacherously to betray, which cannot be done
where there is no trust; but in Mr. Lilburnes imprisonment there was no trust
upon him, and therefore in that condition he could commit no Treason, and the
highest agravation of the Attorney Generals ignorance and malice it was, in
that he in his Prosecution of Mr. Lilburne evads, or passes by all those
things pretended to be done by him, for which Mr. Lilburne was first committed;
yea, and sends for him about seven or eight Months after his first
imprisonment, to come to him in order to his Trial for Treason, and then
friendly in show discourses with him; and afterward at his Arraignment for
his life, brings that discourse or some part of it, as the principal Facts of
Treason, or evidence for Treason that he had against him; therefore can there
be greater ignorance in any man that professes the knowledge and understanding
of the Law, thus to do, or greater malice in the most malicioust of men then in
this (empty Tub) Prideaux.

Now for the more clearer confirmation of my foregoing observations, or the
most of them, I shall desire the Reader to cast his eye upon the third part of
Cooks Institutes, Chapters high Treason and petty Treason (which book is
published by the house of Commons this Parliament for good Law) but I shall
special recommend to the Reader as his special guide, in case he come into
Mr. Lilburnes straits, his Chapter of Council learned in Pleas of the Crown,
follio 137. where he speaks expressly thus.

Where any person is Indicted of Treason or Felony, and Pleads to the
Treason or Felony, not Guilty; which goes to the Fact best known to the
Party. It is holden that the Party in that Case shall have no Counsel to give
in evidence or allege any matter for him: but for as much as Ex facto Jus
Oritur, it is necessary to be explained, what matters upon his Arraignment, or
after not Guilty Pleaded, he may allege for his Defense, and pray Counsel
Learned in the Law, to utter the same in form of Law.

And first, upon the Arraignment what advantage he may take, in case of High
Treason by the Common Law; if it be for compassing the death of the KING, he
may allege, that in the Indictment there is no such overt act set down in
particular, as is sufficient in Law, or the like. For it is to be observed,
that in no case the party Arraigned of Treason or Felony, can pray Counsel
learned generally, but must show some cause.

Secondly, In case of High Treason by force of any Statute, he may allege,
that the Indictment being grounded upon a Statute; the Statute is either
mistaken or not pursued.

Thirdly, Of what matters he may take advantage equally concerning them both.
He may allege, that there was not at the time of the Indictment of High
Treason, two lawful Accusers, that is two lawful Witnesses.

Fourthly, Of what matters he may generally take advantage in all cases of
Treason and Felony. He may allege, that the offense is not certainly
alleged in respect of the matter, time, and place, or that he is not rightly
named, or have not a right addition, or that the offenses were done before the
last general pardon.

Fifthly, After he has Pleaded Not Guilty, what advantage he may take upon the
evidence. He may allege, that he ought to have two lawful Witnesses in case
of High Treason, to prove the fact against him.

Sixthly, He may take advantage in Arrest of Judgment, if the verdict be found
against him; That the trial came not out of the right place, as it fell out in
Arundels case, convicted by a Jury of wilful murder; he informed the Court,
that the Jury that tried him came out of a wrong place, and thereupon he had
counsel learned assigned him; who indeed found, that the Venire facias was
mis-awarded, and the Court thereof by the Council being informed, judgment
was stayed. And that the prisoner may allege these or the like matters, it is
evident; because for every matter in law arising upon the fact, the prisoner
shall have Council learned assigned him. Also it is lawful for any man that
is in Court, to inform the Court of any of these matters, lest the Court
should err, and the prisoner unjustly for his life proceeded with. And the
reason wherefore regularly, in case of treason and felony, when the party
pleads not guilty, he was to have no council, was for two causes. First, for
that in case of life, the evidence to convict him should be so manifest, as it
could not be contradicted. Secondly, the Court ought to see that the
Indictment, Trial, and other proceedings, be good, and sufficient in law,
otherwise they should by their erroneous judgment attaint the prisoner
unjustly. So far Sir Edward Cook.

But now if any should say, all this availes nothing, in case the Parliament
takes away Juries, and sets up Arbitrary high Court of Justice, as already in
their Act for the Earl of Bedfords drayning of the Isle of Ely, and they have
done.

To which I answer, It Is true, it avails nothing, indeed if they so do, but it
is impossible they should; my reasons are first, because it is the most
equallest and justest way of trial in it self, simple considered, that is, in
the whole World, and has been of so long continuance in this Nation, that all
the changes of turning the Nation upside down, could never alter it, either by
the Conquest of the Romans, Saxons, Danes, or the late Normans: and though
since William the Conquerours time, some Princes, and their Fathers have
attempted the Alteration, and overthrow of that just way of trial, by twelve
men as the Neighborhood, yet it has proved very fatal and destructive to
those that were busied in it, witness Empson, Dudly's losing their heads, as
Traitors, therefore although they had an Act of Parliament, viz. 11. H. 7.
chap. 3. to bear them out in what they so did, and therefore it is
un-imaginable, in mere policy the Parliament will run the hazard of such an
attempt, the which, when it is executed, the people are as absolute slaves, as
possible can be, and have no probable certainty either for their lives,
liberties, or estates; of which case Sir Edward Cook in his exposition of the
twenty ninth chapter of Magna Charta, in his second part Institutes from 51.
thus says upon the words, by the Law of the Land, that is to say, says he, by
the Law of England; and hereupon all Commissions are grounded, wherein is this
clause, To do what is just according to the Law and Custom of England, and it
is not said, the Law and Custom of the King of England, left it might be
thought to bind the King only; nor the People of England, left it might be
thought to bind them only; but that the Law might extend to all, it is said,
by the Law of the Land, that is to say, England. And a little below he expressly
says, against this ancient and fundamental Law, and in the face thereof, I
find an Act of Parliament made (viz. 11. H. 7. chap. 3.) that as well Justices
of Assize, as Justices of Peace (without any finding or presentment, by the
verdict of twelve men) upon a bare information for the King, before them made,
should have full power, and authority, by their discretions to hear, and
determine all offenses, and contempts committed, or done by any person, or
persons, against the former ordinance, and effect, of any Statute made, and not
repealed, etc: by color of which Act, shaking this fundamental Law, it is not
credible what horrible oppressions, and exactions, to the undoing of infinite
numbers of people, were committed by Sir Richard Empson, and Edmund Dudley,
being Justices of Peace, throughout England. And upon this unjust and injurious
Act (mark that well) (as commonly in like cases it falls out) a new office
was erected, and they made Masters of the Kings forfeitters.

But at the Parliament holden in the first year of Hen. 8. This Act of 11. Hen.
7. is recited, and made void, and repealed; and the reason thereof is yielded,
for that by force of the said Act, it was manifestly known, that many sinister,
and crafty, feigned, and forged informations, had been pursued against diverse
of the Kings Subjects, to their great damage, and wrongful vexation: and the
ill success hereof, and the fearful ends of these two oppressors, should
deter others from committing the like, and should admonish Parliaments, that
instead of this ordinary and precious trial, by the Law of the Land, they
bring not in absolute and partial trialls by discretion; whose Indictment for
high Treason you may read in his third part Institutes Fol. 208. and fourth
part. Fol. 198, 199.

And in the fourth part of his Institutes Fol. 37. Chapter, high Court of
Parliament, speaking of the manner of some proceedings of Parliament, in some
cases of Attainder, let forgetfulness take it away if it can, if not, however,
let it be buried in silence, for the more high and absolute the Jurisdiction of
the Court is, the more just and honorable it ought to be in the proceeding,
and to give example of justice to inferior Courts.

And in Fol. 39.40. ibid. he further says, and where by order of Law, a man
cannot be attainted of high Treason, unless the offense be in Law high Treason
by Authority of Parliament, (as sometime has been used) but the high Treason
ought to be specially expressed, seeing that the Court of Parliament is the
highest and most honorable Court of Justice, and ought (as has been said) to
give example to inferior Courts.

There was an Act of Parliament (says he) in the eleventh year of King Henry
the seventh, which had a fair flattering preamble, pretending to avoid diverse
mischiefs, which were. First, To the high displeasure of Almighty God.
Secondly, The great let of the Common Law. And thirdly, The great let of the
wealth of this Land, as hereafter (he says) shall manifestly appear; which Act
he there at large recites, after which in Fol. 41. he further thus says.

By Pretext of this Law Empson and Dudley did commit upon the Subject
unsufferable pressures and oppressions, and therefore this Statute was justly
soon after the decease of Henry the seventh, repealed at the next Parliament,
after his decease, by the Statute of 1. Hen. 8. Chap. 6.

A good Caveat (says he) to Parliaments to leave all causes to be measured by
the golden and straight met-wand of the Law, and not to the uncertain and
crooked Cord of discretion; for, it is not almost credible to foresee, when
any maxim, or fundamental Law of this Realm is altered (as elsewhere has
been observed) what dangerous inconveniences do follow, which most expressly
appears by this most unjust and strange Act of 11. Hen. 7. For hereby not
only Empson and Dudley themselves, but such Justices of Peace (corrupt men) as
they caused to be authorized, committed most grievous and heavy oppressions,
and exactions, grinding of the face of the poor Subjects by penal Laws (be
they never so absolute or unfit for the time) by information only without any
presentment or trial by Jury, being the ancient birthright of the Subject,
but to hear and determine the same by their discretion, inflicting such
penalty, as the Statutes not repealed imposed. These and other like oppressions
and exactions by, or by the means of Empson and Dudley, and their Instruments
brought infinite Treasures to the Kings Cofers, whereof the King himself in
the end, with great grief and compunction repented, as in another place we
have observed.

This Statute of 11. Hen. 7. (says the Lord Cook) we have rented and showed
the just inconveniences thereof, to the end, that the like should never
hereafter be attempted in any Court of Parliament, and that others might avoid
the fearful end of those two time-servers, Empson and Dudley. Qui eorum
vestigia insistunt, eorum exitus perhorrescant.

My second Reason why its impossible the Parliament should overthrow Trials by
Juries, is because then they should overthrow the chief declared end of all the
late Wars, and of the whole stream of all the chiefest Declarations; now the
main and principal end of all the Wars they pretended, was for the Peoples
Liberties and Freedoms, amongst all which they reckon Trials by Juries one of
the chiefest, as clearly in their first grand Remonstrance, etc. appears, and
therefore it was that in their 7 th. Article, they impeached the Earl of
Strafford as a Traitor, for subverting the fundamental Laws of the Land, in
giving judgment upon men's Estates, without Trials of Juries, yea, and they
should not only destroy their chiefest Declarations, but also the chiefest and
best Laws of the Land, viz. the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta, and that
excellent Law of the Petition of Right, as they themselves call it in their
Declaration of the 17. of March 1648. page 7. And if so, query, whether their
so doing would not be as high a breach of trust in them as ever they charged
the King with, and deserved as severe a punishment to be inflicted upon them,
as ever they inflicted upon the King, for the breach of his trust.

3. They cannot overthrow Trials by Juries, without an apparent and evident
ruin and destruction to themselves and the whole Nation, by a fresh imbroyling
it again in Wars, because that since they took off the Kings head, for breach
of his trust, they have solemnly declared in two several Declarations, viz.
the 9. of February, 1648. and the 17. of March 1648. that they are fully
resolved, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the fundamental Laws of
this Nation; for, and concerning the preservation of the lives, prosperities
and liberties of the people, with all things incident thereunto, and
particularly that excellent Law of the Petition of Right, which sufficiently
establishes Juries, which good old Laws they call page 23. the badges of our
freedoms which they there say, our Ancestors enjoyed long before the Conquest,
and spent much of their blood to have confirmed by the great Charter, and which
have continued in all former changes, and being duly executed, are the most
unjust, free, and equal of any other Laws in the world; but if in a years
time they should destroy both these Declarations by destroying Juries, the
universality of the People would took upon them as the most faithless
persideous men that ever breathed, and watch all oppertunities utterly to
destroy and exterpate them, as Monsters rather then men, so soon to degenerate.

Obj. I but put the case the Prince should endeavor to set on foot a new
War, and so put the Parliament into unavoidable necessity, may they not for
terror then set up a high Court of Justice as well as for the trial of the
late King.

Answ. No, for these Reasons, first, because before the late Kings death, all
the Laws and process of the Laws, run in his name, therefore it was not
possible in the old form to try him; but now the Laws and process of the Law,
run in the name of the Commonwealth of England, or the Keepers of the
Liberties of England.

2. Before his death, all binding perminent Laws in all late ages, were past
by King, Lords and Commons, and treason was only committable by the Letter of
the Law against the King; but now that is changed, and the Commons become the
supreme Authority, and so declared by their Representatives, at least by those
that so judge themselves, and by two special Acts made by them, upon which Mr.
Lilburn was arraigned for Treason, and printed in his Trial, page 87.88.89.
etc. dated the 14. of May 1649. and the 17. of June 1649. they declare it to be
treason in any person that shall maliciously, or advised publish, by writing,
printing, or openly declaring, that the said Government is tyrannical,
usurped, or unlawful; or that the Commons in Parliament assembled, are not the
supreme Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir
up, or raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or
alteration of the same, or shall plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up any
mutiny in the Army, or shall withdraw any Soldiers or Officers from their
obedience, to their superior Officers, or from the present Government, or
shall procure, invite, aid, or assist any forraigners or strangers, to invade
England or Ireland, or shall adhere to any forces raised by the Enemies of the
Parliament, or Commonwealth of England; now it is impossible any Law can be
more severe then to make words treason; and therefore no necessity now can be
pleaded to set up a high Court of Justice to try the arrantest Cavalier in the
world, who can be reputed at worst, no more then a Traitor, for which the Laws
declared by themselves already provides a punishment, and a Cavalier is an
English man, and thereby by Law ought to have the privilege of any other
English Traitor, and little does men know the danger of breaking down banks,
or pulling up universal Landmarks, though it be in cases of highest and
greatest enemies, which the people of Athens (as Sir Walter Rawly fully
declares) felt sufficiently under their thirty Tyrants, who had no way to
introduce their tyranny upon the people, but in the subversion of their Laws,
and Freedoms, by making examples first, upon those offenders the people most
hated, but then a little space the Tyrant pleaded those presidents, and by
little and little made the people taste of the same sauce, but it is hoped that
now after the full alteration of the Commonwealth, and Acts of Treason
declared thereupon, if any shall dare, though authorized by Parliament, to be
Judges in an High Court of Justice, now to take away any man's life, or estate,
but shortly they shall lose their heads as Traitors; therefore as Empson, and
Dudly did, who had an Act of Parliament made by King, Lords and Commons to bear
them out, and yet by virtue of it never took away any one man's life, but only
meddled with estate; and as for the Earl of Bedfords Act for drayning, that sets
up a High Court of Justice, I am confident of it, upon examination it will be
found some bribing Lawyer, Chareman, misinformed and surprised at an house to
pass it; and therefore, I shall now conclude all according to my promise, with
the Copy of Mr. Lilburns letters to the Speaker, of the 1. December. 1649. which
thus follows.

For the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in Parliament. These Present.
HONORED SIR,
TRuth and Justice, are two of the main attributes of God, with the practices
of whom, he has declared himself to be well pleased, and which he will advance
and set up in his own time, maugre the malice of all that do oppose them. Sir,
I know you would be thought a lover of them, and out of that consideration, I
now write unto you: So it is Sir, that I am an Englishman born, bred, and
brought up, and I hope so to live, and so to dye; and by virtue of being an
Englishman, I am entailed to all the Liberties and Freedoms, that the Laws
and good customs of England, will afford to any of her children whomsoever;
and besides, the series of all my actions, from my childhood to this very day,
have been constant demonstrations, that I love and honor all those her just
boundaries, that distinguish meum and tuum, that supports just Magistracy, and
teaches subjection her due bounds, and that most equally dispenses justicte
indifferently unto all; and that I hate and abhor, all subverting and
Levelling, of the just Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms thereof, to any man's
will whatsoever, never coveting, in my own private thoughts or reason, any
other rule to judge or be judged by, but that righteous one of Jesus Christ,
to do as you would be done to; And because (by reason of man's corruptions)
there is more difficulties, and niceties, in the Laws of the Land of my
nativity and abode, then there is in the plain, and easy to be understood law,
of civil behavior, that the wife and righteous God of heaven and earth, has
given and dispensed in the volumn of truth ( viz. the Old and New Testament) to
the sons of men, but especially to all those that desire to approve their
hearts unto him; therefore I say in regard of the intricacie, of the Laws of
England, especially in the practick part of them, I have heartily labored in
my sphere, and private condition, as much as I could, to attain unto the
knowledge of so much of it, as might be a safe guide unto me, in my conversings
with my neighbors, countrymen, and brethren; and truly, it has been my
maxim, that amongst men, there was no safety for me, but in walking in a
rational conformity, to the dictates of the just and good old plain Laws of
England; but of late many men supposed I was mistaken, and I confess I was in
great hazard of bodily destruction, for doing my duty, in walking in
conformity, to the clearest dictates, that either the law of Reason (which is
the sovereign law of God) or the clearest and most highly prized Laws of this
Nation, could dictate, to a conscientious, inquisitive, and ingenious soul, who
holds it for the most indispensable maxim, that ever the wise God of heaven and
earth established amongst the sons of men; That evil must not, nor ought not,
to be done by any, that good may come thereby: But the greatest good that I can
do, is to be readily obedient to the pleasure, will, or command of him, that is
absolutely sovereign, over both my soul and body, although my body should
perish in the conformity to my duty.

Sir, I say I thought I had been safe enough, when I walked by the dictates of
the best of the Laws of England, I mean the Petition of Right and others
consonant to it, and I thought I had a pretty competency of knowledge, to
preserve my own self; But yet at my late Trial at Guild Hall, I found my
ignorance was very great, in diverse essential things I ought to have known for
my full and clear preservation, according to the formalities or practick part
of the Law; but my good God, by his special or miraculous overruling
providence, [so judged by me] having graciously delivered me, out of that
transcendent snare, and setting my body as well as my soul at liberty, I had
immedidiately two things in my eye; First, whether it were better for me, and
more conducing to my own peace and happiness, to depart the nation, seeing in
the first year of Englands Liberty, words and speeches are become Treason; that
thereby no man knows well, how to behave himself: Or that I should resolve,
with all the understanding I could enjoy from God, to rub it as wisely out in
the land of my nativity, as I could? And truly Sir, as for the first, there was
an impossibility upon me, at the present, in that I have now been above nine
years, in pursuit from your House, for my Star Chamber reparations, in the
following of which, I do with safety aver it, I have really spent almost
2000.l. and yet am not much the nearer then I was the first day I begun,
because that which was in part first and most justly assigned me, out of the
Lord Cottrington's and Sir Francis Windebank's Estates, the two Houses gave
away to the Lord Sey, and otherwise disposed of; and then by several Votes
and an Ordinance, fixed my reparations, totally upon the Lord Coventry's
estate, which in my eye, was very just, in regard he was my chiefest unjust
Judge, in both my Star Chamber bloody Sentences: But truly Sir, to deal
ingeniously with you, I was then informed by a Member of your House, that your
self was then, one of the principal instruments, to get it (after my Ordinance
had past once or twice in your House) off from my Lord Coventry, out of fear of
the future danger of the president of it; and yet I must confess, that the
same party, and my own knowledge, told me, you were not a little active, to get
it fixed, upon some Delinquents estates as the States debt, where I might be
sure (in the eye of reason) in a very short time to have it; and accordingly it
was fixed upon the Estates, of Sir Henry Bellingham, Sir Henry Gibbs, and Sir
Thomas Bows, lying in the County of Durham; whose estates in Land (in good
times) at wracked Rent, amounted to about 900.l. per annum; and Sir Henry Gibbs
his Wood in Bransburth Park, whcih was commonly in that County accounted his,
and much of it sold by his appointment, and for his use, and which Wood was the
principal security, that I had in my eye for my 3000. l. without which I
should never freely have given my consent, to have left my Lord Coventry, and
acquiesced in that security of Delinquents Lands, and which I was enabled by
your House to fell and sell, to make up my money speedily; though the House of
Lords were pleased to restrain me from felling any more Timber Trees, and only
tied me, to make my best of that which was already felled, which at my first
journey to Durham, upon the place was told me to be worth betwixt 1000 and 2000
l. but before the second time I could get down into the Counry, to take
possession of it, old Sir Henry Vane (one of my Star-Chamber-Judges, who in Law
and equity ought to be one of my repairers) had by an Order out of the
Exchequer, seized upon it all, as his pretended right, so that thereby I was
deprived of the greatest part of my security, that I rested upon for my 3000.
l. And afterward the Committee of Durham, sold for me as many of Sir Thomas
Bows his Coals, and Iron to Sir Arthur Haslerigge, as he paid me 400.l. for,
and put me in possession of the Land, and by virtue thereof I received in
rents, above 100.l. more, so that there remained about 24 or 2500 l. behind;
and upon my last imprisonment in March last, Sir Arthur as also Colonel George
Fenwick told my father, etc. I was a Traitor, and he would seize upon my
estate, and did so accordingly, and compounded with Sir Henry Bellingham, and
Sir Thomas Bows (whose estates should have paid me proportionable to my
remaining security about 1600 l.) as a favorite of his said to be Mr. Cuthbert
Siddenham, the Independent Minister of Newcastle, in a late Book against me, in
his 8. Page tells me, for 402. l. And also stopped the rents of Sir Henry Gibbs
his lands, for a whole year together, so that my all is destroyed by him, etc.
For want of which, I can neither travel, nor well follow any trade, to get a
bit of bread, for the subsistence of my family.

And then Sir, in the second place; being I am thereby nolens volens compelled
to live in England, I confess in reason and prudence, it is not safe for me
here to abide, having so many potent and malicious adversaries as I have,
without the attaining to the knowledge of all the formalities, punctillioes,
and niceties of the practick part of the Law, that study and unwearied industry
can furnish me with, that so if ever malice lay hold of me again, I may be my
own Counselor and Lawyer, and stand in need of the help of no others;
especially considering, at my late Trial at Guild Hall, I was denied all those
privileges that are an Englishmans right, and ought to be the means of his
preservation, in the day of his trial; and which privileges of the help of
Counsel, etc. was granted to the Earl of Strafford, Bishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Macguire, called the grand Irish-Rebel, and Duke Hammilton; and which was
granted to my self by the Cavalier Judges at Oxford, as my right by Law, and
which was granted by some of the present Judges, to Major Rolph, the last year
in a most eminent manner, when he was accused of the highest Treason that the
letter of the Law of England ever knew: And Sir, knowing my own ignorance in
the Latin and French tongue, without the knowledge of which, I cannot read the
practick part of the Law of England (more is the pity and misery of the plain
men of England) I repaired to the Temple to some of my acquaintance, and spoke
with your self and several other learned in the Law of England, who all
unanimiusly told me, that neither I nor any other free Englishman, could be
denied admittance into the Temple, if we desired to study the Law; upon which I
went to the Butler to enter my name, and paid my entranoe money, that being the
instructions I received, from those that for many years have been Students of
that House, and the Butler told me your Attourney-Generoll Mr. Prideaux was the
Treasurer, and I must go to him for my admittance; and to his chamber I went,
and he being abroad, I acquainted Mr. Raddon his servant with my business, and
paid 3l. 6s. 8d. to him, who desired me in the afternoon to call, and I should
have my admittance under his Masters hand, who it seems refused it, and
thereupon I waited upon Mr. Prideaux himself the next morning, and found him
something waspish, and did at present positively deny me admittance; making
thereby the quarrel personal betwixt him and me, in denying me (a free and
legal man of England) liberty to study the Law of the Land of my Nativity, in
the place appointed for that end, although if I transgress it (and that
through ignorance) Mr. Prideaux, in all likelihood, will be as he has been
already, the irrational malicious prosecutor of me to take away my life; Oh
Sir, will not rational and unbyassed men blush, at the knowledge of the
irrationality of this malicious man, whom I could easily strip and whip to the
purpose with my pen, but I have no desire to do it, if by this Epistle I can
avoid it and enjoy my right: And therefore Sir, I entreat you to oblige me so
far unto you, as effectually persuade Mr. Prideaux, not further unavoidably to
necessitate me, to that which I am sure, will be neither honorable for him,
nor much profitable for my self. For the Law by Gods assistance I am resolved
to study; unless Mr. Prideaux will get an Act made, that I shall not be hanged
for transgressing of it: And truly Sir, I shall further proffer this to Mr.
Prideaux, that he may clearly see I have no mind to quarrel with him, unless
he force me to it; that if he please to be an effectual instrument, speedily
to help me to my money, which is really my propriety, now detained from me, and
destroyed by Sir Arthur Haslerigge, I will trouble Mr. Prideaux no more for my
Admission at the Temple, or if he will not do that, then in regard of my
acquaintance there, which I hope will much help and teach me, and the
convenience of the place in the nighnesse of it to my family, I desire he will
let me for my money, peaceably enjoy a chamber, from those I can take it of, or
buy it from, to study the Law in a private way, for my own content and
recreation, and I will neither trouble him nor any of his Associates any more
for my admission into their Society of the Temple.

And in the first place, I earnestly beseech you, to let me enjoy your utmost
assistance for the procuring of my money down upon the nayl, either from Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, or from the estate of the late Lord Coventry, my chiefest
unjust Judge, upon whom it was once decreed and ordered to be fixed upon: And
truly Sir, in pure justice, I know not so clearly elsewhere, to seek it, as
from one of their two hands. Sir, I beseech you seriously ponder and consider
of my condition, which truly and unfeignedly is this, I must either sit down in
peace and silence, and so I and mine must unavoidably perish, for want of my
money which is my earthly all, or else I must nolens volens, be compelled to
bussle again for it, though I apparently run the hazard of being hanged
thereby, judging it more righteous Naboth-like to perish in the preservation of
my own right, then be my own Executioner, in suffering my self to starve. Sir,
for your promised speedy, and hearty assistance in these particulars, I shall
be very much obliged to remain, Sir,

Yours in all just ways heartily to serve you individually or generally, JOHN
LILBVRN.
From my habitation at Winchester House in Southwark, the 1. of December. 1649. I
shall make bold to wait upon you two or three days hence, for your answer
herein.




