King DAVID's Deliverance, and Thanksgiving.

Applied to the Case of Our King and Nation, In Two SERMONS, The one preached
on the Second, the other on the Ninth of September. 1683.

By JOHN CAVE, Rector of Cold-Orton in Leicestershire; And Chaplain to the L.
Bishop of Durham.

Si quis unquam fuit inter Reges, qui Davidis expressam and maxim luculentam
imaginem referret, is sane es, ita ut nemo tecum eatenus comparandus esse
videatur. Amyrard. Epistola ad Regem nostrum ante Paraphras. in Psalmos.

Tum demum timentur Reges, cum in populos incidit Domini pavor. E periculis
evadunt, cum Deus dat salutem, and ^os eruit ex gladio maligno. Bochart.
Epistola ad eundem.

The King's Glory is great in God's Salvation: Honor and Majesty has he laid
upon him.

Psalm. 21.5. LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.LXXXIII.

TO THE Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, NATHANAEL, Lord
Bishop of DURHAM, And Clerk of the Closet to his Majesty.
MY LORD,
I Most humbly dedicate these plain Discourses to your Lordship; which though
unworthy of your notice, I hope, may not be altogether unuseful to some part of
our World, at least not to those of my own Charge, among whom I am chiefly
bound (by my best endeavors) to promote Religion and Loyalty.

I know your Lordship favors the Subject; and that you support and adorn it,
much more by your great and eminent Example, than ever I can do by Argument or
Eloquence: Yet I have reason to conclude, that your singular Goodness and
Candor, will easily overlook, or pardon, what your Wisdom cannot patronize.

And because I am well assured, that your Lordship is sufficiently apprehensive
of the evil and spreading Effects of some Men's popular Prints, as well as
Preachings, I hope you will be pleased to allow of my affectionate opposition,
under the conduct of more powerful Reasoners.

It is, I confess, too evident, that the Misactings of the real Papists, and of
our counterfeit Protestants, proceed rather from perverseness of Will, and
frowardness of Temper, than from error of Judgment, or scruple of Conscience:
And therefore they seem to need more the Schoolings of the Law, and the Rebukes
of Authority, than the Illuminations of the Gospel, and the Warnings of the
Scripture, the Doctrines, Exhortations, Perswasives of our Reconciling
Ministry: And if they are not already past feeling, and incurably obstinate,
are like to profit more under an equal distribution of the Acts of Justice,
than a right division of the Word of Truth.

Yet I have still the charity to think, that many of those, who by their fair
Colorings, and plausible Pretenses, have been drawn into Conventicles,
Covenants, and the Society of a very vile Cause, do not err altogether of
malicious wickedness, but partly through simplicity of Heart; like some of
those who followed Absalom. And therefore though too guilty, yet not
incorrigibly so, nor quite past the Cure, at least not the benefit of softer
Remedies; and such we are commissioned to administer, meek Restauratives, and
rational Confirmations.

But if our Sermons alone will not prevail with such as these, they may happily
give edg and success to the Secular Sword, and make even the Law a ministration
of Love, as well as of Terror, by teaching them to be subject, not only for
Wrath, but for Conscience; and to be Active, as far as honestly they can,
before they be Passive in their Obedience; assuring them, that praesumptio est
pro Authoritate imponentis, that where they have not a clear and undoubted
evidence of the contrary, they may safely conclude, that Right and Truth are on
the Governor's side.

My Lord,

I publish this Discourse principally for the sake of such Men as these, who
have been preached into a dislike of our Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity, and
therefore may happily be preached out of it again: Men whose Intentions
possibly have not been so bad as their Cause; but their simple Hearts have been
beguiled with the good Words and enticing Speeches, of those that promised
Liberty and Reformation, while themselves were the Servants of Corruption, and
of a base Interest.

Yet truly, My Lord, I cannot expect any very good Fruit of my own, or of much
better Sermons on the same Occasion, even among this sort of Men, if that
visible Hand of Providence, which has of late so signally detected the
Hypocrisy of their Party, has not already opened their Eyes, touched their
Hearts, and in a good measure wrought off their Prejudices, and prepared them
for contrary impressions.

But if this Publication, and the Prayers that attend it, obtain not all the
good Ends of its Design; yet I shall think it speeds well, if it meets with
your Lordships Approbation, or kind Acceptance, as a real, though a very mean
Testimony of my grateful sense, of your ample and obliging Bounty, to,

My good Lord, Your Lordships most faithfully and humbly devoted Servant and
Chaplain, JOHN CAVE.

King DAVID's Deliverance, and Thanksgiving.
SERMON I.
PSALM 18.48, 49. He delivers me from mine Enemies: yea, thou liftest me up
above those that rise up against me; thou have delivered me from the violent
Man.

Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, (or confess unto thee) O Lord, among
the Heathen; and sing Praises unto thy Name.


THis Psalm, is a Song of Thanksgiving, penned by King David, in commemoration
of his many wonderful and gracious Deliverances, from the Conspiracies and
Assaults of his Enemies, the Philistims, Syrians, Moabites; particularly,
rebellious Absalom, and bloody Saul; as appears by the Course and Method of
the Story, where it is recorded, 2 Samuel 22. In it, with an enlarged and
exilient Spirit, the Spirit of a King, and of a Saint, he celebrates the
Almighty Power and Goodness of God, by describing his Dangers in the most black
and terrible Images; and his Deliverances from them, in all the advantages of
Representation, which the Wisdom of Royal and Religious Gratitude could supply.
Verse. 4, 5.
The Sorrows of Death compassed me, and the Floods of ungodly Men made me
afraid. The Sorrows of Hell compassed me about; the Snares of Death prevented
me. He goes down to the Grave, yea, to Hell it self, to sample his Sorrows and
his Fears, the devilish Malice and Cruelty of his Enemies. He goes up to the
Rocks, the high places of Strength and Safety, yea, to Life and Salvation it
self, in its Eternal Fountain, to furnish him with some suitable Illustrations
of that great Mercy, which so miraculously subdued his Enemies, and supported
his Empire. In the Verses before my Text; The Lord lives, and blessed be my
Rock; and let the God of my Salvation be exalted: It is God that avengeth me,
and subdueth the People under me. What follows is the Text, to which I shall
limit my Discourse at this time.

He delivers me from mine Enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me; thou have delivered me from the violent Man.

Therefore will I confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen: and sing
praises unto thy Name.

In these words we have an account,

I. Of David's Deliverances from his Enemies, verse. 48. II. Of his devout
acknowledgment of, and thankful return for those Deliverances, verse. 49.
First, We have an account of David's Deliverances; and therein these
Observables.

1. The Terms. 2. The Author. 3. The Manner thereof.
1. The Terms of it, or the Evils from which he was delivered; expressed,

1. More generally; from his Enemies. 2. More particularly; from the violent
Man.
2. The Author of those Deliverances; and that is God himself, He has
delivered me from mine Enemies: Thou have delivered me from the violent Man.

3. The Manner of these Deliverances; Thou have exalted me, above those that
rise up against me.

Secondly, We have a devout Acknowledgment of, and thankful Return for these
Deliverances and Preservations: Therefore, (...), so the Septuagint renders it,
will I confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen; and sing praises unto thy
Name.

I purpose to speak of these in their order.

1. Of the Mercy, David's Deliverances. 2. Of the Duty, David's Confession and
Thanksgiving.
And then make what Comparisons we fairly may, between King David's, and our
King's Deliverances; to excite us to the performance of the same Duty, to
promote the same religious Joy and Praise, at the time of our Solemn
Thanksgiving and Festivity.

I. First then for David's Deliverances. Deliverance and Preservation, are Acts
whereby God repeats the Wonder and the Mercy of his Creation, and gives, as it
were, a new Life, in the continuance of the Old; a kind of Resurrection, and
revival, without any real death. Psalm. 102.8.
The People that shall be created, shall praise the Lord; i. e. say some, the
People brought from a low and despicable condition, next to nothing, or the
People delivered from an imminent destruction.

The Deliverance of a King, has on it some special prints and signatures of
the Divine Power and Goodness. God delivered David from the Lion, and the Bear,
and the uncircumcised Philistine, when he was in a more private Capacity; but
his Protections in his Royalty were more eminent and remarkable, and therefore
he magnifies them in the Verses next to my Text. Great Deliverance gives he to
his King, and shows Mercy, that is, signal and extraordinary Mercy, to his
Anointed. And when he sings a new Song of Praise, Psalm. 144.10. this is the
Burden of it, It is he that gives Salvation to Kings, who delivers David
his Servant from the hurtful Sword.

In King David' s Deliverances, we may observe;

First, The dreadful Evils and Dangers from which he was delivered: expressed,

1. More generally by Enemies. Enemy is a word common to Men, with Devils; and
David, who styles his Enemies, as you heard, Floods of ungodly Men, compares
his Sufferings under them, to the Sorrows of Hell, the effects of a deep and
devilish Malice.

Though not only the Lives, but the other Rights and Properties of Kings, are
made by God more sacred and inviolable, than those of other Men; and though
Obedience to Authority, is the Mother and the Nurse of VVelfare, (...).
in Aeschilus his expression; yet through the instigation of the Devil, the
first Plotter of all Mischief, (who is naturally and originally (...), a
professed Enemy to God, and consequently to all who resemble him in Power and
Goodness) are Discontents raised, Sedition and Rebellion moved against the best
Governors. Moses met with great opposition and contradiction; even his own
Kindred, Aaron and Miriam, began to malign him.

To pass by other Instances, we have a full one before us; David, I mean, A Man
after God's own Heart, one who professed and countenanced the True Religion;
and a King of God's own making, crowned, anointed, and placed in the Throne, as
it were, by his immediate Hand; who though he was a wise and gracious Prince,
and ruled them prudently by his Power; yea, though he was popular for some
time, and whatsoever the King did, pleased the People; I say, notwithstanding
all these happy Concurrences, these Conspiracies, as I may so speak, of Virtue,
Right, Prudence, Clemency, He could not sit quiet and safe in his Government;
He found many Enemies, both at Home and Abroad. His own Son rebelled against
him; And with Absalom went two hundred Men out of Jerusalem. 2 Samuel 15.11.
He attracts the People's Eyes, by a Princely Grandeur, and steals away their
Hearts by a popular Compliance, fair Speeches, and obliging Condescentions. He
rises up early, and stands in the way of the Gate; and if any Man came nigh
him, to do him obeisance, he put forth his Hand, and took him, and kissed him.
By these Artifices, he soon gained many Associates, who followed him, some of
them perhaps in the simplicity, but the most, and the most considerable, in the
malice and wickedness of their Hearts, to the great endangering of the Crown
and Life of his Father. So apt are the Sons of Belial, who can bear no Yoke, to
be complaining and quarrelling, not only under the most Just, but under the
most merciful and easy Rule.

The Spirit that is in us lusts to Envy, and is ever and anon murmuring at
petty Grievances, and clamouring at every little Restraint of our
Licentiousness, as a violation of our lawful Liberties and Privileges, and
thereupon grounding Pretenses for Rebellion; which David (in verse. 43. of this
Psalm) calls, the Strivings of the People. The beginning of which Strife, Prove.
17.14.
as Solomon wisely observed, is as when one lets out Water, which has but a
slender utterance at first, but it soon swells and rages, bears down all Dams,
rises above all Banks and Bounds, and spreads into a Flood of Ungodliness, an
irresistible Torrent of Fury, Cruelty, and Treason: Which minds me of the

2. Second Thing, and that which was the greatest and more particular Evil,
from which David was delivered, the Violent Man; Men, whose Discontents, at
some seeming Errors in his Government, soon expressed themselves in diminishing
and defamatory Speeches, Psalm. 89.51.
wherewith they reproached the Footsteps of God's Anointed: And from these
proceeded to Seditious Petitions and Remonstrances, under the color of
preferring a Suit, or Cause, as is expressed 2 Samuel 15.4. Or in the Language of
our Times, a Grievance of the Subject. These Discontents, by degrees, were
confirmed into a Resolution to seize his Guards, and his Person, and so to give
Limits to his Dominion; which perhaps he intimates by that gathering of the
Abjects, and rascality of the People together against him; Psalm. 35.15.
or elsewhere, by the gathering of the Mighty; or more frequently, by their
besetting or compassing him about on every side; which traitorous Machinations,
terminated in the highest instance of Disloyalty, a violent attempt upon his
Sacred Life.

But if the Violent Man may not here be interpreted indefinitely, or for a Band
of Regicides; may we fix it upon Absalom? Perhaps not; His Cruelty, it may be,
was not so great as his Ambition; and he might be content to spare his Father's
Head, if he could take the Crown from it; or else leave that horrid part of the
Plot, to the management of Achitophel and his bloody Accomplices.

Saul rather seems to be the Violent Man in the Text; but we shall not stay to
decide the competition, where each of them seem to have but too just a claim to
this ugly Character.

Proceed we then to the

Second observable in David's Deliverances, and that is the Author of them, the
great Governor of the World. He has delivered, Thou have delivered.

Indeed, all Deliverances are the Works of God himself. Psalm. 68.20.
He is the God of Salvation, to him belong the Issues from Death. It is he
alone that has Goodness, Strength, and Wisdom, sufficient to discover
concealed Dangers, and to deliver from them: Goodness to exercise his Wisdom,
and exert his Strength: Strength, to serve and perfect his Goodness; Wisdom, to
guide and manage; both for a seasonable Detection, and an effectual Defeat, of
the Conspiracies of subtle and evil-minded Men.

But there are some reserved Cases which are more proper to God, in which his
Hand and Power is more visible; and those are Cases of great Extremity; such as
Jonas's in the Whales Belly; the three Children in the fiery Furnace; Daniel's
in the Lion's Den; David's in the depths of his Distress, and when he was
wholly destitute of all humane Aid: I looked upon my right hand, and beheld,
Psalm. 142.4.
but there was no Man that would know me, Refuge failed me; no Man cared for my
Soul. Then he adds, verse. 5. I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my
Refuge, deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are stronger than I; thou art
the helper of the helpless.

So here in my Text, when Faction and Sedition was grown up to the height of
Cruelty and Violence; when the Plot was come to the Birth, and the Fatal Blow
ready to be given, then God delivers by his Prerogative, and David attributes
it to him, not only eminently, but exclusively. It is God that avengeth me, it
is God, and none but He; Thou have delivered me from the Violent Man; Thou, and
Thou only. And he gathers so much confidence from the single protection of his
God, as I may so speak, that he defies whole Troops and Armies of his Enemies:
Psalm. 27.3.
Though an Host should encamp against me, my Heart should not fear.

He had found, by experience, that when God alone appeared for him, neither the
Valor of Absalom, the Policy of Achitophel, nor the Power of Saul could
prevail against him; but he delivers him from all his Enemies; from these,
and from the worst of them, the Cruel, the Violent Man. And so much for the
Author of David's great Deliverances, The Lord, strong and mighty.

We come next to consider, in a

Third place, The manner of this Deliverance; which makes it still greater,
and more to be regarded.

It was a Deliverance from all his Enemies; the Murmurers of the Country, and
the Rioters of the City; the Invaders of his Prerogative, and the Conspirators
against his Life; neither was it only a Deliverance from them, but a lifting
him up above them, and a confirmation of his Dominion.

We shall stay here a little to open these Particulars, and show you,

First of all, That it was a complete Deliverance.

Secondly, That it was an advantageous Deliverance; it put Him, and his
Affairs, into a much better posture than they were in before.

First, I say, It was a complete and entire Deliverance; a Deliverance from all
his Enemies, and from all the Mischief and Violence they plotted against him.

Sometimes our Escape from one Enemy, does but expose us to another; and when
we flee from a Lion, a Bear meets us.

Sometimes God delivers from Death, but yet delivers up to Captivity: As he
would not suffer his People to be destroyed by Shishak King of Egypt,
Nevertheless they shall be his Servants, 2 Chronicles. 12.8
that they may know my Service, and the Service of the Kingdoms of the
Countries. He delivers them from Destruction, but not from Slavery; or he
delivers out of Captivity, but not without some Marks, or Scars, of their
former hard Usage and Endurance: They are saved, like a Brand snatched out of
the Fire, in the Prophet Amos his Comparison; scorched, Amos 4.11.
but not consumed.

Sometimes he vouchsafes complete Deliverance, as he did to Daniel; the Lions
were so far from devouring him, that they did him not the least hurt: And as he
did to the three Children; the Fire was so far from consuming them, that it did
not singe them, nor so much as the smell of it remain upon them.

And so it was here in this Case before us. David was delivered from all his
Enemies, and from all the Effects of their Enmity; from the Strivings of the
People, and the Violence of their Managers; from that sort of Enemies that
could color and palliate their Designs, speak Peace to their Neighbors, and
pretend fair to their King; no less than from open and declared Rebels, who
carry Weapons in their Hands, as well as Mischief in their Hearts. Nay further,
he was delivered, not only from Death, but from Seizure and Imprisonment; from
all Restraints of Power, and Diminutions of Royalty: as appears more fully by
the Particulars of his Acknowledgment; Psalm. 116.8. Thou have delivered my Soul
from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet from falling. And for this reason
he styles it Great, because it was entire and complete Deliverance. Nay more
than so;

Secondly, It was a beneficial and advantageous Deliverance; It placed him in
better Circumstances than he was in before; and by an admirable Contrivance of
the Divine Providence, his Danger confirms his Safety; and the subduing of the
People, contributes to his greater Exaltation.

He delivers me from mine Enemies; yea, thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me. He speaks it with a special Emphasis; and it may denote
these two things.

1. An Establishment of his Throne. 2. An Increase of his Glory.
1. It denotes, An Establishment of his Throne; a new Guard and Defense upon
his Person and Government. Thou liftest me up, (it is as much as if he had
said) thou set me out of the reach, above the Power of those that rise up
against me. Psalm. 30.7.
Lord, by thy Favor, thou have made my Mountain to stand strong.

God gave him a new security of his Life and Peace; not only by giving him the
Necks of his Enemies, delivering them mercifully into his Hands, the Hands of
Justice, who had traitorously lifted up their hands, the hands of Violence,
against his Crown and Dignity.

But also awakening Him, his Counselors, and Magistrates, by the escape of so
imminent a Danger, to greater Care and Vigilance for the time to come.

It was Machiavel's Observation of the State of the Roman Empire, Cum Urbl
Romae, tanta Imperii magnitudo fatalis effet, opprimi and vehementissime
affligi eam oportuit, ut deinceps cautior, prudentiorque fieret ad tantum
Imperii molem acquirendam. Match. Disp. l. 2 c. 29.
That seeing it was destined to so much Grandeur, it was convenient that it
should be often Oppressed and Afflicted, or at least Threatened and Endangered;
that her Rulers might become more prudent and wary in defending of it, and
procuring that greatness and splendour it was to arrive unto.

It was not therefore without reason, that St. Augustine thought it necessary
for those Heathens, who deified all their Benefactors, to build one Altar, and
pay some Homage to their Enemies, as reputing them one sort of Benefactors.
Doubtless, they keep not only the Courage, but the Wisdom of a Nation awake,
and make other Princes, as they did David, more safe, by making them less
secure.

But as it denotes the Increase of his Safety: So,

2. Of his Glory and Honor. In the time of trouble, Psalm. 27.5.
he shall hide me in his Pavilion. Which speaks no less the Obscurity, than the
Safety of his Condition: But in the time of Deliverance, He shall set me up
upon a Rock; as it follows, my Head shall be lifted up, above my Enemies round
about me. It speaks the Height and Eminency of his Power and Greatness, as
Opposites illustrate one another: The confusion of his Enemies, makes his Crown
flourish; and his past Sufferings, enlarge the Felicities of his present Peace,
like the Sun's shining with a greater clearness after an Eclipse. God
communicates some of his Glory with his Goodness, which leaves a Beauty, Gloss,
or Luster, upon the Person, like the shining of Moses his Face, when he was
with God in the Mount: And as he gives great Deliverance, and shows great
Mercy, so he gives great Glory to his King, to David, to his Anointed. And he
expresses the same in the 25th Verse of this Psalm; Thy hand has holden me
up, and thy gentleness has made me great. Thy Gentleness, the Septuagint
renders it, (...), thy Discipline: and the Hebrews derive it, (as Dr. Hammond
and others have observed) from a Verb, which signifies to humble or depress;
plainly intimating, that David's distress and danger, set him higher in Honor
and Dignity than he was before: His Triumphs made him more glorious than his
Tranquillity; and he had never been so great in Chronicle, if he had passed all
his days in Peace.

With what Shouts and Acclamations of Israel was he welcomed home from his long
Exile? How does the Pomp of his Restoration greaten, proportionably to the
Obscurities and Indignities of his Rejection? Therefore when he thankfully
recounts the Divine Mercies in other Deliverances, he styles God, Psalm. 62.7.
not only his Salvation, but his Glory, as before, Psalm. 3.8. My Glory, and the
lifter up of my Head, Which justifies our note upon this Circumstance of his
Deliverance in the Text; Thou have lifted up my Head above those that rise up
against me; that is, Thou have given greater Luster to the Jewels of my Crown,
and advanced me to greater Honor in the eyes and esteem of my People.

I may add one thing more here, That this lifting up, may seem to be a Pledge of
his Heavenly Glory, and of that never-fading Crown which should flourish upon
his Head, when everlasting Confusion covers his Enemies.

And thus much for what I thought requisite to be spoken upon the first part of
my Text, David's great and glorious Deliverance; great, in respect of the Evils
he was delivered from; great and glorious, in respect of the Author, and manner
of his Deliverance.

We come next to

II. The second General, David's devout Acknowledgment of, and thankful Return
for this his Deliverance.

And if we look forward to his form of Thanksgiving, we shall see how congruous
and suitable it was to the manner of his Deliverance; Psalm. 30.1.
I will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made mine
Enemies to rejoice over me. I will extol thee, because thou have advanced me; I
will rejoice in the Lord, because my Enemies rejoice not over me. But to keep
to the Text, we may Observe there,

First, His pious and devout Acknowledgment; I will confess unto thee: So I
crave leave to read it, not only because it is so rendered by the Septuagint,
and in the Vulgar Latin; but because it removes the seeming Tautology of our
Translation, and affords some distinct Matter of useful and seasonable
Discourse: For it seems to denote,

1. If not David's conviction of the Being, and overruling Power of God, yet
at least a further confirmation of his Faith therein; and in that wise and good
Providence, which interesteth it self in humane Affairs; and more especially in
the ordering and governing the Kingdoms of the World, and protecting in them
his own Deputies and Representatives; concluding also, from some notable
Circumstances in his own Case, that verily there is a Revenge for the Wicked,
as well as a Reward for the Righteous; Verily there is a God that judges in
the Earth.

2. It denotes his Resolution to adhere to this God, and to continue steadfast
in the practice and defense of his true Religion, against all Temptations and
Oppositions; I will confess unto thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles. The Gentiles
themselves, it is true, by that small knowledge which Sin had left them, did
discern somewhat of God in the most signal and remarkable Passages of his
Providence; yea, their Poets sung unto, and celebrated the Praises of their
Gods, under the Title of (...), The Givers of good Things.

The Roman Captains having conquered their Enemies, In gremio Jovis Optimi
Maximi deponitur, quoties laetitiam nova victoria attulit. Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 15. c. 30.
took part of the Laurel wherewith the Trumpeters were crowned, and laid it in
the Lap of Jupiter: But these Gentiles, who were Aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel, were no less strangers to David's God, neither did they glorify him as
they ought, and were thankful to him.

Nay, in his Trouble and Affliction, they were ready to reproach him, and other
true Israelites, for their trust in God: for whoever they were, who upon all
sad Occasions, were saying to him, Where is now thy God? It is said expressly,
Psalm. 44.14. Thou make us a by word among the Heathen; Psalm. 42.3.
And therefore, though his confusion in other respects was continually before
him, he shows, that he was not ashamed of his God, nor a weary of his Service,
by owning him in the sight of the Heathen, who so much despised and dishonored
him, by their Idolatries and vain Superstitions.

3. This Confession argues his confidence in the Divine Aid, his dependence
upon God for help and succor in the like danger. For after this manner his
Faith was wont to reason, and draw conclusions, from his own and others
Experiences: 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord has delivered me out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the Paw of
the Bear; and he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistim. And, Psalm.
22.4. Our Fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did deliver them.
What does he conclude from hence? Why, that God would be equally gracious, and
deliver him too.

And indeed, the experience of former Deliverances, may well give confidence of
the continuance of them, that he that has, does, and will still deliver. For
to be sure,

1. There can be no failure in his Ability and Power. In Men, there is many
times this defect; so that we cannot wisely and safely conclude of the one from
the other, of future from former kindness, because their Power and Opportunity,
if not their Friendship, may cease. But now there is no such fear in reference
to God; His strength and might never abates; His Hand is not shortened that it
cannot save, nor his Ear heavy that it cannot hear. Darius set his Heart upon
Daniel to deliver him, and labored it, Dan. 6.21.
but could not effect it; but God sent his Angel, and shut the Lions Mouths.
There is likewise,

2. In God a perpetuity of affection; It Is of the Lord's Mercy that we are not
consumed, because his Compassions fail not.

And it is observable, how our good King glories and flourishes in this
Confidence, yea, despises the Force and Policy of his Enemies thereupon. Psalm.
2.1, 2.
Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? It Is, we know,
spoken prophetically, of Christ's Kingdom; but it had a primary relation to his
own, as the Type of that. And he expresses a great assurance, that his Throne
shall stand firm and unmovable; and all the Plots and Conspiracies, the Rage
and the Malice of wicked Men against it, shall prove but vain Imaginations, and
Impotent Attempts. Thus much for David's Confession, and devout Acknowledgment
of God's merciful Deliverance. I will confess unto thee, O Lord, among the
Gentiles.

I come now to the

Second and last part, David's cheerful Thanksgiving; I will sing of thy
praise. The ancient People of God were wont to record their special Mercies and
Deliverances; as in their Chronicles, in the Names of their Children, and of
their Places; so likewise in Spiritual Songs and Psalms. Thus did Moses,
Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt; Deborah and Barak, their victory over Sisera,
and Jabin King of Canaan. Isaiah pens a Song of Thanksgiving beforehand, for
the Peoples return out of Captivity, Chap. 26. We have Hezekiah's Song too,
after recovery from his desperate Sickness. But to come home, we have David
penning this gratulatory Psalm, and several others; yea, we read elsewhere of
what, and to whom he sung; I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, Mercy to my Self,
and Judgment to my Enemies; Unto thee, Psalm. 101.2.
O Lord, will I sing: And he danced to his own Pipe, his Practices were
Praises, and all the Motions of his Life kept time and pace with the Music of
his Mouth. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, etc. He shows his
Thankfulness, not only in a sudden Rapture, or passionate transport of Joy,
but in a steady practice of Piety; as appears by the following part of that
Psalm, where he seriously resolves upon the well-ordering and governing of
himself, his Family, his Kingdom, that he would be holy and upright in his
Conversation; that he would suffer no notorious wicked Person in his Court;
nay, that he would endeavor to reform, or root out all such out of his
Dominions. I will early destroy all the Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off
all the evildoers from the City of the Lord.

I have done now with David's Thanksgiving, real as well as vocal; yea, I have
done with my Text too, as it concerns his Case; but begin to consider it as it
concerns our own, (...), as St. Paul speaks, to transfer and apply it to our
own King, and his Deliverance; the Blessings we all enjoy thereby, and which
this Day does justly remind us of. And I doubt not but it will be easily made
appear, how well the Text and the Occasion suit and agree together; and that
there is a manifest correspondence in the Subject, the Terms, the Author, and
the manner of the Deliverance. It will behove us to complete the Parallel by
our devout Confession and Thanksgiving; which I shall endeavor to assist you
in, by my Exhortation and Persuasives at the close of my Discourse.

But we are first to compare the Deliverances, and there to show;

1. How they agree in the Subject: And here I need not tell you that they were
both Kings, against whom there is (or at least should be) no rising up, Prove.
30. And that their Monarchical Government was, after the Image of God's
Monarchical, and such as continued in the World without interruption, for 3000
Years together; yet it is worth your better notice, how much our Gracious
Sovereign resembles the good King in the Text.

1. In his way of Education; being trained up, for some time, in the same
School, the School of Affliction, where many Princely Virtues are most easily
learned; not only Piety and Patience, but Prudence, Caution, Thrist, Clemency,
Modesty, and Moderation in time of Prosperity.

After David was King, God would not admit him to the exercise of his Kingly
Power, before he had spent some Years under this Discipline: Which was exactly
the Case of our present Sovereign, who was no ill Proficient under it, as will
appear when we come, by and by, to observe his Royal Qualifications: But in the
mean time I would note this, That though our King was the Son of Nobles, and
this Kingdom the Inheritance of his Father's, and his by an indisputable right
of Succession, as David's was not; yet there was as immediate an Hand of God in
his Restoration, as in David's Advancement. The Builders refused them both,
and threw them among the Rubbish of the People; but God in their several times,
made them the head-Stones of the Corner, and his Doings were alike visible, and
wonderful in each of them.

So that by a different, a peculiar, and more intimate relation to Heaven, He
may be said to be God's King, and his Anointed, and his Person, and Power more
sacred and venerable, upon that advantage of Royalty.

And if his Justice, in punishing none but the Violaters of his Laws; or his
Mercy, in pardoning so many of them; If his Prudence in Government, or his
condescending pleasantness in Conversation; Nay, if above all, His Constancy in
the true Religion, are any ways apt to strengthen Loyalty, or sweeten
Obedience, He is in all these another David: And I give you this transient view
of them, to render the Villainy of his Enemies, black and horrid as Hell it
self, without Plea or Paint, without the mixture of any fair Color, the least
degree of excuse or mitigation. Which brings me to the second thing in the
Parallel.

2. The Evils our David was delivered from, and they too were Enemies, and Sons
of Violence.

1. Enemies of all Sorts, of several Countries, of all Ranks and Qualities.
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; Roman, English, and Scotch Enemies. Enemies of
the Hills, and of the Valleys; Enemies of high, as well as hot Blood; Princes,
Nobles, Commons, and Mechanics.

Yea, the Enemies of our Lord the King, seem to resemble those of our Lord
Christ, the Spiritual David; Soribes, Pharisees, Sadduces; Lawyers, Preachers,
Hobbists, who say there is neither Angel, nor Spirit; and by an easy
Consequence, neither God, nor Devil.

Precisians, and Zealots, who would engross all Religion; and profane
dissolute Persons, who profess none. And it is very observable, that these sort
of Men had a large share in the late Damnable Conspiracy. And the Character
which Eusebius long ago gave their Forefathers in Infidelity, fits them exactly
well; (...), A Confederacy, Band, or Club, of Atheistical Deceit, Men thoroughly
Antimonarchical, who can no more endure a God in Heaven, than a King upon Earth.

He had Preaching, Petitioning, Voting, Associating Enemies; such as, if you
would believe them, hated only Arbitrary Power, dreaded Popery, stickled for
Legal Privileges; and had no worse Design in seizing the King's Guards, than
the Defense of his Person, the Reformation of his Council and Magistracy, and
the Security of Religion; by finding out a better Successor to the Crown, than
God had yet provided.

But we may conclude, from very ill Effects of the like demure and plausible
Pretenses to the Father, how much Mischief was intended the Son, even by the
same sort of Men, who thus palliate Treason, speak Peace to their Neighbors,
and are ready, upon all Occasions, to suggest to them, that it is only their
Love to their Country, and their Zeal for their Religion, which brings their
Loyalty into suspicion. Whereas in truth, with all their fair Professions of
their own Innocence, and good Affection to the Government, they take all
Opportunities, either secretly to whisper false Fears and Dangers into their
Neighbors Heads; or else to fill them with open Complaints and Invectives
against the Remisness of some, or the Rigor of others, in Public Places, till
at last they so poison and enrage their shallow Admirers, that they are ready,
upon the first Occasion, to break out into open Hostility; and to break through
all Difficulties and Dangers, to accomplish their Bloody Purposes; and so to
become the other sort of Enemies we spoke of; if not more dangerous, yet more
daring and violent, who are all for killing, and taking possession.

Who are for smiting the King; but not the King only, as Achitophel was, but
will have his dearest and only Brother, his prime Counselors, Judges,
Magistrates, to share his Fate: And in their breathings out of Slaughter,
saying with that Enemy, Exodus 15.9. We will pursue, we will overtake, we will
divide the Spoil; Our Lust shall be satisfied on them; we will draw our Sword,
and our Hand shall destroy them. Sure theirs would have been the Lust indeed,
the Sport and Wantonness of Cruelty, to have killed, and flayed, and stifled,
as in their Revenge and Rage they propounded.

The Jesuited Papist, that Man of Blood and Massacre, to be sure will be
presently taken upon suspicion for the Violent Man in our Case; and upon a
through-examination of his Principles and Practices in our own Kingdom, and
that not only in the days of our Fathers, but in this present Age, we can by no
means acquit him. He had his Head and Hand deep enough in the Popish Plot, and
no doubt acts still a subtle and spightful part among the several Sects of our
Dissenters.

But in good earnest, they deal a little too hardly with him, who would lay
this Plot too at his Door, and give out, That those very Men, who open so loud
against Popery, and will never be gotten off of that haunt, are themselves
Papists: But the folly of this setting the Devil against himself, and making
Satan to cast out Satan, is manifest to all Men, whose Reason and Knowledge is
not as implicit and blind, as the Papist's Faith and Obedience.

Methinks they had better try whether they cannot help their Cause a little, by
making the Iniquus Homo in the Text, the same with the Inimicus Homo, the
Envious Man in the Gospel, as St. Hierom does; and so shift off the Plot, not
to the Jesuit, but to the Devil himself, their common Counselor and Prompter.

The King knows, and we all know very well who our Violent Men were: The great
complainers of Violence and Oppression, the True Protestants, that seldom or
never came to Church, or at least came not to our Solemn Prayers, or came not
up to the heights of our Regular Service.

Such whom Indulgence and Toleration had emboldned to rebel for Dominion, and
to abuse their Liberty of Assembling for Devotion, to meet together for War. In
a word, a sort of Fanatic Miscreants, who were as far from being true
Protestants, as they were from being good Subjects.

And it is God that has in good measure avenged our David of these Violent
Men. One fell by the Hand of God; Another by his Own: Some have suffered the
Justice of the Nation; some are fled from it, and the rest are reserved in
Custody; where we leave them to the Justice of the Law, and the Mercy of God:

And proceed to the

3. Third Particular; The Author of the King's and the Nations Deliverance from
them. God is seen indeed in the Judgments that he executes; but they are his
strange Work, which he delights not in: But Mercy is his Darling Attribute,
most natural and proper to him, as I may so speak, and he glories most in it.
Punishment is an Act of Power; but Protection and Mercy, are the Works of
Honor: And therefore Princes depute their Administration of Justice, and their
Power of punishing, to their Officers; but Acts of Grace and Pardon, they
reserve to themselves, as a more sacred Impress, and more immediate Character
of Royalty.

In like manner, God, who is glorious in all his Attributes, singles out his
Goodness, his Acts of Protection and Deliverance, as the most eminent displays
of his Glory and Greatness. For when Moses desired to see his Majesty in its
most ample extent, in all its Pomp and Grandeur, he only caused his Goodness to
pass before him. And as his Glory is seen more or less in every Act of his
Goodness, so it shines out fully in the preservation or deliverance of good and
great Men, who are Public Blessings; in whose Sufferings, and in whose
Salvation so many partake, as being the Shields, the Supporters and Foundations
of a Nation, in the Scripture-Allusions. And seeing the Shields of the Earth
belong to God, as in regard of their Honor and Office, so in regard of God's
special care of, and watchful Providence over them, (He being their Shield, as
they are ours) some Beam or Ray of the Divine Sovereignty seems to be
eclipsed in their Dangers; but all its Glory breaks forth in their Deliverance.

As all Kings are God's Kings, and his Anointed by Name and Office, by special
Propriety and Representation; So the King in the Text, and our King, are his,
by most signal and eminent Preservations, Protections, and Deliverances; such
as proclaim their Divine Author, preach God to an unbelieving World, and give
him all the visibility that his Nature is capable of. Psalm. 58.11.
So that a Man (any Man, a mere Man, one that has none but the light of
Natural Reason to see by) may say, Verily there is a God that judges in the
Earth.

However, that taking Title of Liberatores Paetriae, The Saviors of their
Country, should have been misapplied, to the Murderers of their King; God has
been really our Juvans Pater, our mighty Helper in distress, the Father and
Author of his Majesty's Deliverances, in a most apparent manner, at several
times, and by various means, I had almost said Miracles.

And if we do not trace the Providence of God in relation to him, so far back
as his wonderful escape at Worcester; We must reflect upon it in his coming
home from Exile, because perhaps we have not yet, in the Story of any Times, at
least not of our own Nation, a more plain discovery of the Hand of God; a more
convincing demonstration, Dan. 4.32.
That the most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will. And, I hope, it may help to promote the Joy and Thanksgiving of this
present Day, and to confirm our Faith in the Divine Power and Mercy. If we call
to mind his Wonders of Old, particularly that great Miracle of his Majesty's
Restoration; A Work which was accomplished by the Arm of God made bare,
divested of all Humane Assistance. For our Gracious King (whom God keep-long
there) was not possessed of his Throne, until his Friends had in vain tried all
ways to restore him, and his Enemies essayed whatsoever their utmost Malice and
Cunning could suggest against him: A formidable and succesful Army was
scattered without a Blow; a Victory obtained without Fighting; the Enmity slain
without the Wounds of our Enemies: Terrible things, which we looked not for,
were wrought for us by the Hand of the Almighty; in a kind of Parallel and
Proportion to the Deliverance of Israel at the Red Sea; We all stood still, and
saw the Salvation of God.

And truly, whilst we consider the indefatigable and crafty Endeavors of the
Popish Faction ever since, to introduce their Religion, either by laying aside,
or taking off [quacunque art, omni-ratione] an Heretical Prince, as they
esteem ours. And on the other hand, whilst we consider the menacing Ambition
and Revenge of others, whom I would rather call Protestors than Protestants,
the Interest they had in the factious enraged Multitude, whom they had stirred
up, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, did the People against Moses and Aaron; and
the assistance they had from their many Preachers of Sedition, who in their
several Quarters, or Congregations, like Sheba the Son of Bichri, blew a
Trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we any portion in the
Son of Jesse: Or like the Gracchi at Rome, who could talk the People into
Mutiny at their pleasure. Or, lastly, like Demetrins the Silver-smith, who by
one Seditious Oration, filled with Vproar the whole City of Ephesus.

Again, whilst we consider how many Seditious and Scurrilous Pamphlets were put
into trusty Hands, who were ready to lend them to some, and talk them over to
others, with their own Additions and Remarks, for the more effectual promoting
Rebellion and Treason throughout the Land, for the conjuring up of those Venti
Typhonici, restless and violent Spirits, whose work it is to take Peace from
the Earth, and to cast all into Confusion.

Once more; Whilst we consider the great spreading of that Malignant Popish
Principle, even amongst our True Protestants, (as they loved to call
themselves) That Finis dat, non tantum amabilitutem, sed bonitatem mediis; and
that we may do Evil that Good may come of it; that we need not stick at any
thing, though never so lawless and violent, for that which we think to be God's
Cause, and the Interest of Religion; I say, whilst we consider the variety of
the Enemies of the Government, their Quality, Number, Strength; their
Stratagems, Associations, Conspiracies, we cannot but discover Miracles of the
Divine Power and Goodness in our King's continued Defense and Preservation;
only short, if short at all, of those of his happy Return to us from a tedious
Exile.

Yea, what a visible signal Hand of Providence was there in his, and the
Kingdom's Deliverance from this Plot, the most barbarous and bloody that was
ever laid since the Gunpowder Treason! For how much of Accident and Casualty
soever there appeared to be at first in the Fire at Newmarket, we cannot but
conclude, by the happy Event, that God was in the midst of that Fire; and that
it was not kindled so much in Judgment to the particular Sufferers, as in Mercy
to the King, and to the whole Nation; a Fire of Defense, and not of
Destruction: And we may say, We were delivered (without a Comparison, without a
so as) by Fire.

God, who is sometimes said to make his Angel-Ministers a Flame of Fire, may by
as easy a Figure, be said to have made that flaming Fire, a Guardian Angel, a
Minister of Preservation to the King and Kingdom; And that when the
Conspirators were ready to seize upon the Royal Prey, and divide the Spoil,
crying out with David's Enemies; Ah, so would we have it; persecute and take
him, Psalm. 71.11.
for there is none to deliver.

And methinks it is strange, that the Plotters of, and Well-wishers to that
hateful Iniquity, should not be more forward to give glory to God, who has
spoken to them out of the Fire; and that in so remarkable a Circumstance of
their Defeat, they should not be more ready to own the Eye and Hand of that
God, Psalm. 33.10.
who brings the Counsel of the Heathen to naught, and makes the Devices of
the People to be of none effect.

Strange! that they should be no more ready to acknowledge with us, Psalm. 37.39.
That the Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord; and that he is their
strength in the time of Trouble. That it is he that avengeth our King; he that
subdueth the People; he that delivers him from his Enemies, and from the
Violent Man.

But so much for the Author of this Deliverance, the God of our Salvation.

4. For the manner of it; It was a Defense and a Dignity, as well as a
Deliverance.

1. It was a Defense. God has made it a new Settlement to his Throne; an
addition of Strength and Security to his Empire, by washing off the Paints, the
Colorings, and Counterfeits, both of Religion and Loyalty; showing him who are
True Protestants, and who are False Brethren; who are good Subjects, and who
are Movers of Sedition, and inordinate Seekers of Pre-eminence. In a word, who
are the Friends, and who are the Enemies, not only of the Succession, but of
the Monarchy.

Yea, God by this Deliverance, has told our King, and his Magistrates, as by a
Voice from Heaven, how much it concerns them to keep a watchful Eye, and a
strict Hand, upon Men of such lewd, loose, and dangerous Principles; to mark
their Motions, observe their Tendencies, and by prudent and timely Restraints,
to ourb the first stirrings of Rebellion. Yea, from the miscarriage of this
Attempt, we may conceive some good reason to hope, Psalm. 36.12. Psalm. 37.15.
that the Workers of Iniquity are already fallen, and are so cast down, that
they shall not be able to rise. Their Sword shall enter into their own Heart,
and no weapon formed against us shall prosper; But the Transgressors shall be
destroyed together, Psalm. 37.38. Isa. 60.18.
and the end of the Wicked shall be cut off; and such Violence be no more heard
in our Land.

We have reason to hope, that God who has graciously delivered the Soul of our
King from this Death, also has now delivered his feet from falling; that he
has not only stilled the Raging of the Sea, the Noise of the Waves, the
Tumults of the People; but thereby brought our Sovereign into his Haven: And
that the Winds and Storms which so lately shook and threatened our Royal Oak,
have only settled it, and given it a surer and firmer rooting; and that our
Government stands upon a more stable and durable Basis than heretofore, if God
so please.

2. We may look upon the Deliverance, for which we bless God this Day; not only
as an occasion of mending our Fences, of strengthening our Gates, and our
Guards, and consequently re-establishing of our King's Throne; but also as a
means in the good Hand of God, of enlarging his Dignity and Greatness; God
thereby increasing his Glory, bringing forth his Righteousness as the Light,
and his Judgment as the Noonday; making his Majesty more terrible in the Eyes
of his Enemies; more dear and honorable in the Hearts of his Friends, as a new
Blessing from the Hand of God our Savior.

SERMON II.
PSALM 18.49. Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, (or confess unto thee) O
Lord, among the Heathen; and sing Praises unto thy Name.


WE have heard what are the Mercies, and manifold Advantages of our King's
Deliverance; We are to see next, What is to be the Return of his and our
Devotion: Yea, we are taught already, by the Royal Pattern in the Text, it must
consist of two parts.

I. An humble Confession. II. A solemn Thanksgiving.
I am not here to tell you the King's Duty, but our own, by his pious
Declaration, and his appointment of this Day's Solemnities: He has told us
himself, That he very well understands it, and will be our great Example in
his religious performance thereof.

When David kept a Fast, all the People took notice of it, 2 Samuel 3.36.
and it pleased them, they were delighted to do as their King did. And it is
the happiness of this Day, which we now celebrate, and we ought thankfully to
acknowledge, that we may bless God in our Congregations, from the Example of the
Court, Psalm. 68.26.
and the King, the Fountain of Israel. And that,

First; By such a Confession unto him, as implies,

1. An acknowledging and owning, though not by a new, yet by a repeated and
renewed Homage, the Infinite Being, Power, and Providence of God; that the Lord
lives, and that to him belong the Issues from Death. That Power belongs unto
him; and in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. That he is able, not only
to work, but to command; not only to command, but to create Deliverance, and
fetch it out of the greatest distress and desolation, when there is none to
help, or vain is the help of Man. That he goes forth in his strength,
conquering, and to conquer: That he has repayed Fury to our. Adversaries, and
Recompense to our Enemies; given Salvation to our Prince, and delivered Charles
his Servant from the murdering Blunderbuss.

God, who dwells in a Light inaccessible, which neither the Eyes of our Sense
or Reason can bear; does yet, after a sort; show himself in this lower World to
pious Observers, in the ordinary effects of his Wisdom, Power, and Mercy: But
is much more visible in such extraordinary Acts of Protection and Deliverance,
as this which we now celebrate; upon this there are such special impresses of
Divinity, that we must be senseless and stupid, at least Irrational as well as
Irreligious, if we do not see and own God in it; if we do not regard the Lord
in such Works; consider and acknowledge him in such wonderful Operations of his
hands.

2. This Confession implies, a steadfast adherence to God; a walking in his
Name, being faithful to his Covenant, constant in his Religion, zealous for his
Glory, in the midst of the greatest temptations to Apostasy. We must confess
him among the Heathen.

When the King, like that religious Emperor, sets his Crown upon the Bible, and
the Power of the Prince, is a guard and support to the Power of Godliness; when
the profession of the True Religion makes us Rich and Honorable in the World,
and all about us are ready to commend, encourage, and wish us good Luck in the
Name of the Lord; God will want no Votaries, none to make their boasts of him,
and to tell of all his mavelous Acts.

When God causes the South Wind to blow upon his Garden, and the Sun of
Prosperity to shine gently upon his Field, the Church, the shallow-rooted Corn
will put forth, and spring up as fast as the rest; but it cannot abide
unseasonable Weather, too much Heat or Cold nips or blasts it.

Every one will be a Saint, when Religion is in Credit, and Godliness is Gain;
but when Tribulation or Persecution arises, because of the Word, by and by,
many are offended, and slink away from a perilous Profession.

Such were the Samaritans, that when the Jews were in prosperity, would profess
themselves to be of the Jewish Religion; but when the Jews were in Adversity,
would disclaim them and their Religion. Such were those wavering Time-servers,
who were Protestants in King Edward's Reign, Papists in Queen Mary's, and as
true Protestants again as ever in Queen Elizabeth's Days. And many such there
are now among us, whose Religion is their Interest; who are wise to understand
the Times, and to save their Purses.

But if Worldly Considerations make other Men Converts, God grant they may
never make us Apostates: That neither the spoiling, nor the increase of our
Goods, may move us from our Christian Stedfastness and Resolution. It is
storied of a famous Nobleman, Hormisdas.
who when he was deposed from all his Honors, because he would not forsake his
Religion, and afterward restored to them again, as a new Temptation to
renounce it; He gave this resolute Answer to the King of Persia, Si propter
ista me denegaturum Christum putas, ista denuo accipe; If you think I value my
Honors above Christ, pray take them from me again. We have another Instance,
not altogether unlike this, in St. Basil; The Emperor sent to him to subscribe
the Arrian Heresy; Theod.
and ordered his Agent to treat him, at first, with fair and enticing Speeches,
and the promise of great Preferments: which he did; but to them the good Man
replied, Alas! these are Arts to inveigle Children; but we that are nourished
and taught by the Holy Scriptures, are readier to suffer a thousand Deaths,
than to renounce one Article of our Creed. And when he that dealt with him,
proceeded from Entreaties to Increpations, and told him, He was mad; his meek
return was, Opto me in aeternum sic delirare, God grant I may be always thus
mad, that neither Enmity nor Friendship, Fears nor Hopes, may move me, or draw
me off from bearing Testimony to the Truth of Jesus.

We do not, we cannot confess to God aright, if we are not as ready to own him,
and glory in him, among his Enemies, as among his Friends; when the Profession
and Practice of the True Religion of our Savior, shall bring us to taste of
his bitter Cup; and we shall be hated of all, that is, of the generality of
Men, for his Name's sake, for adhering to his Truths, as they have been
delivered in the Scriptures, and taught in the best and purest Ages of the
Church.

Then, and not till then, will it appear, that we are acted by David's Spirit,
when we are ready to speak, if need be, of God's Testimonies, even before Kings
that oppose them, and not be ashamed of them. Then do we approve our selves the
Servants and Worshippers of Daniel's God, when we own him with the hazard, nay,
with the certain loss of Reputation, Liberty, and utmost danger of Life it self.

This Constancy and Courage for the Truth, was it which denominated those
Heroic Christians, of former Ages, Confessors; namely, their taking up their
Master's Cross, and owning him among their Heathen Persecutors.

My Brethren, through the infinite Patience and Goodness of God toward us, who
have deserved no such thing, we have been delivered from our Blood-thirsty
Enemies, Papists, and another sort of Men, who have made use of the Protestant
Name, as a Cloak to secure them in opposing of the Protestant Cause, and
undermining the Established Religion: And we are at present exempt from those
Sufferings and Martyrdoms, which in other Ages, and in our own Country, have
been the Lot of God's most faithful Servants.

But alas! we know not how soon our Heaven may overcast again, and the Clouds
follow after the Rain. The great Fear is, lest the Papists should imitate the
True Protestant Policy, and either pursue their Old, or set on foot a New Plot,
in hopes that if it do, or do not take, they may leave it at other Men's Doors;
and as easily now make the World believe, that it was a Phanatick Plot, as the
Phanaticks could hope to persuade us, that theirs was a Popish One; and so the
latter end of our Fears and Troubles, may prove worse than the beginning.

It will be the wisdom of our Piety, in the midst of our Jubilees and Triumphs,
to prepare for new Dangers and Trials, and to resolve, That the God of our
Mercies and Deliverances, shall be our God in every Condition; that his Rod as
well as his Staff shall comfort us; and that we will put our whole trust in
him, as well when he slays, as when he saves us. This God shall be our God for
ever and ever; he shall be our Guide, even unto death: And this minds me of a

Third Particular, in this our Confessing and Acknowledging of God's Almighty
Goodness in our Deliverance; and that is, Dependence upon him for relief and
rescue in the like distress. Let not our Courage sink, our Spirits be
disquieted or dejected, with misboding Apprehensions of Future Evils; but let
us humbly trust in his continued Aid, who has been our present help in
Trouble, considering that, Donando debet, as St. Cyprian speaks, God's past
Blessings and Deliverances, if we make a good use of them, are Pawns and
Engagements of Future; I say, if we make a due return for them, and a right
improvement of them. Which brings me to the upshot of all, the main Duty of my
Text, and of this Day especially.

II. The speaking, singing, living, of Praises unto the Name of our God. What
we have spoken already concerning Confession unto God, may denote a serious and
wise consideration of his doings toward, and dealings with us, and some more
silent shows of our Gratitude, in our adherence to him, and affiance in him. I
am now to speak of the Solemn Proclamations of his Greatness and Goodness,
which we are to make with the Voice of Thanksgiving: When we have exercised our
observing Faculty, in regarding the Works of the Lord, we must employ our
Mouths to express the Thanks of our Minds, and make known his Faithfulness to
all Generations. St. Basil in Psalm. 28.
(...), Action must follow Contemplation in our Case. And when we have
considered the Operation of God's Hand, our Mouth must praise him with joyful
Lips, not concealing his loving kindness and his Truth from the great
Congregation. We must employ the best Organ we have, our Tongue, (which the
Royal Psalmist styles our Glory) in this best, this heavenly, this glorious
Service of Praise. And indeed, if a grateful Affection live in our Hearts, it
will proceed forth of our Lips; there will be a Conspiracy, and faithful
Correspondency, between our Mind and our Tongue; if the one be sensible, the
other will not be silent. We shall talk of his loving kindness in the Morning,
and of his faithfulness every Night, uttering abundantly the memory of his
great Goodness, and singing of his Righteousness, making known to the Sons of
Men his mighty Acts, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom, according to the
Expressions of our sweet singer in sundry places.

Acknowledgments of the Divine Goodness, and solemn Testifications of our
thankful sense thereof, (how indisposed and averse soever our sluggish Minds
are thereunto) was always, and ever will be, the principal and most noble part
of all Religion, immediately addressed to God. It is the only Heavenly Work that
can be done upon Earth, the only joyful Employment which shall last to all
Eternity; and which should ever wait for God in Sion, and upon all occasions,
be exercised here in the Assemblies of the Faithful.

When the ordinary effects of the Divine Providence, do in any advantageous
manner present themselves to our view; when we peruse the Volumes of Story, and
therein observe the various Events of humane Actions; especially the seasonable
Rewards of Virtue, the notable Protection and Deliverance of Innocence; and the
deserved Punishments of malicious Wickedness. Then is it seasonable to sing
unto the Lord a new Song; to praise him in a high and exalted strain,
especially upon so signal a manifestation of Mercy and Judgment, as that was
which we celebrate this Day.

It was once said of Claudian, That he wanted Matter suitable to the excellency
of his Wit. But where is Wit and Eloquence worthy of this Subject? Who can
utter these mighty Works of the Lord? Who can show forth all his Praise? None
so well as our chief Musician, whose Tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer.
And we cannot do it better, than in a Psalm of his composing. We have seen in
Scripture, how they were wont to praise God with Songs and Hymns. And besides
David, we have instanced in Moses and Miriam, Deborah and Barak, etc. and may
add Simeon and Anna.

In the Christian Church, after they had ended their Love Feasts, they began
their Hymns, which were either taken from the Scriptures, or of their own
composition: Which Pliny takes notice of, as of a great part, nay, as of the
whole in a manner of their Worship; that they did, Secum invicem carmen Christo
quasi Deo dicere; That they joined together in singing a Psalm to Christ as
their God. And indeed, it has been the general and authorized practice of all
Nations, in all Times, by composed Hymns, and panegyrical Elogies, to express
their Gratitude for the Gifts of Nature, and for the Benefits indulged by
Providence. And shall not this stir our Emulation, and kindle our Sacrifices?
Shall not our Devotion keep pace with, if not outgo theirs? Shall we not feel
our Transports in so affecting an Occasion? and in this sense give thanks unto
the Lord among the Heathen, and sing Praises unto his Name?

Surely, if we consider the necessity, as well as the comeliness and expediency
of the Duty, the Admonitions of the Prophets, as well as the Precepts of
Philosophers, and the Examples of both; if we consider the greatness and
imminency of the Danger, and consequently the blessing of the Deliverance, we
shall not want our Hallelujahs, we shall not want any incitement to, or
assistance in this Duty of Thanksgiving; but as we have great reason to bless
God, so I hope we shall make our boasts of him all the Day long.

What a deluge of Confusion were these poor Nations running into? How deep were
the Discontents of the People? How ready the Tinder of unsatisfied Spirits, in
all Parts, to take Fire, and break out into a devouring and irresistible Flame?
Which would soon have made this good Land, that was before them like the Garden
of Eden, to have been behind them like a desolate Wilderness. How near was the
Glory departing from our Israel? How near was the Crown falling from our Head?
and all our Happiness expiring with the Breath of our Nostrils? We know not
where the Rage and Cruelty of our Enemies would have stopped: We know not how
many besides his Royal Brother, should have fallen on the Right, and on the
left Hand of the King. But we know, it was resolved to follow the Blow at
Majesty, with a Massacre; and that several Persons of Quality, and Place, the
Magistrates of our Great City, and Subjects every where, of most eminent and
tried Loyalty, were designed for immediate slaughter.

If this Conspiracy had taken place, we should not, in all likelihood, have
been so much as a People, or a very miserable People, if any at all: For it is
not so many Heads of Men jumbled together, but so many placed in a due
subordination, under Rule and Government, that make a People, a Body or Society
of Men. The very Life and being of a Nation, are the Laws and Ordinances of it,
whether Civil or Sacred: The Civil to make it a Kingdom, and the Sacred to make
it a Church. When those are at any time demolished or dissolved, we cease to be
either Nation or Church; and you may write Lo-ammi upon it, yea, Lo-ruhamah,
Hos. 1.8, 9.
no People, nor yet no Pity. And these were destined to speedy destruction,
with all their sure Supporters, by the Men of Violence we have before
described. Cursed be their Anger, for it was fierce; Genesis 48.7.
and their Wrath, for it was cruel: yea rather, blessed be the most High God,
who has delivered these Enemies into our Hand, and strangled all their teeming
Hopes between the Womb and the World.

Indeed, the horror of the Mischief intended, may a little chill the Mirth of
this Days Thanksgiving, and cause us to rejoice with trembling, even at this
our Deliverance: Yet may we hope withal, that that which damps the Blaze, will
continue the Burning; that such Abatements will help to keep Life in our Joy,
and prolong, if not perpetuate our Sacrifice of Praise.

Perhaps, the contrivance of this Bloody and Barbarous Design was therefore
permitted, that the disappointment might be had in everlasting remembrance, and
celebrated as it is this Day. It may be this was done, that we might say no
more, The Lord lives, who has delivered us from the Treason of pretended
Catholics; but the Lord lives, who has delivered us from the Tyranny and
bloody Rage of wild Fanatical Enthusiasts.

How should such Considerations as these, the Considerations of our great
Dangers, and our gracious Deliverances, enlarge our Hearts, fill our Mouths,
act our Lives with the Praises of the Lord? What Memorials, and Monuments, and
Ebenezers should we every where erect? And how seasonably may we at this time
take to our selves words, The words of the Royal Prophet David? Blessed be the
Lord, Psalm. 124.6.
who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth. Psalm. 68.20.
He is our God, even the God of whom comes Salvation. God is the Lord, by whom
we escape Death. God has showed us his Goodness plenteously; and God has let
us see our Desire upon our Enemies. And after these, the words of the Courtly
Prophet Isay, in a way of holy Triumph over our Enemies.

Associate your selves, O ye People; and give ear, Isa. 8.9, 10.
O ye of all Nations: or rather, ye of the several Sects and Parties in this
Nation, Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: Take counsel
together, Plot, Conspire, and it shall come to naught: speak the word, appoint
one Time and Place after another, for the execution of your bloody Purposes,
and it shall not stand; for God is with us.

And that our glorying may not be in vain, it will concern us very much, to add
Real Thanks to our Verbal; not only to offer Praise, but to order our
Conversations aright.

Our Thanks must not stay in Words and Instruments, but proceed on to return of
Affections and Actions. It must be Actio Gratiarum, a doing, a working of
Thanks, as one speaks.

When David had represented the difficulty, if not the impossibility of giving
God due and full praise; Psalm. 106.1. Who can show forth all his praise? He
tells us, verse. 3. who come nearest doing so, viz. they that keep Judgment, and
he that does Righteousness.

Tacitus, speaking of certain words of Tiberius, says, they were praeclara
verba, sed non pro Tiberio, very excellent words, if Tiberius had not spoken
them. The like may we say of Psalms, and Forms of Thanksgiving, in the Mouths
of ungodly Men, they are good in themselves, but not graceful in them: For,
Prove. 17.7.
excellent Speech becomes not a Fool; nor is praise comely for any but the
Righteous: And Tacitus hit upon the reason of this too; Nec enim ad hanc formam
caetera sunt. His other Actions accord not with these, but found forth God's
Dispraise and Dishonor, in a louder accent than this, wherein his Tongue and
Lips speak his praise. Canticum novum and vetus homo male concordant. I think
it is St. Bernard's; The singing of a new Song, without the leading of a new
Life, is a most unpleasant Discord in our Gratitude.

All Men, the worst of Men, are bound indeed to praise God for his Mercies,
common and special. It lies upon them as a Duty, but it belongs not to them as
a Privilege. Unto they Wicked, says God, What have thou to do to take my
Covenant into thy Mouth? Psalm. 149.3.
But Israel may rejoice in God. Let them praise him in the Dance, in the Dance
as well as with the Song; in their Ways and Walkings before God, as well as
with their Words unto him; in the regular Motions of their Lives, as well as
with the Chantings of their Voice, or the Melody of Timbrel or Harp: for the
Lord takes pleasure in his People, and in their Services.

It is their Honor and their Privilege to serve him; and he is pleased to own
it as his Glory, to be served by them: He that offers Praise, glorifieth me,
Psalm. 58. ult.
i. e. if his Praise be attended with a well-ordered Conversation.

We then thank God, as we ought, for his Goodness, when we become good our
selves; when we serve him with the Mercies we receive from him; and the
mortifying of one Lust, will give more glory to God, than the singing of a
thousand Psalms. We extol and honor God indeed, when we look upwards our
selves; when we mind heavenly Things; when we walk in a way which is above to
the Wise: Or in St. Basil's Expression, Hom. in Psalm. 29. p. 181.
(...), when we discreetly pursue or hasten toward everlasting Happiness; When
we live up to the Principles of our Religion, and give God the Worship and
Homage belonging to his Majesty.

We make great shows, when we assemble and meet together, as we do this Day, to
render Thanks to Almighty God, for the Benefits received at his Hands. And if
this were to be performed with words only, with Hosannah's and Hallelujah's,
and Gloria Patri's, and Psalms, and Hymns, peradventure we should do it well
enough; but in the mean time, by our Lives and Actions, we provoke the Almighty
with all variety of Offenses: We do, daily and hourly, such things as we know
are highly displeasing and odious to him. But we may assure our selves, these
things will not only mar the Music of our Thanksgiving, but render our
Deliverances as insignificant as our Praises. Yea, every Sin, after such a
Mercy as this, has a double Guilt, the Guilt of Ingratitude, as well as
Disobedience; and therefore threatens us with new and greater Punishments, and
to bring us nearer, if it may be, to Ruin, than we were before.

Seeing thou, O God, Ezra 9.13.
have given us such a Deliverance as this; should we again break thy
Commandments? Would thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us,
so that there should be no Remnant, nor escaping? I will therefore, with St.
Jude, ver. 5. put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how the Lord
having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them
that believed not.

Never any People held their Happiness by a fairer Charter than Jerusalem, yet
their Sins forfeited their Privileges, and defaced their Glory. And though God
speak concerning a Nation, to build, and to plant it; if that Nation do evil in
his sight, he will repent of the good wherewith he aid he would benefit them.

Let us therefore, I beseech you, not only thankfully acknowledge, but piously
improve our Mercies, lest our Sins provoke God to let loose our Enemies again
upon us, and suffer them to strike Home, to execute their Malice, and quench
the Light of our Israel.

Let us not grow careless, Isa. 14.29.
because the Rod of him that smote us, is broken, lest out of the Serpent's
Root come forth a Cockatrice. Much less let us rebel against him, who has
subdued our Enemies, and so fall by that very Hand of his which delivered us
out of Theirs; or rather destroy our selves, after so miraculous a Rescue and
Preservation.

We learn this from the Heathen Historian; Livy.
Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, adversa spernentibus; It shall go
well with those that fear the Lord, whilst those that despise him, shall fall
before him.

Valerius Maximus attributed the Prosperity and Flourishing of the Roman
Empire, Non mirum si pro eo Imperio augendo pettinax indulgentia Deorum
excubuit, quod tam scrupulosa cura parvula quoque momenta religionis examinare
videretur.
to their great care, and scrupulous exactness, in every Part and Ceremony of
their Religious Worship. Hence Religion, and the Fear of God, is by Plato
styled the Defense of Power; The Kings and the Peoples Lifeguard both. And
Plutarch tells us, that it is (...), the Band of all Society; and that we may
as easily build a City in the Air, as settle and establish a Commonwealth,
where there is no Fear of God to support it. And the Wise King Solomon, who
spoke by Divine Instruction, assures us, that it is not only the Strength and
Safety, but the Glory and Honor of a Kingdom. Righteousness exalts a Nation,
puts a Dignity and Excellency, as well upon a People, as upon Private Persons.
Yea, the very Shadow thereof, Deus ostendit praeclaro Romanorum Imperio,
quantum valerent virtutes Civiles etiam sine vera Religione. Epist. 5. ad
Marcellin.
has proved (like St. Peter's) Healing to a State. For it was St. Austin's
Observation, of the forenamed ample and glorious Empire, that God prospered it
for their Civil Virtues, though they had no True Religion: Yea, the Son of
Syrach seems to attribute much to a Negative Holiness; Ecclus 35.3. To depart
from Wickedness, is a thing pleasing to the Lord; and to forsake
Unrighteousness, is a Propitiation.

Now if the upholding of Civil Order, and the Public Restraint of the
Extravagant Appetites and Lusts of Men, be such an Honor and safety to a
Nation; How much more is the Profession of True Religion, and the Practice of
Real Righteousness? If Hypocrites have their Reward; How much more will David's
Integrity and Uprightness, preserve both King and People?

It entitles as well to Temporal, as to Spiritual and Eternal Blessings; Isa.
1.19.
If ye be willing, and obedient, ye shall eat the Good of the Land.

Let it therefore be our common Care, as it is our joint Interest, to forsake
those Sins of ours, which weaken our Government, and waste our Land; which sap
the Foundation, and shake the Fabric of Church and State, more than any other
Underminers and Conspirators.

Let us endeavor, in our several Places and Capacities, to show forth that
exemplary Piety, and uniform Obedience, which becomes the Gospel; which is the
Strength and Ornament of the Protestant Cause, our Sanctuary in Trouble, and
the Glory of our Prosperity.

Yea, let our honoring of the King, proceed from our fear of God; Our Loyalty
be the genuine Fruit of our Religion; and the Conscience of God's Ordinance and
Command, be the Promoter and Guide of our subjection to the Civil Power. And
considering that our Obedience to our Superiors, who are God's Vicegerents and
Ministers, is an eminent instance of our true Obedience to God himself; it will
not be amiss, nay certainly, it will be most seasonable at this time, to give
it its due place in my Exhortation, to that Holiness and Righteousness of Life,
which is the best expression of our Thanks.

The Excellent Photius, in his Notes upon the 13th to the Romans, presses
subjection to Governors, as a proper way of glorifying God; Thou gainest by
being a Subject; Apud Oecumenium.
not only because thou fulfillest the Command, (...), because thou do honor
God, in the honoring the Power ordained by him.

I might forbear, methinks, to put you in mind to be subject to Principalities
and Powers, to obey Magistrates, whilst you have before you so many plain
Scriptures, and so many exemplary Providence, preaching and pressing that
Doctrine. The Deliverance we celebrate; the Discovery and Punishment of the
Traitors, as well as the Lessons of the Day, tell us aloud, that God justifies
and abets Rule and Sovereignty, and requires subjection thereunto.

We are taught this, I say, by the Word of God, which engages us to this
Obedience, by as obliging Principles, as it does to any part of Religion. And
we are taught it too, in

The Second place, by the Works of God.

1. By the eminent Judgments that have pursued and seized notorious Rebels. 2.
By the admirable Preservations and Protections of Sovereign Princes.
1. By the final Judgments of God upon Rebels and Traitors. We find many of
them in the Scripture History; and we find there too, that none of them went to
their Graves in peace. Achitophel, Absalom, Sheba, Abner, Abiathar, Joab,
Athaliah, Zimri, Adoniah: They all paid dearly for the Mischief they did, and
ended their days in dishonor, and left nothing behind them but the Memory of
their Sin, and the Record of their Curse.

Yea, if we examine other Chronicles, we shall find Instances of the same
nature.

Suetonius, in the Life of Julius Caesar, observed, that there was hardly one
of his Murders, (though a Heathen, and an Arbitrary Prince) that survived the
Wickedness three Years, Vid. Isaac. Casaub. Not.
neque sua morte defunctus est; all dying violent Deaths, some by Shipwreck,
some in Battle; some by the Hand of Justice, others by their own. And
Marcellinus relates it of the Conspirators against Gordianus the Younger, Quod
velut clarescente justitia cruciabilibus interiere suppliciis; That they died
with exquisite Tortures, that Justice might become more conspicuous in their
Sufferings.

All Stories are full of Examples of this kind, and no wonder, seeing it was a
Truth known to a Proverb in Solomon's time; Prove. 24.22.
My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them that are
given to change: For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both?

Whosoever breaks a Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; whose removes
Foundation-stones, Eccl. 10.8, 9.
shall be hurt therewith. Those that break the Laws, which are the Fence and
Security of a Nation, expose themselves to certain Ruin.

Those Turbulent and Seditions Persons among the Jews, who assumed to
themselves the blazing Title of Zealots, who yet had more Heat and Passion,
than Judgment or Religion; being prone to Mutiny and Faction, and ready to
pretend Conscience, even for Rebellion it self; though they brought Desolation
upon their own City, (...). Jos. l. 7. c. 30.
Ruin upon their Nation, they brought withal the severity of God's Judgments
upon themselves. For as many punishments, as it is possible for Man's Nature to
endure, were heaped upon them, (...), as long as any breath of Life remained.

St. Jude making mention of such as did despise and speak evil of Dignities,
verse. 8, 11. says, That they perished in the gainsaying of Core.

This Core (or Korah) was a Levite, who by his Office was to have taught Jacob
God's Judgments, and Israel his Law; but he being one of those who corrupted
the Covenant of Levi, and did things very unbecoming his Character, drew three
principal Men of the Tribe of Reuben, and then two hundred and fifty Princes of
the Assembly (famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown, popular Persons, and
great Patriots) into his Confederacy; and having gathered his Associats
together, against Moses and Aaron, they stuck not to affront them, and throw
dirt into their Faces: But by these Men's strange perishing in this gainsaying
of theirs, the very Women (who usually make a part in such Factions) were
convinced, that by this way of opposing Moses and Aaron, they opposed God
himself, the Ordainer and Abetter of their Authority; for the Daughters of
Zelophehad could say, Our Father died in the Wilderness, Numb. 27.3.
and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together
against the Lord in the company of Korah. Nay, the very words of the Spirit of
God, concerning Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 26.9, 10.
are express to this purpose; These were famous in the Congregation, (the great
Independents of those Times) who strove against Moses, and against Aaron, when
they strove against the Lord; and the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed
them up together with Korah, when that Company died; what time the Fire
devoured two hundred and fifty Men, and they became a Sign.

A dreadful Sign indeed, unto all them who afterward should follow their steps;
to whom, St. Jude says, is reserved the blackness, of darkness for ever. For
what better end may they expect, that dare adventure upon the like Turbulent
and Seditious Courses? The Levite begun the Faction there; and if he was not
the beginner, we are assured, by his Majesty's Declaration, that he was the
chief Promoter and Manager of our no less Damnable Conspiracy. Our Fergusson,
as their Korah, by the like false Persuasions, draws the Nobles after him;
and no doubt made use of the same Motive, viz. the Ruler's assuming too much to
himself, and his invading the Peoples Rights and Liberties, thereby to
instigate them to that resistance; which if it escape the like punishment in
this World, as it seldom does, shall be sure, if unrepented of, to receive the
same Damnation in the next: Because, whosoever resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of God; and he will make them know so, sooner or later, by the
Vengeance which he executes upon such Resisters. And,

2. By those wonderful Preservations which he vouchsafes to the Persons of
Kings; their Protections being great and extraordinary, as their Dangers are:
Whence they had the Title of (...) given to them by the Ancients; particularly
by St. Chrysostom, (...), We pray for Kings, whom God takes into his peculiar
Care and Safeguard.

How many Assassins have found themselves daunted with the Rays of Majesty?
And, Gowrie's Consp. fol. 6.
like Gowries Man, who when he was prepared to kill King James, trembled in his
presence, and fell to adore him.

How divinely was the same King preserved from a deeper laid Treason, when the
Match was ready to give fire to the Powder?

I cannot stay to instance in the many Preservations and Deliverances of his
Glorious Predecessor Queen Elizabeth.

We may see this Goodness of Almighty God to Princes, Protestant Princes, his
Kings, and his Anointed, nearer home, and in a more affecting Instance, our own
gracious Sovereign, whose many admirable Deliverances, speak him the special
Favorite of Heaven.

Perez was wont to call himself, Camb. Eliz. Part 2.
Monstrum Fortunae, the Prodigy of Fortune; and our Prince may appear to us,
Monstrum Providentiae, the Prodigy of Providence; taking the word, as Scaliger
applies it to Virgil, Monstrum sine labie, a Prodigy of Perfection.

And let us beseech Almighty God, still to deliver him from the Evil Man, to
preserve him from the Violent Man, to keep him from the Snare they have laid
for him, and from the Grins of the workers of Iniquity; and that we, and all
his Subjects, duly considering whose Authority he has, may faithfully serve,
honor, and humbly obey him, in God, and for God, according to his blessed Word
and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord; who with him, and the Holy Ghost,
lives and reigns, ever one God, World without End. Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 16. Line ul^ read (...). Page 17. l. 2. (...) Page 24. l. 24 (...) Page
53. l. 25. (...).
An Eucharistical Ode to God our Deliverer, on the happy discovery of the late
Treasonable Conspiracy.
I.
THou Great JEHOVAH, Mighty King,
Who can enough thy Praises sing?
Or e're enough thy mighty Acts make known,
Which thou great God have shown
To us thy chosen Flock;
To us thy small, but still beloved Stock?
Wondrous, O Lord, are all thy Works, and great,
Thy Mercies ever Infinite.
Thou Sion's Foes does still defeat,
And bring'st their darkest Plots to light.
II.
Great King! had thou not lent thine Aid,
And all our Foes dismayed;
Had not thy piercing Wisdom all their Secrets seen,
We, thy peculiar Lot, had been
Under the insulting Tyranny,
Of a Malignant Enemy;
Who would have all thy Temples raz't,
And laid their stately Buildings waste;
Religion would have been no more,
Nor any left thy Holy Name to adore,
But we should all have gone,
Hurried, by a relentless Foe, to swift Destruction.
III.
But silly Mortals think in vain,
E're to obtain
What the Almighty does deny,
In vain they his great Power defy,
And think in vain to hide, what he can soon espy.
He all their subtle windings sees,
And all their hidden Mysteries
His all-discerning Eyes can trace
Them, through all their hidden ways;
Can all their deep Designs reveal,
Tho dark as Night, and laid as low as Hell.
IV.
'Twas He, the Mighty HE,
Who saved us from the Enemy,
Did save our King and Land,
From out the fierce Destroyers violent Hand.
Their specious Shows, and subtle Arts,
Could not deceive the searcher of their Hearts.
He true Religion could descry,
From mere Hypocrisy:
He knew those painted Tombs outside,
Did but within a rotten Carcass hide;
He knew their Secret Plots, and them betrayed,
Into the Snare which they for others laid.
V.
So perish all, who Israel's Peace molest,
Who Israel and God alike detest.
May Sion's Foes be to confusion brought,
And all who her Destruction sought;
Who would have Israel's King destroyed,
And all the Royal Race beside.
May all such Plots as these
Be brought to light, and may at ease
Our Israel enjoy an everlasting Peace;
While we our daily Hallelujah's sing,
To our Deliverer, Israel's Mighty King.
VI.
Begin, my Song, begin,
And thou great God of Verse and Harmony,
Some of thy Fire into my Breast infuse,
Inspire my dull and grovelling Muse,
That I may Verse, such as may please thee, bring,
Such as the God-like David used to sing;
Such as shall worthy be,
Of Heaven and Thee.
Grant I may sing thy Praise
In fittest Numbers, tuneful Lays,
Which may thy wondrous mighty Works declare,
And make thy bounteous Acts appear:
That the deluded World may all believe,
It Is God, our God alone, can Safety give.
VII.
When Wicked Men begin to rage,
Thou only can their Wrath assuage,
Thou who can still the Winds, can calm the Seas,
And make 'em sink into a tranquil Peace:
Thou Men, more boisterous than they,
Can easily calm, for all things thee obey:
All things act by thy command;
All things are moved by thy Hand,
And Men in vain thy mighty Power withstand.
VIII.
All Creatures, if they could, would sing thy praise,
But Man alone knows all thy ways:
Him thou have exalted, far
Above what other Creatures are:
Have made him Lord of all below,
And taught him how both Good and Ill to know.
He then shall never cease to sing,
Of all thy wondrous Acts, O King;
Of all thy Kindness lately shown
To this our Nation.
We all extol thy Name with one accord;
Extol and magnify thee only, gracious Lord.
Hallelujah.
JOHN CAVE the Son, of Linc. Col. Ox.

FINIS.

