THis Book having been left with me, I have perused diverse parts of it, as my
leisure would permit; and finding it judiciously Written, and the design of it
being very Useful and Seasonable, I do recommend it to the Public.

14 June 1680. Fra. North.

THE LAWS OF Q. ELIZABETH, K. JAMES, and K. CHARLES the First.

CONCERNING Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, etc.

And concerning the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance EXPLAINED BY Diverse
Judgments and Resolutions OF THE REVEREND JUDGES.

Together with other Observations upon the same Laws.

TO Which is added the Statute XXV CAR. II. cap. 2. for preventing dangers
which may happen from POPISH RECUSANTS.

And an Alphabetical Table to the whole.

By William Cawley of the Inner Temple, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, and Richard Chiswell, at the Crown on
Ludgate Hill, and the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXX.

TO THE READER.
THe principal scope and intent of the poenal Statutes here presented to thy
view, is, To assert the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; To abolish the
exercise of that which is foreign and was usurped, and to forbid the entrance
of such into the Realm who would restore that which is abolished; To prevent
the Reconciliation of the Kings Subjects to the Church of Rome, and their
Education in the Religion there professed and taught; To oblige them by Oaths
(held one of the most strict and sacred ties among men) to that Obedience which
they owe their Prince; To take away from seditious and dangerous persons the
power of doing hurt; To procure a general Conformity to the Religion
established, and to inflict capital and other punishments on the infringers of
these Laws.

It Is no part of my design to sharpen this two edged Sword, but only to take
off some of its rust, that, by the brightness, it may be the better discerned
and avoided; And to give some light (such as my own obscurity will afford) what
are the just measures to be taken, in reference to the Laws here treated of.

The Judgments and Resolutions of the Reverend Judges upon the several branches
of these Statutes, and of others likewise here occasionally mentioned, (as far
as they relate to the subject in hand) which lie scattered in the printed
Books, are here collected and placed under proper heads; And this is the only
thing, the Statutes themselves excepted, for which I durst recommend the Book
to thy perusal.

Besides which, there are several other Authorities cited in the Cases, which
arise upon these poenal Laws: And here and there, where the path is untrodden,
I have adventured to add some observations of my own.

Wherein, I am sensible enough how great a hazard I run: But my Apology shall
be, that they are offered only as probable Opinions, (and so I would be
understood) which where Authorities fail, can have no other Basis to fix
themselves on, then the Rules of Law, aptly applied by the strength of Reason.

And if in any of them, the Reason offered shall by the learned be thought too
weak, or the Rule of Law misapplied; I shall not insist upon the misfortunes of
others, who have made Essays of the like nature, as a just excuse for mine; but
support my self with this hope, that such will be most ready to pardon me, who
are the best able to censure me; and that where I find the one, I shall not
fail of the other.

As for the mistakes which I have noted in those who have written more or less
upon these Statutes, I presume, what I have done cannot be taken amiss, seeing
my aim is no other then theirs was, to represent things truly as they are,
(though we may sometimes miss the mark:) And I was the rather induced to
rectify them, for that I found diverse of them con-concern the Justices of
Peace, whose leisure or inclinations may not always serve them to peruse the
Statutes at large, and who, by trusting to those shorter Tracts or Abridgments
they have by them, may be misled in the execution of their Office.

There is only one thing more, which is to give thee notice, that where I cite
Wingate, it is intended of his Abridgment of the Statutes; a work laborious
enough, but not always complying with the sense of the Statute Abridged, and
therefore, here in several places corrected.

W. C.

Stat. I Eliz. cap. I. An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over the Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign
Powers repugnant to the same.
MOst humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, Stat. Sect. 1.
your faithful and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, that where in the time of
the Reign of your most dear Father, of worthy memory, K. Henry the Eighth,
diverse good Laws and Statutes were made and established as well for the utter
extinguishment and putting away of all usurped and Foreign Powers and
Authorities out of this your Realm and other your Highnesses Dominions and
Countries, as also for the restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm the ancient Jurisdictions, Authorities, Superiorities and Preheminences
to the same of right belonging and appertaining, by reason whereof We your most
humble and obedient Subjects, Great Exactions were taken by Foreign Power
before the 25th year of K. H. 8. of the Inhabitants of this Realm.
from the five and twentieth year of the Reign of your said dear Father, were
continually kept in good Order, and were disburthened of diverse great and
intolerable charges and exactions, before that time unlawfully taken, and
exacted by such Foreign Power and Authority as before that was usurped, until
such time as all the said good Laws and Statutes by one Act of Parliament made
in the first and second years of the Reigns of the late K. Philip and Q. Mary,
your Highnesses Sister, entitled, An Act repealing all Statutes, Articles and
Provisions made against the Sea Apostolic of Rome, since the twentieth year of
K. Henry the Eighth, and also for the Establishment of all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Possessions and Hereditaments conveyed to the Laity, were all
clearly repealed and made void, as by the same Act of Repeal more at large does
and may appear. By reason of which Act of Repeal your said humble Subjects were
eftsoons brought under an usurped Foreign Power and Authority, and yet do
remain in that bondage to the intolerable charges of your loving Subjects, if
some redress (by Authority of this your High Court of Parliament with the
assent of your Highness) be not had and provided.

Stat. Sect. 2.
May it therefore please your Highness, for the repressing of the said usurped
Foreign Power, and the restoring of the Rights, Jurisdictions and
Preheminences appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this your Realm, that it
may be enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That the said Act made
in the said first and second years of the Reigns of the said late K. Philip and
Q. Mary, A repeal of the Stat. of the 1 and 2 Ph. and M. 8.
and all and every Branches, Clauses, and Articles therein contained (other
than such Branches and Sentences as hereafter shall be excepted) may from the
last day of this Session of Parliament, by Authority of this present
Parliament, be repealed, and shall from thenceforth be utterly void and of none
effect.

The Statute of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. here mentioned, repealed, The King
declared supreme Head. Stat. 1 and 2. Ph. and Mar. 8. 26 H. 8. 1. 35 H. 8. 3.
the Statutes of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. and 35 H. 8. cap. 3. By both which King Henry
the Eighth, his Heirs and Successors, were declared supreme Head of the Church
of England; And by the repeal of that of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. those other of
26 and 35 H. 8. were revived, and are again in force. Co. 4. Inst. 325. Vide
Sect. 5.

Stat. Sect. 3. A reviver of several Stat.
And that also for the reviving of diverse of the said good Laws and Statutes
made in the time of your said dear Father, it may also please your Highness,
That one Act and Statute made in the three and twentieth year of the Reign of
the said late King Henry the Eighth, entitled, An Act that no person shall be
cited out of the Diocese where he or she dwells, except in certain Cases.

And one other Act made in the Four and Twentieth year of the Reign of the said
late King, entitled, An Act that Appeals in such cases as has been used to be
pursued to the Sea of Rome, shall not be from henceforth had ne used, but
within this Realm.

And one other Act made the five and twentieth year of the said late King
concerning restraint of payment of Annates and First Fruits of Archbishopricks
and Bishoprics to the Sea of Rome.

And one other Act in the said five and twentieth year, entitled, An Act
concerning the submission of the Clergy to the Kings Majesty.

And also one Act made in the five and twentieth year, entitled, An Act
restraining the payment of Annates or First Fruits to the Bishop of Rome, and
of the Electing and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm.

And one other Act made in the said five and twentieth year, entitled, An Act
concerning the Exoneration of the Kings Subjects from Exactions and Impositions
heretofore paid to the Sea of Rome, and for having Licenses and Dispensations
within this Realm without suing further for the same.

And one other Act made in the six and twentieth year of the said late King,
entitled, An Act for Nomination and Consecration of Suffragans within this
Realm.

And also one other Act made in the eight and twentieth year of the Reign of
the said late King, entitled, An Act for the Release of such as have obtained
pretended Licenses and Dispensations from the Sea of Rome; And all and every
Branches, Words, and Sentences in the said several Acts and Statutes contained,
The Sentences and Branches in the aforesaid Statutes shall extend to the Queen.
by Authority of this present Parliament from and at all times after the last
day of this Session of Parliament, shall be revived, and shall stand and be in
full force and strength to all intents, constructions and purposes; And that
the Branches, Sentences and Words of the said several Acts, and every of them
from thenceforth shall and may be judged, deemed and taken to extend to your
Highness, your Heirs and Successors, as fully and largely as ever the same Acts
or any of them did extend to the said late King Henry the Eighth, your
Highnesses Father.

And that it may also please your Highness, that it may be enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, That so much of one Act or Statute made
in the two and thirtieth year of the Reign of your said dear Father King Henry
the Eighth, entitled, An Act concerning Precontracts of Marriages, and
touching degrees of Consanguinity, as in the time of the late King Edward the
sixth, your Highnesses most dear Brother, by one other Act or Statute was not
repealed.

And also one Act made in the seven and thirtieth year of the Reign of the said
late King Henry the Eighth, entitled, An Act that Doctors of the Civil Law
being married may exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; And all and every
Branches and Articles in the said two Acts last mentioned, and not repealed in
the time of the said late King Edward the sixth may from henceforth likewise
stand and be revived, and remain in their full force and strength to all
intents and purposes: Any thing contained in the said Act of repeal before
mentioned, or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding.

What Stat. repealed by the Stat. of 1 and 2 P. and M. 8. shall continue
repealed.
And that it may also please your Highness that it may be further enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all other Laws and Statutes, and the Branches and
Clauses of any Act or Statute repealed and made void by the said Act of Repeal,
made in the time of the said late King Philip and Queen Mary, and not in this
present Act specially mentioned and revived, shall stand, remain, and be
repealed and void in such like manner and form as they were before the making
of this Act, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

A reviver of the Stat. of 1 Ed. 6. 1.
And that it may also please your Highness, That it may be enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that one Act and Statute made in the first year of the
Reign of the late King Edward the sixth, your Majesty's most dear Brother,
entitled, An Act against such persons as shall unreverently speak against the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, commonly called the Sacrament of the
Altar, and for the receiving thereof under both kinds, and all and every
Branches, Clauses and Sentences therein contained, shall and may likewise from
the last day of this Session of Parliament, be revived, and from thenceforth
shall and may stand, remain, and be in full force, strength and effect, to all
intents, constructions and purposes, in such like manner and form as the same
was at any time in the first year of the Reign of the said late King Edward the
Sixth, any Law, Statute, or other matter to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

A repeal of the Statute of 1 and 2 P. and M. 6. and several other Statutes.
And that also, it may please your Highness, That it may be further established
and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that one Act and Statute made in the
first and second years of the late King Philip and Queen Mary, entitled, An
Act for the reviving of three Statutes made for the punishment of Heresies, and
also the said three Statutes mentioned in the said Act, and by the same Act
revived; And all and every Branches, Articles, Clauses and Sentences contained
in the said several Acts and Statutes, and every of them, shall be from the
last day of this Session of Parliament deemed and remain utterly repealed,
void, and of none effect to all intents and purposes; Any thing in the said
several Acts, or any of them contained, or any other matter or cause to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. Sect. 4. The abolishing of Foreign Authority.
And to the intent that all usurped and Foreign Power and Authority Spiritual
and Temporal may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never to be used or
obeyed within this Realm, or any other your Majesty's Dominions or Countries:
may it please your Highness, That it may be further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate,
Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this Session of
Parliament, use, enjoy or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence, or Privilege, Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical within this Realm, or within any other your Majesty's Dominions
or Countries, that now be or hereafter shall be, but from thenceforth the same
shall be clearly abolished out of this Realm, and all other your Highnesses
Dominions for ever: Any Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, or any other
matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

By the abrogating the Jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate, Archbishop of
Canterburies concurrent Jurisdiction abrogated.
all Jurisdiction derived from such Forreigner is abrogated likewise. And
therefore the concurrent Jurisdiction which the Archbishop of Canterbury is
supposed to have in the inferior Diocesses, ought not now to be exercised by
him, but is utterly taken away by this Act: For he had it not as Archbishop but
as Legatus natus to the Pope, and if continued to be exercised is a mere
Usurpation: Hobart. 17. Dr. James's Case.

And that also it may likewise please your Highness, Stat. Sect. 5.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction annexed to the Crown.
that it may be established and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities and Preheminences Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has
heretofore been or may lawfully be exercised or used for the Visitation of the
Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of
the same; And of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses,
Contempts and Enormities, shall for ever by Authority of this present
Parliament be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Sir Edward Coke 4. Inst. 325. calls this an Act of Restitution of the ancient
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, which always belonged of Right to the Crown of
England, That is a restitution of the exercise of it.

For in truth this Statute is not introductory of a new Law, The Kings ancient
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.
but declaratory of the old; and annexes not any Jurisdiction to the Crown, but
that which was, or of right ought to be by the ancient Laws of this Realm
parcel of the Kings Jurisdiction. By which Laws the King as supreme Head has
full and entire Power in all causes Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal: For the
Ecclesiastical Laws are the Kings Laws as well as the Temporal; And the Judges
of either of those Laws derive their Authority from him alone, Co. 5.8, 9.
Cawdries Case; where are several instances of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
exercised by the Kings of this Realm in several Ages, Moore 755. b. 1043.

The King is Persona mixta.
And in this respect the King is said to be Persona mixta, and Persona mixta
and unita cum Sacerdotibus: for that he has both Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Jurisdiction. 10 H. 7.18. Co. 2.44. Bishop of Winchesters Case. Coke 13.17.
Case of Modus Decimandi. Vid. Co. lib. 6. Praefac'.

And supreme Ordinary.
The King is the supreme Ordinary; and by the ancient Laws of this Realm, may
without any Act of Parliament make Ordinances and Institutions for the
Government of the Clergy, and may deprive them if they obey not, Moore 755. C.
1043. Cro. Trin. 2. Jac. 37. And if there be a controversy between Spiritual
Persons concerning their Jurisdiction, the King is Arbitrator, and it is a right
of his Crown to distribute to them, and to declare their Bounds. Hobart. 17.
Dr. James's Case.

Laws to be administered distinctly.
And yet although these Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical and Temporal are both in
the King, they are not to be confounded; For although both Laws are the Kings
Laws, yet they are to be administered distinctly, so that he who has
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction derived from the King ought not to usurp upon the
temporal Law: And the Ecclesiastical Judge who meddles in Temporal Causes or
Suits, and draws the Interest or Cause of the Subject which ought to be
determined by the Common Law, ad aliud examen, viz. to be decided by the
Ecclesiastical Law offends, contra Coronam and dignitatem Regiam, In
confounding those Jurisdictions of the King which ought to be kept separate and
distinct.

Prohibition.
And in such Cases not only a Prohibition lies, but the Ecclesiastical Judge,
if the Cause originally belongs to the Common Law, Pramunire.
and not to the Ecclesiastical Court, incurs a Praemunire, for depriving the
Subject of the benefit of the Common Law, which is his Birthright, Co. 12.37,
38, 39, 40. Co. 3. Inst. 120.

And therefore it was Resolved, That if a man be excommunicated in the Bishops
Court for a matter which belongs to the determination of the Common Law, it is
no less than a Praemunire: Praemunire.
And that by force of the word (elsewhere) in the Statute of 16 R. 2. cap. 5.
Stat. 16 R. 2. 5.
If any man pursue in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, etc. 5 E. 4.6.

The King may do what the Pope might by the Canon Law.
By this and the former Clause which restores to the King the Title and
Exercise of the Power of Supreme Head of the Church of England, and annexes to
the Crown all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction heretofore exercised by any
Forreigner, The King as supreme Head may do whatever the Pope might formerly do
within this Realm by the Canon Law; And upon this ground it was resolved, Trin.
39 Eliz. in Hollingworths Case in the King's Bench, That notwithstanding the
Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. Stat. 25 H. 8. 19
which makes the sentence of the Delegates definitive, and says, that no
further Appeal shall be had, yet the King after such definitive Sentence may
grant a Commission of Review. Commission ad revidendum.
For that after a definitive Sentence the Pope as supreme Head by the Canon Law
used to grant a Commission ad revidendum, Co. 4. Inst. 341.

Upon this ground it was likewise resolved in the Case of Grendon versus the
Bishop of Lincoln and al', That the King with the consent of the Patron, and
without the Bishop, may make an Appropriation; Appropriation
And in such Case the King does it Authoritate sua regia suprema and
Ecclesiastica, qua fungitur; for so are the words in the Charter there. Plowden
497, 498, 500. Vide Co. 5. 10. Cawdries Case, Co. 11. 10, 11. Pridle and
Nappers Case.

And where the King is Patron, an Appropriation may be made by him alone;
Addition to Popham 145.

And as he is supreme Head and supreme Ordinary, a Resignation Resignation.
made to him of a Deanery is as good as if it were made to the Bishop. Dyer 12
and 13 Eliz. 293. Pollard and Walronds Case. Plowden 498. Palmer 493. Hayward
and Fulchers Case

And that your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, Stat. Sect. 6. The Queen
may assign Commissioners to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue
of this Act by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to assign,
name, and authorize, when, and as often as your Highness, your Heirs or
Successors shall think meet and convenient; And for such and so long time as
shall please your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, such person or persons
being natural born Subjects to your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, as your
Majesty your Heirs or Successors shall think meet to exercise, use, occupy, and
execute under your Highness your Heirs and Successors, all manner of
Jurisdictions, Privileges and Preheminencies, in any wise touching or
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these your
Realms of England and Ireland, or any other your Highnesses Dominions and
Countries; And to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such
Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities
whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Power,
Authority or Jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed,
corrected, restrained or amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase
of Virtue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm: And that
such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized, and appointed by
your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him
or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall have full Power and
Authority by virtue of this Act, and of the said Letters Patents under your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors, to exercise, use and execute all the
premises according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents: Any
matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

High Commission Court.
The Jurisdiction and Authority here by given to the late Court, commonly
called the High Commission Court, are now taken away by Act of Parliament, but
the Power here given the Queen to constitute such Commissioners, was no more
than she had before by ancient Prerogative, and the Laws of England; For
thereby she might have made such an Ecclesiastical Commission, if this Act of 1
Eliz. had never been made. Co. 5.8, 9. Cawdries Case, Cro. Trin. 2. Jac. 37.

Stat. Who are compellable to take the Oath. Ecclesiastical Persons and
Officers, Judge, Justice, Mayor, Temporal Officer.

He that has the Queens Fee.


And for the better observation and maintenance of this Act, may it please your
Highness, That it may be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
and every Archbishop, Bishop, and all and every other Ecclesiastical person,
and other Ecclesiastical Officer and Minister, of what Estate, Dignity,
Pre-eminence or Degree soever he or they be, or shall be, and all and every
temporal Judge, Justice, Mayor, and other Lay or Temporal Officer and Minister,
and every other person having your Highnesses Fees or Wages within this Realm,
or any your Highnesses Dominions, shall make, take and receive, a corporal Oath
upon the Evangelist, before such person or persons as shall please your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors, under the Great Seal of England to assign
and name, to accept and to take the same according to the tenor and effect
hereafter following, that is to say, I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in
my Conscience, The Oath for the Queens Supremacy.
That the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of
all other Her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
within this Realm; And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my Power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities, granted or
belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the
Contents of this Book.

And that it may also be Enacted, The penalty for refusing the Oath.
That if any such Archbishop, Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical Officer or
Minister, or any of the said Temporal Judges, Iusticiaries, or other
Lay-Officer or Minister, shall peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take or
receive the said Oath, That then he so refusing shall forfeit and lose only
during his life, all and every Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Promotion, Benefice
and Office, and every Temporal and Lay-Promotion and Office which he has
solely at the time of such refusal made: And that the whole Title, Interest and
Incumdency, in every such Promotion, Benefice, and other Office as against such
person only so refusing, during his life, shall clearly cease and be void, as
though the party so refusing were dead.

And that also all and every such person and persons so refusing to take the
said Oath, shall immediately after such refusal be from thenceforth during his
life, disabled to retain or exercise any Office or other Promotion, which he at
the time of such refusal has jointly or in Common with any other person or
persons.

And that all and every person and persons that at any time hereafter shall be
preferred, promoted or collated to any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, or to any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Benefice, Promotion, Dignity or Office, or
Ministry, or that shall be by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors,
preferred or promoted to any Temporal or Lay-Office, Ministry or Service within
this Realm, or in any your Highness Dominions, before he or they shall take
upon him or them to receive, use, exercise, supply, or occupy any such
Archbishopric, Bishopric, Promotion, Dignity, Office, Ministry or Service,
shall likewise make, take, and receive the said Corporal Oath before mentioned
upon the Evangelist, before such persons as have or shall have Authority to
admit any such person to any such Office, Ministry or Service, or else before
such person or persons as by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, by
Commission under the Great Seal of England, shall be named, assigned or
appointed to minister the said Oath.

And that it may likewise be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
if any such person or persons as at any time hereafter shall be promoted,
preferred, or collated to any such Promotion, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical,
Benefice, Office or Ministry, or that by your Highness, your Heirs or
Successors, shall be promoted or preferred to any Temporal or Lay Office,
Ministry or Service, shall and do peremptorily and obstinately refuse to take
the same Oath so to him to be offered, that then he or they so refusing shall
presently be judged, disabled in the Law to receive, take, or have the same
Promotion Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, or the same Temporal Office, Ministry
or Service within this Realm, or any other your Highness Dominions, to all
intents, constructions and purposes.

He that sues Livery or (...).
And that it may be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and
every person and persons Temporal, suing Livery or Oustre le maine out of the
hands of your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, before his or their Livery or
Oustre le maine sued forth and allowed: He that does homage to the Queen.

He that shall be received into the Queens service.


and every Temporal person or persons doing any homage to your Highness, your
Heirs or Successors, or that shall be received into Service with your Highness,
your Heirs or Successors, shall make, take and receive the said Corporal Oath
before mentioned, before the Lord Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal for the time being, or before such person or persons, as by your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors, shall be named and appointed to accept or
receive the same.

And that also all and every person and persons taking Orders, He that takes
Orders.

He that takes Degrees in any University.


and all and every other person and persons which shall be promoted or
preferred to any Degree of Learning in any University within this your Realm or
Dominions, before he shall receive or take any such Orders, or be preferred to
any such Degree of Learning, shall make, take and receive the said Oath by this
Act set forth and declared, as is aforesaid, before his or their Ordinary,
Commissary, Chancellor, or Vice Chancellor, or their sufficient Deputies in the
said University.

Provided always, He that having an Estate of Inheritance in a temporal Office,
first refuses, and then takes the Oath.
and that it may be further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person having any Estate of Inheritance in any Temporal Office or Offices,
shall hereafter obstinately and peremptorily refuse to accept and take the said
Oath as is aforesaid, and after at any time during his life, shall willingly
require to take and receive the said Oath, and so do take and accept the same
Oath before any person or persons that shall have lawful Authority to minister
the same: that then every such person immediately after he has so received the
same Oath, shall be vested, judged and deemed in like estate and possession of
the said Office, as he was before the said refusal, and shall and may use and
exercise the said Office in such manner and form as he should or might have
done before such refusal: Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

And for the more sure Observation of this Act, Stat. Sect. 8. The penalty of
the maintenance of Foreign Authority.
and the utter Extinguishment of all Foreign and usurped Power and Authority,
may it please your Highness that it may further be enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any person or persons dwelling or inhabiting within this
your Realm, or in any other your Highnesses Realms or Dominions, of what
Estate, Dignity or Degree whatsoever he or they be, after the end of 30 days
next after the determination of this Session of this present Parliament, shall
by Writing, Printing, Teaching, Preaching, express words, deed or act,
advisedly, maliciously and directly affirm, hold, stand with, set forth,
maintain or defend the Authority, Pre-eminence, Power, or Jurisdiction
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, of any Foreign Prince, Prelate, Person, State or
Potentate whatsoever heretofore claimed, used or usurped within this Realm, or
any Dominion or Country, being within or under the Power, Dominion or Obeisance
of your Highness: or shall advisedly, maliciously and directly put in ure, or
execute any thing for the extolling, advancement, setting forth, maintenance or
defense of any such pretended or usurped Jurisdiction, Power, Pre-eminence or
Authority, or any part thereof: that then every such person and persons so
doing and offending, their abettors, aiders, procurers, and Counselors, being
thereof lawfully convicted and attainted according to the true order and course
of the Common Laws of this Realm for his or their first offense, shall forfeit
and lose unto your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, all his and their Goods
and Chattels as well real as personal.

The forfeiture for the first Offense.
And if any person so convicted or attainted shall not have, or be worth of his
proper Goods and Chattels, to the value of twenty pounds at the time of his
Conviction or Attainder: That then every such person so convicted and attainted
over and besides the forfeiture of all his said Goods and Chattels, shall have
and suffer Imprisonment by the space of one whole year without Bail or
Mainprise.

And that also all and every the Benefices, Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical
Promotions and Dignities whatsoever of every spiritual person so offending, and
being attainted, shall immediately after such Attainder be utterly void to all
intents and purposes, as though the Incumbent thereof were dead: And that the
Patron and Donor of every such Benefice, Prebend, spiritual Promotion and
Dignity, shall and may lawfully present unto the same, or give the same in such
manner and form, as if the said Incumbent were dead.

The forfeiture for the second Offense.
And if any such Offender or Offenders after such Conviction or Attainder, do
eftsoons commit or do the said Offenses, or any of them, in manner and form
aforesaid, and be thereof duly convicted and attainted as is aforesaid: That
then every such Offender and Offenders shall for the same second Offense, incur
into the dangers, penalties and forfeitures ordained and provided by the
Statute of Provision and Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of
King Richard the second.

The forfeiture for the third Offense.
And if any such Offender or Offenders at any time after the said second
Conviction and Attainder, do the third time commit and do the said Offenses, or
any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly convicted and
attainted as is aforesaid: That then every such Offense or Offenses shall be
deemed and adjudged High Treason, and that the Offender or Offenders therein,
being thereof lawfully convicted and attainted according to the Laws of this
Realm, shall suffer pains of death, and other penalties, forfeitures, and
losses, as in case of High Treason by the Laws of this Realm.

Vide Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 3. 6. Stat. 1 Eliz. 2.


And also that it may likewise please your Highness, Stat. Sect. 9. Within what
time an Offender shall be impeached.
That it may be enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no manner of person or
persons shall be molested, or impeached for any the Offenses aforesaid,
committed or perpetrated only by Preaching, teaching, or words, unless he or
they be thereof lawfully indicted, within the space of one whole year next
after his or their Offenses so committed. And in Case any person or persons
shall fortune to be imprisoned for any of the said Offenses committed by
Preaching, Teaching, or words only, and be not thereof indicted within the
space of one half year next after his or their such Offense so committed and
done: That then the said person so imprisoned shall be set at liberty, and be
no longer detained in prison for any such cause or offense.

Within the space of one whole year. Indictment within what time.
] If a man had done any Deed or Act, or executed any thing which amounted to
the holding, standing with, or maintaining the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of any Foreign Prelate, etc. he might before the Statute of 23
Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.
have been indicted for it after the year expired: For the Restraint here in
point of time extends to Offenses committed by Preaching, Teaching, or words
only, and not to all cases within this Branch, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 10.
mistakes the meaning of the Clause; But now by the Statute of 23. it seems that
the prosecution must be within a year and a day for all Offenses whatsoever
against this Act.

Within the space of one half year.] The half year Half-year.
here mentioned is not to be understood of six months (as Wingate again
mistakes) which is in Law to be accounted secundum numerum singulorum dierum,
allowing 28 days to every month, and not according to the Solar month, nor
according to the Calendar, unless it be upon the Statute of W. 2. cap. 5. W. 2.
5. 2 and 3 E. 6. 13.
For the account of the lapse in a Quare Impedit, and 2 and 3 E. 6. 13. of
proving a suggestion. Co. 1. Inst. 135. Cro. Trin. 5. Jac. 166. 167. Bishop of
Peterborough versus Catesby. Yelverton 100. Catesby versus Baker. Hobart. 179.
Copley versus Collins. But the half year here is to be understood according to
the Calendar.

Sir Edward Coke 4. Inst. 331. in his construction of this Statute says, That
no persons shall be impeached for any of the Offenses by Preaching, Teaching,
or words, unless they be lawfully indicted within the space of half a year; But
yet it seems that the words of the Statute will not bear such a Construction,
neither if they did, is it Law at this day, nor was when those Institutes were
written. For 1. The Statute where it speaks of half a year, refers only to the
Case of Imprisonment, That where the Offender by Preaching, Teaching, or words,
is imprisoned, and is not indicted within half a year after the Offense
committed, he shall be set at liberty, and be no longer detained in Prison for
any such Cause or Offense, and this was done in favor of liberty, and to
prevent a long Imprisonment upon a malicious and groundless Accusation. But
there is no color to extend the words to the Offender who was never
imprisoned, although the Offense was by Preaching, Teaching, or words only. 2.
But the Case that an Offender by Preaching, Teaching, or words, had been
imprisoned within the half year, yet it seems very questionable, whether at the
half years end when he was set at liberty (as he ought to be by this Act, if he
be not in the mean time indicted) he should have been clearly discharged by
this Act from any prosecution Prosecution.
during the half year then next following. For although it be said he shall be
no longer detained in Prison for any such Cause or Offense, yet that seems to
refer only to his Imprisonment before Conviction; and (detained) imports as
much, viz. That he should not be continued, or remain in the same Imprisonment
which he suffered within the first half year before any Indictment was found
against him, but not that he should not be indicted afterward within the
compass of the year, and if found guilty, suffer the Imprisonment, and other
penalties inflicted by this Act. And it might so have happened, that an
Offender by Preaching, Teaching, or words, might have been accused, taken and
imprisoned a day or two before the half year next after the offense expired. In
which Case it cannot be thought to be the meaning of the makers of the Law,
that by his Imprisonment for a day or two he should escape the penalties of the
Law, and could not be afterward indicted within the compass of the year. And
yet in that case he ought to be set at liberty by the express words of the Act,
which says, He shall be set at liberty if not indicted within half a year
after the Offense, and not half a year after his Imprisonment. 3. It seems now
to be out of doubt but that any Offender against this Act, although by
Preaching, Teaching, or words, may be indicted at any time within a year and a
day after the Offense committed, and that by force of the Statute of 23 Eliz.
cap. 1. which says, Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.
that all Offenses against the Acts of 1 Eliz. touching Acknowledgment of her
Majesty's supreme government in Causes Ecclesiastical, shall and may be
inquirable within a year and a day after the Offense committed. And the
affirming or maintaining the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of a
Forreigner, was without question an Offense against her Majesty's supreme
Government in Causes Ecclesiastical, and against the acknowledgment thereof, so
that the year limited by this Statute is now extended to a day farther, and
whatever the meaning of it was as to the half year: All Offenses against it,
whether by Preaching, Teaching, or words, or otherwise (for that of 23. is
general, and reaches all Offenses whatsoever against the Act of 10. touching
the Supremacy Ecclesiastical) may now be inquired of within a year and a day,
whether the party be in Prison or not. Within what time.
But yet it seems that in Case of Imprisonment within the first half year, this
Provision here for the setting at liberty of the Prisoner at the end thereof,
if he be not before that time Indicted, remains still in force, and is not
abrogated by 23.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 10. All things touching the Praemunire in the
Statute. 1. and 2. P. and M. 8. do continue in force.
and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to repeal any clause, matter,
or sentence contained or specified in the said Act of Repeal made in the said
first and second years of the Reigns of the said late King Philip and Queen
Mary, as does in any wise touch or concern any matter or cause of Praemunire,
or that does make or ordain any matter or cause to be within the Case of
Praemunire, but that the same for so much only as touches or concerns any
Case or matter of Praemunire, shall stand and remain in such force and effect,
as the same was before the making of this Act: Any thing in this Act contained
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Offenses
committed against Statutes revived.
That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend or
be prejudicial to any person or persons, for any Offense or Offenses committed
or done, or hereafter to be committed or done, contrary to the tenor and
effect of any Act or Statute now revived by this Act, before the end of thirty
days next after the end of the Session of this present Parliament: Any thing in
this Act contained, or any other matter or cause to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Stat. Sect. 11. Trial of Peers.
And if it happen that any Peer of this Realm shall fortune to be indicted of
and for any Offense that is revived or made Praemunire or Treason by this Act,
that then he so being indicted, shall have his Trial by his Peers, in such like
manner and form as in other Cases of Treason has been used.

Provision for Trial of Peers.
The provision made in this and other Acts of Parliament for the Trial of a
Peer by his Peers in case of Treason, where he was to be tried according to the
course of the Common Law, is Ex abundanti, and he should have such Trial if no
such Proviso were inserted; the like in the Case of Felony. Stamford Pl. Coron.
153.

Stat. Sect. 12. No matter of Religion, etc. made by this Parliament shall be
adjudged Error, Heresy, or Schism.
Provided always, and be it enacted as is aforesaid, That no manner of Order,
Act or Determination for any matter of Religion, or cause Ecclesiastical, had
or made by the Authority of this present Parliament, shall be accepted, deemed,
interpreted, or adjudged at any time hereafter to be any Error, Heresy,
Schism, or schismatical Opinion: Any Order, Decree, Sentence, Constitution or
Law whatsoever the same be, to the contrary notwithstanding.

What things the Commissiners may adjudge to be Heresy.
Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such person
or persons to whom your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, shall hereafter by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, give Authority to have, or
execute any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority Spiritual, or to visit, reform,
order, or correct any Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses or Enormities by virtue
of this Act, shall not in any wise have Authority or Power to Order, determine
or adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresy, but only such as heretofore have
been determined, ordered or adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, The Scripture. Four general Counsels.
or by the first four general Counsels, or any of them, or by any other general
Counsel, wherein the same was declared Heresy by the express and plain words
of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be ordered,
judged, or determined to be Heresy by the high Court of Parliament of this
Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation: Any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

None shall be indicted or arraigned but by Witnesses.
And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
shall be hereafter indicted or arraigned for any of the Offenses made,
ordained, revived or adjudged by this Act, unless there be two sufficient
Witnesses or more to testify and declare the said Offenses, whereof he shall
be indicted or arraigned. And that the said Witnesses, or so many of them as
shall be living and within this Realm at the time of Arraignment of such person
so indicted, shall be brought forth in person face to face before the party so
arraigned, and there shall testify and declare what they can say against the
party so arraigned, if he require the same.

Provided also, A Proviso for them that give relief to Offenders.
and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall hereafter happen to give any relief, aid, or comfort, or in any
wise be aiding, helping or comforting to the person or persons of any that
shall hereafter happen to be an Offender in any matter or case of Praemunire or
Treason revived or made by this Act: that then such relief, aid or comfort
given, shall not be judged or taken to be any Offense, unless there be two
sufficient Witnesses at the least, that can and will openly testify and
declare that the person or persons that so give such relief, aid or comfort,
had notice and knowledge of such Offense committed and done by the said
Offender, at the time of such relief, aid or comfort so to him given or
ministered: Any thing in this Act contained, or any other matter or cause to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And where one pretenced sentence has heretofore been given in the Consistory
in Paul's before certain Judges De Legate, by the Authority Legantine of the
late Cardinal Poole, by reason of a Foreign usurped Power and Authority
against Richard Chetwood, Esquire; and Agnes his Wife, Chetwoods Appeal to the
Court of Rome.
by the name of Agnes Woodhull, at the suit of Charles Tyrrel, Gent. in a Cause
of Matrimony solemnized between the said Richard and Agnes, as by the same
pretended Sentence more plainly does appear, from which Sentence the said
Richard and Agnes have appealed to the Court of Rome, which Appeal does there
remain, and yet is not determined.

May it therefore please your Highness, that it may be enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if Sentence in the said Appeal shall happen to be given at the
said Court of Rome, for and in the behalf of the said Richard and Agnes for the
reversing of the said pretenced Sentence before the end of threescore days next
after the end of this Session of this present Parliament: that then the same
shall be judged and taken to be good and effectual in the Law, and shall and
may be used, pleaded and allowed in any Court or Place within this Realm: Any
thing in this Act, or in any other Act or Statute contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And if no Sentence shall be given at the Court of Rome in the said Appeal, for
the reversing of the said pretenced Sentence before the end of the said
threescore days, that then it shall and may be lawful for the said Richard and
Agnes and either of them, at any time hereafter to commence, take, sue and
prosecute their said Appeal from the said pretenced Sentence, and for the
reversing of the said pretenced Sentence within this Realm, in such like manner
and form as was used to be pursued, or might have been pursued within this
Realm at any time since the xxiv. year of the Reign of the said late King Henry
the Eighth, upon Sentences given in the Court or Courts of any Archbishop
within this Realm.

And that such Appeal as so hereafter shall be taken or pursued by the said
Richard Chetwood and Agnes, or either of them, and the Sentence that herein or
thereupon shall hereafter be given, shall be judged to be good and effectual in
the Law to all intents and purposes: any Law, Custom, Usage, Canon,
Constitution, or any other matter or cause to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Appeal between Richard Harcourt and Anthony Fydell.
Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where there
is the like Appeal now depending in the said Court of Rome, between one Richard
Harcourt, Merchant of the Staple, and Elizabeth Harcourt, otherwise called
Elizabeth Robins, of the one party, and Anthony Fydell Merchant Stranger, on
the other party, that the said Robert, Elizabeth and Anthony, and every of
them, shall and may for the prosecuting and trying of their said Appeal, have
and enjoy the like remedy, benefit and advantage, in like manner and form as
the said Richard and Agnes, or any of them, has, may, or ought to have and
enjoy: this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Stat. i Eliz. cap. ii. An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service
in the Church and the Administration of the Sacraments.
WHere at the death of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, Stat.
Sect. 1.
there remained one uniform Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the
Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England,
which was set forth in one Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of
England, Authorized by Act of Parliament holden in the Fifth and Sixth years of
our said late Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, Entitled, An Act for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments; the which
was repealed and taken away by Act of Parliament in the First year of the Reign
of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, to the great decay of the due honor of
God, and discomfort to the Professors of the Truth of Christ's Religion.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the
said Estatute of Repeal, A repeal of the Statute of 1 M. 2. And the Book of
Common Prayer shall be in force.
and every thing therein contained, only concerning the said Book, and the
Service, Administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies contained or
appointed in or by the said Book shall be void and of none effect, from and
after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming: And that the
said Book, with the Order of Service and of the Administration of Sacraments,
Rites and Ceremonies, with the alteration and additions therein added and
appointed, by this Estatute, shall stand and be from and after the said Feast
of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist in full force and effect according to the
tenor and effect of this Estatute: Any thing in the aforesaid Estatute of
Repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. Sect. 2. The Book of Common Prayer shall be used.
And further, Be it Enacted by the Queens Highness, with the assent of the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral or Parish Church, or
other place within this Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same,
or other the Queens Dominions, shall from and after the Feast of the Nativity
of Saint John Baptist next coming, be bounden to say and use the Mattens,
Evensong, Celebration of the Lords Supper, and Administration of each of the
Sacraments, and all the Common and open Prayer, The alteration of the Book set
forth 5 and 6 Ed. 6.
in such Order and Form as is mentioned in the said Book, so Authorized by
Parliament in the said Fifth and Sixth years of the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth, with one alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be used on every
Sunday in the year; and the Form of the Letany altered and corrected, and two
sentences only added in the delivery of the Sacrament to the Communicants, and
none other or otherwise.

The forfeiture of those which use any other Service then the Book of Common
Prayer.
And that if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other, whatsoever Minister that
ought or should sing or say Common Prayer, mentioned in the said Book, or
Minister the Sacraments from and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John
Baptist next coming, refuse to use the said Common Prayers, or to Administer
the Sacraments, in such Cathedral or Parish Church, or other places, as he
should use to Minister the same, in such Order and Form as they be mentioned
and set forth in the said Book: or shall wilfully or obstinately, standing in
the same, use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or Manner of celebrating
the Lords Supper, openly or privily, or Mattens, Evensong, Administration of
the Sacraments or other open Prayers then is mentioned and set forth in the
said Book, (open Prayer, in and throughout this Act, is meant that Prayer which
is for others to come unto, or hear, either in common Churches, The Penalty for
depraving the Book of Common Prayer.
or private Chapels, or Oratories, commonly called the Service of the Church)
or shall Preach, Declare or Speak any thing in the Derogation or Depraving of
the said Book, or any thing therein contained, or of any part thereof, and
shall be thereof lawfully convicted according to the Laws of this Realm, by
Verdict of twelve Men, or by his own Confession, or by the notorious Evidence
of the Fact, shall loose and forfeit to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and
Successors, for his first offense, the profit of all his Spiritual Benefices or
Promotions, coming or arising in one whole year next after his conviction. And
also that the person so convicted shall for the same Offense suffer
Imprisonment for the space of Six months without Bail or Mainprize.

That ought or should sing or say Common Prayer, etc. What Minister is here
meant.
] Although the first part of this Clause, (viz.) All and singular Ministers in
any Cathedral or Parish Church, or other place, seems to intend a local
Minister only, and not one who is neither Parson, Vicar, or Stipendiary
Chaplain, yet the next words, If any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister that
ought to say Common Prayer or minister the Sacraments, etc. clearly comprehend
all lawful Ministers and Priests whatsoever: For it is held in our Law, that as
he is Sacerdos, he ought and is bound jure divino celebrare Coenam Dominicam,
and dictae Coenae orationes, etc. And if he be indicted upon this Statute with
the addition of Clericus, that word implies him to be a Priest or Minister
within the meaning thereof, Dyer 3. Eliz. 203.

Note, That by the Statute of 14 Car. 2. Stat. 14 Car. 2.
This and all other Laws which were then in force for the Uniformity of Prayer
and Administration of the Sacraments within the Realm of England, are now
applicable to the Book of Common Prayer, Book of Common Prayer.
authorized by that Act of 14 Car. and are to be put in ure with relation to
the said Book.

Wilfully or obstinately standing in the same.] These words (wilfully or
obstinately standing in the same) seem to restrain the Law to such other
Prayers as are used in hindrance of, or opposition to the Common Prayer, or
after admonition or warning to the contrary, Prayers in the Pulpit.
and therefore the Prayers used in the Pulpit before Sermon, seem not to be
within the meaning of this Law, nor to be forbidden by it, because generally
tolerated by those in Authority, and so not obstinately used; And were those
words wanting, although the words of the Statute are general, (any other form
or open Prayers) yet they ought to have a particular construction according to
reason, and the intent of the makers of the Law, (viz.) That no Minister shall
use any other form to the hindrance of, or in opposition to this: For a penal
Law shall not always be construed according to the words of it, but according
to the intent of the makers of it. Plowden 18. Fogassa's Case. Ib. 465, 466,
467. Eyston versus Studd. Ibib. 109, 110. Fulmerston versus Steward. And the
words of a Law may be infringed, and yet the Law it self may not be infringed,
unless the intent be likewise: Plowden 18. which intent shall never be
construed to be against reason: For many things are excepted out of Statutes by
the Law of reason, which yet are not excepted by express words, Plowden 13.
Fogassa's Case. And it is a general Rule to be allowed in construction of
Statute Laws, Quamvis Lex-generaliter loquitur, restringenda tamen est, ut
cessante ratione and ipsa cesset: cum enim ratio sit anima, vigorque ipsius
Legis non videtur Legislator id sensisse, quod ratione careat, etiamsi verborum
generalitas aliter suadeat. Co. 4. Inst. 330, 331.

Stat. Sect. 3. The penalty for the second Offense.
And if any such person once convict of any Offense concerning the premises,
shall after this first conviction eftsoons offend, and be thereof in form
aforesaid lawfully convict, that then the same person shall for his second
offense, suffer imprisonment by the space of one whole year, and also shall
therefore be deprived, ipso facto, of all his spiritual Promotions, and that it
shall be lawful to all Patrons or Donors of all and singular the same spiritual
Promotions, or of any of them, to present or collate to the same, as though the
person or persons so offending were dead.

The penalty for the third Offense.
And that if any such person and persons, after he shall be twice convicted in
form aforesaid, shall offend, against any of the premises the third time, and
shall be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convicted, that then the person so
offending, and convicted the third time, shall be deprived ipso facto, of all
his spiritual Promotions, and also shall suffer Imprisonment during his Life.

Where the second Indictment must mention the first conviction where not.
For his second Offense.] One is Indicted upon this Statute for administering
Baptism in other form than is thereby prescribed: And is convicted, and
afterward he is again indicted for the like Offense. By the Opinion of Clench
Justice, B. R. the second Indictment must mention the first Conviction: or the
Judgment cannot be for the second Offense, (viz.) Imprisonment for a year and
deprivation: But Wray Chief Justice held, That if both Indictments were before
the same Justices, they are to take notice of the first Conviction, although it
be not mentioned in the second Indictment, and ought to give Judgment
accordingly: But if the second Indictment be taken by other Justices, then
without mention therein of the first Conviction, they cannot give Judgment for
the second Offense. Leonard 1. 295. C. 403.

The Benefice void without any Sentence.
To present or collate, etc.] If the Offender against this Branch of the Act be
judicially convicted of Record for the second or third Offense, It seems that
there needs not any Sentence declaratory by the Ecclesiastical Judge, but his
Benefices or spiritual Promotions are void, ipso facto, upon such Conviction:
For although the word (void) be not here as it is in the Statute of 21 H. 8.
Stat. 21 H. 8. 13 13 Eliz. 12.
c 13. of Pluralities. And of 13 Eliz. cap. 12. about reading the 39 Articles;
Upon which Statutes it is resolved that a Sentence declaratory is not necessary,
but that the Benefice is actually void without it. Co. 4. 75. Hollands Case.
Co. 4. 79. Digbies Case. Co. 6. 29. Greens Case; yet the words here (that the
Patron may present or collate, as if the person so offending were dead) are
tantamount, and of as large an extent as if it had been said that his spiritual
Promotions should be void: And therefore if a Parson be convicted for the
second or third Offense against this Statute, and after such Conviction sues
the Parishioners for Tithes, its a good plea to say, that he stands convicted,
etc. For he is thereby no longer Parson, nor can sue for the Tithes, no more
than if he neglected to read the 39 Articles. And that he is disabled in this
last Case, was adjudged Trin. 30 Eliz. in a Prohibition inter Morris and
Eaton. Vide Leonard 2. 212. C. 267. Wiggen and Arscotts Case, nor will the
Kings Pardon The Kings Pardon.
help or restore an Offender against this Act after the second or third
Conviction, no more than it will him who neglects to read the 39 Articles. Vide
Cro. Trin. 41 Eliz. 679, 680. Baker versus Brent and Robinson.

The Patron must at his peril take notice of a Conviction of the Incumbent upon
this Statute: Notice to the Patron not necessary.
For if he present not within six months after, a Lapse will incur against him,
although no notice be given him: For all men at their perils ought to take
notice of an Act of Parliament, to which every one is party. 39 E. 3. 7. Bishop
of Chichesters Case. Dyer 7 Eliz. 237. Co. Hollands Case and Digbies Case;
supra. In which three last Cases it was held, That no notice to the Patron is
necessary upon an avoidance by the Statute of 21 H. 8. of Pluralities. Vide
Terms de la Ley, Stat. 21 H. 8. 13 13 El. 12.
111. Deprivation: And the Statute of 13 Eliz. touching the 39 Articles, which
provides, that no Title to present by Lapse shall accrue upon any Deprivation,
ipso facto, until six months after notice thereof given by the Ordinary to the
Patron, although it be penned in general terms, extends only to the particular
Cases in that Statute, and to no other Case of Deprivation ipso facto, by Act
of Parliament.

And if the person that shall offend and be convicted in form aforesaid,
concerning any of the premises, shall not be Beneficed, Stat. Sect. 4. The
penalty of an Offender having no Spiritual Promotion.
nor have any spiritual Promotion, that then the same person so offending and
convict, shall for the first Offense suffer Imprisonment during one whole year
next after his said Conviction, without Bail or Mainprize.

And if any such person not having any spiritual Promotion, after his first
Conviction, shall eftsoons offend in any thing concerning the premises, and
shall in form aforesaid, be thereof lawfully convicted, that then the same
person shall for his second Offense suffer Imprisonment during his Life.

Stat. Sect. 5. The forfeiture of them which do any thing, or speak in the
derogation of the Book of Common Prayer. Causing other Prayer to be said or
sung.
And it is ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
or persons whatsoever after the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist
next coming, shall in any Interludes, Plays, Songs, Rhimes, or by other open
words declare, or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving or despising of
the same Book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part thereof; or shall
by open fact, deed, or by open threatenings compel or cause, or otherwise
procure or maintain any Parson, Vicar or other Minister in any Cathedral or
Parish Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place to sing or say any Common
or open Prayer, or to minister any Sacrament otherwise, or in any other manner
and form than is mentioned in the said Book, or that by any of the said means
shall unlawfully interrupt, or let any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister in any
Cathedral, or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other place, to sing or say Common
and open Prayer, or to minister the Sacraments, or any of them, in such manner
and form as is mentioned in the said Book: The forfeiture of 100 marks for the
first Offense.
That then every such person, being thereof lawfully convicted in form
abovesaid, shall forfeit to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her Heirs and
Successors, for the first Offense, an hundred marks.

Any person or persons whatsoever.] A Feme Covert is within the meaning of this
Branch, and shall be liable to the Penalties thereby inflicted, Feme Covert.
Hobart 97. Moore versus Hussy. Dyer 3 Eliz. 203. Sir Edward Walgraves Case.

The beginning of this Parliament uncertain.
There has been a great question when this Parliament of 1 Eliz. began,
Poulton says the 23d. of January. Dyer 3 Eliz. 203. The 25th of January. Co.
4. Inst. 7. the 25th of February: And for the incertainty when it commenced, an
Information was brought upon this Branch of the Statute against Sir Edward
Walgrave and his Wife, by the Queens Attorney, without any special recital of
the Statute, Recital of Statutes.
only supposing the Offense to be, Contra formam and effectum cujusdam Statuti
in Parliamento tenent apud Westmonasterium anno primo Reginae nunc, etc. Dyer 3
Eliz. 203. For this is a general Statute, and general Statutes need not be
particularly recited. Plowden 53. Wimbish verse. Talbois: Ibid. 79. 81.
Partridges Case, Ibid. 231. Lord Barkleys Case.

Hearing Mass.
Compel or cause, or otherwise procure or maintain.] The hearing of Mass is a
maintaining within this Statute, and the person hearing it is Indictable
thereupon. Hobart 97. Dyer 3 Eliz. 203. ibid. 15 Eliz. 323. Fermors Case.

And if any person or persons being once convict of any such Offense, eftsoons
offend against any of the last recited Offenses, Stat. Sect. 6. The forfeiture
of four hundred Marks for the second Offense.
a^nd shall in form aforesaid, be thereof lawfully convict: That then the same
person so offending and convict, shall for the second Offense forfeit to thr
Queen our Sovereign Lady, her Heirs and Successors, four hundred marks.

And if any person after he in form aforesaid shall have been twice convict of
any Offense concerning any of the last recited Offenses, shall offend the third
time, The forfeiture for the third Offense.
and be thereof in form abovesaid, lawfully Convict: That then every person so
offending and convict, shall for his third Offense forfeit to our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, all his Goods and Chattels, and shall suffer Imprisonment
during his Life.

The Offender in any of these Cases cannot be punished for the second Offense,
before he be adjudged for the first; The Offender not punishable for the second
offense until adjudged for the first.
and that second Offense must be committed after the Judgment given for the
first; nor for the third Offense before he be adjudged for the second, and that
third must be committed after the Judgment for the second: For Quod non apparet
non est, and non apparet Judicialiter ante Judicium. Co. 2. Inst. 479. Vide
Dyer 323.

And if any Person or Persons, Stat. Sect. 7. The penalty if the party
convicted do not pay his forfeiture within the time limited.
that for his first Offense concerning the premises, shall be convict in form
aforesaid, do not pay the sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction in such
manner and form as the same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his
conviction: That then every Person so convict, and so not paying the same,
shall for the same first Offense, instead of the said sum, suffer Imprisonment
by the space of six months without Bail or Mainprize.

And if any Person or Persons that for his second Offense, concerning the
premises, shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the said sum to be
paid by virtue of his conviction, and this Statute, in such manner and form as
the same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his said second
conviction; That then every person so convicted and not so paying the same,
shall for the same second Offense, in the stead of the said sum, suffer
Imprisonment during twelve months without Bail or Mainprize.

An Information was brought by the Attorney General in the Kings Bench, upon
the Statute for hearing Mass, The Offender dies within the six weeks.
and Judgment given, Trin. 3 Eliz. Quod foris facereth Dominae Reginae: Et si
non solvet infra, etc. tunc imprisonabitur, etc. The forfeiture was estreated
into the Exchequer within the six weeks mentioned in the Statute, and before
the six weeks expire the Defendant in the Information dies. Quaere, Whether his
Executors shall be charged with the forfeiture of 100 Marks, for that the
Offender died within the six weeks, and so by the Act of God his body cannot
suffer Imprisonment for six months in lieu of the forfeiture: And the Statute
gave his election in this Case, whether he would suffer Imprisonment or pay the
one hundred Marks, Dyer 3 Eliz. 203. Et 6 and 7 Eliz. 231. Sir Edward Walgraves
Case. But this Question may now be prevented, for the Offender may be Indicted
upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 El. 2. 1
which inflicts for such Offense the 100 Marks and Imprisonment both.

Stat. Sect. 8. Every person shall resort to the Church upon Sundays and
Holidays.
And that from and after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist
next coming, all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm or
any other the Queens Majesty's Dominions, shall diligently and faithfully,
having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to
resort to their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or, upon reasonable let
thereof, to some usual place where Common Prayer and such Service of God shall
be used in such time of let, upon every Sunday and other days ordained and used
to be kept as Holy Days; and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during
the time of the Common Prayer, Preaching or other Service of God there to be
used and ministered upon pain of punishment by the Censures of the Church, The
forfeiture for not coming to Church.
and also upon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit for every such
Offense twelve pence, to be levied by the Churchwardens of the Parish where
such Offense shall be done, to the use of the Poor of the same Parish, of the
Goods, Lands and Tenements of such Offender by way of distress.

Every person and persons.] A Feme Covert Feme Covert.
is within this Statute, and shall forfeit twelve pence if she repair not to
Church every Sunday and Holiday. Co. 11. 61. Dr. Fosters Case, Bulstrode 3. 87.
The King against Law, Rolls 1. 93. C. 4. 1. Dr. Fosters Case. Hobart 97. Moore
versus Hussy.

Inhabitant within the Realm.
Inhabiting within this Realm, etc.] In an Indictment upon this Statute for not
coming to Church, it need not be averred that the Offender is an Inhabitant
within this Realm, etc. for if he be not, that ought to come of the other side.
Godbolt 148. C. 191. Anne Mannocks Case.

Reasonable excuse.
Having no lawful or reasonable Excuse, etc.] Nor need it be averred in such
Indictment, That the party had no lawful or reasonable Excuse to be absent, but
that ought likewise to come of the other side. Leonard 2. 5. C. 6. Elizabeth
Dormers Case. Note, in the Report of that Case, these words ( having no lawful
or reasonable, etc.) are by mistake supposed to be in the Statute of 23 Eliz.
1. cap. 1.

To their Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, Not necessary to go to a man's
Parish Church.
or upon reasonable let thereof, etc.] If a man does not resort to the Church
of the Parish wherein he dwells, nor to the Chapel of Ease whereunto the place
of his abode belongs; yet if he goes to that Church or Chapel to which he has
been accustomed to resort, it seems to be sufficient to satisfy the intent of
this Act. Vide Bulstrode 1. 159. and infra.

Common Prayer. Common Prayer.
] For the Book of Common Prayer now established. Vide supra, Sect. 2.

Diligently and faithfully, etc. and then and there to abide orderly and
soberly during, etc.] Although the words of the Statute be in the dis-junctive,
Staying at Church during the whole time.
(viz.) That he shall abide there during the time of Common Prayer, Preaching,
or other Service of God, yet they are to be taken conjunctively, and the party
ought not to depart when the Service is ended, if there be Preaching, but must
continue there for the whole time. Godbolt 148. C. 191 Mannocks Case.

And yet if he abides there during the whole time he may be liable to the
penalty of this Law: Behavior there.
For there are four Adverbs in the Statute. 1. Diligently, which denotes
attention. 2. Faithfully, devotion. 3. Soberly, gravity. And 4. Orderly,
decency. All which ought to be observed: so that if he walk or talk in the
Church during the Service of God there, he may be punished upon this Act as if
he were absent: By Coke Chief Justice. B. R. Rolls 1. 93. C. 41. Doctor
Fosters Case.

Shall forfeit for every such Offense Twelve pence.] This forfeiture still
remains, notwithstanding the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. which gives the 20 l.
per month. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.3 Jac. 4.
And that appears by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. which gives a more speedy
remedy for the recovery of the forfeiture of Twelve pence: And by the different
times when these two forfeitures are due, and the different Offenses for which
they are due, which shows that the one was not intended in the room of the
other: For the 20 l. per month is due for a months absence, and cannot be sued
for till the month is past: But the twelve pence is due for every absence
either Sunday or Holiday: For it is forfeited as soon as the Sunday or Holiday
is past, and may be sued for every Week, so that the Recusant may be punished
both by this Statute for his weekly absence, and by 23. The 12 pence and 20
pounds both forfeited. Conformity.
for his monthly absence; nor is he helped by this Act in case of Conformity,
as he is by 23. Co. 11. 63. Dr. Fosters Case, Rolls 1. 94. C. 41. The same
Case; But yet although this Act does not discharge him of this Twelve pence
upon Conformity, it seems that the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 4. Stat. 1. Jac. 4.
will.

Stat. Sect. 9.
And for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in Gods
name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the utmost of their
knowledges, that the due and true execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocese, and Charges, as they will answer before God, for such evils and
plagues wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his People for neglecting this
good and wholesome Law.

The Ordinary may punish Offenders by the Censures the Church.
And for their Authority in this behalf, be it further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and singular the said Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
their Officers exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as well in place exempt
as not exempt, within their Diocese, shall have full Power and Authority by
this Act, to reform, correct, and punish by Censures of the Church, all and
singular persons which shall offend within any their Jurisdictions or Diocese
after the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming, against
this Act and Statute; Any other Law, Statute, Privilege, Liberty, or
Provision, heretofore made, had or suffered to the contrary notwithstanding.

Not necessary to go to the Parish Church.
The Ordinary or Ecclesiastical Judge cannot legally punish any man for not
coming to the Church of that Parish where he inhabits, if he goes to any other,
although he shows not any reasonable Let. For it shall be a good Plea for the
party to say that that is not his Parish Church, but that he had used to
frequent another Church, and did resort thereunto; And if the Ecclesiastical
Court will not receive this plea, the party shall have a Prohibition:
Prohibition.
For the Spiritual Court has no power to judge what shall be said to be a man's
Parish Church; And so it was resolved by the whole Court of King's Bench. Trin.
9. Jac. Bulstrode 1. 159. Nor can the Spiritual Court try the limits or bounds
of Parishes, but they shall be tried by the Common Law. Co. 13. 17.

Stat. Sect. 10. What Justices may punish these Offenses.
And it is ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize, shall have full Power
and Authority in every of their open and general Sessions, to enquire, hear and
determine all and all manner of Offenses that shall be committed or done,
contrary to any Article contained in this present Act, within the limits of the
Commission to them directed, and to make process for the execution of the same,
as they may do against any person being indicted before them of Trespass, or
lawfully convicted thereof.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, A Bishop may
join with the Justices to enquire of Offenders.
That all and every Archbishop and Bishop shall or may at all time and times,
at his liberty and pleasure, join and associate himself by virtue of this Act
to the said Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or to the said Justices of Assize
at every of the said open and general Sessions, to be holden in any place
within his Diocese, for, and to the enquiry, hearing and determining of the
Offenses aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, At whose charges
the Book of Common Prayer shall be gotten.
That the Books concerning the said Services, shall at the Costs and Charges of
the Parishioners of every Parish and Cathedral Church, be attained and gotten
before the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next following, and
that all such Parishes and Cathedral Churches, or other places where the said
Books shall be attained and gotten before the said Feast of the Nativity of St.
John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the said Books so attained
and gotten, use the said Service, and put the same in ure according to this Act.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Within what time the
Offenders shall be impeached.
That no person or persons shall be at any time hereafter Impeached, or
otherwise molested of or for any the Offenses abovementioned, hereafter to be
committed or done contrary to this Act, unless he or they so offending be
thereof Indicted at the next general Sessions to be holden before any such
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize, next after any Offense
committed or done, contrary to the tenor of this Act.

Provided always, Trial of Peers.
and be it ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
singular Lords of the Parliament for the third Offense abovementioned, shall
be tried by their Peers.

Provided also, Stat. Sect. 11. Chief Officers of Cities and Boroughs shall
enquire of Offenders.
and be it ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor of
London, and all other Mayors, Bailiffs, and other head Officers of all and
singular Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate within this Realm, Wales, and
the Marches of the same, to the which Justices of Assize do not commonly
repair, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, to enquire,
hear and determine the Offenses aforesaid, and every of them yearly, within
fifteen days after the Feast of Easter and St. Michael the Archangel, in like
manner and form as Justices of Assize and Oyer and Determiner may do.

These words [In like manner and form] appoint in what manner the Offenses
shall be enquired of, Mayors, and Head Officers of Corporations.
heard and determined by Mayors and Head Officers of Corporations, etc. by
Indictment, (for so much enquire imports) and Trial and Verdict of twelve men,
or such other Legal proceedings upon the said Indictment as are used by the
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, and Assizes in their general Sessions: For the
Mayor or Head Officer is not left by this Act to his own Arbitrary Will or
Discretion in the hearing and determining the Offense, but must proceed
according to the rules and forms of Law in the Conviction of the Offender. And
the Statute says, (To which Justices of Assize do not commonly repair.) So
that the Mayor or Head Officer of such places were only intended in the lieu
and room of Justices of Assize, and are therefore to proceed by the same Rules
as they do in the Counties at large.

Within what time to proceed.
But these words extend not to the point of time limited for Indicting such
Offender, nor are Mayors and Head Officers tied to their next Sessions, as the
Justices of Oyer and Determiner and of Assize are, as Wingate tit. Service and
Sacraments, numb. 26. mistakes the meaning of the Statute: For, (in like manner
and form) is intended in such respects only where it is not otherwise provided
for by the Statute; But it is expressly provided here, that Mayors and Head
Officers of Corporations shall enquire of these Offenses only twice in the
year, (viz.) within fifteen days after Easter and Michaelmas, and not at their
next general Sessions, unless it happen to be the Sessions after one of those
two Feasts.

To whom the Bishop cannot associate himself.
Nor can the Archbishop or Bishop associate himself in this Case to any Mayor
or Head Officer of a Corporation, as Wingate tit. Service and Sacraments,
number 25. mistakes.

Stat. Sect. 12. The Ordinaries Jurisdiction in these Cases.
Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Archbishops, and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, as well to enquire in their Visitation, Synods, and elsewhere within
their Jurisdiction, at any other time and place to take Accusations and
Informations of all and every the things abovementioned, done, committed or
perpetrated within the limits of their Jurisdictions and Authority, and to
punish the same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration or deprivation,
and other censures and process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like Cases, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

Provided always, and be it enacted, None shall be punished twice for the same
Offense.
That whatsoever persons offending in the premises, shall for their offenses,
first, receive punishment of the Ordinary, having a Testimonial thereof under
the said Ordinaries Seal, shall not for the same Offense eftsoons be convicted
before the Justices. And likewise receiving for the said first Offense
punishment by the Justices, shall not for the same Offense eftsoons receive
punishment of the Ordinary: Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

This Clause being in the affirmative does not abrogate the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction not abrogated.
which was in the Ecclesiastical Judge before the making of the Statute, for
that no Negative words are here added, as that he should proceed no otherwise,
or in no other manner or form than this Statute directs, And therefore if any
Parson, Vicar, etc. deprave or observe not the Book of Common Prayer, although
this Act inflicts only the forfeiture of a years value, and six months
Imprisonment for the first Offense, yet the Ecclesiastical Judge may for the
first Offense deprive him notwithstanding this Act, as he might have done if no
form of punishment had been here appointed.

And the said Book being enjoined by Authority, the Offense of depraving or
non-observing it, is punishable by the Ecclesiastical Judge, according to the
Ecclsiastical Law, without the further aid of any Temporal Law, then the
commanding it to be observed, Co. 5.5, 6. Cawdries Case: And in such Case the
Sentence of Deprivation given by the Ecclesiastical Judge, though it exceed the
punishment inflicted by the Temporal Law, is not to be questioned by the
Temporal Judges, but they ought to give Faith and Credit to it: For cuilibet in
sua art perito, est credendum. Cawdries Case, fol. 7. Co. 4.29. Bunting and
Heppingwells Case.

Provided always, and be it enacted, Stat. Sect. 13. Ornaments of the Church
and Ministers.
That such Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof, shall be
retained and be in use, as was in this Church of England, by Authority of
Parliament in the second year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, until
other Order shall be therein taken by the Authority of the Queens Majesty, with
the advice of her Commissioners, appointed and authorized under the Great Seal
of England, for Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm.

And also, That if there shall happen any Contempt or Irreverence to be used in
the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the mis-using of the Orders appointed
in this Book, the Queens Majesty may by the like advice of the said
Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain and publish such further Ceremonies or
Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods Glory, the Edifying of his
Church, and the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments.

All Laws and Ordinances made for other Service shall be void.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances wherein or whereby any other Service, Administration of
Sacraments, or Common Prayer, is limited, established, or set forth to be used
within this Realm, or any other the Queens Dominions or Countries, shall from
henceforth be utterly void and of none effect.

Stat. v Eliz. cap. i. An Act for the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal
Power over all States and Subjects within her Dominions.
FOR preservation of the Queens most Excellent Highness, her Heirs and
Successors, Stat.
and the Dignity of England: And for the avoiding both such hurts, perils,
dishonors and inconveniences as have before time befallen, as well to the
Queens Majesty's noble Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, as for the whole
Estate thereof, by means of the Jurisdiction and Power of the Sea of Rome,
unjustly Claimed and Usurped within this Realm, and the Dominions thereof; and
also of the dangers by the fauters of the said usurped Power, at this time
grown to marvelous outrage and licentious boldness, and now requiring more
sharp restraint and correction of Laws, than hitherto in the time of the Queens
Majesty's most mild and merciful Reign have been had, used or established.

Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained and Established, Stat.
by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, and the Lords Spiritual and The Penalty for
maintaining the Authority of the Bishop or See of Rome.
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the
same, That if any Person or Persons dwelling, inhabiting or resiant, within
this Realm or within any other the Queens Dominions, Seigniories or Countries,
or in the Marches of the same, or elsewhere, within or under her Obeisance and
Power, of what Estate, Dignity, Pre-eminence, Order or Condition soever he or
they be, after the first day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord
God One thousand five hundred sixty three, shall by Writing, Typhering,
Printing, Preaching or Teaching, Deed or Act, advisedly and wittingly, hold or
stand with, to extol, set forth, maintain or defend the Authority,
Jurisdiction, or Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See, heretofore
claimed, used or usurped within this Realm, or in any Dominion or Country,
being of, within, or under the Queens Power, or Obeisance, or by any Speech,
open Deed or Act, advisedly and wittingly attribute any such manner of
Jurisdiction, Authority or Pre-eminence, to the said See of Rome, or to any
Bishop of the same See, for the time being, within this Realm, or in any the
Queens Dominions or Countries, that then every such Person or Persons, so doing
or offending, their Abbettors, Procurers and Counselors, and also their
aiders, assistants and comforters, upon purpose, and to the intent to set
forth, further and extol the said usurped Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, of
any of the said Bishop or Bishops of Rome, and every of them, being thereof
lawfully Indicted or Presented, within one year next after any such Offenses by
him or them Committed, and being lawfully Convicted or Attainted at any time
after, according to the Laws of this Realm, for every such Default and Offense,
shall incur into the dangers, penalties, pains and forfeitures, Ordained and
Provided by the Statute of Provision and Praemunire, made in the Sixteenth year
of the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Hold or stand with, etc. or attribute.] The Printers of any Book which
attributes to the Pope or See of Rome any such Authority or Jurisdiction within
this Realm, Printing, bringing in, offering and delivering of Books.
etc. and the utterers thereof, in most Cases are within the danger of this
Law; and if any man bring over such Books, Written beyond the Seas, knowing the
Contents thereof, or secretly deliver out such Books to others, he knowing the
Contents thereof, unless in this last Case he be a Trader in them, and deliver
them out upon that Account, without any act or attribution by conference or
allowance, he is an Offender within this Act, by the words, (Hold and stand
with to maintain, etc.) and so is the receiver likewise, if he afterward Reads
and Confers upon any such Book with any other person, and in his Conference by
any Words or Speeches, allows the Book to be good, or conveys it secretly to
his Friend, to the intent he should Read it and be persuaded to be of that
Opinion; or if a man hear of the Contents of such Book, by the report of
others, and does by any overt Speech commend or affirm it to be good: In all
these Cases the Person so doing, especially he that reads it, and then allows
of it, is an Offender within this Act, and shall for the first Offense incur a
Praemunire, and for the second be Guilty of high Treason. So likewise if any
Book, to that effect, be made and Written within the Realm, and sent over Seas,
as if it were made out of the Realm, and be afterward Bought, Read or
Conference be had thereupon, ut supra, such Offenses are within the danger of
this Law, Dyer 11 El. 281. 282. vide Co. l. 6. Praefat'.

Upon purpose and to the intent. The intent material.
] A. was Indicted upon this Statute, and that of 13 Eliz. cap. 2. of a
Praemunire for aiding one B. knowing him to be a principal maintainer of the
Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop and See of Rome, contra formam Statut'
praedict', and the Indictment was certified into the Kings Bench: And it was
held, by the greater part of the Justices, that the Indictment was
insufficient, for want of those words (Upon purpose, and to the intent, to set
forth and extol the Authority, etc.) And contra formam Statut' will not supply
that defect, Trin. 20 Eliz. Dyer 363. Note, in the Report of this Case the
Statute of 1 Eliz. is mistaken for this of 5 Eliz. there being no mention of
the intent in that of Primo. Stat. 1 Eliz. 1.
The intent is a hidden thing, and lies in the Heart, and therefore there must
be some overt Act or Speech which declares the intent; for the intent it self
is not traversable, What traversable.
but that by which it is made manifest, as was adjudged in Boothes Case, Co. 5.
77.

And it is also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat.
That as well Justices of Assize in their Circuits, as Justices of Peace within
What Justices may inquire of and certify the Offenses aforesaid.
or two of every such Justices of Peace at the least, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, shall have full Power and Authority, by virtue of this Act, in their
Quarter or open Sessions, to inquire of all Offenses, Contempts and
Transgressions, perpetrated, committed or done contrary to the true meaning of
the Premises, in like manner and form as they may of other Offenses against the
Queens Peace; and shall certify every Presentment before them or any of them,
had or made concerning the same or any part thereof, before the Queen, her
Heirs and Successors, in her or their Court, commonly called the Kings Bench,
within forty days next after any such Presentment had or made, if the Term be
then open; and if not, at the first day of the full Term next following the
said forty days, upon pain that every of the Justices of Assize, or Justices of
the Peace, The Penalty for default of Certificate of the said Offenses.
before whom such Presentment shall be made, making default of such
Certificate, contrary to this Statute, to lose and forfeit for every such
default One hundred pounds to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors.

And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Justices of the Kings Bench
may hear and determine the Offenses aforesaid.
That the Justices of the Kings Bench, as well upon every such Certificate, as
by enquiry before themselves within the limits of their Authorities, shall have
full Power and Authority to hear, order and determine every such Offense, done
or committed contrary to the true meaning of this present Act according to the
Laws of this Realm, in such like manner and form to all intents and purposes,
as if the Person or Persons against whom any Presentment shall be had upon this
Estatute, had been Presented upon any matter of offense expressed in the said
Estatute, made in the said Sixteenth year of King Richard the Second.

All Offenses, etc. contrary to the true meaning of the Premises.] That is, the
Offenses in holding or standing with to extol, etc. the Jurisdiction of the Sea
or Bishop of Rome, or attributing such Jurisdiction, etc. or Procuring,
Counselling, etc. which is here for the first Offense made a Praemunire. For
these are the only Premises in the Act, and this Clause extends not to the Oath
of Supremacy, or any Offense in refusing of it, much less to all Offenses
against this Act, as it is mistaken in the late Additions to Dalton, cap. 140.
tit. High Treason, Sect. 11. Nor does it seem to be the intent of the Statute
to give the Justices of Peace any Power to inquire of any Offense made High
Treason thereby: The Power of Justices of Peace herein.
For the Power here given to the Justices of Peace is only to inquire of
Offenses contrary to the true meaning of the Premises, and the Premises extend
only to those Offenses made a Praemunire: And this clearly appears by the
subsequent words (viz.) That the Presentment thereof shall be certified into
the Kings Bench, who shall hear and determine every such Offense, as if the
Offender had been Presented upon any matter in the Statute of 16 R. 2. Now that
cannot be intended of High Treason.

And of Justices of Assize.
The like may be said of Justices of Assize, for as they are merely Justices of
Assize they cannot by force of this Act inquire of either the first or second
Offense, in refusing the Oath of Supremacy, nor of the second Offense in
extolling the Bishop of Romes Authority; only for the first Offense of this
last kind, they may inquire and take Indictments thereof, and certify them
into the Kings Bench; but then by their Commission of Oyer and Terminer, they
may not only inquire of the first or second Offense, in extolling the Bishop of
Romes Authority, or refusing the Oath of Supremacy, but may hear and determine
them. And accordingly were Slade and Body Indicted, Arraigned and Tried, in
the County of Southampton, of a Praemunire, for the first Offense in extolling
the Bishop of Romes Authority, upon which they were Attainted; and afterward
of Treason for the second Offense, before Sir Roger Manwood and Justice Periam
Justices of Assize, by virtue of their Commission of Oyer and Terminer.: For
the Certificate here mentioned, which is to be sent into the Kings Bench, is
required only of the Justices of Assize and Justices of Peace. And of Oyer and
Terminer.
But Justices of Oyer and Terminer, upon Indictments taken before them, may
proceed to hear and determine, as Manwood and Periam did in that Case as well
for the first as second Offense, Savile 46. 47. C. 99.

For which first Offense in extolling the Bishop of Romes Authority, it seems
the Justices of Assize who have a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, have their
election either as Justices of Assize to inquire only, and then they must
certify the Presentment or Indictment into the Kings Bench, or to inquire,
hear and determine as they are Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and then they are
not bound to certify: For Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer are not within
the meaning of this Branch of the Statute, as was held in that Case of Slade
and Body.

By what has been said it appears that the question there put by Ayloffe,
scil. how they could proceed upon such an Indictmen not certified into the
Kings Bench within forty days, was grounded upon a double mistake? 1. That
Justices of Oyer and Terminer were bound to certify into the Kings Bench all
Indictments for extolling the Authority of the Bishop of Rome taken before
them. 2. That Indictments for the second Offense were within the meaning of
this Branch of the Statute: For he speaks there of the second Indictment which
was for High Treason.

Every Presentment. Presentment, what.
] By Presentment here is to be understood not only that which is properly so
called, which the Jurors find and present to the Court without any former
Indictment delivered them; but also an Indictment which is drawn and engrossed
in form of Law and delivered to the Jurors to be inquired of which Indictment
the Justices here named have power to take by force of the word (inquire) and
is included within the word (Presentment) being a species of it: For every
Indictment found by the Jurors is a Presentment, and the Record says,
Juratores praesentant, etc. when they find an Indictment. But every Presentment
is not an Indictment, Co. 2. Inst. 739. And as well the one as the other,
touching the Offenses aforesaid, must be certified into the Kings Bench.

If the Term be then open. First day of the Term.
] The Essoin day is the first day of the Term, properly so called, and on that
day the Term is open.

At the first day of full Term.] That is, Quarto die post, Full Term.
which is the usual day of appearance, and the first day of every Term in
common reputation: For the Essoin day is the first day of the Term only to some
particular intents, and it is not full Term till quarto die post. Savile 124.
Co. 193. Matthew verse. Harcourt.

So that if the Forty days expire on the day before the Essoin day, the
Presentment need not be certified until quarto die post, Presentiments when to
be certified.
which is the day of appearance; but if they expire on the Essoin day or
afterward, and before the quarto die post, the Justices here named must not
stay till the quarto die post, but are bound to certify by the last day of the
Forty days, under the penalty here limited, for the Term was then open.

Stat. Sect. 4. Who shall take the Oath set forth, A^. 1 E. 1.
And moreover be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That as well all manner
of Persons expressed and appointed in and by the Act made in the first year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is, entitled, an Act restoring to the
Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual,
and abolishing all Foreign Powers repugnant to the same, to take the Oath
expressed and set forth in the same: As all other Persons which have taken, or
shall take Orders commonly called Ordines Sacros, or Ecclesiastical Orders,
have been or shall be promoted, preferred or admitted to any Degree of
Learning, in any University within this Realm or Dominions to the same
belonging: And all Schoolmasters and public and private Teachers of Children,
as also all manner of Person and Persons, that have taken or hereafter shall
take any Degree of Learning in or at the Common Laws of this Realm, as well
utter Barristers as Benchers, Readers, Ancients, in any House or Houses of
Court, and all principal Treasurers, and such as be of the grand Company of
every Inn of Chancery, and all Attorneys, Prothonotaries and Philizers toward
the Laws of this Realm; and all manner of Sheriffs, Escheators and Feodaries,
and all other Person and Persons which have taken or shall take upon him or
them, or have been or shall be admitted to any Ministry or Office in, at, or
belonging to the Common Law, or any other Law, or Laws, of, to, or for the
Execution of them or any of them, used or allowed, or at any time hereafter to
be used or allowed within this Realm, or any of the Dominions or Countries
belonging, or which hereafter shall happen to belong to the Crown or Dignity of
the same; and all other Officers or Ministers of or toward any Court
whatsoever, and every of them shall take and pronounce a Corporal Oath upon the
Evangelists, before he or they shall be admitted, allowed or suffered to take
upon him or them to use, exercise, supply or occupy any such Vocation, Office,
Degree, Ministry, Room or Service as is aforesaid, and that in the open Court,
whereunto he does or shall serve or belong. And if he or they do not or shall
not serve or belong to any Ordinary or open Court, then he or they shall take
and pronounce the Oath aforesaid, in an open place, before a convenient
Assembly to witness the same, and before such Person or Persons as have or
shall have Authority by common use or otherwise, to admit or call any such
Person or Persons, as is aforesaid, to any such Vocation, Office, Ministry,
Room or Service, or else before such Person or Persons as by the Queens
Highness, her Heirs or Successors, by Commission under the Great Seal of
England, shall be named or assigned to accept and take the same according to
the tenor, effect and form of the same Oath Verbatim, which is, and as it is
already set forth to be taken in the aforesaid Act made in the First year of
the Queens Majesty's Reign.

Admitted to any Ministry or Office. What Officers are to take the Oath of
Supremacy.
] All persons who are preferred to any such Ministry or Office, whether of the
gift of the King or of a Subject, are bound to take this Oath, and not only
such as are preferred by the King, as it is restrained in the late Additions to
Dalton. Cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 9.

Belonging to the Common Law, Common Law preferred.
or other Law or Laws used or allowed within this Realm, etc.] This takes in so
much of the Canon and Civil Law as is allowed here; But the Common Law as the
peculiar Law of this Kingdom, is here preferred, and particularly mentioned,
and not the Canon Law, as is erroneously said in the late Additions to Dalton,
Cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 11.

As have or shall have Authority by Common use, etc. Who are to administer the
Oath.
] The Statute says not, That those who belong not to any Court shall take the
Oath before those who are authorized by Common use to give it, as Wingate tit.
Crown, numb. 20. mistakes the meaning of this Clause: For this being then a new
Oath, devised by the makers of the Act of 1 Eliz. no person could have
Authority by Common use to administer it: And the Act plainly enough speaks of
those who have Authority by Common use to admit the party to the Office, and
not Authority by Common use to give the Oath.

And also, Stat. Sect. 5. The Bishop may tender the Oath to any Spiritual
person.
Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That every
Archbishop and Bishop within this Realm, and Dominions of the same, shall have
full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, to tender or minister the Oath
aforesaid, to every or any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical person within their
proper Diocese, as well in Places and Jurisdictions exempt as elsewhere.

If a man be Indicted for refusing this Oath before him who is reputed to be
Bishop of the Diocese, Bishop or not Bishop.
and he plead to the Indictment Non culp. he may upon that issue give in
Evidence, Quod non fuit Episcopus tempore oblationis Sacramenti. Dyer 6 and 7
Eliz. 234. Bonners Case.

Stat. Sect. 6. The Lord Chancellor may direct Commissions to take the Oath of
any person.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time being, shall and may at all
times hereafter by virtue of this Act, without further Warrant, make and direct
Commission or Commissions under the Great Seal of England to any person or
persons, giving them or some of them thereby Authority to tender and minister
the Oath aforesaid to such person or persons as by the aforesaid Commission or
Commissions, the said Commissioners shall be authorized to tender the same Oath
unto.

The penalty for the first refusal of the Oath.
And be it also further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
That if any person or persons appointed or compellable by this Act, or by the
said Act made in the said first year to take the said Oath: Or if any person or
persons to whom the said Oath by any such Commission or Commissions shall be
limited and appointed to be tendered as is aforesaid, do or shall at the time of
the said Oath so tendered, refuse to take or pronounce the said Oath in manner
and form aforesaid, that then the party so refusing, and being thereof lawfully
Indicted or presented within one year next after any such refusal, and
convicted or attainted at any time after according to the Laws of this Realm,
shall suffer and incur the dangers, penalties, pains and forfeitures ordained
and provided by the Statute of Provision and Praemunire aforesaid, made in the
16th year of the Reign of King Richard the second.

Stat. Sect. 7. Certificate of Refusal into the King's Bench.
And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
such person and persons having Authority to tender the Oath aforesaid, shall
within forty days next after such refusal or refusals of the said Oath, if the
Term be then open, and if not, then at the first day of the full Term next
following the said forty days, make true Certificate under his or their Seal or
Seals, of the names, places and degrees of the person or persons so refusing
the same Oath, before the Queen, her Heirs or Successors, in her or their
Court, commonly called the King's Bench, upon pain that every of the said
persons having such Authority to tender the said Oath, making default of such
Certificate, shall for every such default forfeit 100 l. to the Queens
Highness, her Heirs or Successors: And that the Sheriff of the County where the
said Court, commonly called the King's Bench, shall for the time be holden,
shall or may by virtue of this Act impannel a Jury of the same County, to
enquire of and upon every such refusal and refusals: Indictment of the Offender.
Which Jury shall or may upon every such Certificate, and other Evidence to
them in that behalf, to be given by virtue of this Act, proceed to Indict the
person and persons so offending, in such sort and degree, to all intents and
purposes as the same Jury may do of any Offense or Offenses against the Queens
Majesty's Peace, perpetrated, committed or done within the same County, of and
for the which the same Jury is so Impannelled.

Term.] When the Term Term.
is open, and which is the first day of full Term, Vide supra, Sect. 3.

Make true Certificate, etc. in the King's Bench. Certificate of refusal, by
whom brought in, not material.
] It is not necessary that it be mentioned of Record in the King's Bench, how or
by whom the Certificate was brought in thither. And in Bonners Case, where the
Bishop of Winchester certified the refusal of this Oath: And exception was
taken that the Certificate was entered to be brought into Court, per A. B.
Cancellarium dicti Episcopi, but not per mandatum Episcopi, the exception was
dissallowed for that reason, Dyer 6. and 7. Eliz. 234.

Impannel a Jury of the same County to inquire. A Jury of the County where the
King's Bench is.
] And a Jury of the County where the King's Bench is, can do no more in this
Case then inquire, that is, Indict the party refusing the Oath, unless where
the refusal is in the same County.

Horn Bishop of Winchester tendered this Oath in Surrey (parcel of his Diocese)
to Bonner, then late Bishop of London, By what Jury the Offender shall be Tried
who refused to take it, and this was certified by the Bishop of Winchester
into the King's Bench then sitting at Westminster, in the County of Middlesex,
where Bonner was Indicted by a Jury of that County according to this Act; the
Question was, by what County he should be Tried, whether by a Jury of
Middlesex, where the Indictment was taken, or by a Jury of Surrey where the
offense was committed? And it was resolved that he should be Tried by a Jury of
Surrey, for this Statute extends to the Indictment only, and leaves the
Trial to the Common Law, which appoints it to be where the Offense is
committed, for regularly by the Common Law, debet quis juri subjacere ubi
deliquit, Dyer 6. and 7. Eliz. 234. Co. 3. Inst. 34.

Which Jury shall or may, etc. proceed to Indict. Who to Indict him.
] So that the Jury is to Indict and not the Sheriff, as is mistaken in the late
additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants, Sect. 11.

And for stronger defense and maintenance of this Act, Stat. Sect. 8. It shall
be Treason the second time to maintain the Authority of the Bishop or See of
Rome.
it is further Ordained, Enacted and Established by the Authority aforesaid,
That if any such Offender or Offenders, as is aforesaid, of the first part or
Branch of this Estatute, that is to say by Writing, Cyphering, Printing,
Preaching or Teaching, Deed or Act, Advisedly and Wittingly, hold or stand
with, to extol, set forth, maintain or defend the Authority, Jurisdiction or
Power of the Bishop of Rome or of his See, heretofore claimed, used or usurped,
within this Realm or in any Dominion or Country, being of, within or under the
Queens Power or Obeisance, or by any Speech, open Deed or Act, Advisedly and
Wittingly, attribute any such manner of Jurisdiction, Authority or Pre-eminence
to the said See of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same See for the time being,
within this Realm, or in any the Queens Dominions or Countries, or be to any
such Offender or offenders Abetting, Procuring or Counselling, or Aiding,
Assisting or Comforting upon purpose, and to the intent to set forth, further
and extol the said usurped Power, Authority or Jurisdiction: After such
Conviction and Attainder as is aforesaid, do eftsoons commit or do the said
Offenses or any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly
convicted and attainted as is aforesaid.

Or to refuse the Oath.
And also, that if any the persons abovenamed and appointed by this Act to take
the Oath aforesaid, do after the space of three months next after the first
tender thereof, the second time refuse to take and pronounce, or do not take or
pronounce the same in form aforesaid to be tendered, that then every such
Offender or Offenders, for the same second Offense and Offenses, shall forfeit,
lose and suffer, such like and the same pains, forfeitures, Judgment and
Execution as is used in Cases of High Treason.

What is an advised or witting maintenance.
Advisedly and wittingly.] Slade and Body were condemned in a Praemunire upon
this Statute, before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, for extolling the Authority
of the Bishop of Rome, and remained in Prison for the space of two years, and
afterward were brought to the Assizes and demanded whether they were still of
the same Opinion? To which they answered, that they were; and one of them said,
that if they had a thousand Lives they would lose them all in this Case, upon
which they were Indicted, and Arraigned and Convicted, upon this second Branch
of the Statute, for High Treason. And it was Resolved by the greater part of
the Justices, that the words should be taken to be spoken Advisedly and
Wittingly, and were within the meaning of this second Branch, Savile 46. 47. C.
99.

Tender and refusal.
For tender and refusal, Vide Stat. 7. Jac. cap. 6. Sect. 4. 5. postea.

Stat. Sect. 9.
Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, nor any
Attainder to be had by force and virtue of this Act, shall not extend to make
any corruption of Blood, the disheriting of any Heir, forfeiture of Dower; No
corruption of Blood, disheriting of Heir, or forfeiture of Dower, for any
Attainder by this Act
nor to the prejudice of the Right or Title of any person or persons, other
then the Right or Title of the Offender or Offenders, during his, her, or their
natural Lives only.

And that it shall and maybe lawful to every person and persons to whom the
Right or Interest of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, after the death of
any such Offender or Offenders, should or might have appertained, if no such
Attainder had been, to enter into the same without any Ouster le maine to be
sued, in such sort as he or they might have done, if this Act had never been
had ne made.

Provided also, That the Oath expressed in the said Act, How the Oath expressed
An. 1. Eliz. 1. shall be expounded.
made in the said first year, shall be taken and expounded in such form as is
set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions,
published in the first year of her Majesty's Reign: That is to say, to confess
and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other Authority
then that was challenged and lately used by the Noble King Henry the Eighth,
and King Edward the Sixth, as in the said admonition more plainly may appear.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, In what Courts and places this
Act shall be published.
That this Act shall be openly Read, and Published, and Declared at every
Quarter Sessions, by the Clerk of the Peace; and at every Leet, and Law-day, by
the Steward of the Court; and once in every Term in the open Hall of every
House and Houses of Court and Chancery, at the times, and by the persons
thereunto to be limited and appointed by the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the
Great Seal for the time being.

And be it further Enacted, Stat. Sect. 10. Every Knight, Citizen and Burgess
of the Parliament shall take the said Oath.
That every person which hereafter shall be Elected or appointed a Knight,
Citizen or Burgess, or Baron for any of the five Ports, for any Parliament or
Parliaments hereafter to be holden: shall from henceforth, before he shall
enter into the Parliament House, or have any Voice there, openly receive and
pronounce the said Oath before the Lord Steward, for the time being, or his
Deputy or Deputies for that time to be appointed. And that he which shall enter
into the Parliament House without taking the said Oath, shall be deemed no
Knight, Citizen, Burgess, nor Baron for that Parliament, nor shall have any
Voice; but shall be to all intents, constructions and purposes, as if he had
never been Returned nor Elected Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron for that
Parliament, and shall suffer such pains and penalties as if he had presumed to
sit in the same without Election, Return or Authority.

The Kings dispensation void.
The King cannot dispense with any Member of the Commons House from taking this
Oath; For the reason given by the late Lord Chief Justice Vaughan in the Case
of Thomas and Sorrel touching the Oath of Allegiance holds here, viz. Because
by this Statute he is persona inhabilis, until he has taken it, Vaughan 355.

Stat. Sect. 11. Where no temporal person of or above the degree of a Baron
shall be compelled to take the said Oath.
Provided always, That forasmuch as the Queens Majesty is otherwise sufficiently
assured of the Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords of her High Court of
Parliament: Therefore this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to compel any Temporal person, of or above the degree of a Baron of
this Realm to take or pronounce the Oath abovesaid, nor to incur any penalty
limited by this Act for not taking or refusing the same: Any thing in this Act
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Where he ought to take it.
This Act.] Although by this Act no Temporal person of or above the degree of a
Baron is compellable to take this Oath, yet if he be made a Justice of Peace he
ought to take it by force of the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Jones 152, 153.
Earl of Lincolns Case.

Stat. 1 Eliz. 1. A Bishop must take it.
Temporal Person.] By these words and the Preamble, Forasmuch as, etc.
Archbishops and Bishops, although their possessions be Temporalties, are
excluded out of this Proviso; and therefore are to take the Oath: For every
person who is of the degree of a Baron is not excused, as Wingate tit. Crown
numb. 29. mistakes, but only the Temporal Lords of Parliament.

Stat. Sect. 12. Charitable giving Alms to Offenders shall be no cause of
forfeiture.
Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That charitable giving
of reasonable Alms to any of the Offender or Offenders above specified without
fraud or covin, shall not be taken or interpreted to be any such abettment,
procuring, counselling, aiding, assisting or comforting, as thereby the giver
of such Alms shall incur any pain, penalty, or forfeiture appointed in this Act.

Peers offending shall be tried by their Peers.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
That if any Peer of this Realm shall hereafter offend contrary to this Act, or
any Branch or Article thereof, that in that and all such Case and Cases they
shall be tried by their Peers, in such manner and form as in other Cases of
Treasons they have used to be tried, and by none other means.

Provided also further, and be it Enacted, Stat. Sect. 13. Who only shall be
compelled to take the Oath upon the second tender.
That no person shall be compelled by virtue of this Act to take the Oath
abovementioned, at or upon the second time of offering the same, according to
the form appointed by this Statute, except the same person has been, is, or
shall be an Ecclesiastical person, that had, has, or shall have, in the time
of one of the Riegns of the Queens Majesty's most Noble Father, Brother or
Sister, or in the time of the Reign of the Queens Majesty, her Heirs or
Successors, Charge, Cure, or Office in the Church: Or such person or persons as
had, has, or hereafter shall have any Office or Ministry in any Ecclesiastical
Court of this Realm, under any Archbishop or Bishop, in any the times or Reigns
aforesaid: Or such person or persons as shall wilfully refuse to observe the
Orders and Rites for Divine Service that be authorized to be used and observed
in the Church of England, after that he or they shall be publicly by the
Ordinary, or some of his Officers for Ecclesiastical Causes, admonished to keep
and observe the same: Or such as shall openly and advisedly deprave by words,
writings, or any other open fact, any of the Rites and Ceremonies at any time
used and authorized to be used in the Church of England: Or that shall say or
hear the private Mass prohibited by the Laws of this Realm, and that all such
persons shall be compellable to take the Oath upon the second tender or offer
of the same, and incur the Penalties for not taking of the said Oath, and none
other.

Charge, Cure, or Office in the Church. What Clergymen are punishable upon the
second tender and refusal.
] So that every Clergyman or Person in Orders is not within the danger of this
Law upon the second tender and refusal of the Oath, as Wing. tit. Crown, n. 30.
mistakes: For every Priest or Minister is Clericus, Dyer 3 Eliz. 203. and yet
shall not incur the penalty of High Treason upon the second refusal, unless he
be a local Minister, or have some Charge, Cure or Office in the Church.

By the Ordinary. Ordinary, what.
] Ordinary in the Common Law is properly taken for the Bishop of the Diocese,
but yet usually in the Common Law and in Statutes for every Commissary or
Official of the Bishop, or other Judge that has Ordinary Jurisdiction within
his limits in Causes Ecclesiastical, Stat. W. 2. cap. 19. Stat. 31 E. 3. cap.
11. Terms de la Ley, 212. Ordinary, 8 H. 6. 3. Co. 1. Inst. 344.

Or hear the private Mass. Hearing Mass.
] If a man once in his life time hears private Mass, it seems he is within
this qualification, and incurs High Treason upon the second refusal of the
Oath; and not only if he used to hear it, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 30.
misrecites the Statute.

Stat. Sect. 14. It shall not be lawful to slay any one attainted in a
Praemunire.
And forasmuch as it is doubtful, whether by the Laws of this Realm there be any
punishment for such as kill or slay any person or persons attainted in or upon
a Praemunire, Be it therefore Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That it shall not
be lawful to any person or persons to slay or kill any person or persons in any
manner attainted, or hereafter to be attainted of, in, or upon any Praemunire
by pretense, reason, or authority of any Judgment given, or hereafter to be
given in or upon the same, or by pretense, reason, or force of any word or
words, thing or things contained or specified in any Statute or Law of
Provision and Praemunire, or in any of them: Any Law or Statute, or Opinion, or
Exposition of any Law or Statute, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Punishments inflicted by former Laws.
Saving always the due execution of all and every person and persons attainted,
or to be attainted for any Offense whereupon Judgment of death now is, or ought
to be, or hereafter may lawfully be given by reason of this Statute, or
otherwise; And saving always all and every such pains of death, or other hurt
or punishment as heretofore might without danger of Law be done upon any person
or persons that shall send or bring into this Realm, or any other the Queens
Dominions, or within the same, shall execute any Summons, Sentence,
Excommunication, or other Process against any person or persons from the Bishop
of Rome for the time being, or by or from the Sea of Rome, or the Authority or
Jurisdiction of the same See.

The Judgment in a Praemunire.
The Judgment in a Praemunire is to be out of the Kings Protection, his Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels to be forfeited to the King, and that his body
shall remain in Prison at the Kings pleasure, Co. 1. Inst. 129, 130. Co. 3.
Inst. 218. Rastal Entr. 466. Judgment: But his entailed Lands he shall forfeit
only during his Life: For this Forfeiture must be understood of such an Estate
as he may lawfully forfeit. And the general words of the Statute of Praemunire,
Stat. 16 R. 2. 5. W. 2. 1.
16 R. 2. c. 5. scil. Lands and Tenements, shall not take away the force of the
Statute de donis Conditionaelibus, Co. 1. Inst. 130. 391. Co. 11. 63. Godbolt
308. Lord Sheffeild and Ratcliffe. And the person attainted in a Praemunire is
disabled to be a Witness in any Cause, Co. 1. Inst. 6. or to Sue; For Attainder
in a Praemunire is a good plea in disability of the Plaintiff, A person
attainted in a Praemunire, was out of the Kings Protection. Sc. 25 E. 3. 22.
according to Littleton 41.

By the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 22. which says, That a man attainted in a
Praemunire shall be out of the Kings Protection, and it may be done with him as
with the Kings Enemy. It seems that any man might have lawfully slain such a
person, as was held 24 H. 8. Bro. Coron. 196. Vide Bulstrode 2. 299. Sir
Anthony Mildmay's Case. And this Sir Edward Coke, Co. 7. 14. Calvin's Case, Co.
12. 38. seems to allow for Law before this Statute of 5 Eliz. and positively
affirms it to have been Law in his 1 Inst. 130. and yet in the same Case of
Calvin he says, that in that Statute of 25 E. 3. is intended only a legal
Protection according to Littleton 41. (and so likewise he expounds it in his 3d
Inst. 126.) But yet that the party attainted was still under that Protection
which the Law of Nature gives to the King, which he explains to be such a
Protection as a person attainted of Felony or Treason is under, notwithstanding
his Attainder, so that if any man had killed him without Warrant, he should
have been punished by Law as a manslayer: And this sort of Protection by the
Law of Nature, (says he) is indelebilis and immutabilis, which the Parliament
could not take away: But yet under favor, if a man attainted in a Praemunire
were before this Act of 5 Eliz. under that indeleble and immutable Protection
of the King given by the Law of Nature, then the Opinion held in Brook, and
allowed by himself, was not Law: But if that Opinion in Brook were Law, and
any man might before this Statute have killed a man attainted in a Praemunire,
and that by force of the Statute of 25 E. 3. it follows, that the Protection
which the Law of Nature gives, is not indelebilis or immutabilis, but that an
Act of Parliament might in a particular Case take it away; But there is now no
further need of this Question in the Case of a Praemunire: For if this
Protection by the Law of Nature were taken away by 25 E. 3. it is now restored
by this Statute, and no man can lawfully slay a person attainted in a
Praemunire, no more than he can without Warrant, a man attainted of Felony or
Treason.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 15. Upon what proof only any person may be
indicted.
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons shall
hereafter be Indicted for assisting, aiding, maintaining, comforting, or
abetting of any person or persons for any the said Offenses, in extolling,
setting forth or defending of the usurped Power and Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, unless he or they be thereof lawfully accused by such good and sufficient
testimony or proof as by the Jury by whom he shall so be Indicted, shall be
thought good, lawful, and sufficient to prove him or them guilty of the said
Offenses.

Stat. xiii Eliz. cap. ii. An Act against the bringing in, and putting in
Execution of Bulls, Writings or Instruments, and other Superstitious things,
from the Sea of Rome.
Stat. Sect. 1. A rehearsal of the Stat. of 5 El. 1. touching the abolishing of
the Authority of the Bishop and See of Rome.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the fifth year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is, by one Act and Statute
then and there made, Entitled, An Act for the Assurance of the Queens
Majesty's Royal Power over all States and Subjects within her Highness
Dominions, it is among other things very well ordained and provided for the
abolishing of the usurped Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, and of
the Sea of Rome, heretofore unlawfully claimed and usurped within this Realm
and other the Dominions to the Queens Majesty belonging, That no person or
persons shall hold or stand with to set forth, maintain, defend or extol the
same usurped Power, or attribute any manner of Jurisdiction, Authority or
Pre-eminence to the same, to be had or used within this Realm, or any the said
Dominions upon pain to incur the danger, penalties and forfeitures, ordained
and provided by the Statute of Provision and Praemunire, made in the sixteenth
year of the Reign of King Richard the second, as by the same Act more at large
it does and may appear. And yet nevertheless diverse seditious and very evil
disposed people, without respect of their Duty to Almighty God, or of the Faith
and Allegiance which they ought to bear and have to our said Sovereign Lady the
Quern, and without all fear and regard had to the said good Law and Statute, or
the pains therein limited; but minding as it should seem very seditiously and
unnaturally, not only to bring this Realm and the Imperial Crown thereof (being
in very deed of it self most free) into the thraldom and subjection of that
Foreign, usurped and unlawful Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence and Authority,
claimed by the said See of Rome; but also to estrange and alienate the minds
and hearts of sundry her Majesty's Subjects from their dutiful obedience, and
to raise and stir Sedition and Rebellion within this Realm, to the disturbance
of the most happy peace thereof, have lately procured and obtained to
themselves from the said Bishop of Rome, The effect of Bulls brought from Rome.
and his said See, diverse Bulls and Writings, the effect whereof has been and
is to absolve and reconcile all those that will be contented to forsake their
due obedience to our most gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, and to
yield and subject themselves to the said fained, unlawful and usurped
Authority; and by color of the said Bulls and Writings, the said wicked
persons, very secretly and most seditiously, in such parts of this Realm, where
the people for want of good instruction are most weak, simple and ignorant, and
thereby farthest from the good understanding of their Duties toward God and
the Queens Majesty; have by their lewd and subtle practices and persuasion, so
far forth wrought, that sundry simple and ignorant persons have been contented
to be reconciled to the said usurped Authority of the Sea of Rome, and to take
absolution at the hands of the said naughty and subtle practicers, whereby
has grown great dissobedience and boldness in many, not only to withdraw and
absent themselves from all Divine Service, now most Godly set forth and used
within this Realm, but also have thought themselves dischorged of and from all
Obedience, Duty and Allegiance to her Majesty, whereby most wicked and
unnatural Rebellion has ensued, and to the further danger of this Realm is
hereafter very like to be renewed, if the ungodly and wicked attempts in that
behalf, be not by severity of Laws restrained and bridled.

For remedy and redress whereof, Stat. Sect. 2. Putting in ure any Bull of
Absolution or reconciliation from the Bishop of Rome.
and to prevent the great mischiefs and inconveniences that thereby may ensue,
Be it Enacted by the Queens most Excellent Majesty, with the assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, That if any person or persons, after
the first day of July next coming, shall use or put in ure in any place within
this Realm, or in any the Queens Dominions, any such Bull, Writing or
Instrument, Written or Printed, of Absolution or Reconciliation, at any time
heretofore obtained and gotten, or at any time hereafter to be obtained and
gotten from the said Bishop of Rome or any his Successors, or from any other
person or persons Authorized or claiming Authority by or from the said Bishop
of Rome, his Predecessors or Successors, or See of Rome: Or if any person or
persons after the said first day of July, Absolving or reconciling of any
person, and being absolved or reconciled.
shall take upon him or them by color of any such Bull, Writing, Instrument or
Authority, to absolve or reconcile any person or persons, or to grant or
promise to any person or persons within this Realm, or any other the Queens
Majesty's Dominions, any such absolution or reconciliation by any Speech,
Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or any other open Deed: Or if any person or
persons within this Realm, or any of the Queens Dominions, after the said first
day of July shall willingly receive, and take any such absolution or
reconciliation.

Getting of any Bull from Rome containing any matter whatsoever, or publishing
or putting in ure the same.
Or else if any person or persons have obtained or gotten since the last day of
the Parliament, holden in the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign, or
after the said first day of July, shall obtain or get from the said Bishop of
Rome, or any his Successors, or See of Rome, any manner of Bull, Writing, or
Instrument, Written or Printed, containing any thing, matter or cause
whatsoever, or shall Publish, or by any ways or means put in ure any such Bull,
Writing or Instrument: That then all and every such act and acts, offense and
offenses, shall be deemed and adjudged by the Authority of this Act to be High
Treason, and the Offender and Offenders therein, their Procurors, Abettors, and
Counselors to the Fact, and committing of the said offense or offenses, shall
be deemed and adjudged High Traitors to the Queen and the Realm: and being
thereof lawfully Indicted and Attainted, according to the course of the Laws of
this Realm, shall suffer pains of Death, and also loose and forfeit all their
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, as in Cases of High
Treason by the Laws of this Realm ought to be lost and forfeited.

The Popes Bull.
Bull.] The Popes Bulls in Latin called Bullae, are so called, Quod Bullis
plumbeis obsignentur, and in them, consilium and voluntas Papae continentur.
Vide Terms de la Ley 43. Bull.

Absolution and Reconciliation.
Absolution or Reconciliation.] A man absolves or reconciles, or is absolved or
reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome, without any Bull, Writing, or Instrument
to that purpose: This Case seems not to be within the meaning of this Statute:
For there must be some Bull, Writing or Instrument, to Authorize such
Absolution or Reconciliation, or the person who gives or receives it is not
punishable by this Act, Stat. 23 Eliz. 1. 3 Jac. 4.
although he may be by 23 Eliz. cap. 1. and 3 Jac. cap. 4.

Stat. Sect. 3.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
aiders, comforters or maintainers of any the said Offender or Offenders, after
the committing of any the said Acts or Offenses, to the intent to set forth,
uphold, or allow the doing or execution of the said usurped Power, Aiders,
Comforters, and Maintainers of Offenders after the Offense.
Jurisdiction or Authority touching or concerning the premises, or any part
thereof, shall incur the pains and penalties contained in the Statute of
Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard the second.

To the intent.] Vide supra, Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 2. Intent. Stat. 5
Eliz 1.
and postea Sect. 6.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 4. Concealing or not disclosing of a Bull or
reconciliation offered.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons to whom any such Absolution, Reconciliation, Bull, Writing or
Instrument, as is aforesaid, shall after the said first day of July be offered,
moved or persuaded to be used, put in ure, or executed, shall conceal the same
offer, motion or persuasion, and not disclose and signify the same by writing
or otherwise, within six weeks than next following, to some of the Queens
Majesty's Privy Counsel, or else to the President or Vice President of the
Queens Majesty's Counsel established in the North parts, or in the Marches of
Wales, for the time being: that then the same person or persons so concealing
and not disclosing, or not signifying the said offer, motion or persuasion,
shall incur the loss, danger, penalty and forfeiture of Misprision of High
Treason.

Note, Concealers of the Offense.
All concealers of this Offense are not within the danger of this Law, as
Wingate misrecites the Clause, tit. Crown numb. 35. And therefore if a man be
present at such offer, motion or persuasion, and conceal it, he shall not incur
Misprision of Treason, unless he be the party to whom any such Bull, etc. or
Absolution, etc. was offered.

And that no person or persons shall at any time hereafter be impeached,
molested, Stat. Sect. 5.
or troubled in or for misprision of Treason, for any Offense or Offenses made
Treason by this Act, other than such as by this Act are before declared to be
in Case of Misprision of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 6. Bringing
into the Realm, or using of Agnus Dei, Pictures, Crosses, etc.
That if any person or persons shall at any time after the said first day of
July, bring into this Realm of England, or any the Dominions of the same, any
token or tokens, thing or things, called or named by the name of Agnus Dei, or
any Crosses, Pictures, Beads, or such like vain and superstitious things, from
the Bishop or See of Rome, or from any person or persons authorized, or
claiming Authority by or from the said Bishop or See of Rome, to Consecrate or
Hallow the same, (which said Agnus Dei, is used to be specially Hallowed and
Consecrated, as it is termed, by the said Bishop in his own person, and the
said Crosses, Pictures, Beads, and such like superstitious things, been also
hallowed, either by the same Bishop, or by others having power or pretending to
have power from him or his said See: and diverse Pardons, Immunities, and
Exemptions granted by the Authority of the said See to such as shall receive
and use the same:) and that if the same person or persons so bringing in as is
aforesaid, such Agnus Dei, and other like things as have been before specified,
shall deliver or cause, or offer to be delivered, the same or any of them to
any Subject of this Realm, or of any the Dominions of the same to be worn or
used in any wise: that then as well the same person and persons so doing, as
also all and every other person or persons which shall receive and take the
same, to the intent to use or wear the same, being thereof lawfully Convicted
and Attainted by the order of the Common Laws of this Realm, shall incur into
the dangers, penalties, pains and forfeitures, ordained and provided by the
Statute of Praemunire and Provision, made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of
King Richard the Second.

Bringers in, offerers and deliverers.
And that if the same Person or Persons so bringing in.] A man brings into the
Kings Dominions such Agnus Dei, or other like superstitious things, and another
offers or delivers them; It seems that neither he that brings them in, nor he
that offers or delivers them, is within this Act, or liable to the penalty, for
by the express words it must be the same person: So that neither the bringer
in, unless he offer or deliver them or cause them to be delivered, nor he who
delivers them or causes or offers them to be delivered, unless he be the
person who brought them in, is an Offender within the Act.

To whom an Agnus Dei, etc. may not be offered or delivered.
To any Subject of this Realm, etc.] The offer or delivery of such Agnus Dei, or
other superstitious thing, to any sort of person, is not an offense within this
Act, as Wingate supposes it to be, tit. Crown. Numb. 37. But to make it an
Offense, it must be delivered or offered to a Subject of this Realm or of the
Dominions of the same.

The intent material.
To be worn or used, etc. to the intent to use or wear the same.] The Intent is
material in this Case, an^ therefore, If a man be Indicted upon this Statute,
for bringing in and offering or delivering such Agnus Dei, etc. or receiving
the same, the intent must be mentioned in the Indictment, as it must be in
Indictments upon all Statutes, where the intent (as here) is made part of the
offense: So in an Indictment upon the Statute of 5 E. 6. cap. 4. Stat. 5 E. 6.
4.
it is not enough to say the party drew his Dagger in the Church against J. S.
but it must be averred that he did it with an intent to strike him, as was
Resolved by the Court of King's Bench, Trin. 33 Eliz. in Penhalls Case, Leonard.
4. 49. C. 127.

It seems by the words of this Statute, that to make the Receiver of such
superstitious things an offender within it, there must be a concurrence of
intentions for the using or wearing them both in the giver and receiver: And
that therefore if a person coming from beyond the Seas brings into this Realm
any such superstitious things, but with no intent that they should be worn or
used, and gives them to his friend, at his request, who receives them with an
intent to wear or use them, this is penal to neither: Not to the giver, for he
had no superstitious intent, and the intent is material; nor to the receiver,
for that the offering or delivering them to be worn or used, is expressly made
in the Statute a condition precedent to the obliquity of the fact in receiving
them; for the Statute says, Then as well the person so doing, as also every
other person receiving them, to that intent shall incur a Praemunire. So that
then only when the person delivering them so does, that is, delivers them to be
worn or used, the person receiving them to that intent shall incur a
Praemunire.

But yet there needs not any such concurrence of intentions in the giver and
receiver, to make the giver an offender: And therefore if a man brings into the
Realm such superstitious things, and delivers them to be worn or used, though
the party receive them not to the intent to use or wear them, but defaces,
burns or otherwise destroies them, yet he that gave or delivered them incurs a
Praemunire: for the words in the Act, relating to the Offerer or Deliverer, are
entire in themselves, and have no dependence on the subsequent words relating
to the receiver, but generally make all Offenders who bring them in, and either
offer or deliver them to a superstitious intent, without any respect to the
intent of the party who receives or is offered them.

Provided nevertheless, Stat. Sect. 7. Apprehending an Offender or disclosing
his name.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons to whom any such Agnus Dei, or other the things aforesaid, shall be
tendered and offered to be delivered, shall apprehend the party so offering the
same, and bring him to the next Justice of Peace of that Shire where such
tender shall be made, if he shall be of power, and able so to do, or for lack
of such ability, shall within the space of three days next after such offer
made as is aforesaid, disclose the name or names of such person or persons as
so shall make the same offer, and the dwelling place or place of resort of the
same person or persons (which he shall endeavor himself to know by all the ways
and means he can) to the Ordinary of that Diocese, or to any Justice of Peace
of that Shire where such person or persons to whom such offer shall be made, as
is aforesaid, shall be resiant: And also, Delivering of Agnus Dei received, to
the Ordinary or a Justice of Peace.
if such person or persons to whom such offer shall be made shall happen to
receive any such Agnus Dei, or other thing above remembered, and shall within
the space of one day next after such receipt, deliver the same to any Justice
of Peace within the same Shire where the party so receiving shall be then
resiant or shall happen to be: That then every such person or persons doing any
the Acts or things in this Proviso above mentioned, in form above declared,
shall not by force of this Statute incur any danger, or penalty appointed by
this Statute, or any other pain or penalty: this Act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Next Justice of Peace.
To the next Justice of Peace.] If the person to whom such Agnus Dei, etc. is
offered, do bring the Offender to any Justice of Peace of the County where the
offer is made, although he be not the next Justice, yet it is good enough, and
satisfies the intent of the Act: For the word (next) is put in such Cases into
Acts of Parliament, but for convenience and the more speedy execution of
Justice. Vide Styles, 246. Maine and Sergeants Case.

The respective Justices of Peace here intended.
To any Justice of Peace.] The Statute provides for the discovery of the
Offender in Order to his punishment: in three Cases, 1. If any such
superstitious thing be offered, and the party be able to apprehend him that
offers it, he must bring him to the next Justice of Peace of the County where
the offer is made. 2. But if he cannot apprehend him, he is to disclose his
name and place of abode or resort, to the Ordinary of that Diocese, or a
Justice of Peace of that County where the person to whom the offer was made is
resident, and that within three days after such offer made. 3. But if he
receives the thing offered, then he is not to apply to the Ordinary, but is
strictly tied to deliver it within a day after to some Justice of Peace of that
County where he who received it shall then be resident or happen to be; and in
this last Case, if he receives it with an intent to use or wear it, and keeps
it above a day, or delivers it to any other person or Justice of Peace of any
other County, he incurs a Praemunire. But these Justices of Peace are strangely
confounded, as well in Dalton, V. cap. 89. tit. High Treason, as in Wingate,
tit. Crown, numb. 37.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 8. A Pardon
to them that shall bring in to be cancelled th^se Bulls which they received.
That all and every person and persons, which at any time since the beginning
of the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is, have brought, or
caused to be brought into this Realm any such Bulls, Writings, or Instruments
or Reconciliation, only as are abovementioned, and now have any of the same
Bulls, Writings, or Instruments in his or their hands or custody, and shall and
do within the space of three months next after the end of any Session or
Dissolution of this present Parliament, bring and deliver all such Bulls,
Writings and Instruments, which they or any of them now have in his or their
Custody, to the Bishop of the Diocese where such Absolution has been given and
received, to the intent that the same Bulls, Writings and Instruments, may be
cancelled and defaced, and shall openly and publicly before such Bishop,
confess and acknowledge his or their Offense therein, and humbly desire to be
received, restored and admitted to the Church of England, shall stand and be
clearly pardoned and discharged of all and every Offense and Offenses done or
committed in any matter or cause concerning any of the said Bulls, Writings or
Instruments for or touching such Absolution or Reconciliation only.

And that all and every person or persons which have received, A Pardon of all
those who have been reconciled to the Bishop of Rome and do confess it, and
submit themselves.
or taken any Absolution from the said Bishop of Rome, or his said See of Rome,
of any Reconciliation unto the said Bishop, or to the said See of Rome,
sithence the said first year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen,
and shall within the said space of three months next after any Session or
Dissolution of this present Parliament, come before the Bishop of the Diocese
of such place where such Absolution or Reconciliation was had or made, and
shall publicly and openly before the same Bishop, confess and acknowledge his
or their Offense therein, and humbly desire to be received, restored and
admitted to the Church of England, shall likewise stand and he clearly pardoned
and discharged of all and every Offense or Offenses done or committed in any
matter or cause concerning the said Bulls, Writings or Instruments, for or
touching only receiving of such Absolution or Reconciliation, and for and
concerning all Absolution or Reconciliation had, or received by color of any
of the said Bulls, Writings or Instruments only.

Provided also, Stat. Sect. 9. The penalty of a Justice of P. not disclosing an
Offense declared to him.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Justice of
Peace to whom any Matter or Offense before mentioned shall be uttered, showed,
or declared as is aforesaid, do not within the space of xiv days next after it
shall be to him showed or uttered, signify or declare the same to some one of
the Queens Majesty's Privy Counsel: that then the same Justice of Peace shall
incur the danger, pain and forfeiture provided by the said Statute, made in the
said sixteenth year of King Richard the second.

As is aforesaid.] So that if the Offense be not declared as is aforesaid, No
Praemunire incurred.
that is, to such Justice of Peace as is appointed in the foregoing Clause, but
it shall be declared to any other Justice of Peace of a wrong County, that
other Justice of Peace shall not incur a Praemunire, if he does not signify or
declare it to a Privy Counselor.

One Privy Counselor sufficient.
To some one of the Queens Majesty's Privy Council.] Here it is plain that any
one Privy Counselor suffices, and the Justice of Peace is not bound to
signify the Offense to the Privy Council, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 138.
misrecites the Statute.

Stat. Sect. 10. Trial of a Nobleman by his Peers.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any Nobleman being a Peer of this Realm, shall at any time hereafter happen to
be Indicted for any the Offense or Offenses aforesaid, That then every such
Nobleman and Peer of this Realm shall have his Trial by his Peers, as in cases
of High Treason and Misprision of Treason has heretofore been accustomed or
used.

A saving of the right of others.
Saving to all and every person and persons, bodies Politic and Corporate,
their Heirs and Successors, and the Heirs and Successors of every of them,
other then the said Offenders, and their Heirs claiming only as Heir or Heirs
to such Offenders, and such person and persons as claim to any their uses, all
such Rights, Titles, Interests, Possessions, Leases, Rents, Reversions,
Remainders, Offices, Fees, and all other Profits, Commodities and Hereditaments
as they or any of them shall have at the day of committing such Offense or
Offenses, or any time before, in as large and ample manner to all intents and
purposes, as if this Act had never been had nor made: Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Stat. xxiii Eliz. cap. i. An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in
their due Obedience.
WHere sithence the Statute made in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the
Queen our Sovereign Lady, Entitled, Stat. Sect. 1.
An Act against the bringing in, and putting in Execution of Bulls, Writings
and Instruments, and other Superstitious things from the Sea of Rome, diverse
evil affected persons have practiced, contrary to the meaning of the said
Statute, by other means than by Bulls or Instruments, Written or Printed, to
withdraw diverse the Queens Majesty's Subjects from their natural Obedience to
her Majesty, and to obey the said usurped Authority of Rome, and in respect of
the same, to persuade great numbers to withdraw their due Obedience to her
Majesty's Laws, established for the due Service of Almighty God.

For Reformation whereof, Stat. Sect. 2. Treason to withdraw any from the
Religion Established, to the Romish Religion.
and to declare the true meaning of the said Law: Be it declared and enacted by
the Authority of this present Parliament, That all persons whatsoever, which
have or shall have, or shall pretend to have power, or shall by any ways or
means put in practice to absolve, persuade or withdraw any of the Queens
Majesty's Subjects, or any within her Highnesses Realms and Dominions, from
their natural Obedience to her Majesty, or to withdraw them for that intent
from the Religion now by her Highnesses Authority established within her
Highnesses Dominions, to the Romish Religion, or to move them, or any of them,
to promise any Obedience to any pretended Authority of the Sea of Rome, or of
any other Prince, State or Potentate, to be had or used within her Dominions,
or shall do any overt act to that intent or purpose, and every of them, shall
be to all intents adjudged to be Traitors: And being thereof lawfully
convicted, shall have Judgment, suffer and forfeit as in case of High Treason.
And if any person shall after the end of this Session of Parliament, by any
means be willingly absolved, or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly be
reconciled, It shall be Treason to be reconciled or withdrawn to the Romish
Religion.
or shall promise any Obedience to any such pretended Authority, Prince, State,
or Potentate as is aforesaid; that then every such person, their Procurers and
Counselors thereunto, being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be taken, tried
and judged, and shall suffer and forfeit as in Cases of High Treason.

Persuade or withdraw.] It was held in Lovett and Faulkners Case, Mich. 12.
Jac. B. R. That if a man were Indicted for endeavoring and practicing
voluntary, felonice, and proditorie, to persuade and withdraw any of the Kings
Subjects from his Obedience unto the Romish Religion, and was afterward,
debito modo acquietatus, yet an Action upon the Case in nature of a Conspiracy
would not lie against the party who procured him to be Indicted, Cro. Mich. 12.
Jac. 357, 358. Rolls 1. 209. C. 49. Bulstrode 2. 271. and the main reason given
was, That forasmuch as every man is bound to discover Treason, and it is
dangerous to conceal any thing which may tend to Treason, therefore the
procuring one to be Indicted concerning it was no Cause of Action: And in that
Case Coke Chief Justice said, That such an Action was never before that time
brought. But later Resolutions have been to the contrary of this Opinion:
Action lies for indicting a man of High Treason.
And it is held for Law at this day, That if a man procures another to be
Indicted of High Treason, an Action upon the Case in nature of Conspiracy lies
against him that procures it, as well as if it were for Felony. The first
leading Case of this nature which was resolved upon any solemn argument or
debate, was that of Smith versus Cranshaw or Crashaw, and others, where it was
adjudged, upon great deliberation by all the Four Judges of the Court of Kings
Bench, Hill. 1. Car. 1. That an Action in nature of a Conspiracy does well lie
in such Case, and that not only in Case of Acquittal upon Trial, but upon the
exhibiting a Bill of Indictment for High Treason to the Court or Jury, if the
Jury bring in Ignoramus, although in this last Case a Writ of Conspiracy lies
not: And Lovett and Faulkners Case was denied to be Law: Addition to Bendloes
152. Latch 79, 80. Jones 93, 94, 95. And Justice Dodderidge who concurred in
Opinion with the other Judges in the Case of Lovett and Faulkner, changed his
Opinion in that of Smith and Cranshaw, and held that the Action was
maintainable, Bulstrode 2. 271, 272. so that whosoever of mere malice, without
probable cause, causes any person to be Indicted upon this Statute, Stat. 3.
Jac. 4.
or that of 3 Jac. cap. 4. for endeavoring or practicing so to persuade or
withdraw any Subject, or prefers a Bill to the Court or Jury for that purpose,
is liable to an Action of the Case for so doing, if the party be acquitted, or
the Jury bring in Ignoramus, as in other Cases of Felony.

Any of the Queens Majesty's Subjects. Queens Subjects, Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
] What is meant by the Queens Subjects. Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 19.

And be it likewise Enacted and declared, Stat. Sect. 3. The penalty of aiders,
maintainers and concealers.
That all and every person and persons that shall wittingly be aiders or
maintainers of such persons so offending, as is above expressed, or of any of
them knowing the same, or which shall conceal any offense aforesaid, and shall
not within twenty days at the furthest, after such persons knowledge of such
offense, disclose the same to some Justice of Peace or other higher Officer,
shall be taken, tried and judged, and shall suffer and forfeit as Offenders in
misprision of Treason.

These words ( And shall not within twenty days, Aiders or maintainers
punishable, though discoverers.
etc. disclose the same) have no reference to those who are aiders or
maintainers of the Offender, but only to those who have barely a knowledge of
the Offense without aiding or maintaining the party. And therefore if such as
are aiders or maintainers of the person offending discover the offense within
twenty days, yet such discovery shall not free them from the guilt of
misprision of Treason, as Wingate mistakes in his Abridgment of this Clause,
tit. Crown, numb. 42. but if they once aid or maintain the party, knowing him
to be an Offender, they are guilty whether they disclose or conceal the
offense, and shall have no benefit of the twenty days.

And be it likewise Enacted, Stat. Sect. 4. The forfeiture for saying or
hearing of Mass.
That every person which shall say or sing Mass, being thereof lawfully
convicted, shall forfeit the sum of Two hundred Marks, and be committed to
Prison in the next Goal, there to remain by the space of one year, and from
thence forth till he have paid the said sum of Two hundred Marks. And that
every person which shall willingly hear Mass, shall forfeit the sum of One
hundred Marks, and suffer Imprisonment for a year.

One hundred Marks.] And not Two hundred pounds, Forfeiture.
as it is mistaken in the late Additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants,
Sect. 59.

Be it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 5. The
penalty for not coming to the Church by the space of a Month.
That every person above the age of sixteen years which shall not repair to
some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, but forbear the same,
contrary to the tenor of a Statute made in the first year of her Majesty's
Reign, for uniformity of Common Prayer, and being thereof lawfully convicted,
shall forfeit to the Queens Majesty for every month after the end of this
Session of Parliament, which he or she shall so forbear, twenty pounds of
lawful English money: and that over and besides the said forfeitures, every
person so forbearing by the space of twelve months, as aforesaid, shall for his
or her obstinacy, after Certificate thereof in writing made into the Court,
commonly called the King's Bench, by the Ordinary of the Diocese, a Justice of
Assize and Jail-delivery, or a Justice of Peace of the County where such
offender shall dwell or be, be bound with two sufficient sureties in the sum of
Two hundred pounds at the least to the good behavior, and so to continue bound
until such time as the persons so bound do conform themselves, and come to the
Church, according to the true meaning of the said Statute made in the said
first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign.

Existens aetatis etc. shall refer to the time of absence.
Above the age of sixteen years.] Talbot was Indicted upon this Statute. Quod
existens aetatis 16 annorum and amplius non accessit ad Ecclesiam, etc. The
question was, whether the Existens aetatis 16 annorum, should refer to the time
of his Indictment, or to the time of his absence. And the Judges conceived,
that the Indictment was well enough and pursuant to the Statute. And that
Existens should in this Case refer to the time of his absence, Moore. 606. C.
838.

Recusancy consists in omission.
Not repair, etc. but forbear.] This offense Consists not in committing but in
omitting, and is but a nonfeasance and therefore cannot be said to be in any
certain place. And for this reason, in a Popular Action brought by the
Informer, qui tam, etc. there needs no place be alleged in the Declaration,
Anderson, 1. 139. C. 190. Cuffe versus Vachel, nor is Recusancy within that
Branch of the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. Stat. 31 El. 5.
which says, That the offense shall be laid in the proper County where it was
done or committed: For to speak properly, it was not committed any where,
Hobart 251. Grimstone versus Molineux. Vide infra, Sect. 9.

Conviction in the same Suit sufficient.
Being thereof lawfully convicted.] By this is not meant that the party must be
convicted in some former Suit: But a conviction upon the same Indictment or
Information which is brought against him for the recovery of the 20 l. per
month, is a sufficient conviction within the meaning of this Statute: And so
are all penal Statutes, which have in them those words (being thereof lawfully
convicted) to be understood, that is, of a conviction in the same Suit,
whereupon the penalty is to be recovered: For the meaning only is, that the
Offender shall forfeit nothing before conviction, which is no more then the Law
implies. And therefore in truth these words are but superfluous, and might have
been as well omitted, Co. 11. 59. and Rolls 1. 90. C. 41. Dr. Fosters Case,
Rolls 1. 234. C. 6. and Bulstrode 3. 87. The King against Law.

Nor is (Conviction) here intended only of a Convicton by Verdict: What
Conviction is here meant.
And therefore if the Offender be convicted upon his Confession of the fact,
and Judgment thereupon be had, and consequently if Judgment be had against him
upon a Demurrer (which is a Confession of the matter of fact) or if Judgment be
given against him on nihil dicit, for any other Cause, any of these are
sufficient Convictions whereupon to recover this Penalty: For Convicted is here
to be taken for Attainted, as it is in many other Cases: For until Judgment he
shall forfeit nothing. And although he that is Convicted is not therefore
Attainted, yet every one who is Attainted or Adjudged is Convicted: And of such
a Conviction is this Statute to be understood, Dr. Fosters Case, Rolls 1. 89.
90. C. 41. and Co. 11. 60. where several Cases are cited which prove that
Convicted is oftentimes put for Attainted.

Shall forfeit to the Queens Majesty. Shall forfeit, i. e. to the King.
] These words (to the Queens Majesty) are but surplusage, and import no more
than the Law would have given the Queen without them; for where a Statute gives
a forfeiture, and limits it not to any particular person, the King shall have
it by Construction of Law, as was agreed in the Case of Agard and Tandish.
Anderson 2. 128. C. 73. and so should he have this whole 20 l. per month, if
the Statute had staid here, and had not afterward made another express
appointment. Vid. Sect. 9.

For every month. Month, what.
] It seems that the month here mentioned shall be accounted secundum numerum
singulorum dierum, allowing but 28 days to a month: For so are all Statutes to
be understood which speak of the month, unless W. 2. cap. 5. W. 2. 5. 2 and 3
E. 6. 13
for the account of a Lapse and 2 and 3 E. 6. of proving a suggestion, Co. 1.
Inst. 135. Cro. Trin: 5 Jac. 166. 167. Bishop of Peterburgh versus Catesby,
Yelverton 100. Catesby versus Baker, Hobart 179. Copley versus Collins. And of
this Opinion the Court of King's Bench seemed to be upon Construction of the
Statute of Liveries in the Case of Donner and Smith, Trin. 43 Eliz. Cro. 835.
The Recusant may forfeit for 13 months in a year.
so that by this account the Recusant shall forfeit thirteen score pounds in
the whole year.

In an Information brought by Parker, Qui tam, Conformity in part not available.
etc. against Sir John Curson and his Wife, for the Recusancy of the Wife for
eleven months, and non culp. pleaded. It was proved at the Trial, B. R. Pasch.
17. Jac. that she conformed and came to Church for part of the time in the
Information, yet forasmuch as she was a Recusant both before and after, it was
said by the Court that her Conformity for some part of the time should not
excuse her, and she was found guilty for the whole time, Cro. Jac. 529.

The Informer demands less then is due.
The Informer showed, that the Recusant was absent from Church from the 10 of
September 15 Jac. unto the 9 of Sept. 16. Jac. and demanded Two hundred and
twenty pounds for eleven months: upon non culp. pleaded, it was found against
the Defendant: And it was resolved, that although the Informer had demanded
less then by his own showing was due (for the time mentioned in the Information
was thirteen months complete except one day) yet the Information was well
enough: For the Recovery shall be intended to be for the eleven months, when
the Recusant was first absent, and the addition of more time is not material,
Cro. Pasch. 17 Jac. 529. 530. and Rolls 2. 90. Parker versus Sir John Curson
and his Wife. And this is not like the Case of Bawderock versus Mackaller,
where the Informer Qui tam, etc. upon the Statute of Symony demanded less than
the penalty, and the Court seemed to be of Opinion, that although it was good
enough for the King notwithstanding that misprision, yet it was not so for the
Informer, and compared it to the Case of Agard and Candish, where an
Information was brought upon the Statute of Liveries after the year, and it was
Adjudged to be good for the King but not for the Informer, Cro. Mich. 9. Car.
331. For upon the Statute of Symony which gives one entire penalty for the
offense, if less be demanded, the Statute is not pursued: And there is a clear
variance between that and the Information. But in the Case of Recusancy, when
he demands Two hundred pound for eleven months, the Statute is pursued, and
though it appears by the Information that the Recusant was absent for a longer
time, yet the Informer is at liberty whether he will demand the penalty for his
absence during that supernumerary time.

The Informer demands for 13 months, and the Jury find for 12.
If it be showed in the Information that the Recusant was absent from Church
from a day certain to a day certain, which in all makes 13 months, and the
penalty is demanded for that time, and the Jury find the party guilty for 12
months; It has been held by some, that the Verdict shall be good for 12
months; But whether for the first 12 months is a question: For in Sir J.
Cursons Case, (supra) the demand was but for 11 months. And when the Jury finds
the Defendant guilty, it shall be intended to be for the 11 months for which
the penalty is demanded, and that shall be accounted from the 10 of September,
which was the first day of absence alleged in the Information; and the rest of
the time to the ninth of September following after the first eleven months, is
to be accounted as Surplusage. But in this Case where the Jury abridges the
time for which the penalty is demanded, it may be questioned whether the
Verdict shall be intended to be for the first twelve months of the thirteen:
And the Judges of the Kings Bench to salve a question of the like nature in an
Information brought by Donner against Smith upon the Statute of Liveries,
seemed to be of Opinion, That it is not material which were the twelve months
wherein the party offended, Cro. Trin. 43 Eliz. 835. But if that Opinion be
Law, it must follow that the party can never be punished for the thirteenth
month, but that must be remitted to him: because it is left uncertain which of
the thirteen shall be accounted the month not found by the Jury: And it rather
seems for this reason, That the Verdict is void for the uncertainty which
twelve months of the thirteen the party offended, unless it shall be intended
of the first twelve.

Mr. Shephard in his Sure Guide, cap. 6. Sect. 5. raises this Question, (viz.)
Stat. 1 Eliz. 2.
This Statute having reference to that of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. which says, every
one shall come to Church every Sunday and Holy Day, whether he that is not at
Church every Holy Day does not rigore juris forfeit 20 l. a month by force of
this Statute of 23. But this Question seems altogether needless: The
forbearance from Church must be for a whole month, or no forfeiture of 20 l.
For it is clear by the express words here, that it must be a forbearance from
Church contrary to 1 Eliz. for a whole month together that makes the party
liable to the forfeiture of 20 l. and if he comes to Church on any Sunday or
Holy Day within the month, he is freed from the penalty of 20 l. although not
from the twelve pence by 1 Eliz. for the days of his absence, if he comes not
every Sunday and Holy Day both.

Be bound.] Some have made a question, Recusants where to be bound to the good
behavior.
and among them Mr. Shephard in his Sure Guide, cap. 6. Sect. 5. by whom, or in
what Court the Recusant shall be bound to the good behavior by force of this
Statute: For that the Court is not expressly mentioned. And Wingate in his
Abridgment of this Clause, tit. Crown numb. 44. has stumbled upon a Conceit,
That after Certificate made into the Kings Bench, a Justice of Assize, Goal
delivery, or Peace, shall bind the party to the good behavior, and misrecites
the Statute accordingly. But it seems, That the intention of the Lawmakers
was, that he should be bound in the Kings Bench, (and of that Opinion is Dalton
V. cap. 75. title Good Behavior) For where any proceedings are appointed to be
upon, or after a Certificate sent to any Court, there by common Intendment the
proceedings are to be in that Court to whom the Certificate is sent, if no
other Court be named: And it cannot be presumed by any reasonable construction
of this Act, That the Certificate into the Kings Bench is to any other end than
for the Justices there to proceed in such manner as the Act directs to be done
after such Certificate, as no question they may in this Case as well as upon
Certificate of a Presentment, or of refusal of the Oath of Supremacy against
the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 5 Eliz. 1.
quod vide supra. And it is a rule in construction of Statutes, that where the
intention plainly appears, the Law ought to be advanced according to its end,
though the words be short and imperfect, especially Laws made for Religion, as
is held in Colt and Glovers Case. Hobart 157. and Magdalen College Case, Co.
11. Vide Bulstrode 2. 155. the Case of Griffith and others.

Popish Recusants convict, not sufficient sureties.
Sufficient sureties.] Popish Recusants convicted are not to be reputed
sufficient sureties, and therefore were refused by the Court of Kings Bench, in
the Case of Griffith, and other Recusants who were brought thither to be bound
to their good Behavior, Bulstrode 2. 155.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons, body Politic or
Corporate, Stat. Sect. 6. The forfeiture for keeping of a Schoolmaster not
repairing to Church, or allowed by the Ordinary.
after the Feast of Pentecost next coming, shall keep or maintain any
Schoolmaster, which shall not repair to Church as is aforesaid, or be allowed
by the Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese where such Schoolmaster shall be so
kept, shall forfeit and lose for every month so keeping him ten pounds.

(Provided, That no such Ordinary, or their Ministers, shall take any thing for
the said allowance. The penalty on such Schoolmaster.
) And such Schoolmaster or Teacher presuming to teach contrary to this Act,
and being thereof lawfully convict shall be disabled to be a Teacher of youth,
and shall suffer Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize for one year.

Any Schoolmaster.] An Usher Usher.
or Assistant in teaching is a Master in the School, and seems to be included
within the word Schoolmaster: And the following words here, (or Teacher)
explain who is intended, (viz.) every Teacher of Youth.

A Schoolmaster conforms, or is licensed, either of them sufficient. Stat. 1
Jac. 4. 14 Car. 2. What he must do by Stat. 14 Car. 2.
Repair to Church as is aforesaid, or be allowed.] This Clause being in the
dis-junctive, It seems, That although a Schoolmaster does not come to Church,
yet if he be licensed by the Bishop or Ordinary it shall excuse the penalty.
And this is not altered in that particular either by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap.
4. Sect. 9. quod vide postea, nor by the Statute of 14 Car. 2. But then he must
by that of 14 Car. 2. among other things (for which Vide the Statute at large)
subscribe a Declaration or Acknowledgment that he will conform to the Liturgy
of the Church of England as it is now by Law Established, or he shall for the
first Offense suffer three months Imprisonment without Bail, and for the
second, and every other Offense, shall suffer three months Imprisonment without
Bail, and also forfeit five pounds. But if he be licenced, and subscribe and do
as aforesaid, and so cannot be punished by this or either of the other said
Acts; yet now by the Statute of 17 Car. 2.2. unless he take the Oath there
mentioned, and frequent Divine Service established by the Laws of this Kingdom,
and carry himself there as in the said Statute is appointed, he shall forfeit
for every offense 40 l. So that now Conformity in repairing to Church is
necessarily required of every such Schoolmaster.

No such Ordinary, etc. shall take anything. Twelve pence for a License.
] But now by the Statute of 14 Car. 2. there may be 12 pence taken for such
License.

And be it likewise Enacted, Stat. Sect. 7. What Justices may enquire of
Offenses done against the Stat. of 1 Eliz. 1. 5 El. 1. 13 El. 2.
That all and every Offenses against this Act, or against the Acts of the
first, fifth, or thirteenth years of her Majesty's Reign, touching
acknowledging of her Majesty's Supreme Government in Causes Ecclesiastical, or
other matters touching the Service of God, or coming to Church, or
Establishment of true Religion in this Realm, shall and may be inquirable as
well before Justices of Peace, as other Justices named in the same Statutes,
within one year and a day after every such Offense committed: Any thing in this
Act, or in any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Be it likewise Enacted, That Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of
Assize and of Gaol delivery, in their several limits shall have power to
enquire, hear and determine of all Offenses against this Statute: And Justices
of Peace in their open Quarter Sessions of Peace shall have power by virtue of
this Act to enquire, hear and determine of all Offenses against this Act,
(except Treason and misprision of Treason.)

Within one year and a day. Where the Indictment of the Offender was to have
been within a year and day. Stat. 1 Eliz. 1. 5 Eliz. 1. 13 Eliz. 2.
] This limitation of time extends not to any Offense made Treason by this Act,
but only to such Offenses mentioned in this Act, or those of 1, 5, and 13 Eliz.
as concern the Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, the Service of God,
coming to Church, or Establishment of Religion; and for those touching
Religion, this Statute enlarges the time limited by 1 Eliz. cap. 2. which
says, the party must be Indicted the next Sessions, or if in a Corporation,
within fifteen days after Easter or Michaelmas: for now he may be Indicted at
any time within the year and day. In what cases he may be Indicted afterward.
But for absolving or withdrawing, or for being absolved, withdrawn, or
reconciled, which are here made Treason, no time is limited for the
prosecution: but the Offender may be Indicted at any time after the year and
day. For the latter part of this Clause speaks of those Offenses of Treason
which the Justices of Peace cannot hear and determine, and there no time is
limited, although there be in the former part for those Offenses which are
inquirable by Justices of Peace, Leonard 1. 238. C. 322. Guilfords Case. Vide
Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 9. and infra Sect 9. touching the Informer.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer, who.
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of Assize and of Gaol delivery,
etc. and Justices of Peace.] The Justices of the Court of Kings Bench are the
Sovereign Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver, Co. 9. 118. Lord
Sanchars Case, and therefore may enquire of, hear and determine the Offenses
against this Act, although they be not here especially named.

Two Indictments before several Justices
If an Indictment be preferred upon this Statute before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, or of Assize, for any offense not made Treason or misprision of
Treason, and there is an Indictment before Justices of Peace likewise for the
same Offense; The Judgment of the Justices who do first enquire, hear and
determine the same shall stand, and the Judgment given by the other shall be
void, as was held in the like Case upon the Statute of Inmates, Co. 2. Inst.
739.

Justices of Peace may hear and determine the Offense of not coming to Church.
Stat. 29 Eliz. 6. 3 Jac. 4.
The power here given the Justices of Peace in their open Quarter Sessions to
hear and determine the Offense of not coming to Church, is in force at this
day, notwithstanding the Statute of 29 El. c. 6. which says, That every
Conviction for not coming to Church shall be in the Kings Bench, or at the
Assizes, or general Jail-deliver, and not elsewhere: for the Statute of 3 Jac.
cap. 4. has given power to Justices of Peace in their general or quarter
Sessions, to enquire, hear and determine of all Offenses for not coming to
Church according to former Laws, in such manner as the Justices of Assize and
Gaol delivery might do by former Laws in the Case of Recusancy for not
repairing to Church, which is clearly a reviver of the Power of Justices of
Peace given to them by this Statute to proceed against Recusants, and taken
from them by 29 Eliz. nor does that following Clause in 3 Jac. touching
Conviction by Proclamation, impeach this, or restrain the Justices of Peace to
proceed to Conviction upon Proclamation only, and default of appearance, no
more than the Justices of Assize or Gaol delivery are restrained thereby, or by
29 Eliz. which gives them likewise Authority to proceed by Proclamation: For
both these Clauses of 3 Jac. are in the Affirmative, ( viz. First, That the
Justices of Peace shall have power to hear and determine the Offense of not
coming to Church according to former Laws, in such manner as Justices of Assize
and Gaol delivery might do; And those Justices might hear and determine that
Offense according to this Statute of 23 Eliz. 23 Eliz. 1.
And then comes the next Clause of 3 Jac. That the Justices of Peace shall have
power to convict by Proclamation, which is purely Affirmative also; and
therefore abrogates no part of the power given them by the former Clause. And
this agrees with what Sir Edward Coke says, lib. 12. fol. 13. That if a man be
Indicted for Recusancy at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, the Court may
waive the proceedings by Proclamation upon the Statute of 3 Jac. 4. and may
still if they please proceed against the party by Process upon this Statute of
23 Eliz. Upon this Stature.
In which Case the Process must be by Venire facias, capias, etc. as in
Indictments of Trespass, And if (says he) the party be fugitive in another
County, the Indictment may be removed into the Kings Bench, and then Process
may be there made out against him into any County of England.

In their open Quarter Sessions of Peace. What is meant by Quarter Sessions.
] By Quarter Sessions is intended here only the Sessions of the Peace held at
four times of the year, and not any other, although it be a general Sessions.
And therefore the Justices of Peace in London, who hold a Sessions every month,
cannot take Indictments upon this Statute at any of them, unless it be the
Quarter Sessions: For that their Authority is given them only at a certain
time, as was resolved in the like Case upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. of
Perjury, Mich. 17 Jac. B.R. Palmer 44. Tailors Case; Stat. 5 Eliz 9. 3 Jac. 4.
And the Statute of 3 Jac. c. 4. which gives Justices of Peace Power to take
Indictments of Recusancy at their General or Quarter Sessions, (for so the
word, said, there imports, having reference to the General or Quarter Sessions
mentioned before about Presentiments) yet does not enlarge the Power of the
Justices of Peace in this particular, nor enable them to take such Indictments
at any Sessions, but their four Quarter Sessions: For although it be put there
dis-junctively, General or Quarter, yet the latter word is but Explicative of
the former, and shows what General Sessions are meant, as appears by the said
Statute of 3 Jac. 4. and that other of 7 Jac. cap. 6. touching the Oath of
Allegiance: 7 Jac. 6.
For in 3 Jac. 4. it is said, That if the party refuse the Oath, he shall be
committed to Goal until the next Assizes, General Quarter Sessions, and General
or Quarter Sessions.
or General or Quarter Sessions. And if he refuse the Oath tendered him by the
Justices of Assize and Goal delivery in their open Assizes, or by the Justices
of Peace in their said general Quarter Sessions, he shall incur a Praemunire.
And in 7 Jac. 6. That the party refusing shall be committed to Goal until the
next Assizes or general Quarter Sessions, and if he refuse the Oath tendered him
by the Justices of Assize and Goal delivery in their open Assizes or Goal
delivery, or the Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them in their
general or Quarter Sessions, he shall incur a Praemunire: which clearly shows
that the same thing is intended by general Quarter Sessions, and General or
Quarter Sessions; And that all general Sessions which are not Quarter Sessions
are excluded out of the meaning of those Statutes. Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4.
Sect. 11. and 7 Jac. cap. 6. Sect. 5.

Indictments only here intended.
To enquire, hear and determine.] The Justices named in this Branch of the
Statute are hereby empowered to proceed by Indictment only, and no other way:
For they are to hear and determine after Inquiry. And the word (enquire)
implies an Indictment, and is always so to be expounded; And so are the other
words, (hear and determine) where other proceedings are not specially named, as
here they are not: For the Action of Debt, Information, etc. in any Court of
Record, is given to the Informer Qui tam, etc. afterward in a distinct Branch
by it self, without any reference to this: so that by this Statute, and before
that of 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 35 Eliz. 1
which gave the Queen an Action of Debt, etc. The Queen had no other remedy to
recover the entire forfeitures given hereby, but by Indictment only. Co. 11.
60. and Rolls 1. 93. C. 41. Dr. Fosters Case, Vide Jones 193. For that and the
Suit by the Common Informer are the only ways appointed by this Statute, and
the subsequent Clause of Submission which names the Justices before whom the
party is to submit, viz. the Justices before whom he is Indicted, Arraigned or
Tried, shows what proceedings are meant, which are to be had before the
Justices here named, that is, by Indictment, Hobart 205. Pie versus Lovell.

Offense and Penalty, by two several Statutes.
Talbot and Shelden were Indicted for Recusancy, Contra formam Statuti 23 Eliz.
in which Indictment the penalty was demanded; and in a Writ of Error the
Judgment was reversed: For the Offense is made by the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap.
2. Stat. 1 Eliz. 2
and the penalty is given by this Statute, and therefore it should have been
Contra formam Statutorum, Owen. 135. Wests Case.

Feme Covert when chargeable.
If a Feme Covert be Indicted at the Kings Suit for an offense within this Act,
she may be charged with the penalty after her Husbands death, but the Husband
is not chargeable nor shall pay the penalty, for that he is no party to the
Judgment: And this was one of the causes of making the Statute of 35 Eliz. cap.
1. Stat. 35 Eliz. 1
By which Statute the King may have an Action of debt and recover the
forfeiture against the Husband, Rolls 1. 93. 94. Roy versus Foster, Savile 25
C. 59.

Except Treason and misprision of Treason.] This exception of Treason and
misprision of Treason extends not to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or of
Assize and Goal delivery, as Wingate has mistaken in his Abridgment of this
Clause, tit. Crown numb. 46. Where the Justices of Peace cannot meddle
but only to the Justices of Peace, who are not to meddle in those two Cases,
but the other Justices may.

Stat. Sect. 8.
Provided always, That every person guilty of any offense against this Statute,
other then Treason and misprision of Treason, which shall before he be thereof.
Indicted, or at his Arraignment or Trial, before Judgment, A remedy for a
guilty person conforming himself.
submit and conform himself before the Bishop of the Diocese where he shall be
resident, or before the Justices where he shall be Indicted, Arraigned or
Tried, (having not before made like submission at any his Trial, being Indicted
for his first like offense) shall upon his Recognition of such submission in
open Assizes or Sessions of the County where such person shall be resident, be
discharged of all and every the said Offenses against this Act (except Treason
and misprision of Treason) and of all pains and forfeitures for the same.

Before Judgment submit and conform himself. Conformity after judgment saves
the penalty. Stat. 1 Jac. 4.
] But now by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 4. if the Recusant conforms after
Judgment, it seems it shall be time enough to save the forfeiture. Vide that
Statute, Sect. 2.

A man is convicted of Recusancy according to the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6.
upon Proclamation and default of appearance, 29 Eliz. 6.
and afterward submits and conforms; he shall by force of this Clause be
discharged of the forfeiture of Twenty pounds per month; for this is a
submission and conformity before Judgment, Conviction upon Proclamation, no
Judgment.
the conviction upon Proclamation being no Judgment, but only in nature of a
conviction by Verdict, as was resolved by all the Judges, Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz.
vide Dr. Fosters Case, Rolls 1. 94 C. 41.

Certain persons Indicted upon this Statute for not coming to Church were
Outlawed upon the Indictment; Submission after Outlawry.
the Court of King's Bench would not in this Case receive their submission, but
advised them to purchase their pardon for the Outlawry, which they did, and
then their submission was accepted of, and they were discharged, Leonard 4. 54.
n. 138. Note, in the Report of this Case the Statute of 13 Eliz. is mistaken
for this of 23 Eliz. for no Indictment for not coming to Church lies on 13.
Stat. 13 Eliz. 2


Before the Bishop of the Diocese. Conformity where and how to be pleaded.
] If a man be Indicted for Recusancy before Justices of Pcace, and he submits
and conforms before the Bishop of the Diocese, he may remove the Indictment by
Certiorari into the King's Bench, and there plead his conformity by Certificate
under the Bishops Hand and Seal. Vide Styles 26.

For the manner of a Recusants submission and conformity before the Bishop
after conviction, Submission and Certificate.
and the Bishops certificate thereupon. Vide Co. lib. intr. 569.

Stat. Sect. 9. Who shall have the money forfeited by this Statute.
And be it likewise Enacted, That all forfeitures of any sums of money limited
by this Act shall be divided in three equal parts, whereof one third part shall
be to the Queens Majesty, to her own use, one other third part to the Queens
Majesty for the relief of the Poor in the Parish where the offense shall be
committed, to be delivered by Warrant of the principal Officers in the Receipt
of the Exchequer, without further Warrant from her Majesty, and the other third
part to such person as will sue for the same in any Court of Record by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information: In which Suit no Essoin, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed: And that every person which shall forfeit any
sums of money by virtue of this Act, He shall be imprisoned that is not able or
does not pay the forfeiture.
and shall not be able, or shall fail to pay the same within three months after
Judgment thereof given, shall be committed to Prison, there to remain until he
have paid the said sums, or conform himself to go to Church, and there do as is
aforesaid.

Distribution of the penalties.
All forfeitures of any sums of money limited by this Act.] So that the
distribution here appointed extends not only to the forfeitures of Two hundred
and One hundred Marks, for saying or hearing Mass, and the Ten pounds a month
for keeping a Schoolmaster contrary to this Act, but likewise to the Twenty
pounds per month for not repairing to Church: In which last Case the Informer,
Qui tam, etc. shall have the third part, as well as in the other Cases: For
although by the foregoing clause, the whole Twenty pounds per month is given to
the Queen (which the other forfeitures are not in express words) yet that will
not alter the Case nor make void the express appointment made here, in what
manner and to whom all the forfeitures limited by this Act shall be disposed
of. And it is usual in Acts of Parliament to give the whole penalty for any
criminal matter to the King, and afterward in the same Act to make
distribution thereof, and give part to him that will sue; as in the Statutes of
3 H. 6. Stat. 3 H. 6. 3. 3 H. 7. 7.
cap. 3. and 3 H. 7. cap. 7. and others. And the subsequent distribution shall
always stand good, notwithstanding the precedent words of limitation of the
whole to the King: For those words in penal Statutes (To the King or to the
Queen) are upon the matter but void and superfluous, and give the King or Queen
no other or stricter Interest then they would have had if they had been
omitted, and it had been only said (shall forfeit) without appointing to whom.
And the reason is, for that the Law devolves the forfeiture upon the King,
where no other person is appointed, and (shall forfeit) without more saying, is
as much as shall forfeit to the King. But when afterward in the same Statute a
particular appointment is made how the penalty shall be distributed, that
qualifies the former general words, and such distribution shall be made as the
Statute appoints. Co. 11. 60. and Rolls 1. 89. 90. C. 41. Dr. Fosters Case,
Anderson 1. 139. 140. C. 190. Cuff against Vachell. Vide supra Sect. 5.

For relief of the Poor in the Parish.] Scot was Indicted upon this Statute for
Recusancy, Anno 26 Eliz. by the name of William Scot of Southwark Gent. and
exception was taken to the Indictment, for that within Southwark are several
Parishes, and the third part of the penalty is to be applied to the relief of
the Poor of the Parish, where the offense was committed. But in this Case, the
Recusant being named generally of Southwark, non potest constare Curiae, where
the Offense was, nor to what Parish the third part of the penalty belongs. But
the whole Court of King's Bench were clear of Opinion, The Parish need not be
mentioned.
that the Indictment was good enough, notwithstanding it is not said of what
Parish the Recusant was: For the whole penalty of Twenty pounds per month is at
first given to the Queen: and the Inhabitants of the Parish where the Offense
was are to Sue in the Exchequer for their third part, The Parish must Sue for
their third part in the Exchequer.
and surmise in their Bill that the Offense was in their Parish, and if it were
so, it shall be delivered to them as the Act directs. Leonard 2. 167. C. 204.

The principal Officers in the Receipt of Exchequer. Principal Officers of the
Exchequer.
] The principal Officers of the Court of Exchequer are the Treasurer and
Barons, but the principal Officers of the Receipt of the Exchequer are the
Treasurer and Chamberlains. Savile 38. C. 87.

To such person as will sue for the same. Rules and Cases touching the common
Informer.
] This Branch of the Statute being the Axis upon which all popular Suits for
Recusancy by the common Informer turn and move, I shall be the larger
thereupon, and shall here set down the several Rules, Cases and Resolutions in
our Books which concern the common Informer or Plaintiff qui tam, etc. as far
as they are applicable to the Case of Recusancy, or the other Cases within this
Statute.

Upon a penal Statute where part af the forfeiture is given to the King, and
part to him that will Sue; Tam pro Domino Rege, etc. material.
the Informer or Plaintiff qui tam, etc. sequitur tam pro Domino Rege, quam pro
seipso, and so it must be said in the Information or Declaration, and not only
there, but in the joining of Issue, and the Venire facias, it must be entered,
qui tam pro Domino Rege, etc. or the omission of it is Error. Cro. Mich. 9 Car.
336.

In an Information upon this Statute, the usual way is, The particular Statute
must be named
that the Informer for himself petit inde tertiam partem, juxta formam,
Statut'. Vide Co. 11. 56. Dr. Fosters Case. But then the Statute must be named,
for in an Information by Broughton, Qui tam, etc. against Moore, for forbearing
to come to Church, contra formam Statuti, without naming which Statute, in
which Case the Informer demanded the third part for himself; it was adjudged by
the Court of King's Bench to be ill: For there are several Statutes against
Recusancy, and it did not appear which of them was meant. Cro. Mich. 4 Jac. 142.

Judgment of a Moiety to the King, and a Moiety to the Informer, where good.
But if this Statute be named in certain, and the party who sues demands the
whole forfeiture for the King and himself, and Judgment be given that the King
recover one moiety, and the Informer or Plaintiff Qui tam, etc. the other
moiety, in that case the Judgment is well enough: For the Information or
Declaration being, Quod actio accrevit Domino Regi and praefat. A. ad habend'
and exigend' the full forfeiture, the Judgment does not vary therefrom, when it
says, that a moiety shall be to the King, and a moiety to the Plaintiff or
Informer; And although the Statute says, That he which will sue shall have but
a third part, yet that is by way of distribution only. And such distribution of
the penalty is an Act subsequent to the Judgment, and is to be made as well out
of the moiety given by the Judgment to the Informer or Plaintiff, Qui tam, etc.
as out of the moiety given thereby to the King. And this I conceive to be the
reason of the resolution in Chambers Case, where such a Judgment in the Case of
Recusancy upon this Statute was allowed to be good, Rolls 2. 437.

The Informers demand must be certain.
But if the whole forfeiture be not demanded in certain, there, although the
party who sues demands his own share, it is ill; And so it was adjudged in an
Information upon a poenal Statute, which concluded, Vnde petit advisamentum
Curiae, and quod forisfaciat 5 l. pro qualibet offens. unde ipse petit
medietatem. For the Informer does not make his demand certain, but leaves it to
the Court or Jury to cast up the sum it amounts to. Hobart 245. Pie versus
Westly.

Where Contra formam Statuti, and where Statutorum.
If there be several Statutes, and each of them prohibit one and the same thing,
and inflict a penalty, and give an Information for recovery of it, the
Information may conclude contra formam Statuti, and good; because the best
shall be taken for the King. 5 H. 7. 17. So if one Statute make the Offense,
and another inflicts the penalty or forfeiture, and the Information be for the
Offense only, it may conclude contra formam Statuti, which is to be understood
of that Statute which makes the Offense. But if the Information both lay down
the Offense, and demand the penalty, there both Statutes must be recited, or at
least the Information must conclude contra formam Statutorum: Owen 135. Wests
Case, Vide supra Sect. 7.

In the late Additions to Dalton cap. 191. tit. Informations, Informations
within which Statute of Jeofailes. St. 32 H. 8. 30. 18 Eliz. 14. 21 Jac. 13.
Sect. 6. its said, That Informations and Suits on penal Statutes are stricti
juris, and excepted out of all the Statutes of Jeofailes; which is a mistake:
For they are not excepted out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 30. It Is true,
they are out of the Statutes of 18 Eliz. cap. 14. and 21 Jac. cap. 13. and that
as it seems in all Cases within those two Statutes: Vide Styles 307. Theoballs
against Newton. And in the Case of Scott versus Laws, Hobart 328. it seems to
be intimated that they are excluded out of all three, where the Case was, that
in an Action of Debt brought by an Informer, Qui tam, etc. upon a penal Statute
the Defendant pleads non debet praefato J. meaning the Informer, and not the
King; and the issue was found against the Defendant. In that Case it was
resolved that this was a good Cause to stay Judgment, and there it is said, that
it being upon a penal Statute, the Statute of Jeofailes would not help it; But
that reason was ex abundanti, (it being an incurable fault not aided by any
Statute of Jeofailes, in any sort of Action) and under favor might well have
been spared: For the Statute of 32 H. 8. seems to extend to all popular Suits
whatsoever; and in Wallers Case in an Information brought against him, 18 Eliz.
by Topcliffe, Qui tam pro Domina Regina quam pro seipso, etc. upon the Statute
of 37 H. 8. cap. 9. of Usury, it was adjudged, 37 H. 8.9.
that the mis-conveying of Process, and mis-joyning of issue in the said
Information, were aided by 32 H. 8. Dyer 346, 347.

By the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. an Informer Qui tam, 31 Eliz. 5.
etc. must begin his Suit within one year after the Offense committed, The
Informer must sue within the year.
otherwise he shall not have any part of the penalty, Godbolt 158. C. 216. Cro.
Hill. 12 Jac. 366. Sivedale versus Sir Edward Lenthall: But popular Suits upon
the Statute of Tillage are excepted, and not upon the Statute of Tallage, as
it is mistaken in the late Additions to Dalton, cap. 191. tit. Informations,
Sect. 3.

In Dr. Fosters Case, Co. 11.65. it is said. That the Informer has no Remedy
for recovery of the forfeiture for Recusancy, after the year and day is
expired, for that time is limited in certain by this Act; But yet with
submission it seems the Clause in this Act which limits to a year and a day,
And has not a year and a day.
relates to Indictments only: And so it was held in this very Case of Dr.
Foster, Co. 11. 60. and Rolls 1.93. C. 41. and in Pie and Lovells Case, Hobart
205. and there was no limitation of time for the Informer, Qui tam, etc. upon
this Statute, until the said Statute of 31 Eliz. which limits him to a year
after the Offense committed, and not a year and a day. And although this
Offense of Recusancy cannot in strictness be said to be committed, for that in
truth it is but a bare omission as has been said, and therefore there needs
not be any place alleged, yet in common parlance it will pass well enough for
an Offense committed, To what intent Recusancy may be said to be committed.
and seems to be within the meaning of that Branch of 31 Eliz. which limits the
time of prosecution: And in this very Clause of the Statute of 23 Eliz. it is
said, the third part of the forfeiture for Recusancy shall be to the Poor in
the Parish where the Offense is committed. Now if it be objected, That if
Recusancy be not an Offense which is to be laid in the proper County by that
Statute of 31 Eliz. because it is not an Offense which can be properly said to
be committed; By the same reason the Informer who is restrained by that Statute
to a year after the Offense committed, is not restrained in the Case of
Recusancy; Nor the Poor of any Parish can take any benefit by this Statute as
to the third part of the forfeiture, for that there is no Parish wherein
Recusancy can be said to be committed: I answer, there is a great difference
between those Cases: For in the Cases of limitation of time when the Offense
must be prosecuted, and that of the Poor of the Parish, where the forfeiture is
to be distributed, the word (committed) is no part of the substance of the
matter, and it is no more then if the Statutes had said, within a year after the
Offense, and to the Parish where the Offense was; And there (committed) may be
taken well in that sense; And to what intent, not.
but it cannot be so in that other Case about the proper County: For the
Statute of 31 Eliz. which appoints, that in any Declaration or Information the
Offense against any penal Statute shall not be laid to be done in any other
County but where the matter alleged to be the Offense, was in truth done, and
the Defendant may traverse, and allege that the Offense supposed to be
committed was not committed in such County where the Offense is alleged, etc.
makes the Commission of the Offense matter of substance, and whether it were
committed or not committed in the County where it is laid in the Information or
popular Suit, goes now to the merits of the Cause. For if it were not committed
in that County, and the Defendant allege and traverse it, and it be found for
him, the Plaintiff shall be barred: And those words (that he may traverse that
it was not committed) clearly show, that Offenses which consist only in
omission, were not intended: For otherwise neither Recusancy, nor any other
Offense of that nature could be punished by any Information or popular Action:
For the Jury upon their Oaths must of necessity find that it was not committed
in any County, for that in truth and propriety of speech it was not committed
at all. Vide supra Sect. 5.

Suit by the King within what time. Stat. 31 Eliz 5.
By the said Statute of 31 Eliz. if the Informer Qui tam, etc. does not
prosecute within a year after the Offense, yet the King may at any time within
two years after that year ended: And therefore it was resolved in the Case of
Syvedale and Sir Edward Lenthall before recited, where an Information was
brought in the Court of Exchequer, Tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso upon the
Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. 3 Jac. 4.
for three years forbearance to receive the Sacrament after Conformity, that
although it was not good for the Informer, yet it was well enough as to the
King. Cro. Jac. 366.

A natural born Subject, or a Denizen being Defendant in any Suit upon a penal
Law in the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Special Bail.
or Exchequer, is not compellable to put in special Bail, but may appear by
Attorney. Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 5.31 Eliz. cap. 10. St. 29 Eliz. 5 31 Eliz. 10.
Yelverton 53. St. Georges Case.

An Action of Debt or Information Tam pro Domino Rege quam etc. lies upon this
Statute against the Husband and Wife for the Recusancy of the Wife, Baron and
Feme
and the Husband in that Case is liable to pay the 20 l. per month,
notwithstanding he himself be no Recusant, Bulstrode 3. 87. The King against
Law, Rolls 1. 93. C. 41. Dr. Fosters Case, Hobart 97. Moore versus Hussy,
Savile 25. C. 59.

But the Wife cannot appear by Supersedeas alone without her Husband, for both
must appear or both be outlawed, Hobart 179. Lovedens Case.

Nor can she plead or join issue without her Husband, Must both plead.
Rolls 2. 90. Sir George Curson and his Wives Case; And therefore where in an
Information brought against the Husband and Wife for the Recusancy of the Wife,
the Record was entered, and praedict. J. and M. veniunt, and praedicta M. dicit
quod ipsa non est inde culpabilis, and de hoc ponit se super Patriam: this was
adjudged to be ill, for the Husband pleads not at all; But in this Case the
Dockett being Quod J. C. and M. uxor ejus, etc. placitant non culp: and it
being manifest that they both appeared, Record amended.
the Record was amended by the Dockett after Verdict: For it was but the
misprision of the Clerk in drawing the Plea, Cro. Pasch. 17 Jac. 530. Parker
versus Sir John Curson and his Wife, which is the same Case with that in
Rolls, only the Christian name of the Husband varies.

At the end of the Report of this Case in Croke there is a subsequent note
added, that if Sir John Curson and his Wife had pleaded Quod ipsi non sunt
culpabiles, it had been ill. But yet it seems that the Law is contrary to that
Opinion, Non sunt cuipabiles, where good.
for where an Action or Information is brought against the Husband and Wife for
an offense or wrong done by the Wife, there the Husband is charged quoad
poenam, though not quoad culpam; and when they both plead, quod ipsi non sunt
culpabiles, the meaning is that he is not chargeable quoad poenam, and she is
not guilty quoad culpam, and therefore it was resolved in the Case of Brown
against Audley and his Wife, Trin. 22 Jac. in an Action upon the Case for
scandalous words by the Wife, that where they both pleaded non culp. and the
Jury found the Feme guilty, the Plaintiff should have Judgment: For the issue
was good for the reason aforesaid, and the finding of the Jury was a good
ground for the Judgment; for if the Wife were guilty, quoad culpam, as the
Verdict must necessarily be understood, she being the wrong doer, the Husband
by consequence was chargeable, quoad poenam, and Judgment shall be against
both: Addition to Bendloes 148. and the Resolution in the Case of Needler
versus Symnell and his Wife, reported by Justice Croke, Cro. Mich. 11. Car.
417. in the like Action brought for words spoken by the Wife, is directly
contrary to that opinion at the end of Sir John Cursons Case: For there it is
adjudged, that ipsi non sunt culpabiles, by Baron and Feme is a good issue,
although the wrong were by the Wife alone.

Writ of Error by an Alien.
An Information of Recusancy lies against an Alien upon this Statute, if he
inhabits within the Realm, and if Judgment be had against him, he may have a
Writ of Error to relieve himself, Co. 1. Inst. 129.

Popular Suit appropriated
When once the Informer, Qui tam, etc. has commenced his Suit, he has of a
popular Action made it his own private Action, Co. 65. Dr. Fosters Case,
Vaughan 343. Thomas versus Sorrel. And in this Case it is not necessary that
the Defendant be served with Process to answer it, Without Process.
for if the Informer put his Information into Court, it is enough to appropriate
to him his share of the penalty, Godbolt 158. C. 216. But yet a Note ought
first to be made of the day, month and year, when it was exhibited; for before,
Stat. 18 Eliz. 5.
by the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. it is not to be taken to be of Record, nor
shall operate any thing either in appropriating the penalty, or barring any
other Informer, but when that is done, no other Informer can Sue for the same
Offense; and it is a good Plea in Bar Bar.
of the second Information for the Defendant to say, that there is another
Information depending against him for the same Offense: For as soon as the
first Information is delivered in and entered upon Record, according to the said
Statute of 18 Eliz. it shall be said to be depending, Popular Suit when
depending.
although it be not alleged that any Writ or Process is Sued out against the
Defendant thereupon. Cro. Mich. 33 and 34 Eliz. 261. the Queen versus Harris,
Styles 417, Hobart 209. Parry versus Paris, Palmer 40. Webbs Case, Terms de la
Ley 7. Action Popular.

Two Informations for the same offense. Bar.
The Defendant in an Information pleads, that heretofore another Information was
exhibited against him such a day in another Court for the same Offense, but
mistakes and names in his Plea a wrong day, and not that wherein the first
Information was exhibited. The Plaintiff replies, null tiel Record; yet if it
appears that in truth the Information pleaded in Bar, was exhibited before the
other, which is the substance of the matter, this misprision shall not vitiate
the Defendants Plea in Bar, but Judgment shall be for the Defendant. Hobart
209. Parry versus Paris. Note, this Case is cited in the late Additions to
Dalton, cap. 191. tit. Informations, Sect. 6. to prove that one person cannot
exhibit two Informations in the same or in several Courts. But that was not the
Question there, nor I think ever was made a Question, but that the same person
may exhibit two several Informations, so they be not both for one and the same
Offense.

An Information was exhibited in the King's Bench upon the Statute of 5 E. 6.
cap. 7. for buying of Wools. Stat. 5 E. 6. 7.
The Defendant pleads that there is another Information depending against him
in the Common-Bench at the Suit of L. and avers that they are both for the same
Offense: but in truth that in the Common Pleas supposed the Offense to be done
at one time, and that in the King's Bench at another time, yet this is a good
Plea in Bar Bar.
of the latter Information, being with an Averment that they are both for the
same Offense: for otherwise by the Informers false supposal of the day the
Defendant shall be put to double trouble. Cro. Mich. 33 and 34 Eliz. 261. The
Queen versus Harris.

And the same advantage no question any man may take, against whom two
Informations are exhibited upon this Statute for hearing of Mass: Mass.
for perchance he never heard Mass above once in his life time, and there is no
reason he should be put to double trouble for one offense.

But otherwise it seems to be in the Case of Recusancy: The absence from Church
must be for a month.
For if an Information be brought upon this Statute for not coming to Church
for a month, there if the Defendant proves that he was at Church any time
within that month, it shall be sufficient to avoid the penalty of Twenty
pounds. And as the Defendants giving in Evidence that he was at Church within
the compass of any other month, then that which is laid in the Information,
shall not excuse him; so the Informers proof of his absence any other month
shall not hurt him, but the Evidence must go to the very same month which the
Information mentions: And the reason is, for that this Offense is punishable
according to the time of its duration or continuance, and the Offender is to
forfeit for every month of his absence; so that if another Information be
exhibited against him for not coming to Church during another month, it cannot
be supposed to be for the same absence with that in the first Information, but
for the like absence at another time, and therefore cannot be pleaded in Bar
thereof.

Two Informations on the same day, etc. Bar.
If two Informers, on one and the same day, exhibit Informations against the
same person for the same Offense, they are both void and may be pleaded the one
in Bar of the other, for that there is no priority to Attach the right of
Action in one of the Informers, more than in the other. Hobart 128. Pie versus
Coke.

Although Sunday Sunday.
be not dies Juridicus, so as to award a Judicial Process or enter a Judgment
of Record on that day, yet an Information may be exhibited in Court on that
day, and good. Jones 156. 157. Bedoe versus Alpe.

Information delivered.
In the Common Pleas an Information may by the course of that Court be brought
in and delivered to one of the Judges there out of Term, No antedate. Stat. 18
Eliz. 5.
and shall be dated then: For the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. forbids all
antedates. Rolls 2.33. Smith versus Carter.

Conviction on Indictment, pending the Information.
An Information is brought by an Informer, Qui tam, etc. upon this Statute for
Recusancy; and pending the Information, the Recusant is convicted at the Kings
Suit upon an Indictment for the same absence; the Question is, what remedy the
Recusant has in this Case that he may not Bis puniri pro uno delicto? And to
this it was Answered by Coke Chief Justice, B. R. in the Case of Dr. Foster,
that he may plead this Conviction, puis le darreine continuance, to discharge
himself of the Information, Rolls 1. 95. C, 41. But, as the Reporter there
well observes, the Informer when he has begun his popular Action, has
appropriated the Action to himself: And if it shall be admitted that the King
can divest him of this Action when he pleases, Action appropriated.
by Indictment at his own Suit, this would prove very mischievous to Informers.
Quaere, therefore how in this Case the Recusant shall defend himself from being
doubly punished for one and the same Offense.

But if the Recusant be once convicted at the Kings Suit, either by Indictment
upon this Statute, or according to the Statutes of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Stat. 29
Eliz. 6 3 Jac. 4.
or 3 Jac. cap. 4. upon Proclamation, the Informer, Qui tam, etc. cannot
afterward charge him, but is barred for ever after: Informer barred.
For the intention of this Statute is, that the Informer may exhibit
Informations against such only as are concealed, or not charged at the Kings
Suit: so that the Informer is neque falcator, neque messor, but spicelegus, a
gleaner. And that in such Cases only where the King does not prosecute, pardon
or release before the Informers Action is commenced. Co. 11. 65. Dr. Fosters
Case, Bridgman 121.122. Parker against Sir John Webb and his Wife. Lane 60.

But whether this Rule be general, and will not admit of an exception in the
Case of a Feme Covert, Feme Covert.
is a Question: for by some Opinions, if a Feme Covert be Indicted and
Convicted of Recusancy, that shall not Bar the Informer of his popular Action
upon this Statute against her and her Husband for the Recusancy of the Wife:
Because upon the Conviction by Indictment, she cannot be compelled to pay the
forfeiture of Twenty pounds per month while her Husband lives, nor can it be
levied of her goods and lands: For that during the Coverture, she has nothing
of her own to forfeit, but all is her Husbands. Vide Bridgman 122. 123. Parker
versus Sir John Webb and his Wife. Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 6.

The Condemnation or Acquittal of the party at the Suit of the Informer, is a
good Bar against the King and all others, Bar.
Co. 11. 66.

Before the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 20. Popular Action by Covin.
it seems that if a popular Action had been brought by Covin, and with the
consent of the Defendant, and the Defendant was for want of Evidence or other
Cause found not guilty, and the Covin appeared to the Court, yet Judgment
should have been given thereupon against the King, and it should have been a
good Bar against all others, 9 E. 4. 4. But now by that Statute of H. 7. Stat.
4 H. 7. 20
If any person sue with good Faith any Action popular, and the Defendant plead
a Recovery in an Action popular in Bar, or that before that time he had barred
the Plaintiff in such Action, the Plaintiff may aver such Recovery or Bar was
by Covin, and upon such Covin found, the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; and the
Defendant so attainted or condemned of Covin, shall have Imprisonment for two
years by process of Capias or Outlawry, as well at the Kings suit as any other,
and the Release of the party shall not avail the Defendant; which Covin may be
averred generally. Vide Wymbishe and Talbois Case, Plowden 49, 50, 54, 55.

If a man bring upon a penal Statute an Action of Debt tam pro Domino Rege quam
pro seipso, Who is to reply in a popular Action of debt.
and the Defendant pleads thereunto, the party Plaintiff may reply without the
Kings Attorney; And in Princes Case in an Action of Debt upon this Statute, the
Defendants demurred, and the Plaintiff qui tam, etc. joined in Demurrer without
the Kings Attorney, and held to be good, Cro. Trin. 1 Car. 10, 11. Lionel
Farringtons Case. But in an Information tam, etc. quam, And who in a popular
Information.
etc. the Kings Attorney ought to reply, Rolls 2.33. Smith versus Carter. And
this difference between an Action of Debt and an Information, was taken in the
aforesaid Case of Farrington versus Arundell, Hutton 82. But yet if in an
Information the Defendant plead a special Plea, and the Kings Attorney will not
reply, and prosecute for the Kings part, the Informer shall be admitted to
reply and prosecute for his part, as was adjudged in the Case of Stretton and
Tailor, Co. 11.65. Dr. Fosters Case, Co. 3. Inst. 194.

Where the King may pardon or release the penalty.
The King before any Information or other popular Suit commenced, may pardon or
release the whole penalty incurred, and it shall be a good Bar against all men,
Co. 11.65, 66. Dr. Fosters Case. Co. 3. Inst. 194, 195. 37 H. 6. 4. 2 R. 3. 12.
Terms de la Ley, 102. Decies tantum, 1 H. 7. 3. And if the Defendant in the
Information do not take advantage of such pardon or release by his Plea, but is
condemned in the Suit, and the Kings share of the penalty be put in the Pipe in
magno rotulo, yet he may then discharge himself thereof upon a Compertum fuit
in magno rotulo, by showing forth the whole matter by way of Plea, and shall
not lose the effect of his pardon or release. Vide Savile 23. C. 56.
Tirringhams Case.

And where not.
But when once the Informer has brought his popular Suit, the King cannot
discharge it, and if he then pardon or release, or his Attorney enter an
ulterius non vult prosequi, this is good for the Kings part only, but is no Bar
quoad the Informer, who may proceed notwithstanding for his part of the
penalty: And therefore neither can the Kings Attorney discharge the Jury when
they come to deliver their Verdict. Hutton 82. Vaughan 343. Thomas versus
Sorrel. Leonard 1.119. C. 161. Stretton and Tailors Case. Cro. Trin. 31 Eliz.
138. the same Case. Ibid. Mich. 39 and 40 Eliz. 583. Hammon versus Griffith, 1
H. 7. 3. Co. 3. Inst. 194.

Such Entry of a non vult prosequi by the Attorney General, has the same
effect with a Nonsuit of a private person; The King cannot be nonsuited.
But the King cannot be said properly to be nonsuited, because he is in
Judgment of Law ever present in Court, Co. 1. Inst. 139.227. Hutton 82.
Goldsborough 53. Leighs Case. Savile 56. C. 119. Wear versus Adamson.

Where upon the demise of the King, the proceedings shall be void.
Upon the death of Queen Elizabeth it was resolved by the Judges, That where an
Information tam pro Domina Regina, quam etc. was brought upon a penal Statute,
and pending the same, and before Judgment the Queen died, the Information it
self should stand, for that otherwise the Suit might be lost, there being a
time limited for the bringing of it, but all the proceedings thereupon were
lost and void, and the Defendant should plead de novo, Cro. Pasch. 1 Jac. 14.
Co. 7. 30, 31. Case Of discontinuance of Process. And to that purpose the Case
of Pasch. 5 E. 6. Rot. 38. is there cited, where in a popular Action the King
died after Demurrer upon the Evidence, and before Judgment, and the Defendant
pleaded de novo.

And where not.
But yet in a popular Action of Debt brought upon this Statute against Prince
and his Wife, where the Defendants demurred upon the Declaration, and the
Plaintiff, Qui tam, etc. joined in Demurrer in Hillary Term, and King James
died the Vacation following. It was resolved, that not only the Writ and
Declaration, but all the other proceedings thereupon should stand,
notwithstanding the Demise of the King: For that in such Case it is merely the
Suit of the party, Stat. 1 E. 6. 7.
and is aided by the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 7. of Discontinuances, and he only
joined in Demurrer: Cro. Trin. 1 Car. 10. 11. Lionell Farringtons Case, Hobart.
82. the same Case.

Which Resolutions are in appearance flatly contrary each to other, for that
upon the death of the Queen seems to take in all popular Suits whatsoever, and
as well a popular Action of Debt as an Information. But yet it is observable,
that in Farringtons Case the Plaintiff only joined in Demurrer, and not the
Kings Attorney: And this seems to be the reason why in that Case the
proceedings should stand notwithstanding the Demise of the King: For where the
party alone joins in Demurrer, or Replies, and not the Kings Attorney, there
the Suit may properly be said to be depending between party and party, and
within the express words of 1 E. 6. which provides, that although the King die,
all proceedings in Suits depending between party and party shall stand: But the
Resolution of the Judges upon the death of the Queen is to be understood of
such Cases where after a Plea or Demurrer by the Defendant, the Attorney
General alone replies or joins in Demurrer, there the proceedings shall be
void, and the Defendant shall plead de novo. But the Information it self shall
stand, to avoid a manifest inconvenience; for that the Informer is limited to a
certain time wherein to exhibit his Information: And so I conceive are these
two Opinions (which seem so contrary) to be reconciled.

An Informer, Qui tam, Nonsuit, release, etc. of the Informer,
etc. may be nonsuited although the King cannot, Co. 1. Inst. 139. Hutton. 82.
Farrington versus Arundell.

If pending the popular Action or Information the Plaintiff, or Informer, Qui
tam, etc. be nonsuited, or release, or enter a nolle prosequi, or dye, none of
these shall Bar the King, but the Attorney General may proceed upon the
Information for the Kings part, Leonard 1. 119. C. 161. Stretton and Tailors
Case. No Bar for the Kings part.
Cro. Trin. 31 Eliz. 138. The same Case, Ibid. Mic. 39 and 40 Eliz. 583. Hammon
versus Griffith. Co. 3. Inst. 194. Moore 541. C. 715. Co. 11.66. Dr. Fosters
Case. Bulstrode 2. 261, 262. Sir Thomas Waller versus Hanger, Rolls 2.33.
Smith versus Carter: And therefore the Opinions in 37 H. 6.5. and 38 H. 6. 2.
That if the Plaintiff in a Decies tantum (which is a popular Action) be
nonsuit, the King is without Remedy but by Indictment; or if such Plaintiff
will relinquish his Suit, the King has nothing further to do, seem not to be
Law at this day.

Information in a wrong Court.
And if a popular Information be brought upon a penal Statute in a wrong Court
where the Informer cannot sue, yet it was held in Agar and Candishes Case, that
the King should not for that lose his advantage of the Suit, but the
Information should be good for his part of the penalty. Moore 564, 565, 566. C.
770.

Stat. 18 Eliz. 5.
By the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. if an Informer or Plaintiff upon a penal
Statute, where any forfeiture is generally limited to him that will sue, shall
delay or discontinue his suit, or be nonsuit, The Informer shall pay costs.
or shall have the trial or matter pass against him by Verdict or Judgment of
Law, he shall pay to the Defendant his Costs, Charges and Damages. Vide
Addition to Bendloes 141. Rhobotham versus Vincent; and if it be upon special
Verdict or Demurrer, those Cases are within the Statute, and he shall pay Costs
by force thereof. Hutton 36. Pies Case.

But not find Sureties.
But an Informer is not compellable to find Sureties to answer Costs; howbeit,
the Court if they see cause, may order him to appear in person, before the
Defendant answer the Information. Bulstrode 2.18. Martin and Gunnystons Case.

It was held in the Exchequer Chamber, That if a Writ of Error Writ of Error.
be brought upon a Judgment given for the King at the Suit of an Informer, a
Scire facias Scire facias.
ought to be awarded against the Informer, Savile 10. C. 26. Wilkes Case.

Courts of Record in penal Statutes, are the four Courts at Westminster.
In any Court of Record.] By any Court of Record is here meant the four
Ordinary Courts of Record at Westminster: For they are the general Courts of
Record, and the Courts where the Kings Attorney may acknowledge or deny; and
the words of this Statute being general, are left to the construction of Law,
where the Rule is verba aequivoca and in dubio posita intelliguntur in digniori
and potentiori sensu. And in this sense shall these words (Court of Record) be
construed in all penal Statutes, where the penalty is to be recovered in a
popular Suit; So that the Informer, Qui tam, etc. cannot sue before Justices of
Assize, Goal delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of Peace, as in
Borough or Corporate Towns, or in a Court of Pipowders, Stannary Courts, etc.
Jones 193.

And such a construction has been made of those words, (Court of Record) upon
several Statutes; Stat. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. 5.
as that of 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. cap. 5. of Woollen Clothes, Co. 6. 19, 20.
Gregory's. Case, 21 H. 8. 13.
Moore 600. C. 827. The same Case. Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Of Non-residence.
Cro. Mich. 4. Car. 146. Green versus Guy. 23 H. 8. 4.
Stat. 23 H. 8. cap. 4. of Brewers. Cro. Trin. 4. Car. 112, 113. Farrington
versus Keymer, Hutton 99. the same Case. Stat. 7 E. 6. cap. 5. 7 E. 6. 5.
of Selling Wine without License, Styles 340. Buckstone against Shurlock. 5
Eliz. 4.
Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 4. of Trades and Apprentices, Cro. Hill. 42 Eliz. 737.
Barnabee versus Goodale. Cro. Trin. 17 Jac. 538. Millers Case. Styles 383.
Hodges Case; the Statutes of Tanning of Leather, Moore 421. C. 581. and diverse
others.

It was held Mich. 6 and 7 Eliz. by all the Justices but three, That where a
Statute appoints a penalty for any Offense made thereby, which was not an
Offense at the Common Law, to be recovered in any of the Queens Courts of
Record by Action of Debt, and no other Court is appointed; The Statute intends
the four ordinary Courts of Record at Westminster, and the offense and penalty
cannot be punished and determined by Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer in
Patriam, Dyer 236. But Dyer makes a Quaere hereupon; and Sir Edward Coke in
Scarlets Case, 10 Jac. lib. 12.98. says, That the Opinion of Catlin, Sanders;
and Whiddon, (which were the three dissenting Justices before mentioned) is at
this day held for good Law; And the Opinion aforesaid of the rest of the
Justices, that any Courts of Record are restrained to the Ordinary Courts of
Record at Westminster is not held for Law. Continual experience (says he)
being against it: For that Justices of Assize, in respect of their Commission
of Oyer and Terminer, have always enquired of Offenses, where the penalty is
appointed to be sued in any Court of Record, as upon the Statutes of 33 H. 8.
9. of unlawful Games. 35 H. 8. 17. of Woods. 5 E. 6. 14. of Forestallers, 33 H.
8. 9. 35 H. 8. 17. 5 E. 6.14.
Ingrossers and Regrators, and other Statutes; But, under favor, although
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer may take Indictments for the doing of that
which is made malum prohibitum by a Statute Law, yet that part of the Opinion
in Dyer which relates to the Action of Debt, and the Courts of Record where
such Action must be brought, is good Law; and where only Courts of Record are
named, such Action cannot be brought in any other Court than the four ordinary
Courts of Record at Westminster, as appears by the several Cases and
Resolutions before recited.

By the Statute of 21 Jac. cap. 4. it is enacted, 21 Jac. 4
That all Offenses to be committed against any penal Statute, for which any
common Informer or Promoter may lawfully ground any popular Action, Bill,
Plaint, Suit, or Information before Justices of Assize, Justices of Nisi prius,
or Goal delivery, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of Peace in their
General or Quarter Sessions shall be prosecuted, tried and determined by way of
Action, Plaint, Bill, Information, or Indictment before the said Justices of
the Counties or Liberties where such offenses shall be committed in any of the
Courts, places of Judicature or liberties aforesaid respectively, and not
elsewhere, save only in the said Counties, or places usual for those Counties,
or any of them; And that in all Informations, Bills, Counts, Plaints and
Declarations in any Action or Suit by or on the behalf of the King or any
other, concerning any Offense committed against any penal Statute, the Offense
shall be laid and alleged to have been committed in the County where such
Offense was in truth committed, and not elsewhere. But this Act shall not
extend to any Information or Suit grounded upon any Law against Popish
Recusants, Suits against Recusants, there excepted.
or such who do not frequent the Church, and hear Divine Service, nor to any
Information or Suit for other Offenses named in the said Statute of 21. but
that such Offenses may be laid or alleged to be in any County at the pleasure
of any Informer.

Sir Edward Coke 3. Inst. 193. and 4 Inst. 174. says, That this Exceptiom of
Recusancy in the said Statute of 21 Jac. does not extend to the Courts, wherein
the Informer is to sue, but only to the County where the Offense is to be laid;
so that notwithstanding that exception, the Kings Bench, Chancery, Common
Pleas, Exchequer, or Exchequer Chamber, cannot receive or hold Plea of any
Information for Recusancy either by the Kings Attorney, or any common Informer,
but the matter shall be heard and determined before Justices of Assize, Nisi
prius, Goal delivery or Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of Peace in their
general Sessions according to this Statute of 21 Jac. But the Informer if it be
for Recusancy, may by force of that Exception lay or allege such Offense in
what County he will: For the said Exception extends only to the County and not
to the Courts where the Informer is to sue; Which Opinion of his touching the
extensiveness of the Exception is probable enough, (viz.) That it shall extend
only to the County, and not to the Courts where the Informer is to sue; for the
latter part of it speaks only of the County. But this is unaptly applied to
popular Informations upon this Statute of 23 Eliz. for Recusancy; for they are
not within the meaning of that Branch of 21 Jac. touching the Courts where the
Informer is to sue. For that part of the Statute which speaks of the Courts, In
what Courts an Informer may sue.
meddles not with Informations upon those penal Laws which give the Informer no
other remedy for recovery of the penalty, but by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint
or Information in the Courts of Record at Westminster, nor does it give the
Justices of Assize, or other Justices there named, any new or further power
than they had before; but only appoints, that where Informations might have
been brought before them, or in the Courts of Westminster at the Election of
the Informer, now they shall be brought before Justices of Assize, Nisi prius,
Goal delivery or Oyer and Terminer, or at the Sessions of the Peace in the
County where the Offense was committed, for the ease of the Subjects who are
Defendants, and not in the Courts at Westminster. Cro. Trin. 4 Car. 112, 113.
But in our Case of Recusancy there is no such Election given the Informer by
this Statute of 23 Eliz. or any other Statute, but he is strictly tied to take
his Remedy by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in one of the Courts
at Westminster, and therefore 21 Jac. extends not to it in that branch touching
the Courts where the Informer is to sue; And as for Sir Edward Cokes Opinion,
that since the said Statute of 21 Jac. the Courts at Westminster cannot receive
or hold Plea of any Information brought by a common Informer, not only common
Experience ever since that Statute is against it, but the Judgments and
Resolutions both of the Kings Bench, Mich. 4 Car. 1. in the Case of Green and
Guy, upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. of Non-residence, Stat. 21 H. 8. 13.
and of the Common Pleas. Trin. 4 Car. 1. in the Case of Farrington and Leymer
upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 4. of Brewers, 23 H. 8. 4.
are directly in point contrary thereunto. Cro. Car. 146. ibid. 112, 113.
Hutton 99. And so is the Opinion of Rolls upon the Statute of 7 E. 6. cap. 5.
7 E. 6. 5.
of Selling Wines without License. Styles 340. Buckstone against Shurlock, and
the Resolution in Jones 193.

And yet although in penal Statutes (any Court of Record) shall be restrained
to the ordinary Courts of Record at Westminster, In what Statutes Courts of
Record may be taken in a large sense.
possibly in other Statutes those words may admit of a larger Construction.
Vide Rolls 1. 51. C. 21. Floyde versus Best.

By Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information. An Informer may sue upon this
Statute by Bill. Stat. 18 Eliz. 5.
] By the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 5. it is Enacted, That none shall be admitted
or received to pursue against any person upon any penal Statute, but by way of
Information or original Action, and not otherwise. Vide, Co. 6. 19, 20.
Gregory's Case, Moore 412. C. 565. and 600. C. 827. the same Case. Cro. Hill.
39 Eliz. 544. Gadley versus Whitecot. And this seems to extend to as well penal
Statutes made afterward, as to those which were in force when the said Act was
made: For it is usual for a later Act of Parliament to be guided by a former, of
which see several Instances in Vernons Case. Co. 4.4.

But then that must be in such Cases where there are not express words in the
later Act to control the former. And therefore although the words of 18 Eliz.
be in the Negative, that the Informer shall not pursue otherwise then by
Information or original Action, yet the Affirmative words of this subsequent
Statute of 23 Eliz. that the Informer may Sue by Bill, has taken away the
force of that Negative in 18, in relation to the Offenses mentioned in 23. And
the prosecutor, Qui tam, etc. upon this Statute may Sue by Bill in the
King's Bench, as well as by Information, which otherwise (had there been no
direct words here to that purpose) he could not do, as it seems by the
resolution given in Woodson and Clarks Case, in a Suit brought by Bill in the
King's Bench, 23 H. 6. 10.
upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10. of Sheriffs, Co. 3. Inst. 194. and in
Vdeson and the Mayor of Nottinghams Case, Moore 248. C. 390. contrary to the
opinion in Styles 381. 382. Hill against Dechair.

Within three months after Judgment thereof given shall be committed to
Prison.] Qui non habet in aere, luet in corpore.

The Judgment shall be absolute.
And yet the Judgment in this Case shall be absolute, that the King and Informer
recover, etc. Anderson 1. 140. C. 190. Vachels Case.

A Feme Covert Feme Covert.
Recusant, if the forfeiture be not paid within the time here limited, may be
imprisoned by force of this Statute, until she pay or conform, Co. 11. 61. Dr.
Fosters Case. Hobart 97. Moore vesus Hussy.

And if she be convicted upon Indictment at the Kings Suit, in which Case the
Husband is not bound to pay the penalty, she ought by the opinion of Manword to
have hard and close Imprisonment, Imprisoned.
and be sequestered from all Company until she conform, or the forfeiture be
paid, Savile 25. C. 59. But if the Husband and Wife be Sued upon this Statute
in a popular Action or Information for the Recusancy of the Wife, Her Husband
chargeable.
and Judgment be had against them, and the forfeiture is not paid within the
three months, the Husband in that Case may be imprisoned likewise. Savile 25.
C. 59.

Stat. Sect. 10. Service in a man's private House.
Provided also, That every person, which usually on the Sunday shall have in
his or her house the Divine Service which is established by the Law of this
Realm, and be thereat himself, or her self usually or most commonly present,
and shall not obstinately refuse to come to Church, and there to do as is
aforesaid; and shall also four times in the year at the least be present at the
Divine Service in the Church of the Parish where he or she shall be resident,
or in some other open Common Church, or such Chapel of ease, shall not incur
any pain or penalty limited by this Act for not repairing to Church.

Stat. Sect. 11. Fraudulent Assurances to defeat forfeitures.
And be it likewise Enacted and Declared, That every Grant, Conveyance, Bond,
Judgment and Execution, had or made since the beginning of this Session of
Parliament, or hereafter to be had or made, of Covinous purpose to defraud any
interest, right or title that may or ought to grow to the Queen, or to any
other person by means of any Conviction or Judgment, by virtue of this Statute,
or of the said Statute of the said thirteenth year, shall be, and be adjudged
to be utterly void against the Queen, and against such as shall Sue for any
part of the said penalties in form aforesaid.

Since the beginning of this Session of Parliament.] And yet a Covenons
Conveyance though made before that Session of Parliament, should not have
defeated the interest, Fraudulent conveyances.
right or title which was given to the Queen by this Statute. And therefore in
the Case or Sir John Southwell who in An. 19 Eliz. conveyed his lands to
certain Feoffees and their heirs in Trust for the maintenance of him and his
Family, marriage of his Daughters, payment of his Debts, etc. and to answer to
him the Surplusage of the mean profits, with a Clause of Revocation; after
which he granted Trees, took fines for Leases, etc. and then came this Statute
upon which he was Indicted and Convicted: It was resolved by all the Judges of
England, that the said Lands were liable to this Statute; and the Jurors
charged to inquire what Lands he had, were committed to the Fleet, and fined
each of them Fifty pounds, for that they would not find those Lands to be his.
Leonard. 3. 147. 148.

By means of any Conviction or Judgment.] Pauncefoot being Indicted of
Recusancy, A (...) Outlaw^^^
made a Deed of Gift of all his Leases and Goods to a great value, colored
over with fained considerations, to defeat the Queen of what might accrue to
her by his recusancy or flight; and then went beyond Sea, and afterward was
outlawed upon the said Indictment; and it was Resolved, 36 Eliz. by the whole
Court of Exchequer, that this was a fraudulent Conveyance within the Statute of
13 Eliz. cap. 5. Stat. 13 Eliz. 5
which was made for the Relief of the Queen, and other persons as well as
Creditors: But as this Case is related in Twines Case. Co. 3. 82. It Is
observable, that although it was debated whether the Queen should avoid this
Conveyance by force of the Statute of 50 E. 3. 50 E. 3. 6.
cap. 6. or that of 3 H. 7. cap. 4. 3 H. 7. 4.
or that of 13 Eliz. before mentioned, yet there is no mention made of this
branch of 23 Eliz. for it is clear, that the Queen could not avoid such a
fraudulent Conveyance by force of this Statute, unless Judgment had been first
given against the Recusant, or he had been convicted: And Pauncefoot was
neither convicted or adjudged to be a Recusant, but the Queens interest accrued
to her by means of the Outlawry only.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 12. Trial of a Peer by his Peers.
That if any Peer of this Realm shall happen to be Indicted of any Offense made
Treason or misprision of Treason by this Act, he shall have his Trial by his
Peers, as in other like Cases is accustomed.

Indictment of Peers by whom.
Although a Peer shall be tried per pares, yet he is to be Indicted by an
Inquest under the Degree of Nobility. And may be Indicted before Commissioners
of Oyer and Terminer, or in the King's Bench, if the Offense be committed in the
County where the King's Bench is. Co. 2. Inst. 49.

Stat. Sect. 13. Ecclesiastical Censures.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to take away or abridge the Authority or Jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Censures for any cause or matter: But that the Archbishops and
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Judges may do and proceed, as before the
making of this Act they lawfully did or might have done: Any thing in this Act
to the Contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. xxvii Eliz. cap. ii. An Act against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such
other like dissobedient persons.
WHereas diverse persons called or professed Jesuits, Stat. Sect 1. The Causes
why Jesuits and Priests do come into this Realm.
Seminary Priests, and other Priests which have been and from time to time are
made in the parts beyond the Seas, by or according to the Order and Rites of
the Romish Church, have of late years comen and been sent, and daily do come
and are sent into this Realm of England, and other the Queens Majesty's
Dominions, of purpose (as it has appeared as well by sundry of their own
examinations and confessions, as by diverse other manifest means and proofs) not
only to withdraw her Highness Subjects from their due obedience to her Majesty,
but also to stir up and move Sedition, Rebellion, and open Hostility within the
same her Highness Realms and Dominions, to the great indangering of the safety
of her most Royal Person, and to the utter ruin, desolation, and overthrow of
the whole Realm, if the same be not the sooner by some good means foreseen and
prevented.

For reformation whereof, be it Ordained, All Jesuits and Priests shall depart
out of this Realm.
Established and Enacted by the Queens most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same Parliament, That all and every Jesuits,
Seminary Priests, and other Priests whatsoever, made or Ordained out of the
Realm of England, or other her Highness Dominions, or within any of her
Majesty's Realms or Dominions, by any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction,
derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea of Rome, since the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist, in the first year of her Highness Reign, shall
within forty days next after the end of this present Session of Parliament,
depart out of this Realm of England, and out of all other her Highness Realms
and Dominions, if the wind, weather and passage shall serve for the same: or
else so soon after the end of the said forty days, as the Wind, Weather, and
passage shall so serve.

Stat. Sect. 2. No Jesuits or Priests shall come into or remain in this Realm.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
lawful to or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or
Religious or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever being born within this Realm, or
any other her Highness Dominions, and heretofore since the said Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist, in the first year of her Majesty's Reign made,
ordained or professed, or hereafter to be made, ordained or professed by any
Authority or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, by or of what name, title, or degree soever the same shall be called or
known; to come into, be or remain in any part of this Realm, or any other her
Highness Dominions after the end of the same forty days, other then in such
special Cases, and upon such special occasions only, and for such time only as
is expressed in this Act: And if he do, that then every such Offense shall be
taken and adjudged to be High Treason, and every person so offending shall for
his Offense be adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit as in
Case of High Treason.

A Priest born within this Realm.
Being born within this Realm, etc.] And this must be comprised in the
Indictment, but it need not be shown in what particular place he was born, but
generally, Quod J. S. natus infra hoc regnum Angliae, etc. Popham 94.
Southwells Case.

A Priest Ordained, etc.
Made, ordained or professed.] And so it must be alleged in the Indictment that
he was made a Jesuit or Priest, etc. by Authority challenged or pretended from
the Sea of Rome; but it need not be shown where he was made a Jesuit or Priest,
etc. whether beyond Sea, or within the Realm: for wheresoever it was, it is
within this Law, if he were made so by the pretended Authority of the Sea of
Rome. Popham 94. Southwells Case.

Stat. Sect. 6. Receiving or relieving a Jesuit or Priest shall be felony
And every person which after the end of the same forty days, and after such
time of departure as is before limited and appointed, shall wittingly and
willingly receive, relieve, comfort, aid or maintain any such Jesuit, Seminary
Priest or other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical person as is
aforesaid, being at liberty, or out of hold, knowing him to be a Jesuit,
Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical
person as is aforesaid, shall also for offense be adjudged a Felon without
benefit of Clergy, and suffer death, lose and forfeit as in Case of one
attainted of Felony.

In the late Additions to Dalton cap. 140. tit. High Treason, Sect. 13. it is
said, That the Clause in this Statute touching those who receive, relieve or
maintain a Jesuit, Receiving or relieving a Jesuit, Priest, etc. at this day is
Felony by this Act.
etc. relates only to such as had before that time taken Orders; which conceit
I suppose is grounded upon those words, (viz. who at the end of the said forty
days, and after such time of departure as aforesaid, shall receive, etc.) as if
no Jesuit or Priest were here intended, but such an one as was then a Jesuit or
Priest, and had forty days given him for his departure, nor no person a Felon
by this Act who receives or relieves any other. But the words here ( viz. such
Jesuit, etc.) seem to be more extensive, and to relate as well to the receivers
or relievers of a Jesuit or Priest in Orders at this day, as to those who were
in Orders at the time of making this Statute. And if we weigh the Grammatical
construction of the words, with much more reason the former then the later: For
the proximum antecedens to (such) is the Jesuit or Priest, who was to be made,
ordained or professed, and not he that was then made, ordained or professed
already. And those words in this Clause of relieving, (viz.) Every person which
after the end of the same forty days, etc. shall receive, etc. that is, forty
days next after the end of that Session of Parliament, may well be construed to
extend to all Cases, as well of receiving or relieving such who should be
afterward in Orders, and should be found within the Realm for the time to
come, at any time after those forty days, as of such who were then in Orders,
and were to depart before the forty days were expired: so that the receiving,
relieving or maintaining of a Jesuit, Popish Priest, or other Popish
Ecclesiastical person at liberty, and known by the party to be such, is Felony
at this day by this Act, and the Offender shall lose the benefit of his Clergy;
and so has the Law been taken upon Actions of the Case for saying the
Plaintiff kept a Seminary Priest or Jesuit in his House, knowing him to be
such. Cro. Pasch. 10 Jac. 300. Smith versus Flynt. Palmer 410. Clerk and
Loggins Case.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 4. They
which be in Seminaries shall after Proclamation return and take the Oath.
If any of her Majesty's Subjects (not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or
other such Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical person as is before
mentioned) now being, or which hereafter shall be of, or brought up in any
College of Jesuits or Seminary already erected or ordained, or hereafter to be
erected or ordained in the parts beyond the Seas, or out of this Realm in any
Foreign parts, shall not within six months next after Proclamation in that
behalf to be made in the City of London under the great Seal of England, return
into this Realm, and thereupon within two days next after such Return, before
the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of Peace of the County where he
shall arrive, submit himself to her Majesty and her Laws, and take the Oath set
forth by Act in the first year of her Reign, That then every such person which
shall otherwise return, come into, or be in this Realm, or any other her
Highness Dominions, for such Offense of returning, or being in this Realm, or
any other her Highness Dominions without submission as aforesaid, shall also
be adjudged a Traitor, and suffer, lose and forfeit as in Case of High Treason.

Persons sent out of this Realm.
Return into this Realm, and thereupon within two days, etc.] By this word
(Return) it seems that none are intended here, but such as were sent out of
this Realm: For others born and resident in some other part of the Kings
Dominions until their entry into such Collledge or Seminary, cannot be properly
said to return hither. The Queens Laws.


And her Laws.] What Laws are here meant, Vide Sect. 7.

Whither a person sent beyond Seas must first return.
Or any other her Highness Dominions.] A Subject of the Kings sent out of
England to a Popish College or Seminary, is commanded by Proclamation made in
London to return into this Realm, and within the six months here limited, first
goes into Ireland and then comes into England, and within two days submits
himself, and takes the Oath of Supremacy; In this Case notwithstanding his
return into England within the six months, he shall be guilty of High Treason:
For after such Proclamation he ought to have come directly into England, and
into no other of the late Queens Dominions before he had been in England, and
if he does, he comes into the said Dominions otherwise then is appointed by
this Act: For the intent of the Act seems to be, That he should not remain in
any of the said Dominions until he submits and takes the Oath; which submission
must be made, and Oath taken in England within two days after his arrival here
and not elsewhere. And although the Oath of Supremacy be in force in Ireland,
yet his taking it there will not serve, nor yet his submission there: For he is
to submit to the King and his Laws, by which are intended the Laws of England
and no other: But a submission in Ireland to the Kings Laws, can be taken to be
of such Laws only as are in force in Ireland. Trial in England, of Treason done
in Ireland.
And in this Case the Offender may be tried here in England, although his
Offense was committed in Ireland, and that by force of the Statute of 35 H. 8.
Stat. 35 H. 8. 2. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 10.
cap. 2. notwithstanding the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. cap. 10. For it
was resolved by all the Judges of England in the Case of Ororke, 33 Eliz. that
Treason committed in Ireland may be tried in England. And the like resolution
was in Sir John Perrots Case. 34 Eliz. Co. 7. 23. Calvin's Case. Co. 1. Inst.
261. Co. 3. Inst. 11. Dyer 13 Eliz. 298. Dr. Stories Case. Anderson 1. 263. C.
269. Ororkes Case.

And if a Subject of England, who is a Peer of Ireland, Trial of Peers.
be sent to any such College or Seminary, and offend as aforesaid, he may be
tried in England by a common Jury, notwithstanding the offense was in Ireland
where he is a Peer; contrary to Dyer, 19 and 20 Eliz. 360. where it is said that
Wray, Dyer and Gerard Attorney General, were of opinion, That a Peer of Ireland
cannot be tried in England for Treason done in Ireland, because he cannot here
have his Trial by his Peers; but this is not Law, and Sir Christopher Wray
protested, he never gave any such opinion but held the contrary. Co. 1. Inst.
261.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 5. Sending
relief to any Jesuit, Priest or other person abiding in a Seminary.
If any person under her Majesty's Subjection or obedience shall at any time
after the end of the said forty days, by way of Exchange, or by any other
shift, way or means whatsoever, wittingly and willingly, either directly or
indirectly, convey, deliver or send, or cause or procure to be conveyed or
delivered to be sent over the Seas, or out of this Realm, or out of any other
her Majesty's Dominions or Territories, into any Foreign parts, or shall
otherwise wittingly and willingly yield, give or contribute any money or other
relief to or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest or such other Priest, Deacon, or
Religious or Ecclesiastical person as is aforesaid; or to or for the
maintenance or relief of any College of Jesuits or Seminary already erected or
ordained, or hereafter to be erected or ordained in any the parts beyond the
Seas, or out of this Realm in any foreign parts, or of any person then being
of or in any the same Colleges or Seminaries, and not returned into this Realm
with submission, as in this Act is expressed, and tontinuing in the same Realm:
That then every such person so offending, for the same offense shall incur the
danger and penalty of Praemunire, mentioned in the Statute of Praemunire made
in the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Convey, Deliver. Conveying or delivering relief to a Jesuit, etc.
] So that he who is barely a Messenger or Instrument to convey or deliver such
money, or other relief, is within the danger of this Law, as well as the sender
or giver.

Then being of or in the same Colleges or Seminaries. To what persons this
extends, to what not.
] This Clause extends not to every person brought up in such College or
Seminary; as Wingate tit. Crown n. 54. mistakes: For if such person afterward
quits his College or Seminary, and has no longer any relation thereunto, but
abides elsewhere beyond the Seas, he who gives or conveys relief or maintenance
to him is not within this branch of the Statute; because the person relieved or
maintained is not then of or in any College or Seminary: And yet perhaps this
may be an offense within the Statute of 3 Car. 1. Stat. 3 Car. 1. 2
cap. 2. quod vide postea.

Stat. Sect. 6. None shall send his Child or other beyond the Seas without
license.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
lawful for any person of or under her Highness obedience, at any time after the
said forty days, during her Majesty's life, (which God long preserve) to send
his or her Child, other person being under his or her Government into any the
parts beyond the Seas, out of her Highness obedience, without the special
License of her Majesty, or of four of her Highness Privy Council, under their
hands in that behalf first had or obtained, (except Merchants, for such only as
they or any of them shall send over the Seas, only for or about his, her or
their Trade of Merchandise, or to serve as Mariners, and not otherwise) upon
pain to forfeit and lose for every such their offense the sum of One hundred
pounds.

Where the Offenses committed against this Act shall be inquired of and
determined.
And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every offense to be
committed or done against the tenor of this Act shall and may be enquired of,
heard and determined, as well in the Court commonly called the King's Bench, in
the County where the same Court shall for the time be; as also in any other
County within this Realm, or any other her Highness Dominions where the offense
is or shall be committed, or where the Offender shall be apprehended and taken.

Transporting of Jesuits, Priests, etc.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and
may be lawful for and to every Owner and Master of any Ship, Bark or Boat, at
any time within the said forty days, or other time before limited for their
departure, to Transport into any the parts beyond the Seas, any such Jesuit,
Seminary Priest or other such Priest aforesaid, so as the same Jesuit, Seminary
Priest, or other Priest aforesaid so to be Transported, do deliver unto the
Mayor or other Chief Officer of the Town, Port or Place where he shall be taken
in to be transported, his Name, and in what Place he received such Order, and
how long he has remained in this Realm, or in any other her Highness Dominions
being under her Obedience. Stat. Sect. 7. A Jesuit or Priest submitting himself
and taking the oath and obeying the Laws.


Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any
wise extend to any such Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon
or Religious or Ecclesiastical person, as is before mentioned, as shall at any
time within the said forty days, or within three days after that he shall
hereafter come into this Realm, or any other her Highness Dominions, submit
himself to some Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, or to some Justice of Peace
within the County where he shall arrive or Land, and do thereupon truly and
sincerely before the same Archbishop, Bishop, or such Justice of Peace take the
said Oath set forth in Anno primo, and by writing under his hand confess and
acknowledge, and from thenceforth continue his due obedience unto her Highness
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, made and provided, or to be made or provided in
Causes of Religion.

Continue his due Obedience. The person submitting must continue his obedience.
] The taking of the Oath by such Jesuit, Priest, or other Ecclesiastical
person, and his acknowledgment of his due obedience does not exempt him from
the danger of this Law; as Wingate mistakes, tit. Crown, numb. 57. but he must
continue his due obedience to the Laws made in Cases of Religion: And this
seems to be clearly the meaning of the makers of this Law, so that if
afterward he show his disobedience to any of those Laws, by forbearing to come
to Church, etc. he may be indicted as a Traitor for coming into the Realm, as
if he had never made any such submission and acknowledgment.

Unto her Highness Laws.] That is, Where King or Queen, includes successors.
the Laws of her and her Successors, and not only those which were made in her
own time, but such likewise as should be made afterward: For in Acts of
Parliament, King or Queen if a Sovereign, includes Successors, unless there be
express words of restraint to that individual person. Plowden 176. Hill versus
Grange. Co. 6. 27. Cases de Soldiers. Co. 12. 109. Co. 1. Inst. 9. 2. Inst.
742. 3. Inst. 6. 4. Inst. 352. And so it is of the Kings Grants, if in his
politic capacity, for there his Successor shall be charged, though the Grant
mention neither Heir or Successor; as was adjudged in the Case of an Annuity
granted to Sir Thomas Wroth during his life. Plowden 457.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 8. Trial of a Peer
If it happen at any time hereafter any Peer of this Realm to be Indicted of
any Offense made Treason, Felony, or Praemunire by this Act, That he shall have
his Trial by his Peers, as in other Cases of Treason, Felony or Praemunire, is
accustomed.

Provided nevertheless, and it is declared by authority aforesaid, That if any
such Jesuit, Seminary Priest or other Priest abovesaid, shall fortune to be so
weak or infirm of Body, that he or they may not pass out of the Realm by the
time herein limited without eminent danger of life, and this understood as well
by the Corporal Oath of the party, as by other good means, unto the Bishop of
the Diocese, and two Justices of Peace of the same County where such person or
persons do dwell or abide: That then, and upon good and sufficient Bond of the
person or persons, with Sureties of the sum of Two hundred pounds at the least,
with condition that he or they shall be of good behavior toward our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, and all her liege people: Then he or they so licensed and doing
as is aforesaid, shall and may remain and be still within this Realm without
any loss or danger to fall on him or them by this Act, for so long time as by
the same Bishop and Justices shall be limited and appointed, so as the same
time of abode exceed not the space of six months at the most: And that no
person or persons shall sustain any loss or incur any danger by this Act, for
the receiving or maintaining of any such person or persons so licensed as is
aforesaid, for and during such time only as such person or persons shall be so
licensed to tarry within this Realm: Any thing contained in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. Sect. 9. One knowing a Jesuit or Priest to remain in the Realm must
discover it to a Justice of Peace or higher Officer.
And be it also further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That every person or
persons being Subject of this Realm, which after the said forty days shall know
and understand that any such Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Priest
abovesaid, shall abide, stay, tarry, or be within this Realm, or other the
Queens Dominions and Countries contrary to the true meaning of this Act, and
shall not discover the same unto some Justice of Peace, or other higher Officer
within twelve days, next after his said knowledge, but willingly conceal his
knowledge therein; that every such Offender shall make Fine and be imprisoned
at the Queens pleasure: And that if such Justice of Peace or other such Officer
to whom such matter shall be so discovered, do not within Eight and twenty days
then next following give Information thereof to some of the Queens Privy
Council, or to the President or Vice President of the Queens Council
established in the North, or in the Marches of Wales for the time being: That
then he or they so offending shall for every such Offense forfeit the sum of
two hundred marks.

And be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such of the Privy
Council, President, or Vice President to whom such Informations shall be made,
shall thereupon deliver a note in writing subscribed with his own Hand to the
party by whom he shall receive such Information, testifying that such
Information was made unto him.

Being Subject of this Realm.] And not any person, as Wingate tit. Crown numb.
59. mistakes.

What is meant by a Subject of this Realm. Subject of this Realm, who.
Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 23.

Unto some Justice of Peace or other higher Officer.] Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap.
2. Sect. 8.

At the Queens pleasure. Fine and imprisonment at the Queens pleasure.
] In this Case the Offender must be proceeded against according to the course
of Law, for he cannot be fined or imprisoned at the Kings pleasure by force of
this Statute before he be Indicted, Convicted and Judgment given against him.
And so were the proceedings against Sir Thomas Figet for going armed, contrary
to the Statute of 2 E. 3. Stat. 2 E. 3. 3
cap. 3. For the Book 24 E. 3. 33. says that he was arraigned, etc. And if in
this Case the Offender be committed to prison in order to his Trial and
conviction, yet before Judgment, or at least before conviction he may be let to
mainprize; and the Fine shall be imposed by the Justices before whom he is
convicted. Justiciarii per eorum discretionem assessent finem and non Dominus
Rex per se in Camera sua, nec aliter coram se nisi per Justiciarios suos: and
haec est voluntas Regis (viz.) per Justiciarios suos and legem suam, unum est
dicere. 2 R. 3. 11. vide Co. 4. Inst. 71. 179.

Note, Sir Robert Brook, in abridging the forementioned Case of Sir Thomas
Figet, says, that he was committed to the Prison of the Marshalsey, and could
not be mainprized until the King had signified his pleasure; but omits the
principal matter worthy of observation (viz.) That he was first arraigned etc.
Bro. Contempts 6.

And be it also Enacted, That all such Oaths, Stat. Sect. 10. All Oaths, Bonds
and submissions to be certified into the Chancery.
Bonds and Submissions as shall be made by force of this Act as aforesaid,
shall be certified into the Chancery by such parties before whom the same shall
be made, within three months after such submission, upon pain to forfeit and
lose for every such Offense One hundred pounds of lawful English money, the
said forfeiture to be to the Queen her Heirs and Successors.

None submitting himself shall come within ten miles of the Queen.
And that if any person so submitttng himself as aforesaid, do at any time
within the space of Ten years after such submission made, come within Ten miles
of such place where her Majesty shall ve, without especial License from her
Majesty in that behalf to be obtained in writing under her Hand: that then and
from thenceforth such person shall take no benefit of his said submission, but
that the same submission shall be void, as if the same had never been.

Stat. xxix Eliz. cap. vi. An Act for the more speedy and due Execution of
certain Branches of the Statute made in the 23d. year of the Queens Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience.
FOr avoiding of all Frauds and Delays heretofore practiced, Stat. Sect. 3.
Certain assurances made by Recusants shall be void against the Queen.
or hereafter to be put in ure to the hindrance of the due and speedy Execution
of the Statute made in the Session of Parliament holden by Prorogation at
Westminster the sixteenth day of January, in the three and twentieth year of
the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, Entitled, An
Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience: Be it
Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That every Feoffment, Gift,
Grant, Conveyance, Alienation, Estate, Lease, Encumbrance and Limitation of use
of, or out of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments whatsoever, had or made at
any time since the beginning of the Queens Majesty's Reign, or at any time
hereafter to be had or made by any person which has not repaired, or shall not
repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, but has
forborne or shall forbear the same contrary to the tenor of the said Statute;
and which is or shall be revocable at the pleasure of such offender, or in any
wise directly or indirectly meant or intended to or for the behoof, relief or
maintenance, or at the disposition of any such offender, or wherewith or
whereby, or in consideration whereof such Offender or his Family shall be
maintained, relieved or kept, shall be deemed and taken to be utterly frustrate
and void, as against the Queens Majesty, for or concerning the levying and
paying of such sums of money as any such person by the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm already made, ought to pay or forfeit for not coming, or repairing to any
Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, or for saying, hearing or
being at any Mass, and shall also be seized and had to and for her Majesty's
use and behoof, as hereafter in this Act is mentioned: Any pretense, color,
feigned consideration or expressing of any use to the contrary notwithstanding.

Stat. Sect. 2. Conviction of Recusancy shall be certified into the Exchequer.
And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Conviction
heretofore recorded for any Offense beforementioned, not already estreated or
certified into the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer, shall from the Justices
before whom the Record of such Conviction shall be remaining, be estreated and
certified into the Queens Majesty's Court of Exchequer, before the end of
Easter Term next coming, in such convenient certainty for the time and other
circumstances, as the Court of Exchequer may thereupon award out Process for
seizure of the Lands and Goods of every such Offender as has not paid their
said forfeitures, according to the Laws and Statutes in such Case provided: In
what Courts Conviction of Recusancy shall be.
And that every Conviction hereafter for any offense before mentioned, shall be
in the Court commonly called the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes or general Goal
delivery, and not elsewhere, and shall from the Justices before whom the Record
of such Conviction shall remain, be estreated and certified into the said Court
of Exchequer, before the end of the Term next ensuing after every such
Conviction, in such convenient certainty as is aforementioned.

Sir Edward Coke in Dr. Fosters Case, lib. 11. 61. says, That by this Clause
(as has been well observed) the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 33 Eliz. 1
In what Courts the Informer, Qui tam, etc. may sue.
is altered in a material point, viz. That whereas by 23. the Informer might
sue the Recusant for the penalty in any Court of Record, he is now by this
Statute of 29. restrained from suing in the Common Pleas or Exchequer. But this
is utterly denied to be Law, as the constant practice and experience ever since
the making of this Statute sufficiently testifies. And the Lord Chief Justice
Hobart in his Report of Pie and Lovells Case says, That that Observation was
made (as he takes it) by Sir Edward Coke himself; But however this passage or
observation (as he calls it) came to be inserted by Sir Edward Coke into his
Report; Sergeant Rolls in his Report of that Case of Dr. Foster lib. 1. 93. C.
41. brings him in speaking in another Language, and more consonant to Law,
(viz.) That the Conviction here mentioned is intended of Convictions upon
Indictments only, and that no other sort of Convictions or proceedings upon the
Statute of 23 Eliz. are mentioned or intended throughout this whole Act of 29.
And if so, then the Informer is not concerned in this Act, nor restrained
thereby as to the Courts wherein he is to sue, but that he may sue still in the
Common Pleas or Exchequer. And so was it resolved in point, in that Case of Pie
and Lovell. Hobart 204, 205. where the Opinion of Sir Edward Coke reported by
Rolls touching what sort of Conviction is meant here, is confirmed and allowed
for Law, (this Statute being made only for the benefit of the Queen in her
Suits by Indictment) and that other Opinion in the 11 Report exploded: And the
true reason is there given, why those negative words (and not elsewhere) were
added here, viz. not to exclude the Informer out of the Common Pleas or
Exchequer, but to restrain Justices of Peace from proceeding to convict any
person upon Indictments for Recusancy, or for saying, hearing or being at Mass,
which they were enabled to do by 23 Eliz. but again disenabled by those
negative words in this Act, and the hearing and determining of those offenses
committed only to the Justices of the Kings Bench, Assizes and general Goal
delivery: But for Informations by a common Informer, they were never intended
here, and the Justices of Assize and Goal delivery cannot hold Plea of such
Informations, as was resolved by the Judges Mich. 4 Car. 1. Jones 193.

And yet this Statute did not wholly abrogate the power of the Justices of
Peace, Justices of P. may take Indictments for some offenses against 23 El. 1
or of any other Justices to whom Authority was given by the Statute of 23
Eliz. in relation to the Offenses of Recusancy, or of saying or hearing Mass,
but that they might after this Statute of 29. take Indictments, notwithstanding
the negative words here: For this Statute restrains them only from proceeding
to Conviction, but not from taking Indictments: as was held in Edward Plowdens
Case, cited in Dr. Fosters Case, Co. 11. 63.

And now by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. And hear and determine the offense of
not coming to Church. Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
The power of Justices of Peace, to hear and determine the Offense of not
coming to Church, is again restored to them: Vide that Statute, Sect. 5.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 3. At what time
the money forfeited for not going to the Church shall be paid.
That every such Offender in not repairing to Divine Service, but forbearing
the same contrary to the said Estatute, as has been heretofore convicted for
such Offense, and has not made submission and been conformable according to
the true meaning of the said Statute, shall without any other Indictment or
Conviction pay into the Receipt of the said Exchequer all such sums of money,
as according to the Rate of twenty pounds for every month sithence the same
Conviction, do yet remain unpaid, in form as hereafter ensues; that is to say,
the one moiety thereof before the end of the next Trinity Term, and the other
moiety thereof before the end of the next Hillary Term, or at any such other
times, as by the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor and Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
or any two of them, shall by composition, upon good Bond and Surety taken, be
limited before the end of the said next Trinity Term, if any such Composition
shall happen to be: And shall also in every Easter and Michaelmas Term, until
such time as the same person do make Submission and be Conformable, according
to the true meaning of the said Statute, pay into the said Receipt of the
Exchequer twenty pounds for every month, which shall incur in all that mean
time.

Stat. Sect. 4.
And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Offender in
not repairing to Divine Service, but forbearing the same contrary to the said
Estatute, as hereafter shall fortune to be thereof once convicted, shall in
such of the Terms of Easter or Michaelmas, as shall be next after such
Conviction, pay into the said Receipt of the Exchequer after the rate of twenty
pounds for every month, which shall be contained in the Indictment whereupon
such Conviction shall be: And shall also for every month after such Conviction,
without any other Indictment or Conviction, pay into the Receipt of the
Exchequer aforesaid at two times in the year, that is to say, in every Easter
Term and Michaelmas Term, as much as then shall remain unpaid, after the rate
of Twenty pounds for every month after such Conviction. The Queen may take all
the Goods and two parts of the Lands and Leases of the Offender who pays not 20
l. a month.
And if default shall be made in any part of any payment aforesaid, contrary to
the form herein before limited, that then and so often the Queens Majesty,
shall and may by Process out of the said Exchequer, take, seize and enjoy all
the Goods, and two parts as well of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Leases and Farms of such Offender, as of all other the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments liable to such seizure, or to the penalties aforesaid by the true
meaning of this Act, leaving the third part only of the same Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms to and for the maintenance and relief of
the same Offender, his Wife, Children and Family.

What Conviction is here meant, and when the penalty is appropriated to the
King.
Once convicted.] This Statute meddles not with any other way of Conviction,
then at the Queens Suit by Indictment, as has been said. And so is the
Conviction here mentioned to be understood: For this Statute is not
introductory of a new Law, nor gave the Queen any new or other remedy then what
she had against the Recusant by the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. that is, by
Indictment, but only gave her a more speedy way of proceeding upon that
fundamental remedy. Co. 11. 60. Dr. Fosters Case. Rolls 1. 93. C. 41. the same
Case; so that a Conviction upon an Information against the Recusant upon 23. or
any other way save by Indictment, does not appropriate the penalty of twenty
pounds per month to the King for the time to come, by force of this Statute.
Hobart 205. Pie and Lovells Case; nor (for the same reason) by force of that 3
Jac. cap. 4. where the same words are used, and a Conviction by Indictment only
intended, as here.

In that Case of Pie and Lovell its said, That if a man at the making of this
Statute, had been convicted of Recusancy by any other means then by Indictment,
he had not been bound by this Law to pay the twenty shillings (It should be
twenty pounds) a month from the Conviction. And if a man be now convicted in
the Kings Bench by Indictment or otherwise, he cannot be proclaimed nor
otherwise his penalty run on; which last words infer, that the Conviction here
intended, is only a Conviction according to this Statute by Proclamation upon
default. But if we compare together this Clause which speaks of a Conviction
after the making of this Statute, and the former Clause which speaks of a
Conviction before this Statute, the contrary will evidently appear: For the
former Clause touching Conviction before this Statute, must necessarily be
intended of Convictions according to 23 Eliz. cap. 1. without any Proclamation:
For the Proclamation in the Case of Recusancy was not given until 29. And if a
man had been convicted of Recusancy upon Indictment in the Kings Bench or
elsewhere before this Act, the forfeiture of 20 l. per month should by force of
this Act have run on from the time of such Conviction, that is clear by the
express words of the former Clause. Then comes this Clause, which provides what
shall be done upon Convictions for the future, and appoints in that Case
likewise the forfeiture of 26 l. per month to run on from the time of
Conviction. Both which Convictions, as well before as after this Statute, are
granted to be meant only of Convictions upon Indictment; And there is no
difference between the penning of these two Clauses, but that one respects the
time past, and the other the time to come, but both appoint the penalty to run
on. Now there is no reason to suppose that the makers of the Law intended the
word (Convicted) in a more restrained sense in this Clause, then in the former
Clause where the penalty should have run on upon any conviction whatsoever upon
Indictment, or that the conviction in the former Clause by Indictment upon 23.
without Proclamation should be wholly shut out of the later Clause. By
(Conviction) therefore in these two Clauses seems to be meant such Convictions
upon Indictment as were warranted by the Statutes in force at the several and
respective times here mentioned: That is, in the former which speaks of the
time foregoing, a Conviction upon 23 Eliz. without Proclamation, and in this
later which speaks of the time to come, a Conviction either with or without a
Proclamation: In either of which Cases the penalty of 20 l. per month shall run
on by force of this Act; and consequently it shall run on, if the Recusant be
Indicted, Convicted and adjudged in the Kings Bench, although he cannot be
proclaimed there. And accordingly it was agreed in Dr. Fosters Case, that where
the Recusant is convicted upon Indictment, the penalty should ever after run
on, and be appropriated to the King, Roiles 1. 93. C. 41. And it is not
restrained there to a Conviction upon Proclamation only.

But yet although this Clause extends as well to a Conviction upon 23 Eliz. as
to a Conviction by Proclamation, yet every Conviction upon 23 Eliz. is not here
intended: For if a man Indicted of Recusancy do upon his Arraignment confess
the Indictment to be true and plead guilty, or upon Trial a Verdict pass
against him, these are Convictions in Law, but yet by these Convictions he
forfeits nothing until Judgment: nor shall the penalty of 20 l. per month run
on, or be appropriated to the King until Judgment be given: By (Convicted)
therefore is here to be understood convicted by Proclamation and Default, or
convicted by Verdict, Confession, etc. and adjudged; for so the word is here to
be taken, viz. for adjudged or attainted, unless it be in Case of Conviction
upon Proclamation: And in such a sense it is to be taken in diverse other Cases.
Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 5.

When the 20 l per month is to be paid.
In such of the Terms of Easter or Michaelmas.] That is, the Term of Easter or
Michaelmas which shall first happen, and not the next Easter and Michaelmas
Terms both: For the Recusant ought to pay the whole penalty for the time
contained in the Indictment, in the very first of those Terms next after his
Conviction. See for this, Stat. 3 Jac. 4. Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
Sect. 6.

From what time the said penalty shall run on. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1. 3 Jac. 4.
For every month after such Conviction.] For what time the penalty of 20 l. per
month shall run on after the Recusant is indicted and convicted, and in what
Cases the Informer, and all others but the King, shall be barred after such
Conviction. Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. antea, and Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect.
6. postea.

Office.
Take, seize and enjoy.] But as to Lands and Tenements, there must first be an
Office found for the King: for regularly before the finding of such Office,
Lands or Tenements cannot be seized into the Kings hands. Co. 2. Inst. 573. Co.
8. 169. Paris Stoughters Case. Bro. tit. Office 17. 55. Plowden 486. Nicholls
Case.

By this Statute the Queen was to have and enjoy two parts of the Recusants
Lands and Hereditaments nomine poenae or districtionis, The two parts not
satisfactory of the twenty pounds per month.
until he had in some other manner satisfied her of the whole forfeiture of the
Twenty pounds per month incurred for his Recusancy: And the profits of those
two parts should not have been accounted to go to the payment of any part of
the said debt or forfeiture: For the Statute inflicted this forfeiture upon
him, merely as a farther penalty for his neglect of payment of the Twenty
pounds per month, as was resolved by the two Chief Justices and Chief Baron,
Trin. 43 Eliz. in Gages Case. Cro. Eliz. 845. 846. and by all the Judges, The
Law now altered in that point.
3 Jac. at Russell House. Jones 24. Standen versus University d'Oxon and
Whitton: But now the Law is altered in this point, by the Statute of 1 Jac.
cap. 4. Vide the Stat. infra, Sect. 4. Stat. 1 Jac. 4


All the goods.] A Recusant is Indicted and Convicted, Recusants goods, when
forfeited.
and then fails of payment of the Twenty pounds per month, yet his goods are
not forfeited to the King by this Statute before seizure: For the King has his
Election whether he will seize them or no. By Coke Chief Justice, B. R. 12.
Jac. Rolls 1. 7. C. 8. Cullom versus Sherman.

A Recusant lends money, Recognizance forfeited.
and for security has a Rentcharge granted him in Fee by Deed indented, with
condition of redemption, and takes likewise a Recognizance for performance of
Covenants in the said Indenture. The Recognizance is forfeited, and afterward
he is Indicted and Convicted of Recusancy, and fails of payment of the Twenty
pounds per month. In this case the King shall have the Recognizance by force of
this Act, for when forfeited to the Recusant, it is but a chattel personal,
What is given to the King by this word, Goods.
and shall pass to the King by this word (goods): For in an Act of Parliament,
where the Offenders goods are given to the King, all debts and personal
Chattels and Actions are thereby given him, as well as goods in possession: And
here in this Act as (take and seize) refer to two parts of the Recusants Lands
and Tenements, so (enjoy) refers to goods: And the King shall enjoy the debt
due by the Recognizance. Nor does it alter the Case, for that the Recognizance
was acknowledged for performance of Covenants in an Indenture concerning a
Rentcharge in fee, which seems to savor of the realty, for it was originally
for the loan and forbearance of money, which is personal. Co. 12. 1. 2. Ford
and Sheldons Case.

If a man who is a Recusant take such a Recognizance in the name of another,
Recognizance taken in another name, forfeited.
the King upon his Conviction shall have the Recognizance; for when the
Recusant was such at the time of taking the Recognizance, and so continued
until the time of his Conviction, it shall be intended that it was done by
Covin, and that he took it in the name of another with an intent to prevent the
King of the levying of the forfeiture: and such Covin shall not bar the King.
Co. 12. 2. 3. the same Case.

The Kings grant.
If a Recognizance or Obligation be forfeited to the King by force of this Act,
he may grant it over as he may any other Chattel in Action, under his private
Seal. Rolls 1. 7. C. 8. Cullom versus Sherman.

Hereditaments Rent, Advowson in gross.
Hereditaments.] A Rent of Inheritance, and an Advowson in gross are
comprehended under this word; But whether the King may seize such an Advowson,
as part of his two parts, and present by virtue thereof since the Stat. of 3
Jac. c. 5. which gives the Presentation to the Universities. Stat. 3 Jac. 5
Vide that Stat. infra, Sect. 19.

All other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, liable to such seizure or to
the penalties aforesaid.] It has been much disputed whether Copyhold Lands are
within this Branch of the Statute: Copyhold Lands, if seizable.
for regularly in Acts of Parliament which are Enacted for forfeiture of Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Copyholds shall not be forfeited, but only Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments which are such at the Common Law, and not those
which are such by custom only as Copyholds are: And it was agreed in Heydons
Case, Co. 3. 8. That where an Act of Parliament alters the service or tenure or
other thing in prejudice of the Lord, there general words in the Act shall not
extend to Copyholds. Vide Savile 67. C. 138. And if the King should seize them
by force of the general words here (viz.) Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
the Lord would during the time they are in the Kings hands, lose his Seigniory,
Customs and Services: But yet it was held by Manwood Chief Baron, and Baron
Clark, in the Case of Sulherd and Everet, Mich. 30 Eliz. That Copyholds are
within this Act, and although Manwood seemed to grant that they are not within
it directly by express words, yet they both conceived they were within the
intent of the Act, by reason (as Manwood said) of these words, all other the
Lands, etc. liable to such seizure or to the penalties aforesaid: But it was
granted on all hands, that by these general words here the King has not any
estate given him in the Recusants Copyhold Lands, but only a right or title to
two thirds of the profits: By the Kings receiving of which the Lord cannot be
impeached of his Customs and Services, as he would be if the King should seize
the Land it self: And a difference was there taken between an Act of Parliament
which transfers an Estate to the King, and an Act of Parliament which gives him
only the profits of the Estate: For in the first Case, the Rule in Heydons
Case, that Copyhold Lands shall not pass by general words, shall stand good for
the prejudice that may otherwise accrue to the Lord: But where the Lords
Seigniory, Customs and Services are not to be Impeached or taken away (as here
they will not by the Kings bare receiving of the profits) there (it was said)
Copyholds shall be included within the general words of Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Leonard 1. 97. C. 126. And yet Vide Owen 37. where this Case is
otherwise reported, and that it was at length after great debate adjudged that
Copyhold Lands are not within this Statute, nor are seizable for the Kings two
parts: And according to this Judgment I take the modern practice of the
Exchequer to have been, that neither the Land it self nor the profits of
Copyhold Lands are liable to such seizure.

And for the more speedy conviction of such Offender, Stat. Sect. 5. The
Indictment sufficient though it be not mentioned that the party is within the
Realm.
in not repairing to Divine Service, but forbearing the same contrary to the
said Estatute. Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Indictment of
every such Offender, mentioning the not coming of such Offender to the Church
of the Parish where such person, at any time before such Indictment, was, or
did keep House or Residence, nor to any other Church, Chapel or usual place of
Common Prayer, shall be sufficient in the Law: And that it shall not be needful
to mention in any such Indictment, that the party Offender was or is inhabiting
within this Realm of England, or any other the Queens Majestis Dominions. But
if it shall happen any such Offender then not to be within this Realm, or other
her Majesty's Dominions, that in such case the party shall be relieved by Plea
to be put in in that behalf, and not otherwise.

And that upon the Indictment of such Offender, Stat. Sect. 6. A Proclamation
that the party Indicted shall render his Body to the Sheriff.
a Proclamation shall be made at the same Assizes or Goal delivery, in which
the Indictment shall be taken (if the same be taken at any Assize or Goal
delivery) by which it shall be commanded, that the body of such Offender shall
de rendered to the Sheriff of the same County, before the said next Assizes or
general Goal delivery to be holden in the same County. And if at the said next
Assizes or Goal delivery, the same Offender so proclaimed shall not make
appearance of Record, that then upon such default Recorded, the same shall be
as sufficient a conviction in Law of the said Offense, whereof the party so
stands Indicted as is aforesaid, as if upon the same Indictment a Trial by
Verdict thereupon had proceeded, and been recorded.

If the same be taken at any Assize or Goal delivery.] For if the Indictment
had been taken before Justices of Peace, Proclamation by whom to be made.
no Proclamation thereupon could have been made upon this Statute by the
Justices of Assize or Goal delivery, as was resolved in the Case of Edward
Plowden: And therefore upon such an Indictment for Recusancy taken before
Justices of Peace, the Court was to remove the Indictment into the King's Bench:
And there process might have been made out against the Recusant, and he
convicted: For the Justices of Peace could do no more then Indict, all other
proceedings being taken away from them by this Statute, Co. 11. 63. Dr. Fosters
Case. Rolls 1. 94. C. 41. the same Case. But now by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap.
4. the Law is altered in this point, Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
and the Justices of Peace upon Indictments taken before them, may proceed to
proclaim and convict the Recusant, as well as Justices of Assize and Goal
delivery.

Shall be rendered to the Sheriff.] Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 5.

Before the said next Assizes or general Gaol delivery.] Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap.
4. Sect. 5.

Appearance.
Make appearance of Record.] What appearance will serve in this Case. Vide
Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 5.

Upon such default.] That is upon his default of appearance of Record at the
next Assizes or Goal delivery: For if he makes such appearance, Default saved.
that shall save his default of not rendering his Body to the Sheriff: and the
not rendering himself to the Sheriff shall be no conviction, as Wingate would
make it to be, Tit. Crown numb. 66.

As sufficient a Conviction in Law.] That is, as if he were convicted by
Verdict, Conviction upon Proclamation no Judgment.
but not as sufficient as if a Judgment were had against the Recusant: For
although by force of this and other Statutes, the conviction upon Proclamation
and default of appearance make the Recusant liable to diverse penalties and
incapacities, and is in those respects as forceable as a Judgment, yet it shall
not in other Cases have the force or effect of a Judgment: And therefore it was
resolved 37 and 38 Eliz. in the Case of the general pardon, Anno 35 Eliz. where
there is an exception of all penalties and forfeitures due to the Queen and
converted to a debt by Judgment, that notwithstanding that exception, a
Recusant convicted upon Proclamation was within the pardon, and the forfeitures
due upon such conviction were thereby pardoned: For the debt was not due to the
Queen by Judgment, but upon conviction only: But otherwise it had been, if he
had been convicted according to the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
without Proclamation, and Judgment had been given thereupon. Vide Co. 11. 65.
Dr. Fosters Case.

Stat. Sect. 7.
Provided always, That whenever any such Offender as is aforesaid, shall make
submission, and become conformable, according to the form limited by the same
Estatute made in the three and twentieth year of the Queens Majesty's Reign,
The Offender submitting or dying, no forfeiture shall ensue or be continued.
or shall fortune to die, that then no forfeiture of twenty pounds for any
month, or seizure of the Lands of the same Offender, from and after such
Submission and Conformity, or Death, and full satisfaction of all the
arrearages of twenty pounds monthly, before such seizure due or payable, shall
ensue or be continued against such Offender, so long as the same person shall
continue in coming to Divine Service, according to the intent of the said
Estatute.

It was resolved by all the Judges Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz. That if a man had been
convicted according to this Statute by Proclamation upon default, and
afterward conformed himself, Where Conformity discharges the penalty.
he should be discharged of the penalty due upon his Conviction,
notwithstanding these words, (and full satisfaction of all the Arrearages:) And
the reason of this given by Coke Chief Justice B. R. in Dr. Fosters Case, is,
for that this Statute says, That such Conviction should be as sufficient as if
there were a Verdict recorded, but it is only a Judgment which converts the
penalty into a Debt, and not a Verdict: And here all penalties are discharged
upon Conformity, unless such as are converted into a Debt. But otherwise it
would have been, if there had been a Judgment against the Recusant upon Trial
or Confession on the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.
For then his Conformity would have come too late to have saved the penalty
incurred by his Conviction: For by the Judgment the penalty was converted into
a Debt. Rolls 1. 94. C. 41.

Quaere tamen, Whether these words here (due and payable) are to be understood,
due and payable upon a Judgment only.

However now by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 4. 1 Jac. 4.
if the Recusant conform either before or after Judgment, he shall be
discharged of all penalties.

But the profits of the Recusants Lands taken before his Conformity, shall
never be restored. Savile 130. C. 201. The profits not to be restored.


It has been questioned upon this Statute, Where the penalty is discharged
upon the death of the Recusant, where not.
if a Recusant convicted by Proclamation upon default had died before seizure
of two parts of his Lands, whether his Lands might have been seized after his
death for the Arrearages of the 20 l. per month; or if they were seized in his
life time, whether they should have been discharged after his death without
payment of such Arrears. And the Opinion of those who held that the seizure
should neither ensue nor continue after his death, but that the Arrears were
discharged, was principally grounded upon the aforesaid construction of this
Statute, viz. that (due and payable) extended only to Arrearages due and
payable upon a Judgment, and converted into a Debt: But when the Recusant was
convicted by Proclamation, the penalty was never converted into a Debt, and
therefore when he died there were no Arrearages due in the sense of this
Statute for the heir to pay; And yet that by (such Offender) here is generally
intended all Recusants convicted, as well by Proclamation upon default as upon
Judgment; and the heirs of either should have had the benefit of this Proviso,
(viz.) That upon the death of the Ancestor no seizure should ensue, or be
continued; only in the Case of a Judgment the Arrears were to have been paid.

But there seems now to be no further need of this Question, for the Statute of
1 Jac. cap. 4. Stat. 1 Jac. 4.
meets with both these Cases: For if there be no seizure of the Recusants Lands
in his life time, the discharge of the heir will depend upon his Conformity;
and if there were a seizure, the two parts shall continue in his Majesty's
possession till the Arrears are paid and satisfied.

Intailed Lands when discharged, and when not.
But this is not intended of intailed Lands: For without any aid of this
Proviso, if a Recusant Tenant in Tail be convicted by Proclamation upon default
and dies, neither any seizure for the Arrears of the 20 l. per month shall
ensue after his death; nor if they were seized in his life time shall the
seizure be continued after his death; nor is the Heir in Tail bound to pay any
such Arrears: But if a Judgment be had against the Recusant Tenant in Tail in
his life time, the Heir is bound in that Case, of which see farther in Stat. 1
Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 4.

If a Judgment was had against the Recusant before the said Statute of 1 Jac.
and he had died before seizure of the two parts of his Lands, The question was,
whether after his death they might have been seized by force of this Statute of
29. for the Arrears of the penalty incurred in his life time: For that the
seizure here given is merely in nature of a nomine poenae, or penalty inflicted
for his contempt in not paying the 20 l per month, and should not have gone in
satisfaction of the Debt; But the Queen should have held the Land till the 20
l. per month were otherwise paid and satisfied; And when this penalty of
seizure was not executed in the Recusants life time, by his death the contempt
was gone, and consequently the penalty inflicted for that contempt could not
then be put in Execution. Vide Lane 92, 93. Beckets Case. Ibid. 107. Halseys
Case.

Stat. 1 Jac. 4.
But now by the Statute of 1 Jac. 4. the seizure is not as a mere penalty for
the contempt of non-payment, but for the satisfying of the King of the Arrears
of the 20 l. per month, and the profits of the Land shall go toward the
payment and satisfaction thereof; so that now there is no question but the two
parts of the Recusants Lands may be seized after his death, Seizure after the
Recusants death.
unless the Heir discharge himself by his Conformity.

Note, Discharge upon Affidavit.
in all these Cases of seizure where the Land is to be discharged upon the
death of the Recusant, although an Affidavit be made of his death, and a
discharge obtained thereupon, yet it is a Rule in the Court of Exchequer,
Commission to enquire.
That a Commission shall be awarded first to enquire. Savile 130. Case 201.

And where by the said former Estatute, Stat. Sect. 8. The third part of the
forfeiture how to be disposed of.
the third part of the forfeitures for not coming to Divine Service is limited
to the Poor: Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Lord Treasurer of England, Chancellor and
Chief Baron of the Exchequer for the time being, or two of them, to assign and
dispose of the full third part of the twenty pounds for every month, paid or to
be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer as is aforesaid, for the relief and
maintenance as well of the Poor, and of the Houses of Correction, as of
impotent and maimed Soldiers, as the same Lord Treasurer, Chancellor and Chief
Baron, or any two of them, shall order or appoint: Any thing in the said
Estatute made in the said three and twentieth year of her Majesty's Reign
mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

This Branch seems not to extend to all forfeitures for Recusancy: For the
power here given the Lord Treasurer, To what cases of Conviction this Clause
extends, and to what not.
etc. is only in relation to those forfeitures which are by this Act appointed
to be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, which are the forfeitures due to
the Queen by Conviction upon Indictment: for this Act meddles with no other; so
that if the twenty pounds per month be recovered in a popular Suit by the
Informer Qui tam, etc. one third part thereof ought still to be paid to the
Poor of the Parish only, according to 23 Eliz. cap. 1. notwithstanding this Act.

Provided always, That this Act, Stat. Sect. 9. Assurances made bona fide not
to be impeached.
or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend or be construed
to make void or impeach any Grant or Lease heretofore to be made bona fide,
without fraud or covin, whereupon any yearly Rent or payment is reserved or
payable, or any Grant or Lease hereafter to be made bona fide without fraud or
covin, whereupon the accustomed yearly Rent or more shall be reserved, or any
other Conveyance, Assurance or Assignment whatsoever heretofore made bona fide,
upon good consideration and without fraud or covin, which is not, or shall not
be revokable at the pleasure of such Offender, otherwise then to give benefit
and title to her Majesty her Heirs and Successors, to have, perceive and enjoy
such Rents and Payments during the continuance of such Lease or Grant,
according to the true meaning of this Act.

Seizure of Lands whereof the Offender has but an Estate for life, or in his
Wives right.
And provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not in
any wise extend or be construed to continue any seizure of any Lands or
Tenements of such Offender in her Majesty's hands, or in the hands of her Heirs
or Successors, after the said Offenders death, which Lands or Tenements he
shall have or be seized of only for term of his life, or in the Right of his
Wife: Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Stat. xxxv Eliz. cap. i. An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in
their due Obedience.
FOR preventing and avoiding of such great inconveniences and perils as might
happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of seditious Sectaries
and disloyal persons. Stat. Sect. 1.
The penalty of a Recusant persuading others to impugn the Queens
Ecclesiastical power
Be it Enacted by the Queens most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That if any person or persons above the age of sixteen
years, which shall obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel or
usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service, established by her
Majesty's Laws and Statutes in that behalf made, and shall forbear to do the
same by the space of a month next after, without any lawful cause, shall at any
time after forty days next after the end of this Session of Parliament, by
Printing, Writing or express words or speeches, advisedly or purposely,
practice or go about to move or persuade any of her Majesty's Subjects, or any
other within her Highness Realms or Dominions to deny, withstand and impugn
her Majesty's Power and Authority in cases Ecclesiastical, united and annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or to that end or purpose shall advisedly
and maliciously move or persuade any other person whatsoever to forbear or
abstain from coming to Church to hear Divine Service, Or to forbear coming to
Church.
or to receive the Communion according to her Majesty's Laws and Statutes
aforesaid, or to come to, or to be present at any unlawful Assemblies,
Conventicles or Meetings, under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion,
Or to be present at unlawful Conventicles.
contrary to her Majesty's said Laws and Statutes. Or if any person or persons
which shall obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel or usual place
of Common Prayer, and shall forbear by the space of a month to hear Divine
Service, as is aforesaid, shall after the said forty days, either of him or
themselves, or by the motion persuasion, inticement or allurement of any other,
willingly join in, or be present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles or
Meetings under color or pretense of any such exercise of Religion, contrary to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as is aforesaid, That then every such
person so offending as aforesaid, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall
be committed to Prison, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until they
shall conform and yield themselves to come to some Church, Chapel or usual
place of Common Prayer, and hear Divine Service, according to her Majesty's
Laws and Statutes aforesaid, and to make such open submission and Declaration
of their said Conformity, as hereafter in this Act is declared and appointed.

Which shall obstinately refuse to repair, etc. shall etc. by Printing, etc.]
Wingate in abridging of this Statute, tit. Crown numb. 70. says, that if any
person above sixteen years of age obstinately refuses to come to Church for a
month, or impugnes the Queens Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, he shall be
committed to Prison, which is a great mistake; for no man shall be punished by
this Act for either of those Causes only: The not coming to Church being only a
precedent Qualification required in the person whom the Act makes liable to the
penalties thereof, for the other offenses therein mentioned: Who may be an
offender within this Act, and who not.
And therefore if a man never comes to Church, yet he is no offender within
this Act, unless he advisedly or purposely move or persuade another to deny or
impugn the Kings Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, or to that end or purpose
advisedly and maliciously move or persuade some other to forbear to come to
Church or receive the Communion, or to be present at Conventicles, etc. or he
himself be present at such Conventicles, etc. And on the other hand, if a man
move or persuade any other to deny or impugn the Kings Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, or to forbear to come to Church or receive the Communion, or to
be present at Conventicles, etc. or if he himself be present at any
Conventicles, etc. yet he is no Offender within this Act, if he goes to Church
once within the compass of a month: so that the party must both forbear to come
to Church, and be guilty of some other of the offenses here enumerated, or he
is not punishable by this Act: And as for the denying or impugning the Kings
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, its no offense within this Statute, unless
the party moves or persuades others so to do, and not then neither, unless he
has been absent from Church by the space of a month. Where this Act extends to
Popish Recusants.


Under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion.] Although this Act is
commonly called the Act against Sectaries, as distinguished from those of the
Romish profession, yet in truth it extends to all Recusants whatsoever, as well
Popish as other, except in the point of abjuration: For the Popish service is
performed under color or pretense of exercise of Religion; and the Assembly or
Meeting of Popish Recusants under such color or pretense, is an Assembly or
Meeting contrary to the Laws and Statutes. And they, as well as others, may be
Indicted upon this Statute, if they forbear to come to Church for the space of
a month, and be present at any part of the Popish service, or move or persuade
ut supra: And may be imprisoned without Bail, until they conform, and make
submission as by this Act is appointed: But they cannot be required to abjure,
unless they offend against the Statute of 35 Eliz. cap. 2. Stat. 35 Eliz. 2
A Popish Recusant is likewise subject to the Action of Debt, etc. given to the
Queen by this Statute.

Being thereof lawfully convicted.] That is, What conviction sufficient
convicted both of his absence from Church, and of that other Offense which
makes him punishable by this Act (viz.) going to Conventicles, or moving or
persuading, etc. for his absence from Church for a month must be laid down
precisely in the Indictment, for without that the other is no Offense within
this Act, as has been said: And it is not necessary that the party be convicted
of such absence upon any Prior Indictment, for although there was never any
former conviction of him for Recusancy, yet if he offend against this Act in
any of the other particulars, he may be convicted both of that Offense, and of
his absence upon one and the same Indictment. And so was the Indictment in the
Case of Lee and others, who were Indicted upon this Statute at the Sessions of
the Peace in Essex, for absenting themselves for a month from Church, and
resorting to Conventicles: To which they pleaded not guilty, and the Indictment
was removed into the King's Bench to be tried there. Cro. Mich. 16 Car. 593.
Trial.


Provided always, Stat. Sect. 2. An Offender not conforming himself abjure
shall the Realm.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such person
or persons which shall offend against this Act as aforesaid, shall not within
three months next after they shall be convicted for their said Offense, conform
themselves to the obedience of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in coming
to the Church to hear Divine Service, and in making such public Confession and
Submission as hereafter in this Act is appointed and expressed, being thereunto
required by the Bishop of the Diocese, or any Justice of the Peace of the
County where the same person shall happen to be, or by the Minister or Curate
of the Parish: That in every such Case, every such Offender being thereunto
warned or required by any Justice of the Peace of the same County where such
Offenders shall then be, shall upon his and their Corporal Oath before the
Justices of the Peace in the open Quarter Sessions of the same County, or at
the Assizes and Goal delivery of the same County, before the Justices of the
same Assizes and Goal delivery, abjure this Realm of England, and all other the
Queens Majesty's Dominions forever, unless her Majesty shall license the party
to return: And thereupon shall depart out of this Realm at such Haven or Port,
and within such time as shall in that behalf be assigned and appointed by the
said Justices before whom such abjuration shall be made, unless the same
Offender be let or stayed by such lawful and reasonable means or causes, as
by the Common Laws of this Realm are permitted and allowed in Cases of
abjuration for felony. And in such cases of let or stay, then within such
reasonable and convenient time after, as the Common Law requires in Case of
abjuration for Felony as is aforesaid. And that the Justices of Peace, before
whom any such abjuration shall happen to be made as is aforesaid, shall cause
the same presently to be entered of Record before them, and shall certify the
same to the Justices of Assizes and Goal delivery of the County, at the next
Assizes of Goal delivery to be holden in the same County.

In what case the offender is not bound to abjure.
Being thereunto required by the Bishop, etc. or any Justice of the Peace,
etc.] But put the Case that the Offender is convicted, and the Three months
next after his Conviction elapse, before he is required by the Bishop, or any
Justice of Peace, or the Minister or Curate of the Parish, to conform and make
the submission here appointed; and afterward he is required by one of them so
to do. It seems in this Case such request comes too late, for he ought to
conform and submit within the three months, if he be required, but if he be not
required, he is not bound to abjure for omitting it, although he shall remain
in prison till he conforms and submits. But if within the three months he be
required to conform and submit, and refuse, there is no question but he may be
at any time afterward warned or required to abjure.

Abjuration.
Abjure this Realm of England, etc.] Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 6.

Stat. Sect. 3. The punishment for refusing to abjure not departing or
returning without License.
And if any such Offender which by the tenor and intent of this Act is to be
abjured as is aforesaid, shall refuse to make Abjuration as is aforesaid, or,
after such Abjuration made, shall not go to such Haven, and within such time as
is before appointed, and from thence depart out of this Realm according to this
present Act, or after such his departure shall return, or come again into any
her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, without her Majesty's special License in
that behalf first had and obtained; That then in every such Case the person so
offending shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer as in Case of Felony,
without benefit of Clergy.

Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 7. Stat. 35 Eli^. ^.


And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
Stat. S^ct. 4. An Offender shall be discharged upon his open submission.
That if any person or persons that shall at any time hereafter offend against
this Act, shall before he or they be so warned or required to make Abjuration
according to the tenor of this Act, repair to some Parish Church on some
Sunday, or other Festival day, and then and there hear Divine Service; And at
Service time before the Sermon or reading of the Gospel, make public and open
Submission and Declaration of his and their Conformity to her Majesty's Laws
and Statutes as hereafter in this Act is declared and appointed, That then the
same Offender shall thereupon be clearly discharged of and from all and every
the penalties and punishments inflicted or imposed by this Act for any of the
Offenses aforesaid.

The former part of this Statute appoints the Conformity and Submission to be
at any Church, Submission where to b^ made.
Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, but this limits it to be at some
Parish Church; the meaning whereof seems to be, That if a man be an Offender
against this Act and convicted, he may within the three months after his
Conviction conform and submit in any Church, Chapel or usual place of Common
Prayer, where there is Common Prayer, and either a Sermon or the Gospel read;
But if he be required within the three months to Conform and make Submission,
and he refuses so to do, but the three months expire, then his Conformity and
Submission must be more solemn and public, (viz.) in some Parish Church where,
it is presumed, there will be the greatest number of People to be Witnesses
thereof: And by this construction the seeming difference between these two
branches of the Statute, one whereof limits the Offender to a Parish Church,
and the other leaves him at large to any Church, Chapel or usual place of
Common Prayer, is reconciled.

And this construction naturally flows from the Order wherein these two
branches are placed: For the Statute speaks of a Church, Chapel or usual place
of Common Prayer, before it mentions the parties refusal to conform and submit
within three months next after Conviction; But when it has mentioned such
refusal, then it speaks of the Parish Church only: And the second time here
limited to the Offender when he may conform and submit, viz. before he be
warned or required to abjure, presupposes his refusal to conform and submit
within the three months: For otherwise he could not be required to abjure.

But if the Offender be not required within the three months, according to this
Act, to conform and submit, it seems he is not afterward limited to some
Parish Church, but may do it according to the former branch of this Act, in any
Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, for he is then in no danger of
Abjuration; and his Conformity and Submission is then to no other end, but to
free himself from the Imprisonment inflicted on him upon his Conviction: And in
that Case the Act says, he may conform and submit in any Church, Chapel or
usual place of Common Prayer.

Of this difference between the places of Conformity and Submission, no notice
is taken in the late Additions to Dalton, but any Church or Chapel is made to
serve the turn in all Cases. cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 13.

What is a Parish Church.
By Parish Church is to be understood not only that which has been always the
Mother Church and never belonged to any other, but every Church which has the
Administration of Sacraments and Sepulture. For that, in Law, is a Parish
Church, although it anciently belonged to another Church. Co. 2. Inst. 363.
where the issue was, whether it had Baptisterium and Sepulturam: And the Church
of Stoke Goldenham, though the Town was parcel of the Rectory of Hinckley,
whose Church was anciently the Mother Church, yet having all Parochial Rights
and Churchwardens, was adjudged a Parish Church, and within the meaning of the
Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 2. of the Poor. Hutton 93. Hilton and Paul's Case.

Stat. Sect. 5.
The same Submission to be as hereafter follows, that is to say,

The form of the Submission.
I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge that I have grievously offended God,
in contemning her Majesty's godly and lawful Government and Authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service contrary to the
Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and in using and frequenting disordered
and unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies under pretense and color of Exercise
of Religion; And I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and
testify in my Conscience, that no other person has or ought to have any Power
or Authority over her Majesty: And I do promise and protest without any
dissimulation, or any color or means of any Dispensation, That from henceforth
I will, from time to time, obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes in
repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Service, and do my uttermost
endeavor to maintain and defend the same.

Or any color or means of any Dispensation. Dispensation.
] These words are omitted by Wingate tit. Crown numb. 72. And the form there
set down faulty in several other particulars, and not to be relied upon.

Her Majesty's Laws and Statutes. The Queens Laws. Stat. 27 Eliz. 2.
] What is meant by her Majesty's Laws, Vide Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 7.

And that every Minister or Curate of every Parish where such Submission and
Declaration of Conformity shall hereafter be so made by any such Offender as
aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 6. The Minister shall enter the Submission into a Book.
shall presently enter the same into a Book to be kept in every Parish for that
purpose, and within ten days next following, shall certify the same in writing
to the Bishop of the same Diocese.

Provided nevertheless, The Offender submitting and falling into Relapse.
That if any such Offender after such Submission made as is aforesaid, shall
fall into Relapse, or eftsoons obstinately refuse to repair to some Church,
Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service, and shall
forbear the same as aforesaid, or shall come or be present at any such
Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings under color or pretense of any exercise
of Religion, contrary to her Majesty's Laws and Statutes: That then every such
Offender shall lose all such benefit as he or she might otherwise by virtue of
this Act, have or enjoy by reason of their said Submission; And shall thereupon
stand and remain in such plight, condition and degree, to all intents, as
though such Submission had never been made.

And for that every person having House and Family, Stat. Sect. 7. The
forfeiture for relieving or keeping a Recusant after notice. Rep. 3 Jac. 4.
is in duty bounden to have special regard to the good Government and ordering
of the same: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall at any time hereafter relieve, maintain, retain or keep in his or
their House, or otherwise, any person which shall obstinately refuse to come to
some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service,
and shall forbear the same by the space of a mouth together, contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, That then every person which shall so relieve,
maintain, retain or keep any such person offending as aforesaid, after notice
thereof to him or them given by the Ordinary of the Diocese, any Justice of
Assizes of the Circuit, or any Justice of Peace of the County, or the Minister,
Curate or Churchwardens of the Parish where such person shall then be, or by
any of them, shall forfeir to the Queens Majesty for every person so relieved,
maintained, retained or kept, after such notice as aforesaid, ten pounds for
every month, that he or they shall so relieve, maintain, retain, or keep any
such person so offending.

What sort of Recusants may be relieved or kept. Rep. 3 Jac. 4.
Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not in any wise extend to punish or
impeach any person or persons for relieving, maintaining or keeping his or
their Wife, Father, Mother, Child, or Children, Wards, Brother or Sister, or
his Wives Father or Mother, not having any certain place of habitation of their
own, or the Husbands or Wives of any of them; or for relieving, maintaining or
keeping any such person as shall be committed by Authority to the custody of
any by whom they shall be so relieved, maintained or kept: Any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Repeal. Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
This Branch is repealed by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. Quod vide infra, Sect.
24.

Stat. Sect. 8. The Queens Remedy to recover forfeitures, etc.
And for the more speedy levying and recovering for, and by the Queens Majesty
of all and singular the pains, duties, forfeitures and payments which at any
time hereafter shall accrue, grow, or be payable by virtue of this Act, or of
the Statute made in the three and twentieth year of her Majesty's Reign
concerning Recusants: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every the said pains, duties, forfeitures and payments shall and may be
recovered and levied to her Majesty's use, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint,
Information, or otherwise, in any of the Courts commonly called the Kings
Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer, in such sort and in all respects as by the
ordinary course of the Common Laws of this Realm, any other Debt due by any
such person in any other Case should or may be recovered or levied, wherein no
essoign, protection or wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

A new remedy given to the Queen. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
All and every the said pains, duties, forfeitures and payments.] These words
are not to be understood simpliciter or exclusive, as if the forfeitures upon
the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. could be recovered no other way then what is
prescribed here; But only they give the Queen a new remedy for the recovery of
them which she had not before, and take not away the Remedy given by 23 Eliz.
upon Indictment, 29 Eliz. 6.
nor that by the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. upon Indictment and Proclamation,
nor the Informers popular Suit given him by 23. For all these three are
affirmative Laws, and do not abrogate one the other, The former Laws not
abrogated.
but may well stand together: And the meaning of them taken together, is, That
if the Informer recover the forfeiture upon that of 23. he shall have his part
thereof: But if the Offender were Indicted at the Queens Suit, and Judgment had
against him upon 23. or if he were convicted upon Proclamation and default upon
29. The Queen should have the whole penalty, excluding the Informer, for he
shall not be punished again for the same offense at the Suit of the Informer:
But if the offender were neither Indicted nor Sued by the Informer Qui tam etc.
the Queen should have another Remedy to recover the entire forfeiture by Action
of Debt, etc. upon this Statute, and the Informer shall have no part thereof:
So that the Remedies given by these three Statutes are Cumulative, and not
Privative; and there is no Repugnancy or disagreement between them, but they
have a dependence on each other: The informer not aided here
But as this Statute does not abrogate any of the former Laws touching
Recusancy, nor takes away the Informers popular Suit; so it adds nothing as to
the Informer, nor gives him any more speedy remedy for the recovery of the
forfeiture, but leaves him in the same condition as he was in before, to take
his remedy upon 23. Co. 11. 61, 62. and Rolls 1. 90, 91, 93. c. 41. Dr.
Fosters Case. Cro. Pasch. 16 Jac. 481. and Bridgman. 121. 122. Parker vesus
Webb.

To her Majesty's use. A more speedy remedy here given. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
] Before this Statute the Queen had no other way to recover the entire penalty
for Recusancy, or any other offense within the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. but
by Indictment only; but by this Statute a more speedy remedy was given her by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information. Vide the Cases before cited.

Shall and may be recovered.] The King by the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. 31
Eliz. 5. Within what time the King must sue.
is restrained in this Case to three years after the offense committed, within
which time he must pursue the remedy here given him for the recovery of the
forfeiture; but it seems that he is not restrained to two years, for where the
forfeiture is limited to the King and him that will sue, there the Informer
has one year, and the King the next two years, if the Informer does not sue
within the first year of the three; and the restraint in 31. of the King to 2
years next after the Offense committed, where the forfeiture is limited to the
King, extends not to this Case: For although the King is enabled by this
Statute to sue for the entire forfeiture yet the entire forfeiture was not
originally limited to the King only, for the Informer may sue upon 23 Eliz. as
well as the King may upon this Act. And where the Informer may sue, it was not
the meaning of 31 Eliz. to limit the King to two years after the offense
committed; but he may stay, if he please, till the Informers year is expired;
and then the Statute gives him two years afterward to sue for the penalty.
Where the King is limited to a year and a day, where not.
Much less is the King limited to sue upon this Statute within a year and a
day; and what is said in Dr. Fosters Case, Co. 11. 65. (viz.) that for any
forfeiture before the year and day, neither the King nor the Informer has any
remedy, for that that time is limited in certain by 23 Eliz. is a clear mistake
of the meaning of that Statute of 23. touching the year and day; for the
limitation there of a year and a day, extends only to the Kings Suits by
Indictment, and not to the popular Suit given by 23. much less to the Action of
Debt, etc. given to the King by this Statute: See more of this matter, supra,
in the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 9. in that part touching the Informer,
and the Cases there cited to prove that no other Suits are restrained by that
Statute to a year and a day, but only Suits by Indictment.

By Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information.] If the King sue by any of these
ways, no Proclamation Proclamation.
can be made thereupon: For the Proclamation given by the Statutes of 29 Eliz.
6. and 3 Jac. 4. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6 3 Jac. 4
in Case of Recusancy at the Kings Suit, is upon Indictment only. Co. 11. 62.
Dr. Fosters Case.

The King's Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer.] This Statute adds two other
Courts where the King may sue for Recusancy, Two Courts added where the King
may sue. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6
or for saying or hearing of Mass: For by 29 Eliz. cap. 6. the Queen was
limited to the King's Bench, the Assizes or general Goal delivery, and that only
by way of Indictment: but now by this Statute she might sue not only in those
Courts by Indictment, but in the King's Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information. Co. 11. 61. Dr. Fosters Case.

But whereas it is there said that this Statute of 35 takes not off the
restriction of the Informer, Qui tam etc. by the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. to
the Courts there mentioned (viz.) the King's Bench, Assizes, and general Goal
delivery. This passage was occasioned by an opinion there held in the said Case
of Dr. Foster, that the Informer Qui tam etc. was restrained by 29. to those
Courts: The Informer not restrained by 29 Eliz. 6.
But that opinion is not Law, nor was there ever any such restriction of the
Informer; for the Statute of 29 Eliz. intends only Suits by Indictment, but
touches not the popular Action or Information. Vide Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6.
Sect. 2.

As etc. any other Debt etc. should or may be recovered.] Before this Statute
the Queen had no way to recover of the Husband the entire forfeiture for the
Recusancy of his Wife: For if the Wife had been Indicted of Recusancy at the
Queens Suit, and convicted thereupon, this had not affected the Husband, who
shall never be charged for the Act or default of his Wife, but where he may be
made party to the Action or Suit, as in an Action of Debt, Trespass, Action of
the Case for scandalous words by the Wife, etc. but not upon an Indictment. And
in this respect the Queen having before this Statute no remedy for recovery of
the forfeiture but by Indictment, where the Husband could not be charged for
his Wife, the Informer was then in better Case then the Queen: For he may
charge the Husband and Wife both for the Recusancy of the Wife, and shall
recover the forfeiture of him by force of the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat.
23 Eliz. 1
Vide that Stat. Sect. 9. But upon the Conviction of the Wife upon Indictment,
the Queen must have staid till the death of the Husband before she could have
levied the forfeiture; and if the Wife had died before her Husband, it was
utterly lost in most Cases. Baron and Feme may be charged for Recusancy of the
feme.
But by this Act the Queen might, and the King may at this day charge the
Husband and Wife jointly by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, for
the Recusancy of the Wife, in such sort as he may be charged in any other
Action at Common Law for the Debt or Trespass of his Wife, and the forfeiture
for her Recusancy shall be recovered of him. And this was the principal end and
scope of making this Branch of the Statute, and to this purpose were these
words added here, In such sort, and in all respects, as by the ordinary course
of the Common Laws of this Realm, any other Debt due by any such person, in any
other Case, should or may be recovered. Co. 11. 61, 62. Dr. Fosters Case.
Rolls 1. 233, 234. Roy versus Law and son feme. Savile 25. C. 59.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 9. How the third part of the Penalties shall be
employed.
That the third part of the penalties to be had or received by virtue of this
Act shall be employed and bestowed to such good and charitable uses, and in
such manner and form as is limited and appointed in the Statute made in the 28.
year of her Majesty's Reign touching Recusants.

The Statute here mentioned, Stat. 29 Eliz. 6
and called the Statute of 28 Eliz. is the same with 29 Eliz. cap. 6. before
recited. It being in some Books called the Statute of 28, in others of 29, but
(as it seems) more properly 29. For the Session wherein it was made was by
Prorogation held the 15 of February 29. Eliz.

Provided also, That no Popish Recusant, Stat. Sect. 10. Popish Recusant or
Feme Covert not to abjure. Popish recusant.
or Feme Covert shall be compelled or bound to abjure by virtue of this Act.

No Popish Recusant.] Here Wingate, tit. Crown n. 77. leads his Reader into a
great mistake; for he mentions only a Feme Covert, leaving out the Popish
Recusant.

Feme Covert not here excepted in all Cases.
Or Feme Covert.] In the late additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants,
Sect. 7. it is said, that no married Woman is punishable by this Statute, but
are thereout excepted; whereas in truth they are no where excepted throughout
this Statute, save only that they shall not be compelled or bound to abjure:
For if a married Woman comes not to Church, but forbears for a month, and goes
to Conventicles or any other Meetings or Assemblies, under color or pretense
of the exercise of Religion, contrary to Law, whether they be Popish or other,
or persuades others so to do, or to forbear the Church, or to impugn the Kings
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, she shall be imprisoned by force of this
Act, until she conform and submit her self; but she cannot be further proceeded
against, so as to require her to abjure. A married Woman with her Husband is
likewise punishable by this Act for her Recusancy, by Action of Debt, etc.
brought against her and her Husband at the Kings Suit; so that it is a great
mistake to say she is not punishable by this Statute.

Stat. Sect. 11. The forfeiture of him that abjures or refuses to abjure. The
Wise shall lose no Dower nor the heir any Land for these Offenses.
Provided also, That every person that shall abjure by force of this Act, or
refuse to abjure, being thereunto required as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose
to her Majesty all his goods and chattels forever; and shall further lose all
his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, for and during the life only of such
offender, and no longer: and that the Wife of any Offender, by force of this
Act, shall not lose her dower: nor that any corruption of Blood shall grow, or
be by reason of any offense mentioned in this Act, but that the heir of every
such Offender, by force of this Act, shall and may after the death of every
Offender, have and enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such
Offender, as if this Act had not been made.

Every Abjuration, Abjuration.
as well as that for Felony, is an Exile or Banishment, and if perpetual, and
by Authority of Parliament, amounts to a civil death; and therefore the Wife of
a Man banished or abjured forever might sue or be sued without her Husband;
Suit.
as was ruled in the Case of the Lady Maltravers, 10 E. 3. and of the Lady
Belknap, 1 H. 4. 1. 2 H. 4. 7. And if a man be perpetually banished by
Authority of Parliament, unless is be for Felony, or by force of this Act, his
Wife shall be endowed living the Husband: And if he had been perpetually
banished or abjured for Felony, the Wife should have had her jointure Jointure.
presently, although not her Dower, Dower.
as was resolved in Weylands Case, 19 E. 1. and the reason is, because though
the Husband be naturally living, yet he is civilly and in the Eye of the Law as
a dead man. But yet these Cases are to be understood of a Banishment or
abjuration forever, and not of a Relegation or Exile for a time: For in such
Case neither could the Wife sue or be sued without her Husband, nor could she
have her Dower or Jointure during the natural life of her Husband: Co. 1. Inst.
132. 133. Co. 2. Inst. 47. Bulstrode 3. 188. Rolls 1. 400. C. 27. Wilmores
Case. Moore 851. C. 1159. Wilmots Case.

But if a man be abjured by force of this Act, What dower is here saved.
the Wife shall not have her Dower or Jointure during the natural life of her
Husband, although he be abjured forever; but she is in worse Case then the Wife
of a person perpetually banished was at the Common Law: For this Act, by
express words, gives his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to the Queen during
his life, which is to be understood of his natural life: And the saving here of
the Wives Dower, is not intended of the Dower which she might claim at Common
Law presently upon the abjuration of her Husband, nor shall make void the
former words of the Act, by which all his Lands are given to the Queen during
his natural life; but is only the usual Provision made in Acts of Parliament
which create any new Felony, for the saving of the Dower of the Wife after the
death of the Husband: So that the meaning of this Branch is, that if the
Husband refuse to abjure, or abjure and refuse to depart according to this Act,
or return without lieence, yet the Wife shall be endowed, and the heir inherit
his Lands after he is naturally dead.

And this Act to continue no longer than to the end of the next Session of
Parliament. Stat. Sect. 12.


Note, this Act being at first but temporary, This Act at first but temporary.
was afterward discontinued, Hutton 61. 62. but is since revived by the
Statute of 3 Car. 1. c. 4. and is in full force at this day.

And in such Case it has been questioned if a Statute be discontinued, and
afterward revived, how an Indictment thereupon shall conclude, whether contra
formam Statuti or Statutorum: Where if a Statute be discontinued and revived,
it shall be contra formam Statuti, and where contra formam Statutorum.
For if a Statute be temporary, and afterward continued for a longer time or
made perpetual, and never discontinued, there without doubt it shall be contra
formam Statuti; but it has been held by some that where it was once
discontinued and then revived, there it is as if there were two several and
distinct Statutes, and the Indictment shall conclude contra formam Statutorum.
Palmers Case. 9 Eliz. But others have held the contrary, and that there is not
any difference in the Case of a Statute at first temporary, and afterward
before any discontinuance continued for a longer time or made perpetual, and a
Statute discontinued and then revived, but that it shall in both Cases be held
but as one Statute, and the conclusion shall be contra formam Statuti and not
Statutorum, unless where the Act of Reviver makes any addition to the former
Act, or increases the penalty or forfeiture: For then there is no doubt but
they are two distinct Acts of Parliament. And according to this later opinion
has the practice been in Informations upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 9. of
Perjury, Stat. 5 Eliz. 9
which determined 14 Eliz. and was revived 29 Eliz. And yet all Informations
thereupon conclude Contra formam Statuti: And so as it seems ought all
Indictments upon this Statute of 35. notwithstanding its discontinuance and
reviver. Vide Owen 135. Wests Case.

Stat. xxxv Eliz. cap. ii. An Act for the restraining of Popish Recusants to
some certain place of abode.
FOr the better discovering and avoiding of such Traitorous and most dangerous
Conspiracies and Attempts as are daily devised and practiced against our most
gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, Stat. Sect. 1.
and the happy estate of this Commonweal, by sundry wicked and seditious
persons, who terming themselves Catholics, and being (indeed) spies and
intelligencers, not only for her Majesty's foreign Enemies, but also for
Rebellious and Traitorous Subjects born within her Highness Realms and
Dominions, and hiding their most detestable and divellish purposes under a
false pretext of Religion and Conscience, do secretly wander and shift from
place to place within this Realm to corrupt and seduce her Majesty's Subjects,
and to stir them to Sedition and Rebellion.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by our Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, and the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, A Popish Recusant convicted,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of
the same, That every person above the age of sixteen years, born within any of
the Queens Majesty's Realms and Dominions, or made Denizen, being a Popish
Recusant, and before the end of this Session of Parliament convicted for not
repairing to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, to hear
Divine Service there, but forbearing the same contrary to the tenor of the Laws
and Statutes heretofore made and provided in that behalf, and having any
certain place of dwelling and abode within this Realm, shall within forty days
next after the end of this Session of Parliament (if they be within this Realm
and not restrained or stayed, either by Imprisonment, or by her Majesty's
Commandment, or by order or direction of some six or more of the Privy Council,
or by such sickness and infirmity of body as they shall not be able to Travel
without imminent danger of Life, and in such Cases of absence out of the Realm,
restraint or stay, then within 20 days next after they shall return into the
Realm and be enlarged of such Imprisonment or Restraint, and shall be able to
Travel) repair to their place of dwelling, where they usually heretofore made
their common abode, and shall not at any time after pass or remove above five
miles from thence.

Stat. Sect. 2. Or to be convicted, shall repair to his usual dwelling and not
remove above five miles.
And also, That every person being above the age of sixteen years, born within
any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, or made Denizen, and having or which
hereafter shall have any certain place of dwelling and abode within this Realm,
which being then a Popish Recusant, shall at any time hereafter be lawfully
convicted for not repairing to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common
Prayer to hear Divine Service there, but forbearing the same contrary to the
said Laws and Statutes, and being within this Realm at the time that they shall
be convicted, shall within forty days next after the same Conviction, (if they
be not restrained or stayed by Imprisonment or otherwise as is aforesaid, and
in such Cases of restraint and stay, then within twenty days next after they
shall be enlarged of such Imprisonment or Restraint, and shall be able to
Travel) repair to their place of usual dwelling and abode, and shall not at any
time after pass or remove above five miles from thence, The punishment of an
Offender.
upon pain that every person and persons that shall offend against the tenor
and intent of this Act in any thing before mentioned, shall lose and forfeit
all his and their Goods and Chattels, and shall also lose and forfeit to the
Queens Majesty all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all the Rents
and Annuities of every such person so doing or offending during the Life of the
same Offender.

What Popish Recusants are not within this Act,
Born within any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, or made Denizen.] So that
all Popish Recusants are not within this Branch, as Wingate tit. Crown n. 78.
mistakes: For it extends not to an Alien, who is born out of the Kings
Leigeance, unless he be made Denizen.

And which are.
In the late Additions to Dalton cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 14. this Clause
is restrained to such as are born in England, but it is clear that it extends
to all the Kings natural Subjects, if they live in England, although they were
born in Ireland, or any other of the late Queens Dominions besides England.

Denizen, who.
By Denizen, is here to be understood an Alien who owes to the King an acquired
Subjection or Allegiance, whether he be made Denizen by the Kings Letters
Patents, or be naturalized by Act of Parliament: For Naturalization includes
all the privileges of a Denizen, and something more; and every one who is
naturalized is thereby made a Denizen, although he that is made a Denizen by
the Kings Letters Patents is not thereby naturalized.

Which being then a Popish Recusant.] This is the first penal Statute which was
made against Popish Recusants, by that name, and as distinguished from other
Recusants.

In the late Additions to Dalton cap. 81. tit. Recusants, Sect. 7. What is
Recusancy.
it is said, That the matter of Recusancy stands in two particulars; First,
absenting from the Church; Secondly, refusing the Oaths prescribed by 1 Eliz.
1. and 3 Jac. 4. Stat. 1 Eliz 1. 3 Jac. 4.
But this description of Recusancy is either too narrow or too large: For if
the word, Recusancy, be taken in a large sense, then the refusing to receive
the Sacrament contrary to the Statute of 3 Jac. 4. by him that conforms and
comes to Church may be as fitly called a point of Recusancy as the refusing the
Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance. But if Recusancy be taken in a strict and
proper sense, then it extends only to the point of not coming to Church, and
not to refusing the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance. And in this last sense
are all the Statutes to be understood which inflict any penalty or disability
upon a Recusant or a Popish Recusant, unless where the not receiving of the
Sacrament is particularly mentioned. And this appears by the explanation which
the Statutes make every where of Conformity, (the opposite to Recusancy) viz.
repairing to Church; What is Conformity.
and more particularly the said Statute of 3 Jac. 4. which says, That the
Popish Recusant convicted, which conforms himself and repairs to the Church
shall receive the Sacrament: which words (and repairs to the Church) are
explanatory of the former, (viz.) which conforms himself: so that this
Conformity is not intended of taking the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance, but
consists only in repairing to Church, and consequently Recusancy (its opposite)
properly so called, consists in absenting from Church: And this appears further
by that Branch of the said Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. which relates to the Oath
of Allegiance, where it is said, That the Oath shall be required of him who
confesses or denies not himself to be a Recusant, or that he has not
received the Sacrament, where (Recusant) cannot be understood in any other
sense, then of him who forbears to come to Church.

An Information or Indictment against a Popish Recusant Information or
Indictment against a Popish Recusant.
for Recusancy, is of the same form with that against any other Recusant,
(viz.) That he came not to his Parish Church, or any other Church, Chapel or
usual place of Common Prayer, but forbore the same by the space of etc. Vide
Co. lib. intr. 569. Co. 11. 56. Dr. Fosters Case; so that upon his Conviction
for Recusancy it does not appear of Record whether the Offender be a Popish or
other Recusant: And therefore where this, or any of the subsequent Statutes
commands or prohibits a Popish Recusant convict to do a thing, and a person
convicted of Recusancy who is a Popish Recusant be Indicted thereupon, his
Conviction must be set forth in the Indictment with this or the like confusion:
Per quod praedict. A.B. devenit Papalis Recusans convictus: so it is, if a
Popish Recusant Convict be incapacitated to take or to give or dispose of any
thing, and another person be substituted by the Statute in his stead, as in the
Case of a Presentation by force of the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 5. Stat. 3 Jac. 5.
in a Quare Impedit Quare Impedit.
brought by the Chancellor and Scholars of the University, His Conviction must
be be set forth, with an averment that he is Papalis Recusans. Vide Co. 10. 54.
And if a Popish Recusant, whether convicted or not convicted, be so commanded,
prohibited or incapacitated; in an Indictment or Information upon the Statute,
it must be averred that he is Papalis Recusans.

A person who has a certain place of abode is convicted for not coming to
Church, What Popish Recusants are not within this Act.
and afterward becomes a Papist, being none before: It seems that he is not
restrained by this Act within the compass of five miles; because he was not a
Popish Recusant at the time of his Conviction: For the Adverb (then) cannot
have relation to the foregoing words, (viz.) having any certain place of
dwelling and abode within this Realm; For then the sense would be, That if he
be a Popish Recusant at any time when he has a certain place of dwelling and
abode within this Realm, and he were formerly convicted for not coming to
Church, he shall repair to his dwelling within forty days after his Conviction,
which may be a mere impossibility, For perhaps the forty days after his
Conviction expired before he became a Popish Recusant; and therefore the word
(then) must of necessity relate to the subsequent words touching his
Conviction; And, being then a Popish Recusant, is as much as to say, being a
Popish Recusant at the time of his Conviction: so that if he be convicted as a
Recusant, yet if he be not then a Popish Recusant, he is not restrained by this
Act, if he be within this branch of the Statute, (viz.) one who has a certain
place of dwelling and abode within this Realm.

Above five miles.] When an Act of Parliament speaks of miles, Miles.
they are not to be taken as a Bird or Arrow may fly, but according to the
nearest and most usual way. Cro. Hill. 33 Eliz. 212. Minge versus Earl.

The Miles here I take to be intended of English miles. An English mile
contains eight Furlongs, each Furlong forty Perches or Poles, and every Perch
or Pole sixteen foot and a half. Co. 4. Inst. 274. Dalton. V. cap. 65. tit.
Weights and Measures; and so much was a mile explained to be by the Statute of
35 Eliz. cap. 6. Stat. 35 Eliz. 6.
by the same Parliament which made this Act against Popish Recusants: Rastall.
London 252. where it is said eight Furlongs to a mile, and not five Furlongs, as
it is mistaken in Poulton.

And yet in that Case of Minge and Earl, the Defendant in maintenance that
locus in quo, etc. was four miles from Rye according to the Statute of 23 Eliz.
cap. 5. of Woods, pleaded, 23 Eliz. 5.
that it was four thousand paces from Rye, reckoning five Foot to every Pace,
where is meant the Italian mile, viz. 5000 Foot, and not the English, which is
5280 Foot; and no exception was taken to it by the Plaintiff, or the Court.
Vide Dalton, V. supra.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 4. What a
Popish Recusant shall do having no place of abode
That every person above the age of sixteen years, born within any her
Majesty's Realms or Dominions, not having any certain place of dwelling and
abode within this Realm, and being a Popish Recusant, not usually repairing to
some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, but forbearing the same
contrary to the same Laws and Statutes in that behalf made, shall within forty
days next after the end of this Session of Parliament, (if they be then within
this Realm, and not imprisoned, restrained or stayed as aforesaid, and in such
case of absence out of the Realm, imprisonment, restraint or stay, then within
twenty days next after they shall return into the Realm, and be enlarged of
such imprisonment or restraint, and shall be able to Travel) repair to the
place where such person was born, or where the Father or Mother of such person
shall then be dwelling; and shall not at any time after remove or pass above
five miles from thence, The punishment of the Offender.
upon pain that every person and persons which shall offend against the tenor
and intent of this Act in any thing beforementioned, shall lose and forfeit
all his and their Goods and Chattels, and shall also forfeit to the Queens
Majesty all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all the Rents and
Annuities of every such person so doing or offending during the life of the
same person.

By comparing together this and the precedent Clause, A Popish Recusant not
convicted may be within this Act
it will appear plainly that the Statute puts a great difference between the
Popish Recusant who has a certain place of abode in this Realm, and him that
has none: For to restrain a Popish Recusant, who has a certain place of abode
within this Realm, from traveling above five miles, there are three
Qualifications required by the Act. 1. That he be convicted of Recusancy. 2.
That he be a Popish Recusant at the time of his Conviction. 3. That at the time
of such Conviction he be within this Realm; And if either of these fail, he is
not restrained by this Act. But if a Popish Recusant have no certain place of
abode within this Realm, but is ubiquitary, there no such Qualifications are
required; but if he be a Papist, and does not usually repair to Church, but
forbears so to do, he ought to repair to the place where he was born, or where
his Father or Mother dwelt, and not to remove above five miles from thence; and
that whether he be convicted or not: For the Statute, when it comes to speak of
him who has no certain place of abode, leaves out all the aforesaid
Qualifications required in him who has a certain place of abode; and it
clearly distinguishes between him who is convicted for not repairing to some
Church, etc. (which is required in those whose abode is certain) and him who
does not usually repair to some Church, etc. which in those whose abode is
uncertain is sufficient to bring them within the danger and penalty of this
Law, if they repair not to the place appointed them by the Act, or remove above
five miles from thence: And it is observable that in this Clause which speaks of
the Popish Recusant, who has no certain place of abode, there is no mention
made of Forty days to be allowed him after his Conviction, to repair to the
place appointed him, the reason whereof is because it takes in the whole kind
of such Popish Recusants, as well the not convicted, as the convicted, and
makes no distinction between them, if they have no certain place of abode, Et
ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus.

Nor was it without great reason, that ubiquitary Popish Recusants should be
confined, whether they were convicted or not convicted: As for the other who
have a certain place of abode, it is to be presumed, that the most considerable
of them would be prosecuted and convicted for their Recusancy in the respective
places where they dwell, and de mini mis non curat lex may in this Case be
applied to persons, as well as in other Cases to things: But as for him who is
fixed to no certain place, as he is the more dangerous of the two, so the more
unlikely to be prosecuted to a Conviction, being here one day and gone the
next, and therefore the less taken notice of: And had the Statute taken in only
such as are convicted, it would have been eluded, and rendered ineffectual for
want of a Conviction of the greater part of such ubiquitary Recusants.

The want of due consideration of this Statute in each of these parts of it,
has occasioned some mistakes in those who have handled it: And Wingate tit.
Crown numb. 78. restrains both parts of it, as well relating to those that have
no certain place of abode, as those whose place of abode is certain, to
Recusants convicted, and makes no mention that this later sort must be in
England at the time of their Conviction. And in the late Additions to Dalton
cap. 81. tit. Recusants, Sect. 14. it is not only said that both sorts must be
convicted, but that they must be in England at the time of their Conviction;
which two things are only requisite in such who have a certain place of abode,
and not in the other sort, who are within the meaning and danger of this Law
without any precedent Conviction for Recusancy.

See more of this matter, License to Travel. Stat. 3 Jac. 5.
and how a Popish Recusant shall be licensed to Travel out of his compass of
five miles. Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 5. Sect. 8.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 4. A Popish
Recusant Copyholder.
That every such Offender as is before mentioned, which has or shall have any
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, by Copy of Court Roll or by any other
customary tenure, at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom of any
Manor, shall forfeit all and singular his and their said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments so holden by Copy of Court Roll, or customary tenure as
aforesaid, for and during the life of such offender, (if his or her Estate so
long continue) to the Lord or Lords of whom the same be immediately holden, if
the same Lord or Lord or Lords be not then a Popish Recusant, and convicted for
not coming to Church to hear Divine Service, but forbearing the same contrary
to the Laws and Statutes aforesaid, nor seized or possessed upon Trust to the
use or behoof of any such Recusant as aforesaid; And in such Case the same
forfeiture to be to the Queens Majesty.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 5. Popish Recusants shall notify their coming,
and deliver in their names.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such persons
as, by the intent and true meaning of this Act, are to make their repair to
their place of dwelling and abode, or to the place where they were born, or
where their Father or Mother shall be dwelling, and not to remove or pass above
five miles from thence as is aforesaid, shall within twenty days next after
their coming to any of the said places, (as the Case shall happen) notify
their coming thither, and present themselves, and deliver their true names in
writing to the Minister or Curate of the same Parish, and to the Constable,
Headborough or Tithingman of the Town, and thereupon the said Minister or
Curate shall presently enter the same into a Book, to be kept in every Parish
for that purpose.

Which shall be certified to the Sess^ons, and enrolled there.
And afterward the said Minister or Curate, and the said Constable,
Headborough or Tithingman shall certify the same in writing to the Justices of
the Peace of the same County, at the next general or Quarter Sessions to be
holden in the same County; and the said Justices shall cause the same to be
entered by the Clerk of the Peace in the Rolls of the same Sessions.

Goods and Lands where not forfeited.
A Popish Recusant repairs to the place appointed him by this Act, and keeps
within his compass of five miles, but does not present himself or deliver in
his name; he does not forfeit his Goods or Lands: For there is no particular
penalty inflicted in this part of the Act for that omission, nor yet in the
subsequent Branch for him that has clearly twenty marks per annum in Freehold,
or Goods and Chattels worth forty pounds: But yet such person may be Indicted
for such neglect, and fined upon the general words of the Statute, which
commands the thing to be done: For where an Act of Parliament commands any
thing to be done, and inflicts no penalty, an Indictment lies against the
person who ought to do it, for his neglect or omission. Co. 2. Inst. 55. 163.
Vide Cro. Hill. 41 Eliz. 655. Crouthers Case.

Stat. Sect. 6. The penalty of a Popish Recusant of small ability offending
against this Act.
And to the end that the Realm be not pestered and overcharged with the
multitude of such Seditious and dangerous people as is aforesaid, who having
little or no ability to answer or satisfy any competent penalty for their
contempt and disobedience of the said Laws and Statutes, and being committed to
Prison for the same, do live for the most part in better Case there, then they
could if they were abroad at their own liberty: The Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, do most humbly
and instantly beseech the Queens Majesty that it may be further Enacted, That
if any such person or persons being a Popish Recusant (not being a Feme Covert,
and not having Lands, Tenements, Rents or Annuities, of an absolute Estate of
Inheritance, or freehold of the clear yearly value of twenty marks above all
charges to their own use and behoof, and not upon any secret trust or
confidence for any other, or Goods and Chattels in their own right, and to
their own proper use and behoof; And not upon any such secret trust and
confidence for any other, above the value of forty pounds) shall not, within
the time before in this Act in that behalf limited and appointed, repair to
their place of usual dwelling and abode, if they have any, or else to the place
where they were born, or where their Father or Mother shall be dwelling
according to the tenor and intent of this present Act: And thereupon notify
their coming, and present themselves, and deliver their true Names in writing
to the Minister or Curate of the Parish, and to the Constable, Headborough, or
Tithingman of the Town, within such time, and in such manner and form as is
aforesaid, or at any time after such their repairing to any such place as is
before appointed, shall pass or remove above five miles from the same: And
shall not, within three months next after such person shall be apprehended or
taken for offending as is aforesaid, conform themselves to the obedience of the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in coming usually to the Church to hear Divine
Service, and in making such public Confession and Submission, as hereafter in
this Act is appointed and expressed, being thereunto required by the Bishop of
the Diocese or any Justice of the Peace of the County where the same person
shall happen to be, or by the Minister or Curate of the Parish: That in every
such Case every such Offender, being thereunto warned or required by any two
Justices of the Peace or Coroner of the same County where such offender shall
then be, shall upon his or their corporal Oath, Abjuration.
before any two Justices of the Peace or Coroner of the same County, abjure
this Realm of England, and all other the Queens Majesty's Dominions forever:
And thereupon shall depart out of this Realm, at such Haven and Port, and
within such time as shall in that behalf be assigned and appointed by the said
Justices of Peace or Coroner before whom such abjuration shall be made, unless
the same Offenders be let or stayed by such lawful and reasonable means or
causes, as by the Common Laws of this Realm are permitted and allowed in Cases
of abjuration for felony. And in such Cases of let or stay, then within such
reasonable and convenient time after as the Common Law requires in Case of
abjuration for felony as is aforesaid. Abjuration to be entered of Record and
certified.
And that every Justice of Peace and Coroner, before whom any such abjuration
shall happen to be made as is aforesaid, shall cause the same presently to be
entered of Record before them, and shall certify the same to the Justices of
Assizes or Goal delivery of the said County at the next Assizes or Goal
delivery to be holden in the same County.

If any such person or persons being a Popish Recusant.] That is, any Popish
Recusant within the former Branches of the Statute, and none but such.

What Popish Recusants are within this Branch, and which not.
Dalton V. cap. 45. tit. Recusants, applies this Clause to Popish Recusants
convicted, as if it concerned them, and them only, and so both at once extends
and restrains the Statute contrary to its true meaning: For these words (any
such person or persons) neither extend to all that are convicted, nor are
restrained to such only as are convicted: For the Popish Recusant who has a
certain place of abode within this Realm, although he be convicted, is not
within this Statute, unless he were a Popish Recusant, and in England, at the
time of his Conviction: And the Popish Recusant, who has no certain place of
abode within this Realm, is within this Statute, although he were never
convicted: so that either of these sorts of Popish Recusants, who have an
Estate under value, viz. he who has no certain place of abode, and he who
having a certain place of abode was convicted, when a Popish Recusant, and in
England, and no other are liable by this Act to Abjuration.

Of the clear yearly value Clear yearly value.
of Twenty marks above all Charges.] A Rentcharge of 40 l. per Annum, is
issuing out of Lands worth 100 l. per Annum; a Popish Recusant, liable to be
confined by this Statute, purchases for his Life or in Fee parcel of the Lands,
of the clear yearly value of Twenty marks, over and above what his proportion
of the said Rentcharge comes to: This is an Estate of the clear yearly value
of Twenty marks, within the meaning of this Act, and shall free him from
abjuration: For although, in strictness of Law, his Estate be not clearly so
much above all charges, For that it is chargeable with an yearly Rent of Forty
pounds, yet in equity he shall pay no more then his proportion of it, which the
Land he purchased will discharge, and yet yield Twenty marks per Annum clearly
besides.

Or Goods and Chattels.] This Statute being in the disjunctive (Lands or Goods)
an Estate partly of Lands, Goods and Lands not to be valued together.
and partly of Goods, will not satisfy the intent thereof: And therefore if a
Popish Recusant, who offends against this Act, has fifteen Marks per Annum
clearly in Lands, and be worth Thirty pounds in goods; although this, taken
together, be in truth an Estate of more value then is here required, yet it
shall not free him from Abjuration: For the Statute does not warrant any
valuation of the Lands and Goods together, so as to supply the defect of the
yearly value of the Lands by the Goods, or the defect of the value of the Goods
by the Lands; and therefore the Recusant must have such an Estate in the one or
the other as will answer the Statute. And this is not like the Case of Jurors
upon the Statute of 2 H. 5. Stat. 2 H. 5. 3.
cap. 3. where it is said, That the Iuror shall have Lands of the clear yearly
value of Forty shillings, if the Debt or Damage declared amount to Forty marks:
in which Case, although it be in the disjunctive, debt or damage, yet it has
been adjudged, that where the debt and damages both amount to Forty marks it is
sufficient, and the Juror must have Forty shillings per Annum, Co. 1. Inst.
272. For in that Case the word (or) is cumulative, and (debt or damage) both
amount to no more then one entire thing (viz.) the value of the Cause or Action
depending. And it appears plainly to be the intent of the makers of the Law,
that no Cause declared to be of the value of Forty marks, shall be tried by
Jurors of a less Estate; but in our Case, the Lands and Goods are things of
different nature, one real, the other personal, and cannot be regularly reduced
under one and the same head, and therefore shall not be valued together, unless
the Act had expressly appointed such a Valuation.

But yet if a Popish Recusant has a Lease for years, But leases for years and
personal goods may:
and personal Goods, and both do amount in value to above Forty pounds, he
shall be out of the danger of Abjuration: For although the Lease is in the
realty, and the Goods are personal, yet they shall in this Case be valued
together: For that by this Copulative (and) the Statute expressly so appoints,
without distinguishing between the values of either, but makes it sufficient if
both of them be of that value.

Money secured upon a Mortgage Mortgage.
of Lands is within the meaning of these words (Goods and Chattels): And if the
Popish Recusant has above Forty pounds owing to him upon such Mortgage, he
cannot be required to abjure.

Within three months next after such person shall be apprehended or taken.]
Wingate, in abridging this Clause, tit. Crown numb. 80. clearly mistakes the
meaning of it: For he says, that a Popish Recusant, whose estate is under
value, must make the submission prescribed by this Act within three months next
after his arrival at his place of abode, which is a complicated Error: For he
quite leaves out him who is to repair to the place where he was born, or his
Father or Mother dwells: He makes the party liable to such submission before he
becomes an offender by not repairing, or not presenting himself and giving in
his true name, or traveling above five miles: He speaks nothing of his being
apprehended, The three months relate to the time of the Offenders being
apprehended.
whereas by the Act he cannot be required to abjure until three months after
his apprehension, and he turns the three months after his apprehension, into
three months after his arrival. All great mistakes, and fit to be taken notice
of by Justices of Peace, whose part it is to require the submission and
abjuration, that they may not be misled in the Execution of this part of their
Office, by trusting to that Abridgment.

Required to submit, within what time.
Being thereunto required by the Bishop, etc.] If the Offender be not before
the end of the three months next after his apprehension, required by the
Bishop, a Justice of Peace, or the Minister or Curate to make such submission,
he cannot be required afterward, nor be compelled to abjure by force of this
Act. But if he be required within the three months to make submission, and
refuse, he may be at any time afterward warned or required to abjure. Vide
Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 2.

Abjure this Realm of England, etc.] The Oath of Abjuration may be in this form
or to this effect.

Oath of Abjuration.
You shall swear that you shall depart out of this Realm of England, and out of
all other the Kings Majesty's Dominions: And that you shall not return hither,
or come again into any of his Majesty's Dominions, but by the License of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, or of his Heirs. So help you God. Stamford 119.
120. Co. 3. Inst. 217.

Wilkinson, P. 66. has set down another form upon this Statute (much
resembling that heretofore used at the Abjuration of a Felon mutatis mutandis)
in these words.

This hear you, Sir Coronor, that I J. M. of H. in the County of S. am a Popish
Recusant, and in Contempt of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England, I
have and do refuse to come to hear Divine Service there read and exercised: I
do therefore, according to the intent and meaning of the Statute made in the
35th year of Queen Elizabeth, late Queen of this Realm of England, abjure the
Land and Realm of King Charles, now King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland; and I shall have me toward the Port of P. which you have given and
assigned to me. And that I shall not go out of the highway leading thither, nor
return back again; and if I do I will that I be taken as a Felon of our said
Lord the King: And that at P. I will diligently seek for passage, and I will
tarry there but one Flood and Ebb, if I can have passage; and unless I can have
it in such space, I will go every day into the Sea up to my Knees, assaying to
pass over. So God me help and his holy Judgment.

But in alluding to the old Oath in Case of abjuration for Felony, which began
with the Confession of the particular offense for which the Felon was abjured,
(as Ego A. B. sum latro unius Equi, vel homicida unius hominis, or the like as
the Case was) Wilkinson is mistaken in the very offense for which the Popish
Recusant is to abjure by force of this Statute: for the offense is not his
refusal to hear Divine Service; for that is but only one of the precedent
Qualifications of the person. But the Offense it self is of another nature,
(viz.) his not repairing to the place the Statute appoints him, or his removal
from thence contrary to the Statute, or his not presenting himself, and
delivering his true name as aforesaid: Either of these, if he be a Popish
Recusant within the meaning of this Act, is a crime for which he ought to
abjure, unless he prevents his Abjuration by a timely Submission: Nor is the
Popish Recusant bound to swear, that he will not go out of the High way or
return back, or will tarry but one flood and ebb, or go into the Sea up to his
knees; nor ought the Coroner or Justices of Peace to require any such Oath of
him: For this is a new offense made by a Statute Law, which does not require
the strict form of Abjuration as in Case of Felony. And although the Felon were
tied to these circumstances, yet the Recusant is not, nor shall be a Felon for
omitting them: But it is sufficient if he simply abjure as the Act directs, and
go from the appointed Port within the time limited, and not return without
License into any of the Kings Dominions.

He that thus abjures the Realm does yet owe the King his Ligeance, and
remains within the Kings Protection. He that abjures, yet owes the King his
Ligeance.
Qui abjurat Regnum, amittit regnum, sed non Regem; amittit Patriam, sed non
patrem patriae. Co. 7. 9. Calvin's Case.

And if any such Offender, Stat. Sect. 7. The punishment for refusing to abjure
not departing or returning without License.
which by the tenor and intent of this Act is to be abjured as is aforesaid,
shall refuse to make such Abjuration as is aforesaid, or after such Abjuration
made shall not go to such Haven and within such time as is before appointed,
and from thence depart out of this Realm according to this present Act, or
after such his departure shall return, or come again into any her Majesty's
Realms or Dominions, without her Majesty's special License in that behalf first
had and obtained; That then in every such Case the person so offending shall be
adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer and lose as in Case of Felony, without
benefit of Clergy.

And within such time, etc. and from thence depart. When, and whence the
Offender must depart.
] The Offender is strictly tied to depart from the same Haven assigned him, and
within the time appointed him by the Justices of Peace or Coroner, so that if
he depart the Realm from any other Haven or Port, or over stay his time, and
depart afterward, yet he is a Felon within this Act.

Or return or come again into any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions.] An
Offender within this Act abjures in form aforesaid, and departs this Realm, and
afterward goes into Ireland without License, Return.
and then returns into England with License; such going into Ireland seems to
be Felony by this Act. But quaere how the offense shall be tried; How triable.
not in Ireland, for this Statute binds not that Kingdom, nor can be taken
notice of there; nor yet can it be tried in England, for that the offense was
done elsewhere. So that this is casus omissus, and cannot be punished, for that
no way of Trial is appointed.

Stat. Sect. 8. A Jesuit or Priest refusing to answer shall be imprisoned.
And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person which shall be suspected to be a Jesuit, Seminary or Massing Priest,
being examined by any person having lawful Authority in that behalf to examine
such person which shall be so suspected, shall refuse to answer directly and
truly whether he be a Jesuit, or a Seminary or Massing Priest as is aforesaid,
every such person so refusing to answer shall, for his Disobedience and
Contempt in that behalf, be committed to Prison by such as shall examine him,
as is aforesaid, and thereupon shall remain and continue in Prison without Bail
or Mainprize, until he shall make direct and true answer to the said Questions
whereupon he shall be so examined.

Cause of suspicion.
Suspected.] Although the party be no Jesuit, Seminary or Massing Priest, yet
if there be cause to suspect him, and he refuse to answer whether he be so or
no, such suspicion and refusal is ground enough for his Commitment.

Having lawful Authority in that behalf.] This Clause seems to refer to the
Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Stat. 27 Eliz. 2.
which appoints that the discovery of a Popish Priest or Jesuit shall be made
to some Justice of Peace or higher Officer, who is to give Information thereof
to some of the Privy Council, etc. under the penalty of two hundred marks; Who
shall examine a Jesuit, etc.
which Statute of 27. though it do not in express terms say that the Justice of
Peace or other higher Officer shall examine the Priest or Jesuit so discovered,
yet, inasmuch as it gives him power to take Cognizance of the matter, it seems
implicitly to empower him to inform himself of the truth, whether the party be
a Priest or Jesuit or not, as well by examination of the party as otherwise,
that he may be the better enabled to give Information thereof to some of the
Privy Council, etc. And one Justice of Peace having by 27. lawful Authority to
examine him, he has Authority likewise by this Statute of 35. to commit him,
And commit him.
if he be suspected to be a Priest or Jesuit and refuses to answer, whether he
be such or no. As for Mr. Shephards Opinion in his Sure Guide, cap. 14. Sect.
5. that there must be two Justices of Peace to Commit a man, by force of this
Statute, who is suspected to be a Jesuit or Priest till he answers directly, I
see no ground at all for it.

Answer to the said Questions.] That is, To what point he may be examined.
whether he be a Jesuit, Seminary or Massing Priest, for he is not bound to
answer to any other question, nor can be committed by force of this Act for his
Refusal.

Provided nevertheless, Stat. Sect. 9. License to travel above five miles. Alt.
3 Jac. 5.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any of the
persons which are hereby limited and appointed to continue and abide within
five miles of their usual dwelling place, or of such place where they were
born, or where their Father and Mother shall be dwelling as is aforesaid, shall
have necessary occasion or business to go and Travel out of the compass of the
said five miles; That then and in every such Case upon License in that behalf
to be gotten under the hands of two of the Justices of Peace of the same
County, with the privity and assent in writing of the Bishop of the Diocese, or
of the Lieutenant, or of any Deputy Lieutenant of the same County under their
hands, it shall and may be lawful for every such person to go and Travel about
such their necessary business, and for such time only for their traveling,
attending and returning as shall be comprised in the same License: Any thing
before in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

This Clause is repealed, Repeal. Stat. 3 Jac. 5.
and a new form of License appointed by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 5. which see
there Sect. 8.

Provided also, Stat. Sect. 10. Persons urged by Process or commanded to appear.
That if any such person so restrained as is aforesaid, shall be urged by
Process without fraud or covin, or be bounden without fraud or covin to make
appearance in any her Majesty's Courts, or shall be sent for, commanded or
required by any three or more of her Majesty's Privy Council, or by any four or
more of any Commissioners to be in that behalf nominated and assigned by her
Majesty, to make appearance before her Majesty's said Counsel or Commissioners,
That in every such Case, every such person so bounden, urged, commanded or
required to make such appearance, shall not incur any pain, forfeiture or loss
for traveling to make appearance accordingly, nor for his abode concerning the
same, nor for convenient time for his return back again upon the same.

Urged by Process.] If a Popish Recusant restrained by this Act be summoned by
Warrant of a Justice of Peace to appear before him, the Recusant ought not to
travel to such Justice out of his compass of 5 miles: For although a Justice of
Peace his Warrant be the Kings Process, Wha^ Process is here meant.
yet it is not intended here; For these words (urged by Process) are restrained
by the subsequent words to such Process as requires the Recusants appearance in
some one of the Kings Courts, and extend not to all Cases of Summons and
Process, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 83. mistakes. But if in the Case aforesaid
the Warrant be to Arrest the Recusant, and by force thereof he be carried by
the Constable, etc. out of the compass of five miles, there he is excused, and
shall forfeit nothing, for that it was done by compulsion: And yet if there be
any Covin between the Recusant and the Justice of Peace or Officer, it may be
otherwise.

The Kings Courts.
In any her Majesty's Courts.] All Courts wherein the proceedings are directed
by the Kings Laws, are the Kings Courts; and therefore a Court Leet, Court Leet.
though of an inferior nature and kept in the Lords name, yet is the Kings
Court; Co. 5. 39. Cawdries Case. Hetley 18.

Ecclesiastical Court.
If a Popish Recusant, restrained by this Act, be cited into the Ecclesiastical
Court, he may by force of this Proviso Travel out of the compass of five miles
to appear there; for all Ecclesiastical Courts are the Kings Courts, and the
Laws by which they proceed there are the Kings Laws. Vide Cawdries Case supra.

Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 5. Sect. 7.

Stat. Sect. 11. Persons which are to yield their bodies to the Sheriff.
And be it further provided and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
such person or persons so restrained, as is aforesaid, shall be bound or ought
to yield and render their bodies to the Sheriff of the County where they shall
happen to be, upon Proclamation in that behalf without fraud or covin to be
made, That then in every such Case every such person which shall be so bounden
or ought to yield and render their body as aforesaid, shall not incur any pain,
forfeiture or loss for Traveling for that intent and purpose only without any
fraud or covin, nor for convenient time taken for their return back again upon
the same.

This extends to all Cases in general where the Popish Recusant ought to render
his body to the Sheriff upon Proclamation, Proclamation.
and is not restrained to a Proclamation upon an Indictment for Recusancy. And
therefore if a Popish Recusant confined by this Act had been proclaimed upon
the Statute of Marlebridge in a Plea de Custodia as a Deforceor, he might
lawfully have gone out of the compass of five miles. The like he may do at this
day upon any other Proclamation commanding him to render his body to the
Sheriff.

Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 5. Sect. 7.

And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
Stat. Sect 12. An Offender upon open submission shall be discharged.
That if any person or persons that shall at any time hereafter offend against
this Act, shall before he or they shall be thereof convicted, come to some
Parish Church on some Sunday, or other Festival day, and then and there hear
Divine Service; And at Service time before the Sermon or reading of the Gospel,
make public and open Submission and Declaration of his and their Conformity to
her Majesty's Laws and Statutes as hereafter in this Act is declared and
appointed, That then the same Offender shall thereupon be clearly discharged of
and from all and every pains and forfeitures inflicted or imposed by this Act
for any of the said Offenses in this Act contained.

Before he or they shall be thereof convicted. Where submission will save
abjuration.
A Popish Recusant confined by this Act, whose Estate is under value, is
apprehended for offending against this Act, and before the expiration of three
months next after his apprehension is convicted of such Offense; and then
before the said three months expire conforms and makes such Submission and
Declaration as is here and in the former branch appointed: In this Case,
although he comes too late after Conviction to save the forfeiture of his Lands
and Goods, yet he shall not be compelled to abjure: For the affirmative words
here, that upon such Conformity, Submission and Declaration before Conviction
he shall be discharged of all pains and forfeitures, do not carry in them the
force of a negative, (viz.) That if it be after Conviction, he shall not be
discharged of any of them. And by the former branch of the Statute he is not
compellable to abjure, if at any time within three months next after his
apprehension he conforms, confesses and submits as is there appointed.

To some Parish Church. It must be in some Parish Church.
] It seems clear that no Submission, Confession or Declaration can discharge
the Popish Recusant who is an Offender within this Act from any pain or
forfeiture thereby inflicted, unless it be performed in some Parish Church: For
there is a great difference between the penning of this Statute, and that
branch of 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 35 Eliz 1.
where it is said, That the Offender shall be committed to Prison until he come
to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, and hear Divine
Service, and make such open Submission and Declaration of his Conformity as in
the Act is appointed: For there, there is an express designation of the place
where such Submission and Declaration shall be, (viz.) in any Church, Chapel
or usual place of Common Prayer whither the Offender comes, and this shall free
him from his Imprisonment. Vide that Statute Sect. 4. supra. But here where
it is said in the former part of this Act, That he shall abjure unless he comes
usually to Church, and make such Confession and Submission as is therein
afterward appointed and expressed, His coming usually to Church cannot be
applied to his Confession and Submission, for that is to be made but once and
not usually, and therefore there being there no place appointed where this
Confession and Submission shall be made, we must necessarily have recourse to
this later branch of the Act where a place is appointed, (viz.) some Parish
Church; so that the coming usually to Church, without this formal Submission
and Confession, or Declaration in some Parish Church, frees not the Offender
here in any Case from abjuration; although the coming to any Church, Chapel or
usual place of Common Prayer and hearing Divine Service, and making open
Submission and Declaration there, shall free an Offender within the Statute of
35 Eliz. cap. 1. from Imprisonment.

Parish Church.
What is a Parish Church, Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 4. supra.

Two several Submissions.
Submission.] If a Popish Recusant Indicted upon this Statute makes his
Submission, and brings with him into the Court of Kings Bench a Testimonial
thereof, its the course of that Court to cause him there to make his Submission
again upon his knees, which the Clerk of the Crown reads to him; And so was it
done in the Case of one Thoroughgood Pasch. 2. Car. 1. But Justice Jones said
there was no Statute to compel him to this second Submission; And Thoroughgood
complained that he was not therein dealt with according to Law. Latch. 16.

Stat. Sect. 13.
The same Submission to be as hereafter follows, that is to say,

The form of the Submission.
I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge that I have grievously offended God,
in contemning her Majesty's godly and lawful Government and Authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the
Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and I am heartily sorry for the same,
and do acknowledge and testify in my Conscience, that the Bishop or See of
Rome has not, nor ought to have any Power or Authority over her Majesty, or
within any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions: And I do promise and protest
without any dissimulation, or any color or means of any Dispensation, That
from henceforth I will, from time to time, obey and perform her Majesty's Laws
and Statutes in repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Service, and do my
uttermost endeavor to maintain and defend the same.

Over her Majesty or within any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions. What
Authority of the Pope is to be renounced.
] And not over her Majesty within any her Dominions, as Wingate tit. Crown
numb. 85. grossly misrecites this Submission: For that denies only the Popes or
See of Romes Authority over her Majesty, but not any other Authority which they
might claim over her Subjects: And it is clear by the disjunctive, or, (which
Wingate omits) that both these Authorities are intended to be denied by this
Submission.

Or any color or means of any Dispensation. Dispensation.
] These words, which are a very material part of the Submission, are likewise
omitted by Wingate.

Her Majesty's Laws and Statutes. The Queens Laws. Stat. 27 Eliz. 2.
] What is meant by her Majesty's Laws, Vide Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 7.

And that every Minister or Curate of every Parish where such Submission and
Declaration of Conformity shall hereafter be so made by any such Offender as
aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 14. The Minister shall enter the Submission into a Book.
shall presently enter the same into a Book to be kept in every Parish for that
purpose, and within ten days then next following, shall certify the same in
writing to the Bishop of the same Diocese.

Provided nevertheless, Stat. Sect. 15. A Recusant submitting and falling into
Relapse.
That if any such Offender after such Submission made as is aforesaid, shall
afterward fall into Relapse, or eftsoons become a Recusant in not repairing to
Church to hear Divine Service, but shall forbear the same contrary to the Laws
and Statutes in that behalf made and provided: That then every such Offender
shall lose all such benefit as he or she might otherwise by virtue of this Act,
have or enjoy by reason of their said Submission; And shall thereupon stand and
remain in such plight, condition and degree, to all intents, as though such
Submission had never been made.

Such Relapse, with the Indictment thereof, Relapse, where to be certified
is to be certified into the Court of Exchequer, as was done by the Justices of
the Kings Bench in the Case of Francis Holt. Pasch. 9 Jac. Bulstrode 1. 133.

Stat. Sect. 16. Married Women bound by this Act, saving in the Case of
Abjuration.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every Woman married, or hereafter to be married, shall be bound by all and
every Article, branch and matter contained in this Statute, other then the
Branch and Article of Abjuration before mentioned; And that no such Woman
married, or to be married, during marriage shall be in any wise forced or
compelled to abjure, or be abjured by virtue of this Act: Any thing therein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Stat. i Jac. cap. iv. An Act for the due execution of the Statutes against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, etc.
FOr the better and more due execution of the Statutes heretofore made as well
against Jesuits, Stat. Sect. 1. All Statutes made against Jesuits, Priests and
Recusants shall be put in Execution.
Seminary Priests, and other such like Priests, as also against all manner of
Recusants: Be it Ordained and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
That all and every the Statutes heretofore made in the Reign of the late Queen,
of famous memory, Elizabeth, as well against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
other Priests, Deacons, Religious and Ecclesiastical persons whatsoever, made,
ordained or professed, or to be made, ordained or professed, by any Authority
or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea of Rome, as those
which do in any wise concern the withdrawing of the Kings Subjects from their
due obedience, and the Religion now professed, and the taking of the Oath of
obedience unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, together with all
those made in the said late Queens time against any manner of Recusants, shall
be put in due and exact execution.

Oath of Obedience.] By the Oath of Obedience, Oath of Obedience. Stat. 1 Eliz.
1.
is here meant the Oath of Supremacy in the Stat. of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. which see
there Sect. 7. and by that name it is here called afterward Sect. 3.

Provided nevertheless, Stat. Sect. 2. A Recusant conforming himself shall be
discharged.
and be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That if any
that is or shall be a Recusant, shall submit or reform him or her self, and
become obedient to the Laws and Ordinances of the Church of England, and repair
to the Church and continue there during the time of the Divine Service and
Sermons, according to the true meaning of the Statutes in that behalf, in the
said late Queens time made and provided: That then every such person, for and
during such time as he or she shall so continue in such conformity and
obedience, shall from thenceforth be freed and discharged of and from any the
penalties and losses which the same person might otherwise sustain and bear, in
respect or by reason of such persons Recusancy.

According to the true meaning of the Statutes in that behalf.] It has been
doubted whether these words do refer only to the manner of the Recusants
conformity, or to the time likewise when it is to be done, as well as to the
manner: For if they refer to the time, then the Recusant is still bound
notwithstanding this Statute to conform before Judgment, according to the
Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
or his conformity afterward shall not discharge him of the penalty: But the
better opinion is, that by these words (according to the true meaning of the
Statutes) is to be intended only, that the Recusant must conform in such manner
as is there appointed; but as to the time, the general words here have enlarged
the time limited by 23 Eliz. If the Recusant conforms after Judgment, it is
sufficient.
For this Statute is made in further favor of the Recusant. So that now, if he
conforms after Judgment, it is time enough, and he shall be discharged of all
penalties in respect of his Recusancy: And if an Information tam pro Domino
Rege quam pro seipso be brought upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. against the
Recusant, and after Judgment had against him thereupon, he conforms, he shall
be discharged of the Judgment; but first his Conformity must appear of Record,
otherwise the Court cannot take notice of it; and, as for that, his remedies
against the King and the Informer must be several: His remedies against the
King and informer: Audita Quaerela Plea.
for against the Informer he must bring his Audita Quaerela, and against the
King he must plead his conformity, which he may do in this Case after Judgment,
for that no Audita Quaerela lies against the King, 11 H. 7. 10. and if he
should not be admitted to plead, he would be without any legal Remedy to
discharge himself of the forfeiture and Judgment, as to the Kings part, whose
execution will not be hindered by the Audita Quaerela against the Informer. But
if the Defendant neglect to put in his Plea, and Execution issues for the King,
and he be taken in Execution, he comes too late to plead his Conformity, and
has then no other way left to relieve himself as to the Kings part, but by his
Petition Petition.
to the King to pardon the Debt. Bulstrode 2. 324, 325. Dr. Fosters Case.
Rolls 1. 95. C. 41. the same Case. Vide Savile 23. C. 56. Tirringhams Case.

Stat. Sect. 3.
And if any Recusant shall hereafter die, his heir being no Recusant, that in
every such Case every such heir shall be freed and discharged of all and
singular the penalties, charges and encumbrances happening upon him or her, In
what Cases a Recusants heir shall be charged, in what not.
in respect or by reason of his or her Ancestors Recusancy. And if, at the
decease of any such Recusant, his heir shall happen to be a Recusant, and after
shall become conformable and obedient to the Laws and Ordinances of the Church
of England, and repair to the Church and continue there during the time of the
Divine Service and Sermons, according to the intent and true meaning of the
said Statutes and Ordinances in that behalf made as is aforesaid, and also
shall take the Oath of Supremacy, in such sort as that Oath is expressed in one
Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of our late Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth, before the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese; that in
every such Case, every such heir shall be freed and discharged of all and
singular the penalties, charges and encumbrances, happening upon him or her in
respect or by reason of any of his or her Ancestors Recusancy.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
That if the heir of any Recusant shall happen to be within the age of sixteen
years at the time of the decease of his or her Ancestor, and shall after his or
her said age of sixteen years become or be a Recusant; that in every such Case
any such heir shall not be freed or discharged of all or any of the penalties,
charges and encumbrances, happening upon him or her in respect or by reason of
any of his or her Ancestors Recusancy, until he or she shall submit or reform
him or her self, and become obedient to the Laws and Ordinances of the Church
of England, and repair to the Church, and continue there during the time of the
Divine Service and Sermons, according to the intent and true meaning of the
said Statutes and Ordinances in that behalf as is aforesaid, and shall take the
said Oath of Supremacy, in manner and form before expressed; and yet
nevertheless from and after such submission and Oath had and taken, every such
heir shall be freed and discharged of all and singular the penalties, charges
and encumbrances, happening upon him or her in respect or by reason of any of
his or her Ancestors Recusancy.

If any Recusant shall hereafter die.] That is, Convicted Recusant.
a Recusant either Convicted upon Proclamation and Default, or Convicted by
Verdict, Confession, etc. and adjudged: For, in both those cases, if the
Recusant die, the discharge of the heir depends upon his Conformity.

Of all and singular the penalties, Judgment against Tenant in Tail.
charges and encumbrances.] If Judgment be had at the Kings Suit against a
Recusant Tenant in Tail for Recusancy, this is a charge and encumbrance within
this Statute, of which the heir in Tail shall not be discharged, unless he
conforms, but must satisfy all the arrears incurred in the life time of his
Ancestor: For, it being a Debt to the King upon a Judgment, the intailed Lands
are liable thereto by the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. Stat. 33 H. 8. 39


But these two Clauses discharge the arrears of the Twenty pounds per month
incurred in the Recusants life time, upon the conformity of the heir, in such
Cases only where the two parts of the Recusants Lands were not seized before
his death: Seizure in the Recusants life time.
for if they are seized in his life time, and continue so till his death,
neither his Fee-simple Lands, nor his Intailed Lands (if a Judgment were had
against him for his Recusancy at the Kings Suit) shall be discharged upon the
heirs conformity, without payment of the arrears; for which Vide postea, Sect.
4.

Stat. Sect. 4. The two parts of a Recusants Lands shall go toward
satisfaction of the Twenty pounds per month.
And be it further Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That where
any seizure shall be had of the two parts of any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Leases or Farms, for the not payment of the Twenty pounds due
and payable for each month, according to the Statute in that Case lately made
and provided: That in every such Case, every such two parts shall, according to
the extent thereof, go toward the satisfaction and payment of the Twenty
pounds due and payable for each month and unpaid by any such Recusant; and that
the third part thereof shall not be extended or seized by the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors for not-payment of the said Twenty pounds payable for
each month, forfeited or lost by any such Recusant. And after his death shall
remain in the Kings hands until the arrears be satisfied.
And where any such seizure shall be had of the two parts of the Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Leases or Farms of any such Recusant as is
aforesaid, and such Recusant shall die (the debt or duty by reason of his
Recusancy not paid, satisfied or discharged) that in every such Case the same
two parts shall continue in his Majesty's possession, until the residue or
remainder of the said debt or duty be thereby or otherwise paid, satisfied or
discharged: And that his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall not seize or
extend any third part descending to any such heirs, or any part thereof, either
by reason of the Recusancy of his or her Ancestors, or the Recusancy of any
such heir.

What seizure is here meant.
Where any seizure shall be had.] That is, a seizure upon either a Judgment
against the Recusant, by Indictment on the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23
Eliz. 1 29 Eliz 6
or on Indictment and Conviction by Proclamation and default of appearance
according to the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. For the seizure of two parts of
the Recusants Lands was given the King by 29. upon default of payment of the
Twenty pounds per month in either of those Cases, as has been said, for which
see that Statute, Sect. 4.

Go toward the satisfaction and payment of the Twenty pounds. Stat. 29 Eliz 6
altered.
] Hereby a principal branch of the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. is altered: For
whereas by 29. the Queen might for non-payment of the forfeiture, have seized
two parts of a convicted Recusants Lands nomine poenae, and as a gage or
penalty until the Twenty pounds per month had been paid, and yet the profits
should not have gone toward the satisfaction of the said Twenty pounds per
month: This Statute was made for the ease and benefit of the Recusant in that
point; The two parts satisfactory of the penalty.
so that now if two parts of his Lands be seized for default of payment of the
forfeiture, the profits received to the Kings use, shall go toward
satisfaction thereof; and when the forfeiture is paid out of the profits, the
Recusant shall have his Land again, unless in such Case where the King by force
of the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
makes his Election, and seizes two parts in lieu of the Twenty pounds per
month.

And therefore the Resolution or Judgment said to be given in the Case of one
Gray, Anno 1. or 2. Jac. and cited in Beckets Case, 8 Jac. Lane 93. and by
Sergeant Bridgman in his Argument of Parker and Webbs Case. 16 Jac. Rolls 2.
25. and applied thereunto (viz.) That if a Recusant convicted fails of the
payment of the Twenty pounds per month, the King shall have his Lands as a gage
or penalty, and the profits shall not go toward satisfaction thereof: However
it were true as the Law stood upon 29 Eliz. and before the making of this Act
of 1 Jac. yet it is not Law at this day, nor could be applicable to either of
those Cases of Becket or Parker and Webb, which came to be debated long after
this Act was made, and the Law of 29 Eliz. altered in that point. Vide Stat. 29
Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 7.

Where any such seizure shall be had, etc.] This Relative (such) takes in both
the seizures beforementioned (viz.) a seizure upon Indictment and Judgment
thereupon by force of the Statute of 23 Eliz. and a seizure upon Conviction on
Proclamation and default according to the Statute of 29 Eliz. And, What seizure
is here meant.
Stat. 23 Eliz 1
29 Eliz. ^
as in both those Cases the Recusant who fails of the payment of the Twenty
pounds per month, shall have the benefit to discount the profits received by
the King, so the King shall in the like Cases of seizure retain the two parts
in his hands after the Recusants death, until the residue of the Debt or Duty
due and payable to the King be satisfied.

Where this extends not to Intailed Lands.
Two parts of the Lands, etc. of any such Recusant.] This Clause extends not to
Intailed Lands, unless where there is a Judgment for the King against the
Ancestor for his Recusancy: And therefore if the Recusant, convicted upon
Proclamation and default, be Tenant in Tail, and two parts of his Lands be
seized in his Life time for non-payment of the Twenty pounds per month, and he
die, the arrears not being satisfied to the King, yet the heir in Tail shall
have the Land out of the Kings hands without payment of the arrears: For that
such Conviction is in the nature of a Verdict only, Conviction upon
Proclamation no Judgment.
and not of a Judgment, as was held in Doctor Fosters Case, Rolls 1.94. C. 41.
And where a Statute gives to the King a seizure or forfeiture of Lands, it
shall not be intended of Lands in Tail, unless it be expressly so appointed by
the Statute, or by force of some other Statute cooperating therewith: In which
Case the Intailed Lands may be charged by general words in the Statute which
gives the forteiture or seizure. An instance whereof we have in the Case of a
Recusant Tenant in Tail, Indicted, Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
Convicted and Adjudged upon 23 Eliz. 1. for his Intailed Lands shall remain
after his death in the Kings possession until the arrears be satisfied, 29
Eliz. 6 33 H. 8. 39
and that by force of 29 Eliz. c. 6. and this Statute cooperating with the
Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. which charges the Lands of the heir in Tail with
debts due to the King upon a Judgment had against the Ancestor: Praemunire.
Stat. 16 R. 2. 5
But otherwise it is in the Case of a Praemunire upon the Statute of 16 R. 2.
cap. 5. which says the Lands and Tenements of the Offender shall be forfeit to
the King; for there his Intailed Lands shall be forfeit during his life only:
And the reason is, for that general words in an Act of Parliament, unless aided
by some other Act of Parliament, shall never take away the force of the
Statute, de donis conditionalibus. Co. 1. Inst. 130. 391. Co. 11.63. Godbolt
308. Lord Sheffeild and Ratcliffe: Treason. Stat. 26 H. 8. 13 5 E. 6. 11
And therefore in the Statutes of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. and 5 E. 6. cap. 11. which
make Intailed Lands forfeitable for Treason, the word (inheritance) was added
(any Estate of Inheritance) which expressly denotes Lands in Fee Tail as well as
Feesimple: Now there being neither in this Act or that of 29 Eliz. any express
appointment, that the two parts of all Lands seized in the Recusants life time,
wherein he had any Estate of Inheritance, shall after his death continue in the
Kings possession, nor no other Statute which charges the heir in Tail with the
forfeiture due to the King upon Conviction by Proclamation and Default, the
general words here (that his Lands, Tenements, etc. shall continue in the Kings
possession] shall not enforce a construction in prejudice of the Heir in Tail,
who claims by the Statute de donis conditionalibus, but (where there is no
Judgment) the Recusants Fee simple Lands shall after his death satisfy the
intent of these Statutes.

And so was the Law, in reference to intailed Lands, upon the Statute of 29
Eliz. cap. 6. which speaks of the full satisfaction of Arrearages in Case of
the death of the Recusant: Arrears where to be paid by the Heir in Tail, where
not
And the Arrears were to have been paid by the Heir in Tail only in such Case
where there was a Judgment obtained by the King against the Ancestor for his
Recusancy, but not where the Ancestor Tenant in Tail was convicted only upon
Proclamation and default; for in this last Case, the Heir in Tail was not bound
by the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. because it is not a Debt by Judgment as that
Statute requires. Moore 523. C. 691.

And thus the Opinion of the two Chief Justices, Trin. 43 Eliz. is to be
understood: for they held, That if intailed Lands had been seized for
non-payment of the 20 l. per month, and the Tenant in Tail had died, the issue
in Tail should not have had the Land out of the Queens hands before the Debt
were satisfied, but should have been charged with the said Debt. Cro. Eliz.
846. At the end of which Case is added a Dubitatur; But yet the Opinion there
held stands good, if it be intended only of a Conviction of the Ancestor by
Judgment upon Trial or Confession, and not of a Conviction upon Proclamation
and default.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, Stat.
Sect. 2. None shall go or send any other to a Seminary, etc.
That all and every person and persons under the Kings Obedience, which at any
time (after the end of this Session of Parliament) shall pass or go, or shall
send or cause to be sent any Child, or any other person under their or any of
their Government into any the parts beyond the Seas out of the Kings Obedience,
to the intent to enter into or be resident in any College, Seminary, or House
of Jesuits, Priests or any other Popish Order, Profession or Calling
whatsoever, or repair in or to any the same to be instructed, persuaded or
strengthened in the Popish Religion, or in any sort to profess the same; every
such person so sending or causing to be sent any Child or other person beyond
the Seas to any such purpose or intent, shall for every such Offense forfeit to
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the sum of one hundred pounds: and every
such person so passing or being sent beyond the Seas to any such intent and
purpose as is aforesaid, shall by Authority of this present Act, as in respect
of him or her self only, and not to or in respect of any of his Heirs or
Posterity, be disabled and made incapable to inherit, purchase, take, have or
enjoy any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Annuities, Profits, Commodities,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Debts, Duties, Legacies or Sums of money within
this Realm of England or any other his Majesty's Dominions: And that all and
singular Estates, Terms and other Interests whatsoever hereafter to be made,
suffered or done to or for the use or behoof of any such person or persons, or
upon any trust or confidence mediately or immediately to or for the benefit or
relief of any such person or persons, shall be utterly void and of none effect
to all intents, constructions and purposes.

Public Colleges, etc. only, here intended.
To any College, etc.] This Act extends only to public Houses or Colleges,
but not to such as are bred beyond the Seas in any private Popish Family. And
therefore the Statute of 3 Car. 1. cap. 2. Stat. 3 Car. 1. 2.
was made to supply that defect.

Stat. Sect. 6. They who are in Seminaries, etc. shall return
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person born
within this Realm, or any the Kings Majesty's Dominions, be at this present in
any College, Seminary, House or place in any parts beyond the Seas (to the end
to be instructed or strengthened in the Popish Religion) which shall not make
return into this Realm, or some of his Majesty's Dominions, within one year
next coming after the end of this Session of Parliament, and submit himself as
is aforesaid, shall be in respect of himself only, and not to or in respect of
any of his Heirs or Posterity, utterly disabled and incapable to inherit, have
or enjoy any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Debts
or other things aforesaid within this Realm, or any other his Majesty's
Dominions.

Stat. Sect. 7. Remedy for such as return into the Realm and become conformable.
Provided always, That if any such person or Child so passing, sent, sending or
now being beyond the Seas as aforesaid, to such intent as is before mentioned,
shall after become Conformable and Obedient unto the Laws and Ordinances of the
Church of England, and shall repair to the Church, and there remain and be as
is aforesaid, and continue in such Conformity according to the true intent and
meaning of the said Statutes and Ordinances: That in every such Case every such
person and Child, for and during such time as he or she shall continue in such
Conformity and Obedience, shall be freed and discharged of all and every such
disability and incapacity as is before mentioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That no
Woman, Stat. Sect. 8. No Woman or Child shall pass over the Seas without
License, except, etc.
nor any Child under the age of one and twenty years (except Sailers or
Ship-boys, or the Apprentice or Factor of some Merchant in Trade of
Merchandise) shall be permitted to pass over the Seas, (except the same shall
be by License of the King, his Heirs or Successors, or of some six or more of
the Kings Privy Council, thereunto first had under their hands) upon pain that
the Officers of the Port that shall willingly or negligently suffer any such to
pass, The forfeiture of the Officer of the Port. Owner of the Ship.
or shall not enter the names of such Passengers licensed shall forfeit his
Office, and all his Goods and Chattels; And upon pain that the Owner of any
Ship or Vessel, that shall wittingly or willingly carry any such over the Seas
without License as is aforesaid, shall forfeit his Ship or Vessel, and all the
Tackle; and every Master or Mariner Master and Mariners.
of or in any such Ship or Vessel, offending as aforesaid, shall forfeit all
their Goods, and suffer Imprisonment by the space of twelve months without Bail
or Mainprize.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 9. The
forfeiture for being or keeping a Schoolmaster contrary to this Act.
That no person after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next, shall keep
any School, or be a Schoolmaster out of any of the Universities or Colleges of
this Realm, except it be in some public or free Grammar School, or in some
such Noblemans or Noblewomans, or Gentleman's or Gentlewomans House as are not
Recusants, or where the same Schoolmaster shall be specially licensed thereunto
by the Archbishop, Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties of that Diocese,
upon pain that as well the Schoolmaster, as also the party that shall retain or
maintain any such Schoolmaster contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
Act, shall forfeit each of them for every day so wittingly offending forty
shillings.

Note, All Grammar Schools are not here excepted, Grammar Schools. Gentlemen's
Houses.
but only public or free Grammar Schools, nor yet all Gentlemen's Houses, but
only of such as are not Recusants, in both which respects this Statute is
defectively recited, in the late Additions to Dalton cap. 87. tit.
Schoolmaster, Sect. 1.

Stat. Sect. 10. The forfeitures how to be recovered.
The one half of all the penalties and sums of money beforementioned to be
forfeited, to be to the King his Heirs and Successors, the other to him or them
that shall or will sue for the same, in any the Courts of Record in
Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in which no
Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Stat. iii Jac. cap. iv. An Act for the better discovering and repressing of
Popish Recusants.
FOrasmuch as it is found by daily experience that many his Majesty's Subjects,
Stat. Sect. 1.
that adhere in their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the infection drawn
from thence, and by the wicked and devilish Counsel of Jesuits, Seminaries,
and other like persons dangerous to the Church and State, Some Popishly
affected do repair to the Church.
are so far perverted in the point of their Loyalties and due Allegiance unto
the Kings Majesty and the Crown of England, as they are ready to entertain and
execute any treasonable conspiracies and practices, as evidently appears by
that more then barbarous and horrible attempt to have blown up with Gunpowder
the King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons in the House of Parliament
Assembled, tending to the utter subversion of the whole State, lately
undertaken by the instigation of Jesuits and Seminaries, and in advancement of
their Religion by their Scholars taught and instructed by them to that
purpose, which attempt by the only goodness of Almighty God was discovered and
defeated: And where diverse persons Popishly affected, do nevertheless, the
better to cover and hide their false hearts, and with the more safety to attend
the opportunity to execute their mischievous designs, repair sometimes to
Church to escape the penalty of the Laws in that behalf provided.

For the better discovery therefore of such persons and their evil affections
to the Kings Majesty and the State of this his Realm, Stat. Sect. 2.
to the end that being known their evil purpose may be the better prevented: Be
it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That every Popish Recusant convicted or hereafter to be
convicted, which heretofore has conformed him or her self, or which shall
hereafter conform him or her self, and repair to the Church and continue there
during the time of Divine Service, according to the Laws and Statutes in that
behalf made and provided, shall within the first year next after the end of
this Session of Parliament (if he or she be conformed as aforesaid before the
end of this Session of Parliament) or within the first year next after that he
or she shall after this Session of Parliament so conform him or her self, and
repair to Church as aforesaid, and after the said first year, shall once in
every year following at the least, receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, in the Church of that Parish where he or she shall most usually abide
or be within the said year, wherein by the true meaning of this Statute he or
she ought so to receive.

The forfeiture of a conformed Recusant which does not receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper yearly.
And if there be no such Parish Church, then in the Church next adjoining to the
place of his or her such most usual abode. And if any Recusant so conformed,
shall not receive the said Sacrament of the Lords Supper accordingly, he or she
shall for such not receiving, lose and forfeit for the first year, Twenty
pounds, and for the second year for such not receiving, Forty pounds, and for
every year after for such not receiving, threescore pounds, until he or she
shall have received the said Sacrament as is aforesaid. And if after he or she
shall have received the said Sacrament as is aforesaid, and after shall
eftsoons at any time offend in not receiving the said Sacrament as is
aforesaid, by the space of one whole year; that in every such Case the person
so offending shall for every such offense lose and forfeit Threescore pounds of
lawful English money, the one moiety to be to our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him that will sue
for the same: And to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts or Record at
Westminster, or before Justices of Assize, or general Goal delivery, or before
Justices of the Peace at their general Quarter Sessions, by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection or wager of Law
shall be allowed.

Popish Recusants.
Every Popish Recusant convicted.] Wingate tit. Crown numb. 98. speaks
indefinitely, as if this extended to all Recusants whatsoever, which is
contrary to the express words of the Statute.

Conviction must be showed in certain.
In an Information upon this Statute for not receiving the Sacrament; the
Conviction of the party for Recusancy ought to be showed in certain, before
whom, in what Court, etc. For before he is convicted of Recusancy, he is not
liable to the penalty inflicted by this Act for not receiving: And yet if it be
only generally showed in the Information, that the Defendant was convicted in
due form of Law, and the Defendant does not demur thereto, but pleads not
guilty, and it be found against him, there Judgment shall not be stayed for
this defect: for he has lost his advantage, and by his Plea has admitted the
point of Conviction, and at the Trial the only thing in issue was whether he
had received the Sacrament, and not whether he was convicted. Tanfeild Chief
Baron compared this Case to that of Debt upon an Obligation, and in the
Declaration no place is shown; That is not good: But if the Defendant Pleads a
Release, he shall never afterward take advantage of the Defect in the
Declaration. Cro. Hill. 12. Jac. 365.366. Sivedale versus Sir Edward Lenthall.

Which shall hereafter conform him or her self, Conformity generally showed,
sufficient.
etc.] This conformity need not be set forth in the Information in every
particular circumstance, as when or before whom the Popish Recusant conformed
himself: For it is sufficient, if it be said, that he went to Church and
continued there during Divine Service, and afterward neglected to receive the
Sacrament, etc. And upon such Conformity and neglect he is liable to the
penalty inflicted by this Act, although he never went before the Ordinary.
Ordinary.
Cro. Hill. 12. Jac. 366.

And for every year after for such not receiving threescore pounds.] Note, the
Statute says not, that the Offender shall forfeit for the first, second and
third offense, but for the first and second year, and for every year after; for
if it had been said he should have forfeited Twenty pounds for the first
offense, Forty pounds for the second, and Threescore pounds for the third; he
must have been convicted and have had Judgment of the first offense before he
could have incurred the penalty for the second, and of the second before he
could have incurred the penalty for the third: And every one of these offenses
must have appeared judicialiter, which could not be ante Judicium: But here,
where it is said, he shall forfeit Twenty pounds for the first year, Forty
pounds for the second, and Threescore pounds for every year after, it is
otherwise. And the Offender shall forfeit Threescore pounds for the third year,
although he was never convicted for the first or second year: In an Information
for the third year, conviction for the first or second year, not necessary.
And therefore in an Information brought upon this Statute for Threescore
pounds against a Popish Recusant, convicted for Recusancy, who has conformed
and neglected to receive the Sacrament the third year after his Conformity:
It Is sufficient to set forth that he was a Popish Recusant, and was convicted
and conformed himself, and went to Church, etc. two years before such a day,
and that after the said day he failed for a whole year to receive the
Sacrament, without mentioning what he did the first or second year after his
conformity: And so was the Information in the Exchequer in the Case of Sir
Edward Lenthal, Cro. Hill. 12 Jac. 365.

Shall for every such offense lose and forfeit Threescore pounds. Receiving the
Sacrament and neglecting it afterward:
] If a Popish Recusant once receive the Sacrament after his Conformity, and
afterward neglect so to do within the time prescribed by this Act, and is
guilty of such neglect for two years together; although he was never convicted
for the first year, yet an Information lies against him, and he shall forfeit
Threescore pounds for the second year: For he is liable to pay so much for
every offense, that is, for every year wherein he neglects to receive the
Sacrament after he has once received it, The Informer may sue for any year.
and the Informer is at his liberty for which offense or year he will inform,
whether for the first, second, etc. And the reason of this is, because here are
no steps or gradations to increase the penalty for the second or third offense,
but the penalty is equal and a like in this Case for every offense.

It is observable, that the Popish Recusant who after his conformity receives
the Sacrament, and afterward neglects so to do, for the space of one or more
years, is in worse Condition then he who conforms and receives it not at all:
For in this last Case he shall forfeit but Twenty pounds for the first, and
Forty pounds for the second year: But if he once receive the Sacrament, and
afterward neglect it for the space of two years, he shall forfeit for each of
those years Threescore pounds.

To him that will sue for the same.] An Information upon this Branch of the
Statute must be brought by an Informer Qui tam etc. within a year after the
offense or neglect, Within what time he must sue.
or he can take no advantage thereof: For such an Information is within the
Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 5. Stat. 31 Eliz. 5
Cro. Hill. 12 Jac. 366. Vide Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 9.

Before whom a Common Informer cannot sue.
Or before Justices of Assize etc.] Note, that notwithstanding these words, an
Information on this Statute by an Informer Qui tam etc. for not receiving the
Sacrament cannot be brought before Justices of Assize or Goal delivery, or
Justices of Peace: For no Common Informer can sue for the King and himself
before any of those Justices, but must sue in one of the Courts of Record at
Westminster, as was resolved, Mich. 4. Car. 1. Jones 193. Vide Stat. 23. Eliz.
cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
Sect. 9.

Stat. Sect. 3. Presenting the monthly absence from Church of a Recusant.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the
Churchwardens and Constables of every Town, Parish or Chapel for the time
being, or some one of them, or if there be none such, then the chief Constables
of the Hundred where such Town, Parish or Chapel is or shall be, or one of
them, as well in places exempt as not exempt, shall once in every year present
the monthly absence from Church of all and all manner of Popish Recusants
within such Towns and Parishes, and shall present the names of every of the
Children of the said Recusants, being of the age of nine years and upwards,
abiding with their said Parents, and as near as they can the age of every of
the said Children, A Recusants Children and Servants.
as also the names of the Servants of such Recusants, at the general or Quarter
Sessions of that Shire, limit, division or liberty.

Of all and all manner of Popish Recusants. Whose monthly absence from Church
must be presented, and whose not.
] As this Act is penned, it seems that the Churchwardens and Constables are not
bound thereby to present the monthly absence from Church of any of the Children
or Servants of a Popish Recusant, although such Children or Servants be
Recusants, unless they are Popish Recusants; And that it is sufficient, to
satisfy the Statute, to present their names, without taking any notice of
their absence from Church: But if they be Popish Recusants, they fall within
the general words of the Act, and their monthly absence ought to be presented
as well as that of their Parents or Masters: Wingate in his Abridgment of this
Statute tit. Crown numb. 100. has clearly mistaken the meaning thereof in this
particular: for he tells us that the monthly absence of all the Children and
Servants of a Popish Recusant ought to be presented.

At the general or Quarter Sessions. General or Quarter Sessions. Stat. 23
Eliz. 1
] What is meant by those words, vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 4. The
presentiments recorded.
That all such presentiments shall be accepted, entered and recorded in the said
Sessions by the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk for the time being, or his
Deputy, without any Fee to be had, asked or taken for the same; And in default
of such presentment to be made, the said Churchwardens, Constables, or High
Constables respectively shall for every such default forfeit twenty shillings:
And in default of such accepting, entering and recording without Fee as
aforesaid, the said Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk shall for every such
Offense forfeit and lose forty shillings.

And that upon every Presentment of such monthly absence as aforesaid, The
reward of the Churchwardens and Constables.
whereupon such party so presented shall after happen to be Indicted and
Convicted, (not being for the same absence before presented) Then the said
Churchwardens, Constables or High Constables respectively so making such
Presentiments, shall have a reward of forty shillings to be levied out of the
Recusants Goods and Estate, in such manner and form as by the more part of the
said Justices shall be by Warrant under their Hands and Seals then and there
ordered and appointed.

Stat. S^ct. 5. What Justices shall hear and determine these Offenses.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Assize and Goal delivery at their Assizes, and the said Justices of Peace at
their said Sessions shall have Power and Authority by virtue of this Act to
enquire, hear and determine of all Recusants and Offenses, as well for not
receiving the Sacrament aforesaid according to the true meaning of this Law, as
for not repairing to Church according to the meaning of former Laws, in such
manner and form as the said Justices of Assize and Goal delivery do, or may now
do by former Laws in the Case of Recusancy for not repairing to Church; And
also shall have power at their Assizes and Goal delivery, and at the Sessions
(in which any Indictment against any person, either for not repairing to Church
according to former Laws, or not receiving the said Sacrament according to this
Law, The effect of the Proclamation.
shall be taken) to make Proclamation, By which it shall be commanded, that the
body of every such Offender shall be rendered to the Sheriff of the same County,
or Bailiff or other keeper of the Goal of the Liberty, before the next Assizes
and general Goal delivery, or before the next general or Quarter Sessions
respectively to be holden for the said Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty: And
if at the said next Assizes, and general Goal delivery, or Sessions, the same
Offender so proclaimed shall not make appearance of Record, Conviction of a
Recusant.
That then upon every such Default recorded, the same shall be as sufficient a
Conviction in Law of the said Offense whereof the party shall stand Indicted as
aforesaid, as if upon the same Indictment a Trial by Verdict thereupon had
proceeded, and been found against him or her, and recorded.

General or Quarter Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1 Power of Justices of Peace
revived. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1 29 Eliz. 6.
At their said Sessions, etc. General or Quarter Sessions, etc.] What Sessions
are here meant, vide 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

To enquire, hear and determine.] This is intended of Indictments only, and
revives the power of Justices of Peace given them by the Statute of 23 Eliz.
cap. 1. and taken from them by the negative words of the Statute of 29 Eliz.
cap. 6. so that now the Justices of Peace may proceed to Judgment against the
Recusant upon 23. or convict him upon Proclamation and default of appearance;
and so may the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery Justices of Assize and Goal
delivery.
proceed either way: For the words of this Statute, and that of 29. which give
the Proclamation being in the affirmative, The Proclamation may be waved.
do not take away the proceedings upon 23. but that the Justices may wave the
Conviction by Proclamation, if they please; Nor is the Informers Informer.
popular Suit taken away by 29. or by this Statute. Co. 11.61. Dr. Fosters
Case. vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

Against any Person, either for not repairing to Church, This branch extends to
all Recusants.
etc.] So that this Branch of the Statute, which gives the Conviction by
Proclamation, extends to other Recusants besides Popish Recusants, and is not
restrained to this latter sort, but is misrecited in this particular by Dalton
V. cap. 110. tit. Forfeiture for Felony.

Shall be rendered to the Sheriff etc. before the next Assizes, etc.] In an
Action brought against Sir John Webb and his Wife, for recovery of twenty
pounds per month for the Recusancy of the Wife; The Defendants plead, that the
Feme was before that time convicted for the same absence upon Indictment at the
Kings Suit, Proclamation erroneous.
and Proclamation made that she should render her self at the next Assizes, and
default of appearance thereupon; But it was resolved by the Court of Kings
Bench, That the Plea was ill, and that this was not a Conviction according to
Law, and therefore was in effect as no Conviction: For the Proclamation was
erroneous in two points. 1. In the person to whom; the Statute says it shall
be proclaimed that the Offenders body shall be rendered to the Sheriff, etc. But
this Proclamation was, That she should render her self to the Justices of
Assize: For the rendering of the body to the Sheriff is a material point: And
the intent of the Statute is not pursued in this Proclamation: For the intent
was, that Recusants, being dangerous members of the Commonwealth, should be in
the Custody of the Sheriff, etc. ne nocere valiant. 2. In the time when; The
Proclamation was, that she should render her self at the next Assizes, but the
Statute says before the next Assizes; And when the Proclamation is ill, the
Conviction for default of appearance thereupon cannot be good, nor shall bar
the King or the Informer of their Action: And although by the subsequent Clause
in this Act, That no Proclamation shall be avoided for any defect, etc. the
Recusant perhaps may be estopped to take such exception to the Proclamation,
yet the King is not: Palmer 40.41. Bridgman 122. Rolls 2.108. Note that Palmer
in his Report of this Case has stated the first difference between the Statute
and Proclamation as it is here laid down, and so the truth of the Case was; But
in reciting Bridgmans Argument, he reports it quite contrary, viz. That the
Proclamation was, That the Recusants body should be rendered to the Sheriff, and
that it ought to have been that it should be rendered to the Justices of Assize;
But this is a mistake, and contrary to the Statute, and the truth of the Case.

Or other keeper of the Goal. Keeper of a Goal.
] A keeper of a Goal may be by usage or prescription, Lib. Assiz. 259. A. 42.
Pl. 7. Co. 1. Inst. 114. And if the person indicted for Recusancy, live in a
Corporation where the Sheriff has not to do, and he be Proclaimed upon this
Statute, he may render himself to the keeper of the Goal there.

Shall not make appearance of Record.] And if the Recusant do appear of Record
at the Assizes, Appearance shall save the default.
Goal delivery or general or quarter Sessions, it shall be sufficient to save
his default, although he did not render himself to the Sheriff upon the
Proclamation; and this is clear by the words of the Statute which is grossly
mistaken in this particular by Wingate, tit. Crown numb. 102. who says, the
Recusant shall be convicted if he render not his Body to the Sheriff or Bailiff
of the Liberty, and that default be recorded.

Appearance how to be made.
This appearance must be in proper person, and not by Attorney: for none can at
first appear by Attorney, unless enabled by some Statute; and all appearances
by the Defendant in any Court ought by the Common Law to be in person, Co.
10.101. Bewfages Case. But after a Plea pleaded to an Indictment, an Attorney
may be admitted at the discretion of the Court, if they think fit, but not
otherwise, and in some Cases not without a special Writ directed to the
Justices to that purpose. Vide 16 E. 4. 5. Fitz. N. B. 26.

It must be entered of record.
The party Indicted and Proclaimed, who appears at the Assizes or Sessions must
take care that his appearance be entered of Record: For if the Clerk of the
Assizes, or Clerk of the Peace should mistake, and instead thereof record his
default, he has no way to avoid his standing convicted; Action upon the Case.
But is put to his Action upon the Case against such Clerk of the Assizes or
Peace. Vide Popham 29. and Keilway 180.

What is a good appearance, and what not.
The personal presence at the next Assizes or Sessions of the party indicted of
Recusancy and Proclaimed, although he continue there from the beginning to the
ending, is no sufficient ground to record his appearance, nor shall save his
default: For although he be there personally present, and openly confess
himself to be the same person who was Indicted, and against whom the
Proclamation issued, yet if he deny to appear upon the Proclamation, or to
consent that his appearance be entered of Record, it seems that his appearance
cannot be Recorded, but his default shall, and he shall stand Convicted
thereupon: And this is no more an appearance then where a Prisoner is brought
to the Common Pleas Bar by habeas Corpus, to the intent to have him appear to
an Original brought against him, and he denies to appear to the Action, in
which Case his appearance cannot be Recorded, as was resolved in Ascoughs Case,
43 Eliz. Gouldsborough 118.

Shall be as sufficient a conviction in Law.] That is, a Recusant thus
Convicted upon Proclamation and Default of appearance, shall be in the same
Condition as if he were convicted by Verdict, but no Judgment is given.
Bridgman 122. Parker versus Webb.

But this Conviction upon Proclamation is no Judgment, as was resolved in
Doctor Fosters Case, Co. 11.65. Conviction upon Proclamation, no Judgment.
And although it shall make the Recusant liable to the several forfeitures,
penalties and incapacities inflicted on Recusants convict, yet it shall not
operate as a judgment, as has been already showed in diverse instances.

For this reason, it has been questioned whether, if a Recusant be Convicted
upon Indictment and Proclamation, the King may not wave his advantage of this
Conviction, and bring his Action of Debt given him by the Statute of 35 Eliz.
cap. 1. Stat. 35 Eliz. 1
For that such Conviction is no Judgment, and consequently ought not to bind
the King, as a Judgment against the Recusant should have done. Palmer 40.41.
Sir John Webbs Case.

Worsley obtained a Patent to have all the Penalties of Recusants convict.
Although such a Patent was illegal, for that the King cannot grant the penalty
of a penal Law to a Subject, for which Vide Rolls 1.10. C. 11. Roy versus
Tollin, Hobart 155. Colt and Glover versus the Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, Ib. 183. Davison versus Barber; yet, admitting the Patent to be
good, The King cannot grant the forfeiture on a penal Law.
it was resolved that the penalties of Recusants convicted by Proclamation
should not pass by those general words, Rolls 1. 94, 95. C. 41. Doctor Fosters
Case.

And be it further Enacted, Stat. Sect. 6. The penalty of a convicted Recusant.
That every offender in not repairing to Divine Service, but forbearing the
same contrary to the Statutes in that behalf made and provided, that hereafter
shall fortune to be thereof once convicted, shall in such of the Terms of
Easter and Michaelmas as shall be next after such Conviction, pay into the
Receipt of the Exchequer, after the rate of Twenty pounds, for every month
which shall be contained in the Indictment whereupon such conviction shall be:
And shall also for every month after such Conviction, without any other
Indictment or Conviction, forfeit Twenty pounds, and pay into the Receipt of
the Excheqver aforesaid, at two times in the year, that is to say, in every
Easter and Michaelmas Term as much as then shall remain unpaid after the rate
of Twenty pounds for every month after such Conviction, except in such Cases,
where the King shall and may by force of this Act refuse the same, and take two
parts of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Leases and Farms of such
Offender, till the said party being Indicted for not coming to Church, contrary
to former Laws, shall conform himself, and come to Church according to the
meaning of the Statute in that behalf made and provided.

What Convictions are here meant.
Once Convicted.] This extends to all Convictions whatsoever upon Indictment,
whether by Verdict, Confession, etc. whereupon Judgment is given, as well as to
Convictions upon Proclamation and default: And the penalty of Twenty pounds per
month shall in any of the said Cases run on forever after, and be appropriated
to the King. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6
Vide Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 4.

In what Term the forfeiture is to be paid.
In such of the Terms of Easter and Michaelmas as shall be next after such
conviction.] Here Easter and Michaelmas is to be taken disjunctively for Easter
or Michaelmas, as it is in the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 4. For the
meaning is not, that the Recusant shall have both of the Terms of Easter and
Mithaelmas next after his Conviction, wherein to pay the forfeiture of Twenty
pounds for every month contained in the Indictment. But he ought to pay the
whole into the Exchequer the next Easter or Michaelmas Term, which shall first
happen after his Conviction: And therefore if he be convicted in February, he
ought to pay the whole the next Easter Term (unless where the King chooses to
seize the two thirds of his Lands by force of this Statute) as was admitted in
the Case of Standen and the University of Oxford, Hill. 20 Jac. Jones 24. 25.
And in the Lady Webbs Case, who was convicted in March, the pleading was, that
in the Easter Term then next following, the said Katherine did not pay into the
Exchequer according to the rate of 20 l. per month, without any mention of
Michaelmas Term; Bridgman Pasch. 16 Jac. 121.

For every month after such Conviction.] By this Clause and that of 29 Eliz.
cap. 6. Sect. 4. 29 Eliz. 6. Penalty appropriated to the King.
to the same purpose, after the Recusant is once Convicted, the penalty of
Twenty pounds per month shall run on without any new Indictment or Conviction,
and shall be for ever afterward appropriated to the King alone, and paid into
the Exchequer: so that the Informer cannot bring any popular Action or
Information for the Twenty pounds per month, Informer barred.
for any time incurred after such Conviction, but is utterly barred, Co. 11.61.
Doctor Fosters Case. Rolls 1. 93. C. 41. the same Case. Owen 37. Sulherd and
Evererds Case.

The Lady Webb was Indicted and Convicted of Recusancy upon Proclamation and
default of appearance, Whether barred in the Case of a Feme Covert.
and afterward an Informer Qui tam etc. sued her and her Husband for a new
offense of Recusancy in the Wife, subsequent to such Conviction, to which they
both pleaded the said Conviction at the Kings Suit: The question was whether
the Informer should be barred by this Plea, or whether the Information was
maintainable notwithstanding such former Conviction of the Wife; for that the
Wife seems not to be such an Offender as is here intended; because she can have
no Goods or Lands during the Husbands life which may be seized for non-payment
of the penalty: But it was granted on all hands, that, if she had been a Feme
sole, this had been a good Plea in bar of the Informers popular Suit, for then
she had been bound to pay the Twenty pounds per month into the Exchequer, and
she should not be doubly punished both that way and at the Suit of the
Informer: And for the same reason it was urged, that this Information would not
lie against the Husband and Wife; for after the Husbands death, she would be
liable to pay into the Exchequer all the arrears after the rate of Twenty
pounds per month from the time of her Conviction, and her goods and two parts
of her Lands might be then seized for non-payment thereof: And if the Husband
and Wife should in the mean time, at the Suit of the Informer, pay Twenty
pounds per month for part of the same time, for which the Wife was liable to
pay after the Husbands death, this would be a double punishment for one and the
same offense; and it was further said, that it was usual where the Wife was
Indicted and Convicted for Recusancy, Seizure of the Wives Lands and Leases.
to seize by Exchequer Process the Lands and Leases which the Husband had in
her right; and one Woods Case was cited to this purpose, which proves that a
Feme Covert is within the meaning of the Act; and therefore after she is once
Convicted upon Indictment, shall be no more subject to the Informers popular
Suit, then a Feme sole: Cro. Pasch. 16 Jac. 481.482.

But this last point is much to be questioned, for the Lands and Leases of the
Wife are the Husbands during the Coverture: and it is a general rule, that his
Goods or Lands cannot be seized for the forfeiture or penalty, where the Wife
only is Indicted and Convicted of the Offense.

See more of this matter antea, Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz 1
Sect. 9.

A Recusant is Indicted for absenting himself from Church for 12 months, and
afterward is Convicted upon that Indictment: Where an Informer may sue after
Conviction upon Indictment.
Quaere, whether nevertheless the Informer Qui tam etc. may not sue him for his
absence for the months intervening between the time laid in the Indictment, and
the time of his Conviction: For these words here, viz. (after such Conviction)
seem to relate to the proximum antecedens, (every month) and to imply, that the
penalty here appropriated to the King, is only the penalty due for the months
which incur after such Conviction upon Indictment at the Kings Suit; but not to
hinder the Informer after Conviction from suing for the months incurred before
Conviction.

Except in such Cases where the King shall etc. refuse the same. The King may
seize two parts presently after Conviction.
] If a man be Indicted and Convicted of Recusancy, the King is not bound to
stay till the next Easter or Michaelmas Term, to see whether the Recusant will
tender twenty pounds for every month contained in the Indictment, and incurred
after such Conviction; for the King having his Election whether he will accept
thereof, or seize two parts of the Recusants Lands, A Commission for seizure of
the Lands may issue out presently, if the King will wave the twenty pounds per
month: For he may take his Election as soon as he will, after Conviction: By
Jones Justice in the Case of Standen and the University of Oxford. Jones 24.

Stat. Sect. 7. Every Conviction shall be certified into the Exchequer
And that every Conviction recorded for any Offense beforementioned, shall
from the Justices before whom the Record of such Conviction shall be remaining,
be certified into the Kings Majesty's Court of Exchequer, before the end of the
Term following such Conviction, in such convenient certainty for the time and
other circumstances, as the Court of Exchequer may thereupon award out Process
for the seizure of the Lands and Goods of every such Offender, as the Cause
shall require: And if default shall be made in any part of any payment
aforesaid contrary to the form herein before limited, that then and so often,
the Kings Majesty his Heirs and Successors shall and may by process out of the
said Exchequer, take, seize and enjoy all the Goods, and two parts as well of
all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms of such Offender,
as of all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments liable to such seizure,
or to the penalties aforesaid, by the true meaning of this Act, leaving the
third part only of the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases and
Farms to and for the maintenance and relief of the same Offender, his Wife,
Children and Family.

Timber Trees.
All the Goods.] A Recusant convicted is Tenant for Life, the Remainder to a
Stranger in Fee: He in the Remainder, with the Recusants assent, cuts down
Timber Trees and sells them: In this Case the King can be no ways entitled to
the Trees. Bulstrode 1.133.

Vide Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 4.

As Well of all the Lands etc. Leases and Farms of such Offender. Lease in trust
for another.
] Elizabeth Bows was convicted of Recusancy, and she standing so Convicted, a
Lease was made to her in trust which she conveyed over according to the trust:
The question was, whether the King might seize this Lease. And the reason given
in Lane 39. why the King should have the Term is, because the Recusant after
she was Convicted was not capable of any trust, and therefore the Conveyance
made by her was as if it had been voluntary, without relation to the Trust;
Tamen quaere, by what Law a Recusant, merely for the matter of Recusancy, is
incapable of any Trust, although Convicted.

All other the Lands etc. liable to such seizure, Copyhold Lands. Stat. 29
Eliz. 6.
or to the penalties aforesaid.] Whether Copyholds be liable to such seizure,
vide Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 4.

Lands are conveyed to A. in trust for B. a convicted Recusant; Lands in trust
for a Recusant.
Quaere whether the King may seize such Lands for the Recusants non-payment of
the twenty pounds per month; for if he make his Election and accepts of two
thirds in lieu of the twenty pounds per month, there is no question but such
Lands are liable to seizure; For the words of the subsequent Clause are, That
the King may seize two parts of all Lands that shall come to any other person
to the use of or in Trust for such Recusant; But in this Clause, which relates
to the seizure of two parts for non-payment, the words seem to be more
restrictive. Vide, Lane 105. 106. Halseys Case.

And whereas by an Act made in the Session of Parliament holden by Prorogation
at Westminster in the three and twentieth year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, entitled, Stat. Sect. 8. The Stat. of 23 Eliz. 1. touching a
Recusants monthly forfeiture.
An Act to retain the Subjects of the said late Queen in their due Obedience,
It was, amongst other things, Enacted by Authority of the said Parliament, That
every person above the age of sixteen years, which should not repair to some
Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, but forbear the same contrary
to the tenor of a Statute made in the first year of the Reign of the said late
Queen for Uniformity of Common Prayer, and being thereof lawfully convicted,
should forfeit to the said Queen for every month, after the end of the said
Session of Parliament, which he or she should so forbear, twenty pounds of
lawful English money, as in and by the said Act of Parliament more at large
appears.

And whereas afterward by another Act of Parliament of the said Queen, It was
further Enacted by the Authority of the said Parliament, (amongst other things)
how and when the said payments of the said 20 l. should be made, and that if
default should be made in any part of any payment of the said twenty pounds,
contrary to the form in the said last specified Statute limited, that then and
so often the said Queen should and might, by Process out of her Highness
Exchequer, take, seize and enjoy all the Goods and two parts as well of all the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms of such Offender, as of
all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments liable to such seizure or to
the penalties aforesaid, by the true meaning of the said Act of Parliament,
leaving the third part only of the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Leases and Farms to and for the maintenance and relief of the same Offender,
his Wife, Children and Family, as in and by the last specified Statute more at
large also may appear: Now, forasmuch as the said penalty of twenty pounds
monthly is a greater burden unto men of small living, then unto such as are of
better ability, and do refuse to come unto Divine Service as aforesaid, who
rather then they will have two parts of their Lands to be seized, will be ready
always to pay the said twenty pounds according to the limitation of the said
Statutes, and yet retain the residue of their livings and Inheritance in their
own hands, being of great yearly value, which they do for the most part employ
(as experience has taught) to the maintenance of Superstition and Popish
Religion, and to the relief of Jesuits, Seminaries, Popish Priests and other
dangerous persons to the State: Therefore; to the intent that hereafter the
penalty for not repairing to Divine Service might be inflicted in better
proportion upon men of great ability: Be it Enacted by the Authority of this
present Parliament, The King may refuse 20 l. a month, and take two parts of a
Recusants Lands.
That the Kings Majesty his Heirs and Successors, shall from and after the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next coming after the end of this Session of
Parliament, have full power and liberty to refuse the penalty of twenty pounds
a month, though it be tendered ready to be paid according to the Law, and
thereupon to seize and take to his own use, and the uses, intents and purposes
hereafter limited, two parts in three to be divided, as well of all the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms, that at the time of such seizure
shall be, or afterward shall come to any the said Offenders in not coming to
Church, or any other to his or her use, or in trust for him or her, or at his
or her disposition, or whereby or wherewith, or in consideration whereof such
Offender or his Family, or any of them shall be relieved, maintained or kept,
as of all other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in any wise or at any time
liable to such seizure, or to the penalties aforesaid, and the same to retain
to his own and other uses, intents and purposes hereafter in this Act
appointed, till every such Offender shall conform him or her self respectively
as aforesaid, in lieu and full recompense of the twenty pounds monthly that,
during his such seizure and retainer, shall incur any thing in the said
Statutes or any of them, or any other Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: saving to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, and all and every person and persons, Saving the Right of others.
bodies politic and corporate their Heirs and Successors, (other then the said
Offender his or her Heirs, and all claiming to his or their use, or in trust
for him or them, or at his or their will or disposition) all and all manner of
Leases, Rents, Conditions, and other Rights and Titles whatsoever had, made and
done (bona fide) and without fraud and covin before such seizure.

Though it be tendered, or ready to be paid.] By this Branch of the Act, a new
advantage is given to the King against the Recusant: For whereas by the Statute
of 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6.
the convicted Recusant had his Election to pay the King twenty pounds per
month, and so prevent the seizure of the two third parts of his Lands; now by
this Statute that Election is taken away, Election taken from the Recusant, and
given to the King.
and the choice is given to the King whether he will accept of the twenty
pounds per month, or refuse it and seize two third parts of the Recusants Lands
in lieu thereof; and if the King chooses the Lands, the tender of the twenty
pounds per month at the Exchequer will not save the seizure, but the King shall
enjoy the Lands notwithstanding. Jones 24, 25. Standen versus University of
Oxford.

Hereditaments.] An Advowson is an Hereditament, Hereditament, Advowson.
and passes by that word. 18 Eliz. Dyer 351. and is devisable by the Statute of
32 H. 8. cap. 1. of Wills as an Hereditament; and, if it be an Advowson in
gross, yet it may be seized by the King by force of this Act as part of his two
parts of the Recusants Hereditaments: Jones 23, 24. Standen versus University
of Oxford: For it is a thing valuable, and shall be Assets, and is extendable
for the Kings Debt; and upon a Writ of right of an Advowson there shall be a
Recovery in value, scil. for every mark twelve pence. Fitzh. Recovery in value
9. 11. Hobart 304. London versus the Chapter of Southwell. Co. 1. Inst. 374.
Britton 185.

In the late Additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 23. it is said,
That the King may refuse the twenty pounds per month, and take to two parts of
the Recusants Lands, and all the Goods etc. And an Advowson is without that
Clause: and the said Case of Standen and the University of Oxon is there cited
for Authority; But this is a mistake as to the Clause it self, and as to the
point in Law, and the Authority brought for it: For in truth there is no such
Clause in this Statute, nor in any other, that the King upon refusal of the
twenty pounds per month should take the Recusants Goods: For the seizure of the
Goods is given where the Offender fails of payment of the twenty pounds per
month, Where a Recusants Goods cannot be seized.
but not where the King discharges him of that payment by refusing it; so that
where the King refuses the twenty pounds per month, the Recusants Goods cannot
be seized, but only two parts of his Lands. The Law likewise is mistaken; For
if the King refuses the twenty pounds per month, he may seize an Advowson as
part of his two parts, as has been said; so that an Advowson is within this
Clause, An Advowson is within this Clause.
and not without it: And the Case of Standen and the University of Oxon is
quite contrary to that Opinion in the late Additions to Dalton: For Justice
Jones held strongly that an Advowson was within this Clause; And Hobart Chief
Justice, and Justice Winch, declared themselves to be of the same mind: and
Justice Hutton denied not that an Advowson was within it, only held that the
force of it (as to an Advowson in gross) was taken away by the Statute of 3
Jac. cap. 5. Stat. 3 Jac. 5. University.
which gives the Presentation to the University: But the three other Justices
were against him, and held, That where the King had seized it as part of his
two parts, and the Incumbent died, The King should present, and not the
University: See of this matter more at large. Stat. 3 Jac. car. 5. Sect. 19.

If the King seize by Inquisition two parts of a Manor, belonging to a
Recusant Convict, to which an Advowson is Appendant, Two parts of an Advowson
Appendant, seized by seizure of two parts of the Manor.
by such seizure two parts of the Advowson are likewise seized by consequence,
although it be not named in the Inquisition, as was resolved in the Case of the
Chancellor, etc. of Cambridge and Walgrave. Hobart 126, 127. Moore 872. C. 1214.

The King shall present alone.
And there, although the King has Title but to two parts of the Advowson, yet
he shall present alone by his Prerogative, as was resolved in that Case; and so
he should have done, where there were three Coparceners of an Advowson, two of
full age, and one under age, and in Ward to the King; the King only should by
his Prerogative have presented during the Wardship. 47 E. 3. 14. 38 H. 6. 9.

But yet, His two parts shall not pass from him by general words.
although two parts of an Advowson shall pass to the King by the word
(Hereditaments) and the seizure of the Manor shall draw with it the seizure of
the Advowson, yet the Kings two parts of the Advowson shall not pass from him
by such general words: And therefore, if the King seizes two parts of a Manor
belonging to a Recusant Convict, to which an Advowson is Appendant, and grants
over his two parts of the Manor to a Subject, with all Hereditaments,
Appurtenances, etc. yet two parts of the Advowson will not pass, unless
specially named, or the grant be adeo plene and integre and in tam amplis modo
and forma prout, etc. the Recusant had the Manor. Hobart 126, 127. Moore 872.
C. 1214.

All other Lands etc. liable to such seizure, or to the Penalties aforesaid.]
Whether Copyhold Lands Copyhold Lands.
are seizable by force of these words, Vide Stat. 29 Eliz. cap. 6. Sect. 4.
Stat. 29 Eliz. 6.


In lieu and full Recompense of the twenty pounds monthly.] So that if the King
make his Election to seize the two parts, the Recusant is no longer liable to
pay the twenty pounds per month, The twenty pounds per month discharged.
but the two parts of his Lands shall go in lieu and full Recompense thereof.
Jones 24. Standen versus University of Oxon.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 9. A Recusants Mansion house shall be reserved to
him.
and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, shall not take into his two parts, but leave to such
Offender his chief Mansion House as part of his third part, and shall not
Demise, Lease or put over the said two parts nor any part thereof to any
Recusant, nor to or for the use of any Recusant: The Kings two parts shall not
be demised to a Recusant.
And that whosoever shall take the same in Lease or otherwise of his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, shall give such security, not to commit nor suffer
wast to be committed in or upon any the said premises, as by the Court of
Exchequer shall be allowed sufficient.

His chief Mansion House.] Mansion House Mansion house
is in Law most commonly taken for the chief Message or habitation of the Lord
of a Manor, or the Manor House where he most remains or continues; Terms de
la Ley 199. Mansion. But it is to be taken here in a larger sense, for any
other House which is the Recusants chief dwelling House.

And for the better Trial how his Majesty's Subjects stand affected in point of
their Loyalty and due Obedience; Stat. Sect. 10. Who are compellable to take
the Oath.
Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the end of
this present Session of Parliament, it shall be lawful to and for any Bishop in
his Diocese, or any two Justices of Peace, whereof one of them to be of the
Quorum, within the limits of their Jurisdiction out of the Sessions, to require
any person of the age of Eighteen years or above, being or which shall be
Convict or Indicted of or for any Recusancy, other then Noblemen or Noblewomen,
for not repairing to Divine Service, according to the Laws of this Realm, or
which shall not have received the said Sacrament twice within the year then
next past, Noblemen and Noblewomen excepted, or any person passing in or
through the County, Shire or Liberty, and unknown, except as is last before
excepted, that being examined by them upon Oath, shall confess or not deny
himself or her self to be a Recusant, or shall confess or not deny that he or
she had not received the said Sacrament twice within the year then last past,
to take the Oath hereafter following upon the holy Evangelist. Certificate of
the name and place of abode of him which takes the Oath.
Which said Bishop, or two Justices of the Peace, shall certify in writing,
subscribed with his or their Hands, at the next General or Quarter Sessions for
that Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty, within which the said Oath shall be so
taken, the Christen Name, Surname and place of abode of every person which
shall so take the said Oath; which Certificate shall be there recorded by the
Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk, and kept amongst the Records of the said
Sessions.

Where this Oath cannot be tendered.
Passing in or through the County, Shire or Liberty, and unknown.] These words,
passing and unknown, being in the Conjunctive, it seems that the Bishop or two
Justices ought not to examine upon Oath, or tender this Oath to any Passenger
or Traveller, quatenus such, unless he be unknown, viz. such an one as conceals
his true Name or Quality, or cannot give a good Account what he is: For so it
must be reasonably intended, and not of all Travelers through the Country (as
Wingate tit. Crown numb. 106. mistakes) for it appears, by the other
qualifications here enumerated, that the intent of the Act is, that it shall be
offered by the Bishop or two Justices to such only of whom there is any just
cause of suspicion.

Stat. Sect. 11. Refusal of the Oath.
And be it further Enacted, That if any such person or persons, other than
Noblemen or Noblewomen, shall refuse to answer upon Oath to such Bishop or
Justices of Peace examining him or her as aforesaid, or to take the said Oath
so duly tendered unto him or her by such Bishop, or two such Justices of Peace
out of Sessions; that then the said Bishop or Justices of Peace shall and may
commit the same person to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize until the next Assizes, or General or Quarter Sessions to be holden
for the said Shire, Division, Limit or Liberty, where the said Oath shall be
again in the said open Assizes or Sessions required of such person by the said
Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace then and there present, or the greater
number of them. And if the said person or persons, or any other person
whatsoever, other then Noblemen or Noblewomen, of the age of Eighteen years or
above shall refuse to take the said Oath being tendered unto him or her by the
Justices of Assize and Goal delivery in their open Assizes, or the Justices of
Peace, or the greater part of them, in their said general Quarter Sessions;
every person so refusing shall incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire,
mentioned in the Statute of Praemunire, Praemunire.
made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard the Second, except
Women Covert, Women Covert.
who upon refusal of the said Oath shall be by the said Justices of Assize in
their open Assize, or Justices of Peace in their General or Quarter Sessions
for the said Offense, committed only to the common Goal, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize, till they will take the said Oath.

There to remain without Bail or Mainprize. Sureties cannot be taken.
] The Bishop or two Justices cannot take Sureties of him who refuses the Oath,
for his appearance at the Assizes or Sessions, (as Wingate tit. Crown numb.
107. mistakes) but must commit him immediately to Goal, nor can any other Court
or Justices Bail him in this Case.

Until the next Assizes, or General or Quarter Sessions.] This being in the
Disjunctive, Commitment till Assizes or Sessions.
the Bishop or two Justices have their election, to commit the party refusing
the Oath, either until the next Assizes or until the next Sessions, as they
shall think fit: For some may be more aptly committed until the next Assizes,
and some until the next Sessions, Co. 12. 131, 132.

What Sessions is here meant. Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

And if the said person or persons, or any other person whatsoever, etc shall
refuse.] These words (any other person whatsoever) are exclusive of the said
person or persons who are committed for refusal; For it is here in the
disjunctive; To whom the Oath may be tendered.
so that it seems that if any person whatsoever of the age of eighteen years or
above, and under the degree of a Nobleman or Noblewoman, be at the Assizes or
general Quarter Sessions of the Peace, whether voluntarily, or brought in upon
Process on an Indictment of Recusancy, or for any other matter, and be there
tendered this Oath, and refuse to take it, although it were never tendered to him
before, yet upon his refusal there, he incurs a Praemunire. And in this
respect, this Statute is more extensive then that of 7 Jac. cap. 6. Stat. 7
Jac. 6.
where there must be a Prior tender and refusal of this Oath, otherwise a
refusal of it at the Assizes or Sessions, does not make a Praemunire by that
Act. Vide Co. 12. 131.

Shall incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire.] If a man be committed by
the Bishop or two Justices of Peace, for refusal of this Oath, and the tender
and refusal be expressed in the Mittimus, the Justices of Assize or Justices of
Peace in their Sessions are bound to take notice of this tender and refusal;
and after they have there made the party a second tender of the Oath, and he
refuses it, Indictments of Praemunire upon this Statute.
by which he incurs a Praemunire, the Indictment against him, to convict and
attaint him of a Praemunire, must contain all the special matter, viz. that he
stood Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, or that he had not received the
Sacrament twice within the year next before, or that passing through the
Country and unknown, being examined upon Oath, he confessed or denied not, etc.
(as the Case is) and that the Oath was tendered to him by the Bishop or two
Justices of Peace Quorum unus etc. and he refused it, and that it was again
tendered to him in open Court, and he again refused it: For in this Case the
Mittimus Mittimus.
is the ground, upon which he must be proceeded against at the Assizes or
Sessions. But if the first tender and refusal be not expressed in the Mittimus
or Warrant of commitment; there, although there was a tender and refusal of the
Oath before the Bishop or two Justices, yet the Justices of Assize or Justices
of Peace in their Sessions can take no notice of it. But they must there tender
him the Oath without reference to any Prior tender (which they may do by force
of the said general words, any other person whatsoever) and if he refuse it, he
incurs a Praemunire: And in this Case, the Indictment may be short and general
(scil.) that he was tendered the Oath in open Court, and refused it, etc. And so
it must be in all Cases, where in truth there was never any Prior tender and
refusal. Co. 12. 131, 132.

Stat. 7 Jac. 6. Justices of Peace.
Vide the Statute of 7. Jac. cap. 6. whereby the power of the Justices of Peace
is in some particular Cases enlarged, in reference to this Oath.

Stat. Sect 12. The Oath of Allegiance.
The form of which Oath hereafter follows.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely, acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King James is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, and that the Pope, neither of himself nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any Violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
sentence of Excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King his Heirs or
Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience: I will
bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and
him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power against all conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons,
their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such sentence or
declaration or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my Heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes, which
be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Believe and in Conscience am Resolved, That neither the Pope nor any
Person whatsoever has Power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof,
which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully Ministered unto
me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all
these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to
these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense
and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or mental
Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this Recognition and
Acknowledgment, heartily, willingly and truly upon the true Faith of a
Christian. So help me God.

Unto which Oath so taken, the said person shall subscribe his or her Name or
Mark.

If a man refuse to take any word of this Oath, What is a refusal of the Oath.
it is a refusal of the whole. Bulstrode 1. 198. Lord Vaux his Case.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 13. No
Indictment or other proceedings against a Recusant shall be discharged or
reversed for default of form.
That no Indictment or Indictments had or found, or hereafter to be had or
found against any person or persons, for not repairing to some Church or
Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, but absenting him or her self by the
space of one month contrary to the Laws and Statutes in that behalf provided,
or for not receiving the said Sacrament contrary to this present Law, nor any
Proclamation, Vtlawry or other proceeding thereupon, shall at any time
hereafter be avoided, discharged or reversed by reason of any default in form,
or lack of form, or other defect whatsoever (other then by direct traverse to
the point of not coming to Church, or not receiving the said Sacrament) whereof
such person or persons has been or shall be Indicted; but the same Indictment
shall stand in force, and be proceeded upon: Any such default of form, or other
defect whatsoever notwithstanding.

Vtlawry. A term for years sold upon an Outlawry, restored.
] A termor for years was outlawed upon an Indictment of Recusancy, The Term was
sold by the Lord Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, and afterward the
Outlawry was reversed. The Question was, whether, upon Reversal of the
Outlawry, the Recusant should have restitution of his Term again: And Periam
Justice doubted thereof, and observed that the Book of 11 H. 4. 65. which
says, that the party outlawed shall upon reversal of the Outlawry have
restitution, speaks only of Goods seized, but not of a term sold before; But
Anderson Chief Justice, and Walmesly Justice held, That the Termor in this Case
should have his Term again, in whose soever hands the Land came, and upon
whatsoever Consideration; and not the money for which the Term was sold: For
the Outlawry being reversed, it is as if there were no Record of it; And the
Queens Interest was but conditional, scil. if the Outlawry were good: Nor is
this like the Case where a Sheriff upon a Fieri facias Fieri facias.
and venditioni exponas sells a Term: For there, if the Judgment be reversed,
the party shall have the money for which the Term was sold, but not restitution
of the Term it self, as was resolved 26 Eliz. Dyer 363. And the reason is,
because the Sheriff did no more then he was commanded; For he was commanded to
sell, and therefore the Sale shall be good to all intents. But in the Case of
an Outlawry it is otherwise, and there is no such Command; which difference
between a Fieri facias and Capias utlagatum was agreed in Dr. Drury's Case, Co.
8. 143. And in the principal Case here, Judgment was given for the Termor,
according to the Opinion of Anderson and Walmesly. Cro. Pasch. 34 Eliz. C. B.
278. Air versus Woodfine.

Where the Patron outlawed shall be restored to his presentment.
A man is seized of an Advowson in gross, the Church becomes void, and then the
Patron is outlawed upon an Indictment of Recusancy, whereupon the King
presents; the Presentee is instituted and inducted, and afterward the Outlawry
is reversed: In this Case, the Patron shall be restored to his presentment. So
if the Patron of an Advowson in gross has Judgment in a Quare Impedit, and is
afterward outlawed for Recusancy, and the King presents, and the presentee is
instituted and inducted; In this Case the Patron shall have a Scire facias to
execute the Judgment, and shall oust the Presentee of the King: And the reason
in both these Cases is, because upon the Reversal of an Outlawry the party
shall be restored to all things which are principal, and here the presentment
was the principal thing forfeited by the Outlawry, and therefore upon reversal
the Patron shall be restored to it. Vide Moore 269, 270. C. 421. Beverleigh
versus Cornwall. Savile 89. C. 166. the same Case.

And where not.
But if the King upon an Outlawry seize a Manor to which an Advowson is
appendant, and the Church becomes void, whereupon the King presents, and the
presentee is inducted; There it is otherwise, and the Kings presentee shall not
be removed upon reversal of the Outlawry: For the presentment in that Case is
but as an accessory that follows the principal, which is the Manor, the
profits of which Manor the King was to have during the Outlawry, and
consequently the presentment as a profit of the Advowson, which is parcel of
the Manor: Moore ibid.

The Recusant may plead collateral matter.
Or other defect whatsoever.] This is meant of defects within the Indictment or
other proceedings, and not of any collateral matter which the Recusant has to
discharge himself, as a Pardon, auterfoits convict etc. For the Recusant is not
hereby disabled to plead such collateral matter, but may take advantage
thereof. Co. 11. 65. Dr. Fosters Case.

Nor yet is this meant of all defects whatsoever within the Indictment or other
proceedings: For if there be any defect, Defects to the Kings prejudice.
which apparently tends to the Kings prejudice, the Recusant may take advantage
of it; And therefore in the Case of the Marquess of Winchester, who was
Indicted and Convicted of Recusancy, and had Judgment thereupon, but ideo
capiatur was omitted, the Judgment was reversed for that omission. Cro. Trin.
14 Car. 504, 505.

Provided always, That if any person or persons, Stat. Sect. 14. He that
Conforms may avoid an Indictment or other proceedings.
so Indicted or to be Indicted, shall at any time hereafter submit and conform
him or her self, and become Obedient to the Laws of the Church of England, and
repair to the Parish Church of his or her most abiding, and if there be none
such, then to the Church next adjoining to his or her such dwelling, and there
hear Divine Service according to the true meaning of the Statute in that behalf
made and provided, and there publicly receive the said Sacrament according to
the Laws of this Realm of England now established: That then every such person
and persons so Indicted, shall and may from thenceforth be admitted and allowed
to avoid, discharge, reverse and undo the said Indictment and Indictments, and
all proceedings thereupon in such manner and form as if this present Act had
not been had nor made: Any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as it is found by late experience, Stat. Sect. 15.
That such as go voluntarily out of this Realm of England to serve Foreign
Princes, States or Potentates, are for the most part perverted in their
Religion and Loyalty by Jesuits and Fugitives, with whom they do there
converse: Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Subject of this Realm, that after the Tenth day of June next coming shall go or
pass out of this Realm to serve any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, or
shall after the said Tenth day of June pass over the Seas, He shall take the
Oath which goes out of the Realm to serve another Prince.
and there shall voluntarily serve any such Foreign Prince, State or
Potentate, not having before his or their going or passing as aforesaid, taken
the Oath aforesaid before the Officer hereafter appointed, shall be a Felon.

And that if any Gentleman or person of higher degree, or any person or persons
which has born or shall bear any Office or place of Captain, Lieutenant, or
any other place, Certain persons to be bound to the King.
charge or Office in Camp, Army or Company of Soldiers, or Conducter of
Soldiers shall after go or pass voluntarily out of this Realm to serve any such
Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, or shall voluntarily serve any such
Prince, State or Potentate before that he and they shall become bound by
Obligation, with two such sureties as shall be allowed of by the Officers which
are hereafter by this Act limited to take the same Bond, unto our Sovereign
Lord the Kings Majesty his Heirs or Successors, in the sum of twenty pounds of
current English money at the least, with Condition to the effect following,
shall be a Felon.

Subject of this Realm.
Every Subject of this Realm.] What is meant by a Subject of this Realm, vide
postea Sect. 23.

Service.
Shall go or pass out of this Realm to serve.] The Service mentioned throughout
this branch of the Statute, is intended of civil or domestic Service, as well
as Military. Co. 3. Inst. 80. and, although the later part of it speaks of
Officers and Soldiers, yet it also speaks there of Gentlemen and persons of
higher Degree, without pointing at any particular sort of Service; so that to
serve, or go to serve a Foreign Prince, etc. in any capacity whatsoever,
without first doing what is here required, is Felony by this Act.

Felony though the party serve not.
The passing or going out of this Realm to serve a Foreign Prince, etc. without
taking the Oath, or (if of that quality) entering into Bond, is Felony by this
Statute, although the party be never received into actual Service: For the
words are in the disjunctive, go or pass to serve, or voluntarily serve. Co. 3.
Inst. 80.

Or intended not to serve.
Or shall etc. pass over the Seas and there shall voluntarily serve.] So if he
pass over the Seas upon some other occasion, and not with an intent to serve a
Foreign Prince, etc. yet, if when he is there, he voluntarily serve him, and
did not before his departing hence take the Oath, and (if of that quality)
enter into such Bond, he shall incur the penalty of this Law, and suffer as a
Felon. Co. 3. Inst. 81.

Bond must be Domino Regi.
Shall become bound by Obligation, etc. unto our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty.] An Obligation made to the Kings use is not sufficient, nor will
satisfy the intent of the Act, but it must be made to the King himself: For
the Bond must be Domino Regi, according to the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39.
Stat. 33 H. 8. 39
or the Officer who takes it is liable to Imprisonment for taking a Bond
contrary to that Statute. Wingate therefore tit. Crown numb. 112. lays a snare
for the Officer of the Port, when he directs him only to take this Bond to the
Kings use: And he might have informed himself out of that Statute of 33. and
the Statute of 24 H. 8. cap. 8. of the difference between a Bond made to the
King, and a Bond made to the Kings use. Vide Savile 13. C. 33.

Shall be a Felon.] The Offender against any part of this branch of the
Statute, may have the benefit of his Clergy. Clergy.
Co. 3. Inst. 81.

Vide postea Sect. 28.

The tenor of which Condition follows, viz. Stat. Sect. 16. The Condition of
the Bond.

That if the within bounden etc. shall not any time then after be reconciled to
the Pope or See of Rome, nor shall enter into or consent unto any practice,
Plot or Conspiracy whatsoever against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, or any his and their Estate and Estates, Realms or Dominions: but
shall within convenient time after knowledge thereof had, reveal and disclose
to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or some of the Lords of his or
their Honorable Privy Council, all such Practices, Plots and Conspiracies,
That then the said Obligation to be void.

And that for the due execution of this branch of this present Law, Stat. Sect.
17. Who shall take the Obligation and minister the Oath.
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Customer and Controller of every
Port, Haven or Creek, or one of them, and their or either of their Deputy or
Deputies, and none other, to receive and accept all and every such Bond and
Obligation to and for the uses aforesaid, and to minister and give the Oath
aforesaid according to the true intent of this Statute; (taking for such Bond
six pence, and no more, and for the said Oath no Fee at all) which said
Customer and Controller shall Register and Certify all and every such Bond and
Oath so taken, into the Court of Exchequer at Westminster, once every year,
upon pain of five pounds for every Bond not so certified, Forfeiture for not
certifying.
and twenty shillings for every Oath not so certified.

Which said Customer and Controller.] These words, Who is bound to certify,
who not.
notwithstanding the Copulative (and) are not to be taken conjunctively, as if
every Bond and Oath is to be certified both by the Customer and Controller; For
if the Customer take the Bond and Oath, the Controller is not to be punished
for not certifying; no more is the Customer, if the Controller take them: For
each of them shall forfeit for his own default, and not for the default of the
other: And it cannot be reasonably presumed, that one of them is privy to the
doings of the other; And therefore these words must be construed disjunctively,
(Customer or Controller) that is, he of the two who takes the Bond and Oath is
to certify them into the Court of Exchequer, or to forfeit etc. For where the
literal sense will engender an absurdity or impossibility, such a construction
must be made as will stand with reason, and the intent of the Lawmakers; And
in such Cases a Copulative shall be taken for a disjunctive, or a disjunctive
for a Copulative; vide Plowden 289. Chapman versus Dalton. Ib. 363. Lord
Zouches Case.

But if the Deputy Deputy.
of the Customer or Controller take the Bond or Oath, and no Certificate
thereof is made, the Customer or Controller himself, whose Deputy he is, shall
forfeit for that default, although he had no notice from his Deputy of the
taking of the said Bond or Oath; For he is answerable for all the defaults of
his Deputy; vide Dyer 7 Eliz. 238, 239. where 'twas held, that the Customer
should forfeit the treble value of the Merchandise upon the Statute of 3 H. 6.
cap. 3. Stat. 3 H. 6. 3.
for his Deputies concealing of the payment of the Customs. So a Sheriff shall
answer for all Officers under him. Co. 4. 33. Mittons Case. Crompton Jurisdict.
tit. Court d'Eschequer 110. And so generally shall all other Officers answer
for their Deputies. Co. 9. 48. Earl of Shrewsburies Case. Co. 9. 98. Sir George
Reynells Case. Terms de la Ley 111. Deputy. Brook forfeiture 27. 39 H. 6. 34.

Penalty.
Five pounds for every Bond.] Note, in the late Additions to Dalton cap. 81.
tit. Recusants Sect. 38. this penalty for not certifying the Bond is mistaken,
and there said to be fifty pounds, instead of five pounds.

Stat. Sect. 18.
Provided always, That this last mentioned Branch shall not extend to any
person or persons which are already gone, or shall go beyond the Seas to serve
any Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, before the Tenth day of June next
coming, for his said going or passing before the said Tenth day of June.

Stat. Sect. 19. Putting in practice to absolve or withdraw any from his
Obedience, or to reconcile them to the Pope.
And further be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons at any time after the said Tenth day of June, shall either upon the
Seas, or beyond the Seas, or in any other place within the Dominions of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors put in practice to absolve, persuade or
withdraw any of the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, or of his Heirs and
Successors of this Realm of England from their natural Obedience to his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or to reconcile them to the Pope or See of
Rome, or to move them or any of them to promise Obedience to any pretended
Authority to the Sea of Rome, or to any other Prince, State or Potentate, That
then every such person, their Procurers, Counselors, Aiders and Maintainers,
knowing the same, shall be to all intents adjudged Traitors, and, being thereof
lawfully convicted, shall have Judgment, suffer and forfeit as in Cases of High
Treason.

And if any such person as aforesaid, Being withdrawn or reconciled.
at any time after the said Tenth day of June, shall be either upon the Seas,
or beyond the Seas, or in any other place within the Dominions of the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, willingly absolved or withdrawn as aforesaid,
or willingly reconciled, or shall promise Obedience to any such pretended
Authority, Prince, State or Potentate as aforesaid, That every such person and
persons, their Procurers and Counselors, Aiders and Maintainers, knowing the
same, shall be to all intents adjudged Traitors, and being thereof lawfully
convicted, shall have Judgment, suffer and forfeit as in Cases of High Treason.

Withdraw any of the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, Kings Subjects who here
meant.
etc. from their natural Obedience.] By the Kings Subjects are to be understood
here natural Subjects only, that is, such whose Subjection is natural and
absolute, due by nature and birthright, and which begins with their birth: And
not Aliens, although they are Naturalized or made Denizens, much less those who
are only local Subjects; For none but natural Subjects can be said to be
withdrawn from their natural Obedience. And as the King of England cannot be
said to be a natural Lord or King to an Alien born, so neither can an Alien be
said to be his natural Subject: Natural King. Natural Subject.
Natural Prince and natural Subject being correlatives: And an Indictment of
High Treason Indictment of High Treason.
against an Alien born, who resides here, although it shall be contra
ligeantiae suae debitum, and contra dominum Regem, in respect of his local
ligeance, yet naturalem shall be omitted out of the Indictment. And so it was 2
and 3 Ph. and Mar. in the Case of Sherley a Frenchman, and 36 Eliz. in the
Cases of Stephano Ferrara de Gama, and Emanuel Jews Tinoco, two Portugals, who
conspired with Dr. Lopez against Queen Elizabeth; And so, as it seems, it ought
to be for the same reason, if the Alien were indenized or naturalized; For
Naturalization Naturalization
it self which is by Act of Parliament, and the highest privilege an Alien is
capable of, yet cannot create this natural Subjection or Obedience; which is
not due by any Law or Constitution of man: Naturalization being but a fiction
in Law, which confers the privileges of a natural Subject, but cannot make him
a natural Subject who was none before; For then he would have two natural
Princes, one where he was born, and the other, where Naturalized: Vaughan 279,
280. 283. Craw versus Ramsey. Co. 7. 5, 6, 7. 25. Calvin's Case. Dyer 3 and 4
Ph. and Mar. 145. Hobart 171. Curteenes Case; so that to absolve, persuade,
withdraw or reconcile an Alien born, whose Subjection to the King began not
with his birth, or for any such to be absolved, persuaded, withdrawn or
reconciled, seems not to be Treason within this Act.

But this Subjection is not to be understood locally, Subjection not to be
understood locally.
or in respect of the place of a man's Birth, but in respect of the Prince to
whom Subjection is due at the time of his Birth: And therefore if a Scot or
Irishman be absolved or reconciled in England, although the Offense be
committed in another Kingdom then that where his Subjection begun, yet, being
born a Subject to the King of England, its Treason in the absolver or person
reconciling, and in him that is absolved or reconciled: Nor is it necessary in
all Cases that the party be born in the Kings Dominions, but that he may be a
natural Subject notwithstanding, and consequently within this Act, as in the
Case of an Ambassador, vide Co. 7. 18. Calvin's Case.

Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1
Sect. 2.

Stat. Sect. 20. A reconciled person taking the Oath.
Provided nevertheless, That the last mentioned Clause of this Branch, or any
thing therein contained, shall not extend, or be taken to extend to any person
or persons whatsoever, which shall hereafter be reconciled to the Pope or See
of Rome as aforesaid (for and touching the point of so being reconciled only)
that shall return into this Realm, and thereupon within six days next after
such return before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of Peace (jointly
or severally) of the County where he shall arrive, submit himself to his
Majesty and his Laws, and take the Oath set forth by Act in the first year of
the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, commonly called the Oath of Supremacy,
as also the Oath before set down in this present Act, which said Oaths the said
Bishop and Justices respectively shall have Power and Authority by this present
Act to minister to such persons as aforesaid; And the said Oaths so taken, the
said Bishop and Justices before whom such Oaths shall be so taken respectively,
shall certify at the next General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be
holden within the said Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty wherein such person as
aforesaid shall submit himself, and take the said Oaths as aforesaid, upon pain
of every one neglecting to certify the same as aforesaid, the sum of Forty
pounds.

Submission in case of Treason.
Which shall hereafter be reconciled.] In the late Additions to Dalton cap.
140. tit. High Treason Sect. 12. is intimated, that this Clause, which provides
in Case of Submission, extends to no Cases of Treason or Misprision of Treason;
for there in reciting this part of the Statute, the Cases of Treason and
Misprision of Treason are excepted, which is a great mistake; For the
Submission here spoken of is only in the Case of a declared Treason, scil.
being reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome.

For and touching the point of so being reconciled only.] In the latter part of
the former Section there are three several sorts of Offenses made Treason.
Reconciled to the Pope, etc. what meant thereby.
1. To be willingly absolved or withdrawn from a man's natural Obedience. 2. To
be willingly reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome. 3. To promise Obedience to
any pretended Authority of that See, or to any other Prince, State or
Potentate; but in this Clause only the second of these Offenses is remitted in
Case of Submission, (viz.) the being reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome; By
which I conceive to be meant the forsaking of the Religion established by Law,
and embracing that which is professed and maintained by the Pope and See of
Rome; And in that sense those words are commonly taken at this day: And that
this is the meaning of those words appears by the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1.
which makes it Treason to absolve or withdraw the Subjects from their natural
Obedience, or to withdraw them from the Religion Established to the Romish
Religion, or to move them to promise Obedience to the Sea of Rome or any other
Prince, etc. to answer which, follows in that Act three other sorts of Treason,
viz. to be absolved or withdrawn, or to be reconciled, or to promise such
Obedience; so that the Offense of being reconciled answers to the Offense of
withdrawing the Subjects from the Religion Established to the Romish Religion,
which explains what is meant by such Reconciliation, viz. the being so
withdrawn from the one Religion to the other; But by this Clause, if a person
be thus reconciled, that is, change his Religion, and become a Papist, yet if
he be capacitated to submit as is required by this Act, and submit accordingly,
and take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, such Offense of being
reconciled shall not be Treason.

But as for being absolved or withdrawn from his natural Obedience, Offenses
not within this Proviso.
or promising Obedience to the pretended Authority of the Sea of Rome, or any
other Prince, State or Potentate besides his natural King, such Submission and
taking the Oaths shall not absolve him from that guilt, but he shall have
Judgment and suffer for the same as in Case of High Treason, notwithstanding
such Submission, etc.

Dalton V. cap. 89. tit. High Treason, is therefore clearly mistaken in
extending the benefit of this Submission, etc. generally to all who have been
willingly absolved, withdrawn or reconciled, or have promised such Obedience.

Submit himself to his Majesty and his Laws. The Kings Laws. Stat. 27 Eliz. 2
] What Laws are here meant, vide Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 7.

Stat. Sect. 21. Where the Trial shall be.
And be it further Enacted, That all and every person and persons, that shall
offend contrary to this present branch of this Statute, shall be Indicted,
tried and proceeded against by and before the Justices of Assize and Goal
delivery of that County for the time being, or before the Justices of the Court
of Kings Bench, and be there proceeded against according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm against Traitors, as if the said Offense had been
committed in the same County where such person or persons shall be so taken:
Any Law, Custom or Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

In what County.
The Offender may be proceeded against, by force of this Act, in any County
where he shall be imprisoned; for so the word (taken) is to be expounded, and
the like Exposition has been made of the Statutes of 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 2. of
Soldiers; and 1 Jac. cap. 11. of having two Wives living. Stat. 1 and 3 E. 6. 2
1 Jac. 11.
Hutton 131.

If the Offense be committed out of this Realm, yet it cannot be tried upon the
Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 2. Stat 35 H. 8. 2.
of Trial of Treasons committed out of the Realm: For this Act has prescribed
a special form of a Trial in this Case, which must be observed; And if such
Offender be a Peer of England, Indictment of a Peer.
the Indictment cannot be taken before any others then the Justices of Assize
and Goal delivery in the County where he is imprisoned, or the Justices of the
Kings Bench: Hutton 131. Lord Digbies Case.

Stat. Sect. 22. Trial of Peers.
Provided always, That if any Peer of this Realm shall happen to be Indicted of
any Offense made Treason by this Act, he shall have his Trial by his Peers, as
in other like Cases of Treason is accustomed.

Stat. Sect. 23.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Subject of this Realm, at any time
after one month next after the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall
not resort or repair every Sunday to some Chuch, Chapel or some other usual
place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service, according to
the Statute made in that behalf, in the first year of the Reign of the late Q.
Elizabeth, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for any one Justice of
Peace of that Limit, Division or Liberty wherein the said party shall dwell,
upon proof unto him made of such default by confession of the party or Oath of
witness, to call the said party before him: and if he or she shall not make a
sufficient excuse and due proof thereof, to the satisfaction of the said
Justice of Peace, That it shall be lawful for the said Justice of Peace to give
Warrant to the Churchwarden of the said Parish, wherein the said party shall
dwell, under his Hand and Seal to levy twelve pence for every such default by
distress and sale of the Goods of every such Offender, rendering to the said
Offender the Overplus of the money raised of the said Goods so to be sold, and
that in default of such distress, it shall and may be lawful for the said
Justice of Peace to commit every such Offender to some Prison within the said
Shire, Division, Limit, or Liberty wherein such Offender shall be inhabiting,
until payment be made of the said sum or sums so to be forfeited, which
forfeiture shall be employed to and for the use of the Poor of that Parish,
wherein the Offender shall be resident or abiding at the time of such Offense
committed.

Provided, That no man be impeached upon this Clause, Within what time the
Offender shall be impeached.
except he be called in question for his said default, within one month next
after the said default made.

And that no man, being punished according to this Branch, But once punished
for one Offense.
shall for the same Offense be punished by the forfeiture of twelve pence, upon
the Law made in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth.

If any Subject of this Realm.] By a Subject of this Realm, Subject of this
Realm, who here meant,
is to be understood a natural born Subject, or an Alien naturalized here by
Act of Parliament, or made a Denizen of England by the Kings Letters Patents;
And who not.
But these words here are exclusive of two sorts of Subjects. 1. Of an Alien
inhabiting in this Realm, who owes to the King a local Subjection or Ligeance,
and is neither naturalized or made Denizen; For the word (Subject) is as a mark
of distinction, and must be necessarily exclusive of some persons or other
within this Realm, and therefore cannot be supposed to take in mere Aliens,
who, if neither naturalized or made Denizens, are only local Subjects, and of
the lowest form: For if no person inhabiting within the Realm were here
intended to be excepted; the word (Subject) would be idle and to no purpose. 2.
An Alien Naturalized by Act of Parliament in Scotland or Ireland, or made
Denizen of either of those Kingdoms by the Kings Letters Patents, is for the
same reason out of the meaning of this Branch, although he live in England;
For, it seems, that such a person is still an Alien here, and shall not partake
of any privileges in England, by his being Naturalized or made Denizen in
Scotland or Ireland: Their Acts or Laws not being Obligative or concluding to
us in England. Vide Vaughan 278, 279, 280, 285, 287. Craw versus Ramsey.

And therefore the power here given any one Justice of Peace, to levy the
twelve pence per Sunday, does not extend to either sort of these Aliens; An
Alien within Stat. 1. Eliz. 2
but yet they may forfeit twelve pence per Sunday for their absence from
Church, upon an Indictment of the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. and that by force
of the general words there, Every person and persons inhabiting within this
Realm; so that what is said in Dr. Fosters Case, Co. 11.63. viz. That this
Statute gives a more speedy remedy for the Recovery of the twelve pence, is not
to be understood of all persons within 1 Eliz. but only of the Subjects of this
Realm in the sense of this Branch of the Statute.

And if a man be born within any of the Kings Dominions, which were such and
united with England in their subjection at the time of his birth, although he
be not born within England, Natural Subjection not local.
yet if he live here, he is a Subject of this Realm within the intent of this
Act: For Natural Subjection and Ligeance are not local, or confined to that
Kingdom or Country where he was born: But he is a natural Subject in any of the
Dominions belonging at the time of his Birth to the Prince under whom he was
born; And upon this ground it was resolved in Calvin's Case. Co. lib. 7.
Postnati.
That a man born in Scotland after the Union of the two Kingdoms, should
inherit in England. So that a man born in Scotland or Ireland, or any other of
the Kings Dominions, which were such and so united at the time of his birth, if
he live in England is punishable by this Act, and any one Justice of Peace may
grant his Warrant to levy the twelve pence for his absence from Church, vide
antea Sect. 19.

Morning and Evening Prayers.
Every Sunday.] This repairing to Church every Sunday must be as well to
Evening Prayers as to Morning Prayers: For it ought to be an entire day and an
entire Service. By Hutton and Berkley Justices; Dalton V. cap. 45. tit.
Recusants.

To the satisfaction of the said Justice of Peace.] In this Case the Justice of
Peace is sole Judge, whether the excuse Excuse.
the party makes for his absence be sufficient, and sufficiently proved: And
the same cannot be brought into question elsewhere by the party.

To levy twelve pence for every such default.] So that this Forfeiture of
twelve pence may be levied weekly: For it is due for every absence, as soon as
the Sunday is ended, and has no relation to the forfeiture of twenty pounds
per month given by the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1 Recusants
may forfeit the twelve pence, and twenty pounds both.
But the Offender may be punished both by this Act for his weekly absence, and
by 23 Eliz. for his monthly absence; By Coke Chief Justice B. R. Rolls 1. 94.
Dr. Fosters Case.

And because in one Act of Parliament begun and holden at Westminster in the
five and thirtieth year of the late Queen Eliz. Stat. Sect. 24. A Repeal of two
branches of the Statute of 35 Eliz. 1.
Entitled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience, there are two branches contained, the first beginning thus:

(And for that every person, having House and Family, is in duty bounden to
have especial regard of the good government and ordering of the same) and so
forth to the next Clause beginning thus: (Provided nevertheless, That this Act
shall not in any wise extend to punish or impeach any persons for relieving,
etc. ending with these words, Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.) Which said two Branches or Clauses are found defective.

Be it therefore Enacted, That the said two Branches or Clauses of the said
Act, and no more, shall be by Authority of this present Parliament utterly
repealed and made void.

Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7. Stat. 35 Eliz. 1


And in lieu thereof Be it. Enacted, Stat. Sect. 25. Maintaining or keeping a
Recusant in his house.
that every person and persons which after one month next after the end of this
present Session of Parliament shall willingly maintain, retain, relieve, keep
or harbor in his or their House any Servant, Sojourner or Stranger who shall
not go to, or repair to some Church or Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer
to hear Divine Service, but shall forbear the same by the space of one month
together, not having a reasonable Excuse, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, shall forfeit ten pounds for every month that he, she or they shall
so relieve, maintain, retain, keep or harbor any such Servant, Sojourner or
Estranger in his or their House, so forbearing as aforesaid.

And that every person, Retaining a Recusant in his Service, fee or livery.
which shall within the time aforesaid retain or keep in his, her or their
service, fee or livery, any person or persons which shall not go to, or repair
to some Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service,
but shall forbear the same by the space of one month together, shall forfeit
for every month he, she or they shall so retain, keep or continue in his or
their service, fee or livery, any such person or persons so forbearing as
aforesaid, knowing the same, ten pounds, the same penalties to be recovered and
employed in manner and form hereafter following.

Willingly etc. keep or harbor. Master, where not punishable
] A man freely and of his own accord takes an Apprentice or Covenant Servant
for a certain time, not knowing him or her to be a Recusant, and such
Apprentice or Servant forbears to come to Church; It seems that the Master
shall forfeit nothing, although he keeps them in his House: For he does no more
then what the Law will compel him to, during the time agreed on and limited for
such Apprentiship or Service; and this cannot be said to be done willingly, for
it is not in his choice to discharge them until the time is expired.

Where punishable.
But if the Master, before he took such Apprentice or other Servant, knew him or
her to be a Recusant, or after their forbearance to come to Church, retains
them for a longer time then was at first agreed on, this is a keeping or
harboring them willingly, and he shall be liable to this penalty.

In his, her or their service, Fee or Livery.] This extends to all Servants
whatsoever, although they dwell not in the Masters House, nor are his menial
Servants: for if they are retained in his Service, Fee or Livery, as Bailiff,
Steward, or in any other capacity, and forbear to come to Church, the Master
shall be punished for their absence.

Penalty.
Ten pounds.] Note, in the late additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants
Sect. 27. The penalty upon this Branch of the Act is mistaken, and said to be
in some Cases Twenty pounds per month, and in other Cases One hundred pounds
per month: The contrary whereof is evident.

Stat. Sect. 26. The Father, Mother, Ward and Person committed by Authority.
Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not in any wise extend to punish or
impeach any person or persons for maintaining, retaining, relieving, keeping or
harboring, his, her or their Father or Mother, wanting, without fraud or
Covin, other habitation or sufficient maintenance, or the Ward of any such
person, or any person that shall be committed by Authority to the custody of
any by whom they shall be so relieved, maintained or kept: Any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Child, where punishable.
Wanting, without fraud or Covin, other habitation or sufficient maintenance.]
A Father or Mother has no settled habitation, but yet has sufficient
maintenance; The Child receives such parent into his House, who forbears to
come to Church; in this Case the Child shall forfeit Ten pounds per month: For
although the Parent had no habitation, yet this is not a wanting habitation
within the meaning of this Act, seeing he wanted not sufficient means to
procure one.

Where not.
But if the Parent has an habitation, yet if he want sufficient maintenance to
keep him in that habitation, although he refuse to come to Church, the Child
shall forfeit nothing for receiving him into his House; for the words here are
in the disjunctive, and if the Parent wants either other habitation in the
sense of the Act, or sufficient maintenance, the Child may receive him.

That shall be committed by Authority to the custody, etc. Master, where not
punishable
] The former Case of an Apprentice was put only of such an one whom the Master
takes of his own accord; but if it be a Parish Child bound by the Churchwardens
and Overseers, with the assent of the Justices of Peace, if the Master be duly
required to take him, such Apprentice, as it seems, is committed to the Masters
custody within the meaning of this Proviso, for he is punishable if he refuse
him; and if he were a Recusant, or forbear to come to Church, yet the Master
shall forfeit nothing for keeping or harboring him.

A Sergeant at Arms, Pursevant, Messenger, Sergeant at Arms, Pursevant, Jailer.
etc. who keeps his Prisoner in his House, or a Jailer, if he keeps his
Prisoner in his own House, which is no part of the Prison, shall not forfeit
any thing by force of this Act, although he suffers him to go abroad in the day
time at his pleasure, and he forbears to come to Church: For that such Prisoner
was committed by Authority to his custody.

And be it further Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That upon
any lawful Writ, Warrant or Process, Stat. Sect. 27. Breaking a House to take a
Recusant Excommunicate.
awarded to any Sheriff or other Officer, for the taking or apprehending of any
Popish Recusant standing Excommunicated for such Recusancy, it shall be lawful
for such Sheriff or other Officer Authorized in that behalf, if need be, to
break open any House wherein such person Excommunicate shall be; or to raise
the power of the County for the apprehending of such person, and the better
Execution of such Warrant, Writ or Process.

Standing Excommunicated.] This extends to an actual Excommunication only: For
although by the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 5. Stat. 3 Jac. 5. Excommunication.
A Popish Recusant after conviction shall be disabled as an Excommunicated
person, yet to other intents he shall not be reputed as a person standing
Excommunicated. Vide that Statute Sect. 12.

For such Recusancy. For Recusancy.
] So that if a Popish Recusant stand Excommunicated for any other Cause then
for Recusancy, this Branch of the Statute does not affect him.

And be it further Enacted, Stat. Sect. 28.
That all and every offense to be committed or done against this present Act,
shall and may be enquired of, In what Courts the Offenses shall be heard and
determined.
heard and determined before the Justices of the Kings Bench, Justices of
Assize and Gaol delivery in their several Assizes and Gaol deliveries. And all
offenses, other then Treason, shall be enquired, heard and determined before
the Justices of Peace, in their General or Quarter Sessions to be holden within
the Shire, Division, Limit or Liberty wherein such offense shall happen.

General or Quarter Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1. Trial where part of the offense
happened.
General or Quarter Sessions.] What Sessions are here meant, Vide Stat. 23
Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

Wherein such offense shall happen.] If a man serves, or goes to serve a
Foreign Prince, State or Potentate, without first taking the Oath of
Allegiance, or (if of that Quality) entering into Bond, although part of the
offense was done out of the Realm, yet for that other part thereof (viz.) his
going or passing over the Seas was done in the Realm, he shall be tried in the
County where that part of the offense happened, that is, where the Haven or
Port is from whence he went or passed over: For a Statute is to be so
expounded, ut verba accipiuntur cum effectu. Co. 3. Inst. 80.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 29.
Attainder of Felony no forfeit of Dower or corruption of Blood.
That any Attainder of Felony, made Felony by this Act as is aforesaid, shall
not in any wise extend to take away the Dower of the Wife of any such person
attainted, or be any bar for recovery of the same, nor shall make or work any
corruption of Blood, or disherison of any the heir or heirs of any such person
or persons so attainted: This Act, or any thing therein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

The Plea to an Action brought for doing any thing by force of this Statute.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Action or Actions shall at any time
hereafter be commenced or brought against any person or persons, doing,
committing or commanding any Act or Thing for or concerning the Execution of
this present Statute, or any Article or Clause therein contained, That then
every Defendant in such Action and Actions may plead the general Issue, and be
received to maintain the same, by any Evidence that shall prove his doings and
proceedings warrantable by this Law.

The Authority of the Ecclesiastical Court reserved.
Provided always, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to take away or abridge the Authority or Jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Censures, for any Canse or Matter, but that the Commissioners of
his Majesty, his heirs and Successors, in Causes Ecclesiastical for the time
being, and the Archbishops, Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Judges may do and
proceed, as before the making of this Act they lawfully did or might have done:
Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Stat. Sect. 30. No forfeiture for the
Wives offense.
That no person shall be charged or chargeable with any penalty or forfeiture
by force of this Act, which shall happen for his Wives offense in not receiving
the said Sacrament during her Marriage, nor that any Woman shall be charged or
chargeable with any penalty or forfeiture by force of this Act, for any such
Offense of not receiving which shall happen during her Marriage.

With any penalty or forfeiture by force of this Act. Feme Covert not receiving
the Sacrament.
] But yet a Married Woman may be punished by force of any other Act, for not
receiving the Sacrament during her Marriage, Co. 11.64. Doctor Fosters Case.
And therefore if she be a Popish Recusant convict, and receive not the
Sacrament within the year next before her Husbands death, she shall forfeit the
profits of two thirds of her Jointure and Dower, and be further disabled as the
Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 5. appoints. Stat. 3 Jac. 5.
And unless she receive the Sacrament after Conviction, she cannot be Plaintiff
with her Husband in any Action, but is disabled by that Statute: And if she
receives it not within three months after her Conviction, she may be imprisoned
by force of the Statute of 7 Jac. 6. unless the Husband pay to the King as is
there appointed. 7 Jac. 6.


For any such offense of not receiving. Feme Covert punishable.
] Wingate in abridging this Clause, tit. Crown numb. 125. quite mistakes the
meaning of it: For a married Woman is not exempted from all penalties by force
of this Act, but only from the penalty for not receiving the Sacrament during
her marriage: And there is no question but she may be imprisoned, if she
refuses the Oath of Allegiance: and an Indictment of High Treason lies against
her upon this Statute, if she be absolved or withdrawn from her obedience to
his Majesty, or be reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome, or promise obedience
to the said See, etc.

Provided also and be it Enacted by Authority of this Parliament, Stat. Sect.
31. Who may take the Oath of a Nobleman or Woman.
That in all causes where any Bishop or Justices of the Peace may by force of
this Act require and take of any Subject the Oath above mentioned, That the
Lords of the Privy Counsel for the time being, or any six of them, whereof the
Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer or the principal Secretary for the time being
to be one, shall have full Power and Authority by force of this Act, at any
time or times to require and take the said Oaths before mentioned, of any
Nobleman or Noblewoman (then being above the age of Eighteen years). And if any
such Nobleman or Noblewoman (other then Women married) shall refuse to take
such Oath or Oaths, that in every such Case such Nobleman and Noblewoman shall
incur the pain and danger of a Praemunire.

Where any Bishop or Justices of the Peace.] The Justices of Peace Justices of
Peace.
have a twofold power given them by this Act in reference to the Oath of
Allegiance. 1. Out of Sessions, and so any two Justices of Peace (quorum unus
etc.) may tender the Oath to any person eighteen years old or above, other then
Noblemen or Noblewomen. 2. In their general or Quarter Sessions, and there they
may tender the Oath to any such person who has before refused it, or to any
person whatsoever of or above that age, other then Noblemen or Noblewomen; Now
whether the six Privy Counselors Six Privy Counselors,
here mentioned may require this Oath of Noblemen and Noblewomen, in all Cases
where the Justices of Peace may require the same of any Subject either in or
out of Sessions, or only in such Cases where they may require it out of
Sessions, seems to be a Question: For if the power here given to the six Privy
Counselors, be the same with that of the Justices of Peace in their Sessions,
they may by force of this Act tender it to any Nobleman or unmarried Noblewoman
whatsoever above eighteen years old: For the Justices of Peace in their
Sessions may tender it there to any other person whatsover: But if it be meant
of the power given the Justices of Peace out of Sessions, then the six Privy
Counselors can tender it by force of this Act, to such Noblemen or unmarried
Noblewomen only, who stand Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy for not coming to
Church, or who have not received the Sacrament twice within the year next
before, or who, passing through the Country unknown, shall upon examination
confess or not deny their Recusancy, or that they have not so received the
Sacrament.

To whom they may tender this Oath.
For the solving of which doubt, it is to be considered. 1. That the Bishop and
not the Justices of Assize are here joined with the Justices of Peace: And
these words (where any Bishop or Justices of Peace) seem to bear this
Construction, viz. where any Bishop or Justices of Peace, either the one or the
other indifferently, may require the Oath, and that can be intended only of the
power given out of Sessions; For in Sessions the Bishop has nothing to do: But
had the Justices of Assize been here added, scilicet, in all Causes where the
Bishop, Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace may require this Oath, it had
been clear that the Power, here given the six Privy Counselors, was as
extensive as that which is given the Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace
in their Sessions, and they might have required the Oath of any Nobleman or
unmarried Noblewoman whatsoever of competent age; so if the Justices of Peace
only had been here named, it had been clearly intended of the Justices of Peace
in either Capacity, either in or out of Sessions: But (Bishop) seems here to be
a restrictive word, and to give the Privy Counselors no more power in respect
of the Nobility, then the Bishop had in reference to any other Subject. 2.
These words (in all causes where etc.) seem to be restrictive likewise, and
exclusive of some Causes; But the Power of the Justices of Peace in Sessions
extends to all Causes and Persons under the Degree of Nobility whatsoever,
which therefore cannot be here intended, but only some particular Causes
ejusdem generis, which can be no other then the Causes before mentioned,
wherein the Bishop or two Justices out of Sessions may deal, (viz.) where the
party was before Convicted or Indicted, or had not received the Sacrament, or
passed unknown and confessed, etc.

And yet as it is reported in Bulstrode 1. 197. the Case of the Lord Vaux Pasch.
10. Car. 1. is to the contrary: For it is said there, he was committed to the
Fleet by the Privy Council for refusing this Oath, and afterward Indicted in
the Kings Bench of a Praemunire for such his refusal, he being then of the age
of eighteen years and above; And the said Oath being lawfully tendered, etc. All
which was certified to the Court by diverse of the Privy Council, upon which
Indictment he was attainted, and no word in the Indictment of his standing
Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, or not having received the Sacrament, etc.
and yet the Indictment was grounded upon this Statute, and not upon that of 7
Jac. 6. For by that Statute of 7 Jac. he could not have been Indicted of a
Praemunire for the first refusal, but must have been Committed until the next
Assizes or Sessions, and if he had there refused it the second time, he might
have been Indicted of a Praemunire, and not otherwise: But whether this
Indictment were according to Law, or only passed sub silentio, Quaere.

Note, by the Statute of 7 Jac. cap. 6. any Privy Counselor, Stat. 7 Jac. 6.
or the Bishop of the Diocese may now require this Oath of any Baron or
Baroness of or above the age of eighteen years in all Cases: And in some Cases
three Privy Counselors, Quorum unus, etc. may require it of persons above the
said Degree, vide the Statute.

A Noblewoman by Marriage.
Noblewoman.] A Noblewoman, who was such by Marriage only, becomes a Widow, and
takes to her second Husband a person under the Degree of Nobility; By this her
second Marriage she has lost her Nobility; And, if she again becomes a Widow,
the Oath shall not be tendered her by Privy Counselors: But the Bishop or two
Justices of Peace (quorum unus etc.) may by force of this Act require her to
take it, and upon her refusal may proceed against her as is above directed in
the Case of a common person; see more of this matter Stat. 7 Jac. cap. 6. Sect.
4.

Age.
Then being above the age of Eighteen years.] In this Case, that day Eighteen
years on which the party was born must be wholly elapsed; for before, this Oath
cannot be tendered, although the hour of his birth be elapsed: For the Law
rejects all Fractions and Divisions of a day for the incertainty, Fractions of
a day rejected.
which is always the Mother of Contention. Co. 5.1. Claytons Case. Vide Rolls
abridg. tit. Temps 521.

Counsel, and Trial by Peers.
Praemunire.] In the aforesaid Case of the Lord Vaux, who was Indicted of a
Praemunire for refusing this Oath, the Court of Kings Bench denied him Counsel,
or Trial by his Peers: And it was there held, that the Trial of a Nobleman by
his Peers is at Common Law in four Cases only, (viz.) Treason, Felony,
Misprision of Treason, and Misprision of Felony, but not to be allowed in the
Case of a Praemunire, for that in effect it is no more then a Contempt.
Bulstrode 1. 197, 198, 199.

Stat. Sect. 32. Who shall take the Oath in the Cinque Ports.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by Authority of this Parliament, That where
any person or persons shall go or pass out of the Cinque Ports, or any Member
thereof, to any parts beyond the Seas, to serve any Foreign Prince, State or
Potentate: that in every such Case the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports for the
time being, or any person by him in that behalf appointed, or to be appointed,
shall have full Power and Authority by virtue hereof, to take the Bond and
minister the Oath to such Passengers, as is above mentioned.

If the Warden of the Cinque Ports Warden of the Cinque Ports.
do take such Bond and minister such Oath, and do not certify them into the
Exchequer, this seems to be Casus omissus, and not provided for by the Act: For
he shall not be liable to the penalty inflicted on the Customer and Controller:
For that, although it be within the same mischief, there are no express words
here to reach him; And penal Statutes shall not be taken or construed by
Equity. Lee 77. Bishop of Chichester versus Freeland. Rolls 2. 420. Jones
versus Lord Sheffeild and Ratcliffe. Yelverton 22. Broad versus Owen. Plowden
17. Fogassa's Case. Et 86. Partridges Case. Co. 1. Inst. 238. Keilwey 96.

Stat. iii Jac. cap. v. An Act to prevent and avoid dangers which may grow by
Popish Recusants.
Stat. Sect. 1.
WHereas diverse Jesuits, Seminaries and Popish Priests daily do withdraw many
of his Majesty's Subjects from the true Service of Almighty God, and the
Religion established within this Realm to the Romish Religion, and from their
Loyal Obedience to his Majesty, and have of late secretly persuaded diverse
Recusants and Papists and encouraged and emboldened them to commit most
damnable Treasons, tending to the overthrow of Gods true Religion, the
destruction of his Majesty and his Royal Issue, and the overthrow of the whole
State and Commonwealth, if God of his goodness and mercy had not within few
hours before the intended time of the execution thereof, revealed and disclosed
the same: wherefore to discover and prevent such secret damnable conspiracies
and Treasons, as hereafter may be put in ure by such evil disposed persons, if
remedy be not therefore provided;

Stat. Sect. 2. The reward of him which discovers a Popish Priest or Mass.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That such person as shall first discover to any Justice
of Peace, any Recusant or other person which shall entertain or relieve any
Jesuit, Seminary or Popish Priest, or shall discover any Mass to have been
said, and the persons that were present at such Mass, and the Priest that said
the same, or any of them within three days next after the offense committed;
and that by reason of such discovery any of the said Offenders be taken and
Convicted or Attainted, That then the person, which has made such discovery,
shall not only be freed from the danger and penalty of any Law for such
offense, if he be an Offender therein, but also shall have the third part of
the forfeiture of all such sums of Money, Goods, Chattels and Debts, which
shall be forfeited by such offense (so as the same total forfeiture exceed not
the sum of One hundred and fifty pounds, and if it exceed the sum of One
hundred and fifty pounds, the said person so discovering the said offense shall
have the sum of Fifty pounds only for every such discovery:) And such person so
discovering the same, after conviction of the offender, shall have a
Certificate from the Judges or Justices of Peace, before whom such Conviction
shall happen to be, directed to the Sheriff or other Officer of the same
County, Limit or Place, that shall seize the Goods or levy the said forfeiture,
commanding the said Sheriff or other Officer to pay the same accordingly to him
that so discovered the same, out of the moneys to be levied by virtue of the
said forfeitures, which Warrant and payment shall be effectual in the Law for
that purpose, and a sufficient discharge in that behalf for the Sheriff or
other Officer upon his Account.

Within three days next after the Offense committed.] Discovery, within what
time.
So that if three days, next after the Offense committed, elapse before the
discovery is made, the discoverer shall have no benefit by this Act.

And therefore, if the person discovering had no notice of the Offense till the
three days expire, although he discovers it presently upon such notice given
him, yet he comes too late: much less shall he have three days after notice, as
Wingate tit. Crown numb. 128. mistakes the meaning of this Clause.

Commanding the said Sheriff or other Officer to pay the same.] In the late
additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants, Who is to pay the discoverer
Sect. 57. it is said, that the Sheriff is to grant his Warrant for the payment
of the discoverer; but that is a misrecital of the Statute, for the Sheriff
himself is to pay him.

And whereas the repair of such evil affected persons to the Court or to the
City of London may be very dangerous to his Majesty's person, and may give them
more liberty to meet, Stat. Sect. 3. A Popish Recusant shall not come to Court.
consult and plot their Treasons and practices against the State, then if they
should be restrained and confined unto their private Houses in the Country: For
remedy hereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Popish
Recusant Convicted, or to be Convicted, shall come into the Court or House
where the Kings Majesty or his Heir apparent to the Crown of England shall be,
unless he be commanded so to do by the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
or by Warrant in writing from the Lords and others of the most Honorable Privy
Council of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or any of them, upon
pain to forfeit for every time so offending one hundred pounds, the one moiety
to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the other moiety to him that
will discover and sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any one of his Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign,
protection or wager of Law shall be allowed.

Stat. Sect. 4. Popish Recusants shall depart from London.
And that all Popish Recusants Indicted or Convicted, and all other persons
which have not repaired to some usual Church or Chapel, and there heard
Divine Service, but have forborne the same by the space of three months last
past, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, dwelling, abiding or
remaining within the City of London, or the Liberties thereof, or within ten
miles of the said City, shall within three months next after the end of this
Session of Parliament, depart from the said City of London, and ten miles
Compass of the same, and also shall deliver up their names to the Lord Mayor of
London, in case such Recusant do dwell or remain within the said City of
London, or the Liberties thereof: And in case the said Recusant shall dwell or
remain in any other County within Ten miles of the same City, Then the said
Recusant shall deliver up his or her name to the next Justice of Peace within
such County, where the said Recusant shall so dwell or remain, within forty
days after the end of this Session of Parliament, upon pain that every person
offending herein shall forfeit to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, the sum of One hundred pounds: The one moiety whereof
shall be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the other moiety to
him or them that will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

Stat. Sect. 5.
And that all Popish Recusants, which shall hereafter come, dwell or remain
within the said City of London, or the Liberties thereof, or within ten miles
of the said City, which now are or hereafter shall be Indicted or Convicted of
such Recusancy, or which shall at any time hereafter not repair unto some
Church or Chapel, and there hear Divine Service, but shall forbear the same by
the space of three months, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
shall within ten days after such Indictment or Conviction, depart from the
said City of London and ten miles Compass of the same, and also shall deliver
up their names to the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, in Case such
Recusant shall dwell or remain within the said City of London, or the Liberties
thereof: And in Case the said Recusant shall dwell or remain in any other
County within ten miles of the said City, then the said Recusant shall deliver
up his or her name to the next Justice of Peace within such County where the
said Recusant shall so dwell or remain, within the said ten days next after
such Indictment or Conviction, upon pain that every person offending herein
shall likewise forfeit to our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, the like sum of an hundred pounds; The one moiety whereof shall
be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other to him or them
that will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in
any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, protection or
wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

In the late Additions to Dalton cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 45. this Clause
is otherwise recited, (viz.) That the Recusant, Delivery up of the Recusants
name.
if he live within ten miles distance of London, is to deliver up his name to
the Lord Mayor there, and if he live above ten miles distance, then to the next
Justice of Peace, But the Statute is there mistaken in both points; For if the
Recusant dwell within ten miles of London, and not in London, he is to deliver
up his name to the next Justice of Peace, and not to the Lord Mayor; And if he
dwell above ten miles from London, he is not within this Act, nor bound by
force thereof to deliver up his name at all.

For miles, Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 2.

Provided always, Stat. Sect. 6. Tradesmen and dwellers in or about London,
That such person or persons as now use any Trade, mystery or manual Occupation
within the said City of London, or within ten miles of the same, and such as
have or shall have their only dwelling within the said City or ten miles
Compass of the same, not having any other dwelling or place of abode elsewhere,
shall or may remain and continue in such place within the said City or ten
miles of the same, as they have dwelled, inhabited or remained in by the space
of three months next before this present Session of Parliament: Any thing
herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

This Proviso is by some taken to be in force at this day: At this day not
excepted.
But yet under favor (as the Proviso is penned) it seems to the contrary; and
that now all Popish Recusants Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, or not
repairing to Church, but forbearing by the space of three months are by this
Act to depart London, and ten miles compass of the same, notwithstanding they
are Tradesmen, or have no other place of dwelling: For as to Tradesmen, here
are no other excepted then such, as when this Act was made used some Trade,
Mystery or manual Occupation: And as to both Tradesmen, and such as had or
should have their only dwelling within London or ten miles compass, the Statute
limits them to that place, where they inhabited three months next before that
Session of Parliament, wherein this Act was made; which cannot by any strained
construction extend to those in future times: But the meaning seems to be, That
Popish Recusants Indicted or Convicted of Recusancy, or not repairing to
Church, etc. who were then Tradesmen within London, or ten miles compass, or
such as then resided within London or ten miles compass, and should have no
other place of abode, might continue there, so that they removed not to any
other dwelling, then where they inhabited by the space of three months next
before that Session of Parliament; or if they did, they were to lose the
benefit of this Proviso, and must have removed above ten miles from London, as
well as other Popish Recusants Convicted or Indicted, or not repairing to
Church as aforesaid.

As for those words, ( such as shall have their only dwelling within the said
City, etc.) the future Tense (shall have) does not intend such Recusants as
should have their dwelling there, or within ten miles compass, after the making
of this Act, and not before; But only such, who having their dwelling there
before that Session of Parliament, should at the time of their being Indicted
or Convicted have their only dwelling there, and no other place of dwelling
elsewhere: For if they had at such time of their being Convicted or Indicted,
two several Houses, one within London or ten miles, and the other at a farther
distance; although they inhabited in that which was within London or ten miles,
for three months next before that Session of Parliament, yet, if they were not
Tradesmen at the time of making of this Act, they should have had no benefit by
this Proviso, but ought within ten days after such Indictment or Conviction for
Recusancy, to have removed out of the compass of ten miles.

Stat. Sect. 7.
And whereas by a Statute made at Westminster in the Five and thirtieth year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act for the restraining of Popish
Recusants to some certain place of abode, it was, amongst other things,
Ordained and Enacted, That every Popish Recusant then or after Convicted for
not repairing to Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, A Recusant
confined:
having any certain place of dwelling and abode within this Realm, should,
within the time limited by the said Statute, repair to their place of usual
dwelling and abode; or not having any certain place of dwelling or abode within
this Realm, should likewise within the time limited by the said Statute, repair
to the place where such person was born, or where the Father or Mother of such
person should be dwelling, and not at any time remove or pass above five miles
from thence under the pains in the said Statute limited and provided: Which
Statute, by reason of sundry Licenses given unto such Recusants under color of
a Proviso in the said Statute contained, has not wrought that good effect in
the Commonwealth as was hoped: Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by this
present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That the said Statute
made in the said Five and thirtieth year of the said Queen Elizabeth, for and
concerning the confining of the said Recusants, under the pains and penalties
therein contained, shall by this Act, and by the Authority of the same be
confirmed, and be hereafter put in due execution according to the tenor, true
intent and meaning of the said Statute in that behalf made: Repeal of a Proviso
in 35 Eliz. 2.
And that the said Proviso in the said Statute contained, giving power to grant
License or Licenses unto the said Recusants to go and Travel from or out of the
compass of the said five miles, shall be from and after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, utterly repealed and void, Any thing in the said Statute
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Then or after Convicted.] Vide Sect. 8. infra.

Giving power to grant License or Licenses unto the said Recusants.] The
Proviso in the Statute of 35 Eliz. cap. 2. here repealed, is only that which
there impowers the Justices of Peace; For that is the only Proviso which gives
power to grant Licenses; And the cause here alleged for the Repeal, is, the
giving of sundry Licenses to Recusants under color of a Proviso in 35. which
can be construed only of those which were to be given by the Justices of Peace,
and not of the other Licenses given by 35. in several other cases: so that the
Proviso's there, permitting the Popish Recusant to Travel in case of Process,
or commandment by Privy Counselors, or the Queens Commissioners, or
Proclamation to render his body to the Sheriff, remain still in force, and
unrepealed, and the Recusant may take the benefit thereof at this day.

Stat. Sect. 8.
Provided nevertheless, and be it further Enacted by this present Parliament,
and by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful for the Kings
most excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or for three or more of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, or for three or more of the Privy
Council of his Heirs or Successors, in writing under the hands of the said
Privy Counselors, License to a Popish Recusant confined.
to give License to every such Recusant to go and Travel out of the compass of
the said five miles, for such time as in the said License shall be contained,
for their traveling, attending and returning, and without any other Cause to
be expressed within the said License. And if any of the persons which are so
confined by virtue of the said Statute as is aforesaid, shall have necessary
occasion or business to go and Travel out of the compass of the said five
miles, That then and in every such Case, upon License in writing in that behalf
to be gotten under the Hands and Seals of four of the Justices of Peace of the
same County, Limit, Division, or place next adjoining to the place of abode of
such Recusant, with the privity and assent in writing of the Bishop of the
Diocese, The effect of a License to be granted by four Justices of Peace.
or of the Lieutenant, or of any Deputy Lieutenant of the same County, residing
within the said County or Liberty, under their Hands and Seals, In every of
which License or Licenses in writing so to be had and made, shall be specified
and contained both the particular cause of the said License, and the time how
long the said party licensed shall be absent in traveling, attending and
returning; It shall and may thereupon be lawful for every such person so
licenced, to go and Travel about such their necessary business, and for such
time only for their traveling, attending and returning as shall be comprised
in the said License, the said party so licenced first taking his corporal Oath
before the said Four Justices of the Peace or any of them (who shall have
Authority by virtue of this Act to minister the same) that he has truly
informed them of the Cause of his Journey, and that he shall not make any
causless stays; And that all and every License hereafter to be made in this
behalf, contrary to the tenor, effect and true meaning of this Statute, shall
be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, Any thing in the said former
Act, or in this Act, to the contrary notwithstanding. And every person so
confined, which shall depart or go above five miles from the place whereunto he
is or shall be confined, not having such License, and not having taken such
Oath as aforesaid, shall incur the pain and penalty, and forfeit as a Recusant
Convicted, and passing or going above five miles from the said place, whereunto
he is or shall be confined by the said Statute of tricesimo quinto Elizabethae,
should do.

For the Kings most Excellent Majesty, etc. or for three or more of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. to give License to every such
Recusant.] What recusants may be Licensed to travel above five miles.
By (such Recusant) is intended here such Recusant as is confined by the
Statute of 35 Eliz. 2. and not only such as was mentioned in the foregoing
Clause of recital: For that recital is imperfect, in that it mentions only the
Popish Recusant Convicted, Stat. 35 Eliz. 2 Imperfect recital here,
whereas 35 Eliz. speaks as well of the Popish Recusant not Convicted, who has
no certain place of abode, as of the Popish Recusant Convicted: And the benefit
of having Licenses from the King or three Privy Counselors by force of this
Act, is intended as well to the one as the other, although the Convicted only
are mentioned in the recital: and this will plainly appear, first, by the
following words here, which empower the Justices of Peace to grant Licenses,
and expressly extend to all persons confined by virtue of the said Statute, that
is the Statute of 35 Eliz. now it cannot be presumed, that the makers of the
Law intended any difference between the persons to be licenced by the King or
Privy Counselors, and the persons to be Licensed by the Justices of Peace; the
only difference being in the manner of granting the License, the power given to
the King or Privy Counselors being more absolute, and not under such
precautions as is that which is given to the Justices of Peace: For the King or
Privy Counselors may grant a License to the Recusant to travel, without any
particular cause shown in the License, or the assent of any other person, and
without any Oath to be made by the Recusant, which the Justices of Peace cannot
do: And there is no reason to think that the Power here given to the King or
Privy Counselors, which in all other particulars is so much more absolute and
extensive then that given to the Justices of Peace, should be yet less
extensive as to the persons to be Licensed. Secondly, It were absurd to think
that the Makers of the Law intended to confer a greater privilege upon the
Recusant convicted (whose Offense appears upon Record) then to such as are not
convicted: Et ealis interpretatio in ambiguis semper fienda est, ut evitetur
inconveniens and absurdum. But if by (such Recusant) should be meant only such
as are mentioned in the recital, viz. those Convicted, and not all who are
Confined by 35 Eliz. It would follow that the Convicted Recusant (who is the
more notorious Offender) may have a License without any cause shown or Oath
made; But he who is not Convicted is barred of that privilege, and can apply
himself only to the Justices of Peace for a License clogged with diverse
circumstances, which are not required in a License granted by the King, or the
three Privy Counselors.

Shall not impeach 35 El. 2.
Much less shall this Recital of the Statute of 35 Eliz. impeach the express
words of that Statute, as if no other Popish Recusants were intended to be
confined thereby, but only such as are Convicted, because no other are
mentioned in the Recital: For the Recital of an Act of Parliament in another
Act of Parliament, being only by way of Preface or Introduction, cannot add to
or diminish the Act recited, or make it liable to any other construction, then
what shall naturally flow from the Act it self. Vide Co. 4. Inst. 331.

Vide Stat. 35 Eliz. cap. 2. Sect. 3.

Without any other cause to be expressed.] Here is one difference between a
License by the King or three of the Privy Counsel, Necessary business where
requisite to a License: where not.
and a License by Justices of Peace: For by these, it ought not to be granted,
unless the Popish Recusant has necessary occasions or business; But the Kings
or Privy Counselors License may be granted in any Case, at the Recusants
request.

Seals and Subscription.
Under the Hands and Seals.] An Indictment was brought upon the Statute of 35
Eliz. 2. for traveling out of the compass of five miles: The Recusant pleaded
a License under the Seals of four Justices of Peace; and exception was taken to
the Plea, For that the License ought to have been under their Hands, as well as
their Seals, Cro. Mich. 12 Jac. 352. Maxfeilds Case. And this is a good
exception, for a License by Justices of Peace, although in Writing, is not
sufficient without Seals and Subscription both: Rolls 1. 108. C. 47.
Mucclefields Case.

Four Justices Peace.
Of four of the Justices of Peace.] And a License from less then four will not
now serve, since the repeal of the aforesaid Branch of 35 Eliz. touching
Licenses, Stat. 35 Eliz. 2
and therefore the Case of Mucclefield, Mich. 12 Jac. in Rolls 1. 108. C. 47.
is misreported in that particular: For there, mention is made of a License from
two Justices of Peace, as if no more were then requisite; and that Case could
not be grounded upon the Proviso in 35 Eliz. which required only two Justices,
as well for the distance of time (being nine years after the Repeal of the said
Proviso) as for that, in the said Case of Mucclefield, there is mention of a
License under the Seals of the Justices of Peace, and of the Oath to be taken
by the Recusant; neither of which was appointed by the said Proviso in 35 Eliz.
but by this Statute of 3 Jac. which must therefore necessarily be there
intended, and not any Statute of 1 Jac. which is another mistake in the Report
of that Case. Vide the Case, and the objections urged against the License there
in question.

With the privity and assent in Writing of the Bishop, etc. the Lieutenant or
of any Deputy Lieutenant.] An Information was brought against a Popish Recusant
Convict, for removing above five miles from the place of his confinement, who
pleaded a License from four Justices of Peace; but the Plea was disallowed,
says the Reporter, because he did not set forth that the License was granted
with the privity of the Bishop or Lieutenant, Mich. 12 Jac. Moore 836. C. 1127.
Mansfields Case. Assent of a Deputy Lieutenant sufficient.
But yet if it had been granted with the assent of any Deputy Lieutenant
residing in the County, there is no doubt but it had been good enough.

The Bishop, Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenant, Five persons, viz. four to
License, and one to assent.
who gives his assent, must be a distinct person from the Justices of Peace who
grant the License: And therefore if one and the same person be a Justice of
Peace and Deputy Lieutenant, he cannot Act herein in both Capacities: For una
persona non potest supplere vicem duarum. And if he Sign and Seal the License
as a Justice of Peace, the assent of some other Deputy Lieutenant, or of the
Bishop or Lieutenant must be had thereto, or the License is void: Cro. Mich. 12
Jac. 352. Maxfields Case. Moore 836. C. 1127. Mansfields Case. Rolls 1. 108.
C. 47. Mucclefields Case.

And although the Rule be, Quando duo jura concurrunt in una persona, aequum
est ac si essent in diversis, yet that Rule holds not in such Cases where
distinct persons are necessarily required by the Law, Co. 7. 14. Calvin's Case:
and here four persons are necessarily required to grant the License, and
another person to assent to it.

In Maxfields Case, B. R. one exception to the License was, License and assent
in one Writing.
that the assent of the Deputy Lieutenant was contained in the License granted
by the four Justices of Peace, and was not separate and distinct by it self,
Cro. Jac. supra; but to this the Court made no answer: And it seems that such
an Assent is well enough, though in the same Writing with the License, if it be
expressed that the four Justices do License, and the Deputy Lieutenant does
assent, and such Writing be under the Hands and Seals of all five.

Residing within the said County or Liberty. Residence in the County.
] These words seem to refer as well to the Bishop and Lieutenant, as to the
Deputy Lieutenant; so that if a Bishops Diocese extends into diverse Counties,
and he resides in one of them, His assent can be good only for the Popish
Recusants of that County where he resides, and not for those of any other part
of his Diocese; so if a Lieutenant reside out of the County whereof he is
Lieutenant, his assent to such License is void: And that these words (residing
within the said County or Liberty) cannot be restrained to the Deputy
Lieutenant only, appears by those next beforegoing, viz. (of the same County)
which clearly relate to the Lieutenant, as well as to the Deputy Lieutenant;
and by consequence so must the word immediately subsequent, viz. (Residing:)
And as to the Bishop, the inconvenience is the same, as in the Case of the
Lieutenant: For by their remoteness, they are disabled to judge of the
condition and behavior of the Recusant to be Licenced, and of the
circumstances wherein he stands, and whether such License may be granted to him
without hazard of the public safety; which seems to be the reason of this
restriction to the County or Liberty, where the party who is to assent resides,
and holds as well in the Case of the Bishop or Lieutenant, as of any Deputy
Lieutenant residing out of the County.

Particular cause of the License.
The particular cause of the said License.] In Maxfields Case B. R. another
exception to the License granted by the four Justices was, that it was said to
be granted for certain urgent Causes, but no particular Cause for the Recusants
travel was expressed in the License: Cro. Jac. supra. And this seems to be a
good exception, for the inserting into the License, that the Popish Recusant
has urgent or necessary occasion or business, answers only the former part of
this Proviso, which gives the four Justices power to License him, if he has
necessary occasion or business to travel out of the compass of five miles: but
withal it ought to be mentioned in the License particularly, what that occasion
or business is which is the cause of the License, for so this Act here expressly
appoints: And therefore that form of a License for the Recusant to Travel,
which Dalton, V. cap. 124. tit. Licenses, has set down, wherein no other Cause
is mentioned but urgent and necessary business, seems too short and general,
and is not to be relied on; which defect the Author of the late Additions to
Dalton would have done well to have rectified.

Oath of Allegiance.
First taking his Corporal Oath.] In Mansfields Case, Moore 836. C. 1127. There
is another Oath mentioned for the Popish Recusant to take, before he can be
Licensed to Travel, and that is the Oath of Allegiance prescribed by the Stat.
of 3 Jac. cap. 4. Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
For its there said, That in an Information brought against the Recusant, for
Traveling out of the compass of five miles, the Defendant pleaded a License
from four Justices of Peace, and his Plea was disallowed because (among other
things) he did not show, that before the License he had taken the Oath of
Allegiance; yet Quaere of this, and by what Law the omitting to take that Oath
makes the License void.

But I rather think it to be a mistake, and that such an exception might be
moved, but the Plea not disallowed for that reason.

One Justice may give the Recusant his Oath.
Before the said four Justices of the Peace or any of them.] Mr. Sheapard
thinks that no less then two of the four Justices of Peace, can minister this
Oath to the Recusant; Sure guide, cap. 14. Sect. 5. But I take it to be clear,
that any one of the four Justices may minister the Oath in this Case: And there
is a great difference between any Justices (for that denotes the plural number,
as in the subsequent Clause about Armor where any Justices may imprison the
Offender, that is, any two Justices or more) and any of the Justices, as here,
which denotes the singular number, and the following words (who shall have
Authority by virtue of this Act to minister the same) may be well enough
applied to any one Justice of Peace.

That he has truly informed them of the cause of his Journey.] Averment that
the cause is true.
If an Information be brought against a Popish Recusant for traveling out of
his compass of five miles, and he plead a a License from four Justices of
Peace, it seems necessary that he aver in his Plea, that the Cause contained in
his License was true and real. Vide Moore 836. C. 1127.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 9. A
Recusant disabled to execute certain Offices and Functions.
That no Recusant convict shall at any time after the end of this Session of
Parliament, practice the Common Law of this Realm, as a Chancellor, Clerk,
Attorney or Solicitor in the same, nor shall practice the Civil Law, as
Advocate or Proctor, nor practice Physic, nor exercise or use the Trade or Art
of an Apothecary, nor shall be Judge, Minister, Clerk or Steward of or in any
Court, or keep any Court, nor shall be Register or Town Clerk, or other
Minister or Officer in any Court, nor shall bear any Office or Charge, as
Captain, Lieutenant, Corporal, Sergeant, Ancient-bearer, or other Office in
Camp, Troup, Band or Company of Soldiers, nor shall be Captain, Master,
Governor, or bear any Office or Charge of or in any Ship, Castle, or Fortress
of the Kings Majesty's, his Heirs and Successors, but be utterly dissabled for
the same: and every person offending herein, shall also forfeit for every such
offense One hundred pounds, the one moity whereof shall be to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him that will sue
for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of the
Kings Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law
shall be admitted or allowed.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 10. No Popish
Recusant shall be a public Officer.
That no Popish Recusant convict, nor any having a Wife being a Popish Recusant
convict, shall at any time after the end of this Session of Parliament, or any
Popish Recusant hereafter to be convict, or having a Wife which hereafter shall
be a Popish Recusant convict, at any time after his or her conviction, shall
exercise any public Office or Charge in the Commonwealth, but shall be utterly
disabled to exercise the same by himself, or by his Deputy, (except such
Husband himself, and his Children which shall be above the age of nine years
abiding with him, and his Servants in household, shall once every month at the
least, not having any reasonable excuse to the contrary, repair to some Church
or Chapel, usual for Divine Service, and there hear Divine Service; And the
said Husband, and such his Children and Servants as are of meet age, receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at such times as are limited by the Laws of
this Realm, and do bring up his said Children in true Religion).

This Clause extends not to all sorts of Recusants who are convicted, or have
Wives who are Recusants convicted, as is mistaken in the late additions to
Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants, Sect. 46. To whom this clause extends:
But at this day only to the Popish Recusant convicted, or having a Wife who is
a Popish Recusant convicted.

To whom not.
A Popish Recusant not convicted, has a Wife who is convicted of Recusancy, but
is no Popish Recusant; The Husband is not disabled by this Statute to exercise
any public Office or Charge, for that neither the Husband is a convicted
Recusant, nor the Wife a Popish Recusant.

A person who is convicted of Recusancy, but is no Popish Recusant, has a Wife
who is a Popish Recusant, but not convicted: The Husband is out of this Branch
of the Statute, for that neither the Husband is a Popish Recusant, nor the Wife
convicted.

Stat. Sect. 11. A Married Woman being a Popish Recusant.
And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Married Woman
being, or that shall be a Popish Recusant convict (her Husband not standing
convicted of Popish Recusancy) which shall not conform her self and remain
conformed, but shall forbear to repair to some Church or usual place of Common
Prayer, and there to hear Divine Service and Sermon, if any then be, and within
the said year receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Laws
of this Realm, by the space of one whole year next before the death of her said
Husband, shall forfeit and loose to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, the issues and profits of two parts of her Ioynture, and two parts
of her Dower in three parts to be divided during her life, of or out of any the
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, which are or were her said Husbands; and
also be disabled to be Executrix or Administratrix of her said Husband, and to
have or demand any part or portion of her said late Husbands Goods or Chattels,
by any Law, custom or usage whatsoever.

The issues and profits of two parts of her Ioynture and two parts of her
Dower.] A Woman may have Jointure and Dower both.
And not of two parts of her Jointure or Dower, as Wingate tit. Crown numb.
134. For there are diverse Cases, where notwithstanding the Statute of 27 H. 8.
cap. 10. the Wife shall have her Dower and Jointure both; And forfeit two parts
of both.
And if she offend against this branch, she shall forfeit the profits of two
parts of both.

And that not only where the Jointure made to her is not warranted by that
Statute, but in some Cases where the Jointure is pursuant and according to the
Statute, she shall have her Dower and Jointure both.

Of the first sort are these. Where the Jointure is not warranted by Stat. 27
H. 8. 10.


If an Estate be made of Lands to the Wife for the life of another. Co. 4. 3.
Vernons Case.

Or for a thousand years, or for a thousand years if she live so long. Co. 1.
Inst. 36.

Or if a Rent be granted to the Wife for the life of another, or for years, or
any other way not pursuant to that Statute. Vide Anderson 1. 288. c. 296.
Bickley's Case. Anderson 2. 30, 31. c. 20. Wentworths Case.

Or if an Estate be made to others in fee, or for the Wives life upon Trust for
her benefit. Co. 1. Inst. 36.

Or if a man Covenant to stand seized to the use of himself in Tail, the
Remainder to the use of his Wife for life. Pasch. 16. Jac. B. R. Woods Case.

Or if the Husband make a Feoffment in see to the use of himself for life, the
remainder to another for life, or years, the remainder to the Wife for her
life. Co. 4. 2. 3. Hutton 51. Sherwells Case.

In all these Cases, although the Lands or Rent were conveyed to the Wife for
her Jointure, yet the Estate not being within the Statute of 27 H. 8. her
acceptance thereof shall not bar her Dower, but she shall have such Jointure,
and her Dower also.

And the reason why in the two last Cases the Wife shall not be barred of her
Dower, although there be an Estate limited to her for her life, is, because the
Estate is not in its first Creation appointed to take immediately after the
death of the Husband; And no matter which arises ex post facto, can salve this,
or make it a Jointure within that Statute, to bar her Dower.

And therefore if, in the first of those two Cases, the Husband Tenant in Tail
dies without issue, or if in the last Case he in the remainder die before the
Husband, or the term for years determines in the Husbands life time, so that
the Wife may enter presently after his death, yet because the Estate to the
Wife for her life, was not originally limited to take immediately after his
death, it shall not bar her Dower; For quod ab initio non valet, in tractu
temporis non convalescet. Co. 4. 2, 3. Hutton 51.

And as in all the Cases before mentioned, if the Estate were made for her
Jointure, the Wife shall have such Jointure and her Dower both, so (if she be
an Offender within this branch of the Act, and conform not within the year next
before her Husbands death) she shall forfeit the profits of two parts of both.

Of what Lands she shall not forfeit the profits.
But otherwise it is where an Estate is given or limited by the Husband to the
Wife, and its neither expressed, nor can be averred and proved to be given or
limited for her Jointure, or in recompense of her Dower.

And therefore if any of the Estates before mentioned, which are not within the
Statute of 27 H. 8. be granted or limited to the Wife by the Husband, or any
other Estate for her life or otherwise, which would be a good Jointure within
the said Statute, if it were intended for a Jointure, as if a man, before or
after Marriage, Covenants to stand seized of Lands to the use of himself for
life, the Remainder to his Wife for her life, and it is neither expressed in
the Deed, nor can be averred and proved that it was for her Jointure; or if a
man devise Lands by his last Will to his Wife generally, and there is no
mention in the Will that it is for her Jointure, (for in this Case an Averment
that it was so intended will not serve, unless there be express words in the
Will to that purpose:) These Estates so gained by the Wife, as they do not bar
her Dower out of the residue of her Husbands Estate, but that she shall enjoy
both the one and the other, Co. 4. 4. so they are not within the meaning of
this Act, because not made for her Jointure; And she shall not forfeit the
profits of two parts of them, although she may forfeit the profits of 2 parts
of her Dower which she has out of the residue of her Husbands Estate.

If Lands be conveyed to the Wife before marriage for part of her Jointure, and
other Lands are conveyed to her after Marriage in full satisfaction of her
Jointure, and she refuse those conveyed after Marriage, in this Case she may
retain those conveyed before Marriage, and yet be endowed of the residue of her
Husbands Estate: For that the Lands first settled on her were not for her whole
Jointure. Co. 1. Inst. 35. Co. 4. 3.

Forfeiture of the profits of part of her Jointure.
And if she be a Popish Recusant Convict, and her Husband none, and she conform
not within the year next before his death, she shall forfeit the profits of two
parts both of such Dower, and of the Estate so conveyed to her before her
Marriage.

And as the Wife shall have her Jointure and Dower both, Where the Jointure is
pursuant to the Statute.
in such Cases where the Jointure is not pursuant to the Statute of 27 H. 8. so
in some Cases likewise where she has a Jointure pursuant to that Statute: As
where she has such a Jointure made to her by the Husband before Marriage, and
he afterward endow her ad ostium Ecclesiae, or if she has a Jointure made by
the Husband in his life time; and after his death his Heir or Feoffee assign
other Lands to her in Dower, or the Heir plead to her in a Writ of Dower ne
unque seisi que Dower, etc. or nient accouple in Loyal Matrimony, or any other
Plea save Jointure in bar of Dower, and it be found against him; In these Cases
the Wife shall hold her Jointure, and yet be endowed, and (if she be an
Offender within this branch of the Act) shall forfeit the profits of two parts
of her Jointure and Dower both.

But if a Widow, Dower not forfeited.
who is endowed of the Lands of her deceased Husband, takes a second Husband
who is no Popish Recusant Convicted, by whom she has a Jointure, and she
becomes a Popish Recusant Convict, and the second Husband dies, and the Wife is
an Offender within this Act; In this Case, she shall not by force thereof,
forfeit the profits of two parts of such Dower and Jointure both; but only of
her Jointure; For that her Dower is not out of the Lands of her said Husband,
that is, of the Husband in whose life time she stood convicted, and after such
Conviction forbore to conform, etc. within the year next before his death.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 12. A Popish
Recusant shall be disabled as an Excommunicate person.
That every Popish Recusant, which is or shall be convicted of Popish
Recusancy, shall stand and be reputed to all intents and purposes disabled as a
person lawfully and duly Excommunicated, and as if he or she had been so
denounced and excommunicated according to the Laws of this Realm, until he or
she so disabled shall conform him or her self, and come to Church, and hear
Divine Service, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the
Laws of this Realm, and also take the Oath appointed and prescribed in one
other Act made this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the
better discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants: And that every person or
persons sued or to be sued by such person so disabled, shall and may plead the
same in disabling of such Plaintiff, as if he or she were Excommunicated by
Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court.

What Conviction disables him.
Convicted of Popish Recusancy.] The Conviction mentioned here, and in the
other branches of this Statute, seems to be intended not only of a Conviction
according to the Statute of 29 Eliz. 6. or 3 Jac. 4. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6. 3 Jac. 4.
upon Proclamation and default of appearance, but of a Judgment likewise upon
an Indictment or popular Suit on the Statute of 23 Eliz. 1. or an Action of
Debt, etc. by the King alone by force of the Statute of 35 Eliz. 1. 35 Eliz. 1.
For (Convicted) in relation to these three last mentioned remedies, is to be
taken for adjudged or attainted. Vide for this the Statute of 23 Eliz. 1. Sect.
5. And the Popish Recusant who is either convicted upon Proclamation and
default of appearance, or against whom Judgment is had upon an Indictment,
popular Suit or Action of Debt, etc. at the Kings Suit, is hereby disabled as
an Excommunicate person, and liable to all other the penalties and incapacities
inflicted by this Act on a Popish Recusant convicted.

To what intent as excommunicate.
Reputed to all intents and purposes disabled as a person etc. Excommunicated.]
And not reputed to all intents as an Excommunicate person, as Wingate tit.
Crown numb. 135. misrecites the Statute: For (as it seems by the words of the
Statute) the Popish Recusant convicted is not to be reputed as a person
Excommunicate in any other respect, or to any other intent, but as to his
disability only.

And yet the Opinion of the Court of Kings Bench, Mich. 11 Jac. in the Case of
Griffith and others seems to be to the contrary, and that a Popish Recusant
convicted, may by force hereof be attached upon a Writ of Excommunicato
capiendo, Excommmnicato capiendo.
Bulstrode 2. 155. Tamen Quaere, whether this Statute being a penal Law, and
speaking only of the point of disability, shall be extended by Equity to other
Cases, or the Recusant be attached upon an Excommunicato capiendo, unless he be
first actually Excommunicated.

A Popish Recusant Convict is disabled, as an Excommunicate person, Witness.
to be a Witness in any Cause between party and party. By Coke Chief Justice,
Bulstrode 2. 155.

This disability but quousque.
May plead the same in disabling of such Plaintiff.] This disability in the
Popish Recusant convicted is but quousque etc. until he Conform, etc. and take
the Oath of Allegiance; And the Defendant must in this Case plead the
Conviction at large, and must, as in a Plea of Excommengement, demand if the
Plaintiff shall be answered. Hetley 18. which is the legal conclusion of a Plea
in disability of the person. Co. 1. Inst. 128.

Plea in disability is peremptory.
The Defendant in Debt upon an Obligation, pleads that the Plaintiff is a Popish
Recusant Convict, who replies, null tiel Record: Such Plea in disability of the
person is peremptory, and null tiel Record is an Issue, and Judgment shall be
given against the Defendant upon failer of the Record. Hetley 18.

But yet, if there be a Plea of a Conviction of Recusancy had before Justices
of Gaol delivery, and the Defendant mistakes and takes out a Certiorari
Certiorari.
to the Justices of Peace, this shall not be a failer of the Record, Failer of
Record.
although the Defendant has it not at the day, For that the issuing of the
Certiorari was the Award of the Court: But a Certiorari shall be awarded de
novo to the Justices of Gaol delivery before whom the Plaintiff was convicted.
Hobart 135. Pie against Thrill.

Note, if the Defendant be sued in the Common Pleas, or any other of the
principal Courts at Westminster, and he plead a Conviction of Recusancy before
Justices of Gaol delivery or Justices of Peace, he need not take his Certiorari
Certiorari out of what Court,
out of the Chancery, and so bring it by Mittimus; But the Court may send a
Certiorari immediately to that inferior Court, where the Plaintiff was
convicted, as was held in that Case of Pie and Thrill: vide 19 H. 6. 19.

And the Justices themselves, And by whom.
before whom the Conviction was had, must certify; and therefore if the
Conviction was before Justices of Peace, the Certificate cannot be by the
Custos Rotulorum Custos rotulorum.
alone, though he keep the Records; for the Certiorari is in such Case directed
to the Justices of Peace, Hobart 135.

A Popish Recusant is convicted of Recusancy in a popular Suit, and after such
Conviction sues the Informer Qui tam etc. Who may take advantage of this
disability, Informer:
upon some other matter or cause of Action arising between them, Quaere whether
the Defendant may plead such Conviction in disability of the Recusant: For this
Conviction disables the Recusant to sue, as if he were excommunicated, and no
otherwise. Now if a Bishop Excommunicate any one, and the Bishop Bishop.
be afterward sued at Law, for any other matter or cause, by the person so
excommunicated, the Bishop cannot plead this Excommunication in disability of
the Plaintiff who sues him. Co. 1. Inst. 134. Swinborne Part 5. Sect. 6. p.
305. And the reason given for this in Trollops Case, Co. 8. 68. is, because the
Bishop was a party to the Excommunication, and therefore shall take no
advantage by it; which reason seems to hold likewise in the Case of an Informer
Qui tam etc. who is a party to the Conviction of the Recusant upon the popular
Suit, which Conviction renders the Recusant disabled to all intents as an
Excommunicant person. And therefore, he being a party to it, by the same Rule
shall not take advantage of it in disability of the Recusant, in any Action
brought by the Recusant against him.

But yet notwithstanding, I conceive the Informer Qui tam etc. at whose Suit
the Recusant was convicted, may well take advantage of this Conviction, and
plead it in disability of the person of the Recusant. And that the true reason,
why the Bishop shall not be admitted to plead an Excommunication pronounced by
himself, in disability of the person Excommunicated, is not because he is a
party to the Excommunication, but because in matters of Excommunication the
Bishop acts as a Judge, and it is by his Sentence and Authority that the party
is Excommunicated, and he shall not take advantage in another Suit of a
Sentence given by himself judicially: And this will not hold in the Case of an
Informer, who though he be a party to the Suit in which the Recusant is
disabled as an Excommunicate person, yet is no Judge in the Case, whether the
party Sued shall be disabled or no; as the Bishop is in the other Case, where
the party is actually Excommunicated by him. And if the Bishop should be barred
to Plead and take advantage of such Excommunication, because he is a party
thereunto, it would follow that the person who Sues in the Spiritual Court, and
at whose instance the person Sued is Excommunicated, should be barred likewise
to take advantage of such disability in the Plaintiff at Law, for he is a party
to the Excommunication, for that he is a party to the Suit, upon which the
Excommunication is originally founded: But the contrary to this is strongly
implied in 14 H. 4. 14. where the Case was, A. was Excommunicated in a Suit
depending between him and B. and afterward A. Sues B. upon the Statute of
Praemunire, who pleads this Excommunication in disability of the Plaintiff:
Here the Plea was disallowed, because the principal Suit on which the
Excommunication depended was brought before the Pope; But in the debate of the
Case, there was not the least word of exception to the Plea upon this ground,
because the Excommunication was at the instance of the Defendant, or that the
Defendant should not take advantage of the Plaintiffs disability, for that he
was a party to the Excommunication which disabled him.

Executor or Administrator disabled:
If an Executor or Administrator becomes a Popish Recusant convict, it seems, he
is disabled by this Act to Sue in either of those Capacities: For the Act
says, He shall be disabled to all intents as an Excommunicate person. Now a
person actually Excommunicated cannot Sue as Executor or Administrator, as is
held in 21 E. 4. 49. 21 H. 6. 30. 14 H. 6. 15. Co. 1. Inst. 134. Although there
are some opinions to the contrary. Vide Finch 27.

Stat. Sect. 13. What Suits a Popish Recusant may prosecute.
Provided nevertheless, That it shall and may be lawful for any such person so
disabled, for and notwithstanding any thing in this Law contained, to sue or
prosecute an Action or Suit, for or concerning only such of his or her Lands,
Tenements, Leases, Rents, Annuities and Hereditaments, or for the Issues and
Profits thereof, which are not to be seized or taken into the Kings hands, his
Heirs or Successors, by force of any Law for or concerning his or her
Recusancy, or any part thereof.

Which are not to be seized or taken into the Kings hands, etc.] These words
are not restrained to such Lands, Lands seized into the Kings hands.
etc. as cannot be seized into the Kings hands for Recusancy: For then the
Recusant could in no case Sue for more then the third part, for that the King
may, if he please, make his Election, and seize the other two parts in lieu of
the Twenty pounds per month: But they are intended of all Lands, etc. of the
Recusant, which neither the King has seized, nor are by Law to be seized by
virtue of any thing which the King has already done, or in respect of what the
Recusant (after his conviction) has omitted to do: And therefore, if a man be
convicted of recusancy upon a popular Suit, or an Action of Debt at the Kings
Suit alone (in which Cases the penalty of Twenty pounds per month is not
appropriated to the King for the time to come) and he pays the penalty
recovered: or if he be Convicted upon Indictment, and after such Conviction
duly pays the Twenty pounds per month into the Exchequer, and the King makes no
Election to take the two third parts of his Estate in lieu thereof; such
Recusant may by this Proviso in either of those Cases, Sue or Prosecute for any
of his Lands, Tenements, Leases, Rents, Annuities or Hereditaments whatsoever,
notwithstanding his Conviction: For when the penalty recovered is satisfied, or
the forfeiture, appropriated to the King, is duly paid into the Exchequer, his
Lands, etc. are not to be seized by force of any Law for Recusancy, unless the
King make his Election to have the two parts: And until that Election, they
cannot in the sense of this Proviso be said to be Lands to be seized or taken
into the Kings hands, for that the King cannot have the two parts, and the
Twenty pounds per month both; But if the King make no such Election, and the
Twenty pounds per month be duly paid into the Exchequer, the Recusant is to
hold and enjoy all his Lands, Tenements, etc. as if he had never been
convicted: And during that time, there can be no distinction made between the
two parts, and the Recusant's third part: so that in this Case, the Recusant
must either be enabled to Sue and Prosecute for all his Lands, etc. or none;
and to think the latter of these, were to render this Proviso nugatory and
vain: But when once the King has seized the two thirds for recusancy, either
by way of Election, or for nonpayment of the penalty, then the Recusant is
enabled to Sue only for the other third part, whether in the hands of the King,
or of a common person.

Stat. Sect. 14.
And for that Popish Recusants are not usually Married, nor their Children
Christened, nor themselves Buried according to the Law of the Church of England,
but the same are done superstitiously by Popish Persons in secret, whereby the
days of their Marriages, Births and Burials cannot be certainly known.

Stat. Sect. 15. Marriages of Popish Recusants.
Be it further Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That every man
being, or which shall be a Popish Recusant convicted, and who shall be
hereafter Married otherwise then in some open Church or Chapel, and otherwise
then according to the Orders of the Church of England, by a Minister lawfully
Authorized, shall be utterly disabled and excluded to have any Estate of
Freehold into any the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of his Wife, as Tenant
by the Courtesy of England: And that every Woman being, or which shall be a
Popish Recusant convicted, and who shall be hereafter Married in other form
then as aforesaid, shall be utterly excluded and disabled not only to claim any
Dower of the Inheritance of her Husband, whereof she may be endowable, or any
Iointure of the Lands and Hereditaments of her Husband or any of his Ancestors,
but also of her Widows Estate and Frank-bank in any Customary Lands, whereof
her Husband died seized, and likewise be disabled and excluded to have or enjoy
any part or portion of the goods of her said Husband by virtue of any custom of
any County, City or Place where the same shall lie or be: And if any such man
shall be Married with any Woman contrary to the intent and true meaning of this
Act, which Woman has or shall have no Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
whereof he may be entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy, Then such man so
Marrying as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose One hundred pounds, the one half
thereof to be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other
moiety to such person or persons as shall Sue for the same by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint or Information in any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

Where the Husband is no offender.
Every man being or which shall be a Popish Recusant Convicted.] A Man who is
no Popish Recusant Convicted, marries a Woman who is a Popish Recusant
Convicted, in other form then is here appointed: He shall not forfeit any
thing, or be disabled by this Act.

By a Minister lawfully Authorized. Minister lawfully Authorized.
] In an Information upon this Statute, for being married otherwise then is here
appointed, it is sufficient for the Defendant to say, that he was married, etc.
by a Minister lawfully Authorized, without showing in particular how, or where,
or when; but if a Traverse come of the other side, then the Defendant is in his
Rejoinder to show the time and place. Vide Bulstrode 2. 50. 52. Creswich
against Rookesby.

Every Woman being or which shall be a Popish Recusant Convicted.] A Woman who
is no Popish Recusant Convicted, Where the Wife is no offender.
marries a Man who is a Popish Recusant Convicted, in other form than is here
appointed, she shall not be disabled by this Branch of the Act: For the
forfeiture or disability extends only to the Popish Recusant Convicted; and as,
in the Case before recited, the Woman only shall be disabled, so in this Case
the Man only shall forfeit or be disabled.

Or any Ioynture of the Lands and Hereditaments of her Husband, or any of his
Ancestors. Jointure.
] A Feme who is a Popish Recusant Convicted, and married otherwise then is
appointed by this Act, is not therefore disabled to have any sort of Jointure,
as Wingate tit. Crown n. 136. mistakes; but only such Jointure as is of the
Lands or Hereditaments of her Husband, or some of his Ancestors; and therefore
if in consideration of some service done, or for some other consideration, and
for the advancement of A. in marriage, Lands are settled upon his intended Wife
for her Jointure, by some person besides A. who is not any of the Ancestors of
A. such Jointure is not within this Act; nor shall the Wife, although a Popish
Recusant Convicted, and married otherwise, etc. be disabled by any strained
construction of this Law, to enjoy the Lands after her Husbands death: For a
penal Law shall be taken strictly, and not by equity or intendment, especially
where the intent of the Lawmakers does not appear to the contrary, and the Case
such as does but rarely happen: And it is a good Rule in the construction of
Statute Laws, which the late Lord Chief Justice Vaughan has laid down in his
Argument of Bole and Hortons Case, Mich. 25. Car. 2. (viz.) when the words of a
Law extend not to an inconvenience rarely happening, and do to those which
often happen, it is good reason not to strain the words farther then they
reach, but to say it is casus omissus, and that the Law intended quae
frequentius accidunt. Vaughan 373.

And yet there is no question but such Lands are a Jointure, The extent of the
word:
and, if made with the Wives assent before marriage, shall bar her Dower by the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. which speaks of an Estate or purchase made to the
Wife for her Jointure generally, not saying by whom: Mr. Sheapard therefore in
his Epitome, p. 523. falls very short of the full description of a Jointure,
when he limits it only to be of the Franktenement of her Husband, which
restriction daily experience confutes, For that it is commonly made by the
Ancestor of the Husband, of Lands in which the Husband never had any
Franktenement, nor perhaps ever shall have.

Custom,
By virtue of any custom of any County, City or Place.] And not of Cities only,
as it is restrained in the late additions to Dalton, cap. 85. tit. Recusants
Sect. 48.

Where in force.
The Custom here mentioned (viz.) that the Wife shall have a certain portion of
her Husbands goods after his decease, is of force throughout the whole Province
of York, and in diverse other places of England, and if he gives them away from
her by his Will, the bequest is void. Vide Swinburne, Part 3. cap. 14. p. 151.
152.

What goods are not within the Act.
A Woman is an offender within this Branch, and her Husband by his last will
gives her all or part of his goods not claimable by custom; she is not by this
Act disabled to enjoy them after his death, For the words here are plainly
restrictive to such goods as she claims by custom.

Where not Tenant by Courtesy, not One hundred pounds forfeited.
Whereof he may be entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy.] A Popish Recusant
convicted marries an Inheritrix, in other form then is appointed by this Act,
The Wife dies without issue born alive of the marriage: In this Case, although
the Husband is not entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy, yet the possibility
which he once had to be so entitled, seems to satisfy the intent of the Act,
and he shall not forfeit the hundred pounds.

So that here is another Casus omissus: For it may so happen, that a Popish
Recusant Convict may have a great Portion in money with his Wife, and but a
small Estate in Lands with her, perchance but a few Acres, yet if he be an
Offender within this branch, the Lands, for that he may be entitled to be
Tenant of them by the Courtesy, shall save his hundred pounds; and if his Wife
die, having had no issue born alive, he is wholly exempted out of the Act, and
cannot be punished either way.

Stat. Sect. 16. Baptism of Popish Recusants Children.
And that every Popish Recusant, which shall hereafter have any Child born,
shall within one month next after the Birth thereof cause the same Child to be
baptized by a lawful Minister, according to the Laws of this Realm, in the open
Church of the same Parish where the Child shall be born, or in some other
Church near adjoining, or Chapel where Baptism is usually administered: or if
by infirmity of the Child it cannot be brought co such place, then the same
shall within the time aforesaid, be baptized by the lawful Minister of any of
the said Parishes or places aforesaid, upon pain that the Father of such Child,
if he be living by the space of one month next after the Birth of such Child,
or if he be dead within the said month, then the Mother of such Child shall for
every such Offense forfeit one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, one
third part whereof to be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, one
other third part to the Informer, or him that will sue for the same, and the
other third part to the Poor of the said Parish, to be recovered by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of
Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be admitted or
allowed.

And if any Popish Recusant man or woman, Stat. Sect. 17. Burial of Popish
Recusants not excommunicate.
not being Excommunicate, shall be buried in any place other than in the Church
or Churchyard, or not according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, That
the Executors or Administrators of every such person so buried, knowing the
same, or the party that causes him to be so buried, shall forfeit the sum of
twenty pounds, the one third part whereof shall be to our Sovereign Lord the
King, the other third part to the Informer, or him or them that will sue for
the same, and the other third part to the Poor of the Parish where such person
died, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of
the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager
of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

The Exception here of a Popish Recusant Excommunicate, That is, not actually
Excommunicate.
is intended only of one actually Excommunicated, and not of him who is a
Popish Recusant convicted, who shall not be reputed as a person Excommunicate
to this intent, but only as to the point of a disability, as has been said
Sect. 12. So that if any Popish Recusant not actually Excommunicate be buried
elsewhere, or otherwise then is here mentioned, although he were convicted, yet
it is an Offense punishable by this Law.

And be it further Enacted by this present Parliament, Stat. Sect. 18. Children
departing the Realm.
That if the Children of any Subject within this Realm, (the said Children not
being Soldiers, Mariners, Merchants, or their Apprentices or Factors) to
prevent their good Education in England, or for any other cause, shall
hereafter be sent or go beyond Seas, without License of the Kings Majesty or
six of his Honorable Privy Council, (whereof the principal Secretary to be
one) under their Hands and Seals, The forfeiture of such as depart,
That then all and every such Child and Children so sent, or which shall so go
beyond the Seas, shall take no benefit by any gift, conveyance, descent,
devise, or otherwise, of or to any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Leases,
Goods or Chattels, until he or they being of the age of eighteen years or
above, take the Oath mentioned in an Act of Parliament made this present
Session, Entitled, An Act for the better discovering and repressing of Popish
Recusants, before some Justice of Peace of the County, Liberty or Limit where
such Parents of such Children as shall be so sent did or shall inherit and
dwell. And that in the mean time the next of his or her kin, which shall be no
Popish Recusant, shall have and enjoy the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Leases, Goods and Chattels, so given, conveyed, descended or devised, until
such time as the person so sent or gone beyond the Seas shall conform him or
her self, and take the aforesaid Oath, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. And after such Oath taken and conforming of himself, and receiving the
Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, he or they which have so received the
profits of the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, or any
of them, shall make account of the profits so received, and in reasonable time
make payment thereof, and restore the value of the said Goods to such person as
shall so conform him or her self as aforesaid. And of him that sends them.
And that all such persons as shall send the said Child or Children over Seas
without License as aforesaid (unless the said Child or Children be Merchants,
or their Apprentices or Factors, Mariners or Soldiers) shall forfeit one
hundred pounds, to be divided, had and recovered in three equal parts, whereof
the one third part shall be to the King, his Heirs and Successors, the other
third part to such as shall sue for the same, and the other third part to the
Poor of such Parish where such Offender does inhabit or remain, by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record,
wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

Next of kin, who,
The next of his or her kin.] It has been a great Question formerly, whether
the Mother can be said to be of kin to the Child, and it has been held in the
negative as well by the Common Lawyers as Civilians, as appears by the Case in
5 E. 6. called the Duke of Suffolks Case; and that of Brown and Shelton. Bro.
tit. Administr' 47.

But the Law is now held to be otherwise, (viz.) That the Mother shall be taken
to be of kin to the Child, and that in a nearer degree then is the Brother or
Sister: And that she shall be preferred in the Case of an Administration upon
the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 5. and of Guardianship by the Statute of
Marlebridge, where a man dies seized of Lands holden in Socage. Which later
Opinion agrees with that of Littleton in his tenures fo. 1. where he says,
That the Parent is nearer of blood to the Child then the Uncle; vide Co. 1.
Inst. 88. And in Ratcliffes Case, Co. 3.40. the Duke of Suffolks Case is denied
to be Law. So that if any Child be sent or go beyond the Seas contrary to this
Act, his Mother shall be preferred before his Brother or Sister, and as next of
kin may have and enjoy his Lands, etc. unless she be a Popish Recusant.

For next of kin, And who not.
or next of blood shall not be accounted here by course of descent, but as in
the Case of a purchase, where a Remainder is limited to the next of blood or
kin; And therefore if a man has issue three Sons, A. B. and C. and dies, A.
and B. have issue each of them a Son and die, The Son of B. goes beyond the
Seas contrary to this Act; In this Case C. the youngest Uncle shall by force of
this Act have and enjoy the Lands of the Offender until his Conformity, and not
the Son of A. the elder Uncle: For that C. has in him jus propinquitatis, as
being the Uncle, and so nearer of kin then the Cousin german. And yet the Son
of A. is heir at Law jure representationis, as being the Son of the eldest
Brother. Vide Co. 1. Inst. 10. Palmer 304, 305. Periman versus Pierce.

Shall have and enjoy the said Lands, etc.] What is forfeited.
It was held by Montague and Hobart Chief Justices, Pasch 15 Jac. in Tredway's
Case, That if a person goes beyond the Seas contrary to this Act, yet the State
of the Land is not forfeited, nor settled in the next of kin, but vests in the
heir himself who is the Offender: For the Statute says not that he shall not
take by descent, but only that he shall take no benefit by descent, and that
therefore this Statute differs from those of 5 R. 2. of consenting to
Ravishment, Stat. 5 R. 2. 11 H. 7. Sale by the heir.
and 11 H. 7. of discontinuances by Women: And Hobart said, That if the Heir
beyond Sea bargain and sell the Land descended to him, he shall prevent the
next of kin, if he has not entered; And if he has entered, the Land shall be
taken from him. Quaere of this, for Tanfeild Chief Baron seemed to be of a
contrary Opinion in the main point, and held that the State of the Land is
settled by this Act in the next of kin. Ley 59. Note in the Report of this Case
of Tredway, its said to be the meaning of this Act, that the profits of the
Land should be received by the next of kin during the Offenders Nonconformity;
But these words (have and enjoy) seem to imply some what more, and that the
next of kin shall have the Land it self.

All such persons as shall send the said Child or Children, etc.] Here Wingate
tit. Crown numb. 139. mistakes the person who shall forfeit the hundred pounds,
Forfeiture of 100 l.
applying it to the Child who goes beyond Sea, and not to the person who sends
him.

Stat. Sect. 19. The forfeiture of those already gone beyond the Seas.
And for that many Subjects of this Realm, being neither Merchants, nor their
Factors nor Apprentices, Soldiers, nor Mariners, are of late gone beyond the
Seas without License and are not as yet returned: Be it further Enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, That if any of the said persons so gone
beyond the Seas without License, which are not yet returned, shall not within
six months next after their return into this Realm, then being of the age of
Eighteen years or more, take the Oath above specified before some Justice of
Peace of the County, Liberty or Limit where such person shall inhabit or
remain, that then every such Offender shall take no benefit by any gift,
conveyance, descent, devise, or otherwise of or to any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels, until he or they, being of the said age of
Eighteen years or above, take the said Oath, and that likewise in the mean time
the next of kin to the person so offending, which shall be no Popish Recusant,
shall have and enjoy the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and
Chattels so given, conveyed, descended or devised, until such time as the
person so offending shall conform himself, and take the aforesaid Oath, and
receive the said Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And after such conforming,
taking of the said Oath, and receiving of the said Sacrament, he or they that
shall have so received the profits of the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods and Chattels, shall make account of the profits so received, and in
reasonable time make payment thereof, and of the value of such Goods and
Chattels, to such person as shall so conform him or her self as aforesaid.

Stat. Sect. 20. A Popish Recusant shall not Present to a Benefice, nor grant
the next avoidance, etc.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That
every person or persons that is or shall be a Popish Recusant Convict, during
the time that he shall be or remain a Recusant, shall from and after the end of
this present Session of Parliament, be utterly disabled to present to any
Benefice with cure or without cure, Prebend, or any other Ecclesiastical
living, or to collate or nominate to any Free School, Hospital or Donative
whatsoever, and from the beginning of this present Session of Parliament, shall
likewise be disabled to grant any avoidance to any Benefice, Prebend or other
Ecclesiastical living.

And that the Chancellor and Scholars of the University of Oxford, so often as
any of them shall be void, shall have the Presentation, Nomination, Collation,
and Donation of and to every such Benefice, Prebend or Ecclesiastical Living,
School, Hospital and Donative, set, lying and being in the Counties of Oxford,
Kent, Middlesex, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire,
Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall, Dorsetshire, Herefordshire,
Northamptonshire, Pembrokeshire, Carmarthenshire, Brecknockshire,
Monmouthshire, Cardiganshire, Montgomeryshire, the City of London, and in every
City and Town being a County of it self, The Chancellor and Scholars of Oxford
and Cambridge shall Present to a Popish Recusants Benefice, etc.
lying and being within any of the Limits or Precincts of any of the Counties
aforesaid, or in or within any of them, as shall happen to be void, during such
time as the Patron thereof shall be and remain a Recusant Convict as aforesaid.

And that the Chancellor and Scholars of the University of Cambridge shall
have the Presentation, Nomination, Collation and Donation of and to every such
Benefice, Prebend or Ecclesiastical Living, School, Hospital and Donative, set,
lying and being in the Counties of Essex, Hartfordshire, Bedfordshire,
Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Lincolnshire, Rutlandshire,
Leicestershire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Shropshire, Cheshire, Lancashire,
Yorkshire, the County of Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland,
Radnorshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Carnarvonshire, Angleseyshire,
Merionethshire, Glamorganshire, and in every City and Town being a County of it
self, lying within any of the Limits or Precincts of any of the Counties last
before mentioned, or in or within any of them, as shall happen to be void,
during such time as the Patron thereof shall be and remain a Recusant Convict
as aforesaid.

Provided, None shall be presented who has another Benefice with cure of Souls.
That neither of the said Chancellors and Scholars of either the said
Universities, shall present or nominate to any Benefice with Cure, Prebend, or
other Ecclesiastical living, any such person, as shall then have any other
Benefice with cure of Souls. And if any such Presentation or Nomination shall
be had or made of any such person so beneficed, the said Presentation or
Nomination shall be utterly void; Any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Grant of the next avoidance where void.
From and after the end of this present Session of Parliament.] A man seized of
an Advowson grants the next avoidance, and then becomes a Popish Recusant
Convict; The grant of the next Avoidance is void, and the University shall
Present; For the foregoing words (during his Recusancy) do not import the time
when his disability shall begin, but when it shall end, viz. when he remains no
longer a Recusant. But when once he becomes a Popish Recusant Convict, his
disability shall have relation Relation.
to all the time going before, scil. from the end of that Session of Parliament
wherein this Act was made. Co. 10. 55, 56. Case of the Chancellor, etc. of the
University of Oxford: Jones 20. Standen and al' versus University d' Oxon and
Whitton. Retrospects.
And such retrospects are usual in Acts of Parliament, For which see the Cases
cited in Co. 10. supra.

Recusancy by Covin.
And yet if after the Grant of the next Avoidance, the Patron or Grantor becomes
a Popish Recusant convict by Covin, and to the intent to make void such his
Grant, this shall not defeat the interest of the Grantee, but he may present
when the Church becomes void, notwithstanding such Conviction. Jones 20.

Averment, Verdict.
But then the Covin must be averred by the Grantee, and found by the Jury to be
to that particular intent, as in the Case herein after mentioned, where the
Recusant grants away the Advowson by Covin, which vide postea.

A Recusant disabled to nominate.
Be utterly disabled to Present to any Benefice, etc.] A man has the right of
nomination to a Benefice which is presentative, and another has the right of
Presentation; If he who has the right of Nomination become a Popish Recusant
Convict, I conceive he is disabled by this Act to nominate: For although only
the word (Present) be here used as to a Benefice or Ecclesiastical living
presentative, yet this shall extend as well to Nomination: For the intent of
the Act is, to prevent a Recusant from appointing who shall be Incumbent, and
the Case of Nomination is in equal mischief with that of Presentation: And if
the Recusant should not be disabled to Nominate as well as to Present, the
intent of the Act would be eluded: For he that has the right of Nomination is
in effect the Patron; and he that Presents at the Nomination of another, is but
as a Messenger between him and the Ordinary; 14 H. 4. 11. And if he who is to
Present, Presents any other then the person nominated to him, or does not
Present the person nominated, he who nominates may bring a Quare Impedit
against him: And he who has the Nomination must jointly with him who has the
Presentation, confirm the Lease of the Incumbent. Moore 49. C. 147. Fitz. n. b.
33.

It Is true, the general Rule is, Penal Statues, how expounded.
that penal Statutes shall not be taken by Equity, from whence may be inferred,
that this Statute only disabling a Recusant to present to a Benefice
presentative, shall not be extended to disable him to nominate, although it be
within the same mischief; but that Rule has some exceptions, and where the
intent of the makers of the Law plainly appears by other words in the same
Statute, a penal Statute shall be expounded largely, and according to that
intent beyond the Letter, as in the Case of Simony upon the Statute of 31 Eliz.
cap. 6. Stat. 31 Eliz. 6.
Hobart 75. Now in the subsequent Clause touching the University, the
nomination as well as presentation is given to them, and consequently the
Recusant was intended to be disabled in the one Case as well as the other:
Besides, the words (disabled to present) may be aptly enough expounded,
disabled to nominate: Presentment, in whom.
For the presentment is truly and really in him who has the right of
nomination, as is held in 14 H. 4. 11.

Chancellor and Scholars of the University.] Chancellor and Scholars a good
description.
Although the University be incorporated by the name of Chancellor, Masters and
Scholars, yet the description here made of them by the name of Chancellor and
Scholars is well enough, and sufficiently denotes the persons intended: And
the University shall have the presentation, etc. as if the true name of the
Incorporation had been expressed: For Acts of Parliament, as well as Wills, are
to be taken according to the intent of the Makers, and not according to the
strict Letter, Co. 10. 57.

Shall have the presentation, etc.] What is given the University.
It has been made a Question what is given the University by these words,
whether only a bare power or liberty to present, or a settled estate and
interest in the Partronage or Advowson; See the before cited Case of Standen
versus University d'Oxon; Jones 22, 23, 25, 26. where two Justices Hutton and
Jones were divided in opinion upon this point: For Hutton held, that that which
is given to the University by this Act, is a settled estate and interest, and
compared it to the interest or estate of the Lord, who was to hold the Land,
until he was satisfied the value of the marriage of the Heir; and to that of
the Conusee by the Statute of Acton Burnell; and to an estate given to a Man
until a hundred pounds be paid: In all which Cases the party has a settled
estate and interest in the Land. But Jones held the contrary, and that the
University has by this Act, only a power or liberty to Present when the Church
becomes void, and compared it to the power given to the Bishop to Present by
lapse after the six months, and to that given by the Statute of Proviso's 25 E.
3. where the Pope provides, Stat. 25 E. 3. 31 Eliz. 6
and to that given the King by the Statute of 31 Eliz. of Simony: In which
Cases, no Estate or Interest is transferred, but only a power or liberty
granted to Present: For this Act does not remove the Patronage from the Popish
Recusant, The Recusant is still Patron.
but that continues still in him, and he is Patron notwithstanding his
Conviction, and as Patron shall confirm a Lease made by the Incumbent, as he
might have done before his Conviction, which proves that the Interest of the
Patronage is not divested out of him, nor consequently settled in the University.

Private clause.
Note, Although this be a general Statute, and that part of it which disables
the Recusant to Present etc. or to grant any Avoidance, be general, of which
the Judges ought to take notice; yet this part of it, which gives the
Presentation etc. to the Universities, is special and private, for that it
concerns only particular persons, and must be pleaded or specially found, or
otherwise the Judges cannot take notice of it. Hobart 227. Anne Needler versus
the Bishop of Winchester. Co. 10. 57. See the Rules touching public and
private Acts of Parliament, and touching special or private Clauses in general
Acts of Parliament, 13 E. 4. 8. Co. 4. 76, 77. Hollands Case.

During such time as the Patron thereof shall be and remain a Recusant
Convict.] Conviction, when requisite
If the University bring a Quare Impedit upon this Statute, they must averr
that the Popish Recusant Convict was and remained such, at the time when the
Church became void; For without that, they do not enable themselves to Present:
But they need not averr, that he remains a Popish Recusant Convict at the time
of the bringing of the Quare Impedit, for when the Presentment hac vice is once
vested in the University, although the Recusant conform or die, yet the
University shall Present. Co. 10.57, 58.

University has a limited power.
These words are words of restraint, and the Statute gives only a limited power
to the University, scil. so long as the Recusant shall be Patron, or the Patron
shall be a Recusant; So that if, before the Church becomes void, the Recusancy
be removed from the Patron by his Conformity, or the Patronage be removed from
the Recusant, although he continues a Recusant, the University have lost their
power to Present. Jones 19.

And therefore if the Patron grant the Advowson in Fee, or in Tail, Grants
which bar the University.
or for life or years, these Cases are out of the Statute; And although after
the Grant he becomes a Popish Recusant Convict, and then the Church becomes
void, yet the University shall not Present. And it seems, that although the
Patron make such Grant of the Advowson after his Conviction, and before the
Church is void, yet this shall bar the University: For the Patronage was before
the Avoidance removed from the Recusant. Jones 19. Co. 10. 56. contrary to the
Opinion of Hutton, who held, that if a man make a Lease for years of an
Advowson, yet if afterward he becomes a Popish Recusant Convict, the
University shall have the Presentation, as a future interest given to them by
this Act, notwithstanding such Lease. Jones 26.

And the reason why by such Grants the University shall be barred, is, for that
the disability here inflicted on the Recusant, is only a disability to Present,
or to grant the next Avoidance, which extends not to any of the Grants
beforementioned, nor severs the Patronage from the Patron, as those other
Grants do. And the intent of the Statute is to prevent a Presentation by the
Recusant, or by him to whom he should grant the next Avoidance, Intent of the
Statute.
who it was presumed, would Present such an one as the Recusant should appoint:
But now, when he grants the Advowson it self away, that mischief is prevented,
and the Statute intended not in that Case, to give away the Presentation from
the Grantee to the University. Jones 19, 20.

And yet if the Recusants Grant of the Advowson in Fee, Covinous Grant.
or in Tail, or for life or years, were by Covin or in Trust on purpose to
avoid this Statute, and be averred and found so to be, such Grant shall not bar
the University. Jones 20. Co. 10. 56. Vide Godbolt 216. C. 309.

But then the Averment Averment:
in such Case, must not be of Covin or Fraud to any other intent only, but it
must be averred to be to the particular intent to avoid this Statute, and
defeat the University of the Presentment, and so it must be found by the Jury:
Verdict.
For if it be averred, or the Jury find that the Recusant granted away the
Advowson for any other Covinous purpose, Intent.
as to deceive Creditors, or the like, and not to avoid this Act, this will not
help the University, nor shall they take advantage thereof, so as to divest or
impeach the Interest or Estate of the Grantee in the Advowson: And this
resembles the Case of 9 and 10 Eliz. in the Court of Wards, cited in the Case
of the Chancellor, etc. of the University of Oxford, Co. 10. 57. Tenant in
Capite makes a Feoffment to the intent to deceive his Creditors, And this
fraudulent intent was found, and quod nulla alia Causa aut Collusio, viz. ad
defraudandam Reginam, etc. de custodia haeredum vel terrarum, etc. There it was
resolved, That although in truth by the event, the Queen was by the Feotfment
defrauded of the Wardship of the Body and Lands of the Heir, yet because the
fraud was found only to one particular intent, scil. to deceive Creditors, it
should not be extended to another intent, scil. to defeat the Queen of her
Wardship.

A man seized inter alia of an Advowson in gross, Where the King shall Present.
becomes a Popish Recusant Convict. The King seizes the Advowson as part of his
two parts, The Church becomes void: In this Case it was held by Justice Hutton,
That the University, and not the King, shall Present; But Justice Jones held
strongly to the contrary, and that, notwithstanding this Act, the King shall
have the Presentation: Stat. 3 Jac. 4.
For the Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 4. says, That the King may take and seize two
third parts of a Recusants Hereditaments, under which word an Advowson is
comprehended: And although the power or liberty of Presenting is here given the
University, yet that is to be intended only in such Cases, where a Popish
Recusant Convict is Patron: But when the King has seized the Advowson as part
of his two parts, the King is Patron, and not the Recusant; nor shall the Title
the King has to the Advowson by the Act of 3 Jac. 4. be divested by another
Act of Parliament, unless it had been there given away from the King, in
express terms. And Hobart Chief Justice, and Winch Justice, declared they were
of the same Opinion with Jones, in the main point. Jones 17. etc. Standen and
al' versus University d' Oxon and Whitton.

Hales Case. Plowden 260, 263. the Recusant by consequence may grant the
Avoidance, contrary to the express Letter of this Act: viz. his Recusancy be
voluntary, yet the Conviction and Forfeiture thereupon are involuntary; And the
Recusant is therein potius patiens quam agens. Jones 21.

A Popish Recusant Convict, seized in fee of an Advowson in gross, is attainted
of Felony or Praemunire, Felony. Praemunire.
and the Church becomes void; In this Case Hutton held, That the Interest which
accrued to the University upon the Conviction for Recusancy, should not be
divested by the Attainder; And that if a man, seized of such an Advowson,
Statute Merchant.
acknowledge a Statute Merchant, and afterward becomes a Popish Recusant
Convict, and then the Statute is extended, the Interest of the University shall
not be divested by the extent; But Jones seemed to be of a contrary Opinion in
the Case of Treason or Praemunire. Jones 20.26.

If the King seize two parts of a Manor belonging to a Popish Recusant
Convict, Advowson follows the Manor.
for non-payment of the forfeiture of twenty pounds per month, to which Manor
an Advowson is appendant; The two parts of the Advowson shall follow the two
parts of the Manor, and the King shall Present and not the University,
notwithstanding this Act: For after such seizure, the King is Patron of the
Advowson, and not the Recusant, and in this Case the King shall present alone.
Hobart 126, 127. The King shall Present alone.
Chancellor, etc. of Cambridge versus Walgrave and al'. Moore 872. C. 1214. the
same Case.

As shall then have any other Benefice with Cure of Souls.] And not as is
already beneficed, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 140. mistakes: For a sine Cura
is a Benefice, Sint Cura.
and yet the University may Present or Nominate him who has a sine cura.

A Donative of the Kings may be cum cura animarum. Donative cum cura.
And so is the Church of the Tower of London. Cro. Mich. 9. Car. Mackaller
versus Todderick; And the University cannot Present or Nominate him that has
such a Donative.

Notwithstanding what is said by Sir Edward Coke 3. Inst. 355. Deanery,
Archdeaconry, Prebend, etc.
It seems that a Deanery, Archdeaconry, Prebend, etc. are not Benefices with
Cure of Souls, nor had they been comprehended under the name of Benefices with
Cure of Souls within the Statute of 21 H. 8. Pluralities, Stat. 21 H. 8. of
Pluralities.
Although the special Proviso in that Act had been omitted: For that Proviso is
ex abundanti, and there is no such to except them out of the Statute of 13
Eliz. cap. 12. Stat. 13 El. 12.
of reading the Articles, and yet if a Dean, Archdeacon or Prebendary read not
the Articles within the time limited by 13 Eliz. his promotion is not void by
that Statute, And the reason is, because it is not a Benefice with Cure of
Souls; The Opinion of Justice Tirrell at Lincoln Assizes in Lent 1668/9. Who in
the Case of Dr. Sanderson denied the Archdeacon of Lincoln to be lawful
Archdeacon, For that he had not read the Articles, within the time so limited
and affirmed an Archdeaconry to be a Benefice with Cure within 13 Eliz. being
contrary to Law, and to the received meaning of that Statute: And as for a
Prebend, the reason given for the Opinion in Bland and Maddox Case. B. R. Mich.
29 and 30 Eliz. is expressly against what is said by Sir Edward Coke: For it was
there agreed, that a Layman may be presented to a Prebend, quia non habet curam
animarum: Cro. Eliz. 79. And for the same reason a Dean, Archdeacon,
Prebendary, etc. may be in this Case presented or nominated by the University,
for their promotion is not a Benefice with Cure of Souls.

Stat. Sect. 21.
Moreover, because Recusants Convict are not thought meet to be Executors or
Administrators to any person or persons whatsoever, nor to have the Education
of their own Children, much less of the Children of any other of the Kings
Subjects, nor to have the marriage of them: Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, A Recusant shall not be Executor or Administrator
That such Recusants convicted, or which shall be convicted at the time of the
death of any Testator, or at the time of the granting of any Administration,
shall be disabled to be Executor or Administrator by force of any Testament
hereafter to be made, or Letters of Administration hereafter to be granted, Or
Guardian.
nor shall have the custody of any Child as Guardian in Chivalry, Guardian in
Socage, or Guardian in nurture of any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, being
Freehold or Copyhold, but shall be adjudged disabled to have any such Wardship
or Custody of any such Child, or of their Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
being Freehold or Copyhold as aforesaid.

Who shall have the Wardship.
And that for the better Education and Preservation of the said Children and of
their Estates, the next of the kin to such Child or Children, to whom the said
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of such Child or Children cannot lawfully
descend, who shall usually resort to some Church or Chapel, and there hear
Divine Service, and receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper thrice in
the year next before, according to the Laws of this Realm, shall have the
Custody and Education of the same Child, and of his said Lands and Tenements
being holden in Knights Service, until the full age of the said Ward of one and
twenty years: And of his said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments being holden
in Socage, as a Guardian in Socage, And of the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments holden by Copy of Court Roll of any Manor, so long as the Custom
of the said Manor shall permit and allow the same, and in every of the said
Cases shall yield an Account of the profits thereof to the said Ward, as the
Case shall require.

And that if at any time hereafter, any of the Wards of the Kings Majesty, or
of any other, shall be granted or sold to any Popish Recusant Convict, such
Grant or Sale shall be utterly void and of none effect.

Convicted at the time of the death of any Testator, or at the time of the
granting of any Administration.] Granting of Administration.
] These words are to be construed reddendo singula singulis, (viz.) That the
Recusant shall be disabled to be Executor, if he be convicted at the time of
the death of the Testator, or to be Administrator, if he be Convicted at the
time of the granting of Letters of Administration: For so these words (at the
time of the granting of any Administration) are here to be understood.

And therefore, if a man makes his Will, and therein appoints a Recusant
Convict to be his Executor, Executor, where not disabled.
and before the Testators death the Conviction is removed by Reversal of the
Judgment, or avoided or discharged for some defect in the Indictment,
Proclamation or other proceedings, and then the Testator dies; In such Case the
Recusant is not by this Act disabled to be Executor; For although the naming of
an Executor, is in Law a granting of Administration, And if a man by his last
Will grants the Administration of his Goods and Chattels to J. S. without more
saying, thereby J. S. is made his Executor, Dyer 290. So that the naming of an
Executor, and the granting of Administration, seem to be the same thing; yet
this is not a granting of Administration within the meaning of this Act;
Administration here, relating only to an Administrator, and not to an Executor;
besides, the naming of an Executor amounts not to a complete grant of
Administration until the Testators death: For then, and not before, the Will
becomes in force; And if the party stands not then convicted, he is not
disabled.

Much less shall he be disabled to be Executor, who is not convicted at the
time of the Testators death, although he be convicted at the time of the
Probate of the Will: For if these words (granting of Administration) should
relate to an Executor as well as to an Administrator, which in truth they do
not, yet the power given to the Executor by the Ordinary or Ecclesiastical
Judge upon the probate of the Will, cannot be called a granting, but only a
committing of Administration Committing of Administration. What the Ordinary
grants to an Executor
according to the Will of the deceased; And in such Case, all that the Ordinary
or Ecclesiastical Judge can grant, are Letters testifying what the Testator
has already given to the Executor, and a Power or Authority to execute the
Will.

As Guardian in Chivalry.] Although the Recusant seized in Chivalry, and
Convicted, could not have been Guardian, yet if he had granted the Seigniory
Seigniory granted over.
to one who was no Recusant, the Grantee should have been Guardian
notwithstanding this Act: for the mischief here intended to be prevented was
removed, when the Seigniory was granted to another who was no Recusant: By
Jones Justice C. B. Hill, 20. Jac. Jones 19.

So if the King had seized Seized by the King.
the Recusants Seigniory as part of his two parts, the King should have had the
Wardship, and not the next of kin, for the same reason. Jones 21.

Stat. Sect. 22. Popish Books.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That no
person or persons shall bring from beyond the Seas, nor shall Print, sell or
buy any Popish Primmers, Ladies, Psalters, Manuels, Rosaries, Popish
Catechisms, Missals, Breviaries, Portalls, Legends and Lives of Saints,
containing superstitious matter, Printed or Written in any Language whatsoever,
nor any other superstitious Books Printed or Written in the English Tongue;
upon pain of forfeiture of Forty shillings for every such Book, one third part
thereof to be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, one other third
part to him that will sue for the same, and the other third part to the Poor of
the Parish where such Book or Books shall be found, to be recovered by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of the Kings Majesty's Courts of
Record, wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be admitted or
allowed; and the said Books to be burned.

Stat. Sect. 23. Popish Relics and Books.
And that it shall be lawful for any two Justices of Peace within the Limits
of their Jurisdiction or Authority, and to all Mayors, Bailiffs and Chief
Officers of Cities and Towns Corporate in their Liberties, from time to time,
to search the Houses and Lodgings of every Popish Recusant Convict, or of every
person whose Wife is or shall be a Popish Recusant Convict, for Popish Books
and Relics of Popery: And that if any Altar, Pix, Beads, Pictures or such
like Popish Relics, or any Popish Book or Books shall be found in their or
any of their Custody, as in the Opinion of the said Justices, Mayor, Bailiff or
Chief Officer, as aforesaid, shall be thought unmeet for such Recusant as
aforesaid, to have or use, the same shall be presently defaced and burnt, if it
be meet to be burned: And if it be a Crucifix or other Relic of any price,
the same to be defaced at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, in the
County where the same shall be found; and the same so defaced, to be restored
to the owner again.

Shall be thought unmeet for such Recusant.] So that the Justices of Peace are
not bound by this Act to deface all Relics of price, or to burn or deface Not
all to be defaced or burnt.
all other Relics or Popish Books, as Wingate tit. Crown numb. 144. misleads
them in this particular.

Unmeet, sense of it here.
And although herein much is referred to the discretion of the Justices of
Peace, yet where the Husband is a Protestant, and only the Wife a Popish
Recusant, it seems by these words that they are not to consider what is unmeet
for the Husband, but what is unmeet for the Recusant, (viz.) the Wife; and that
it was not intended that they should seize, burn or deface any Books of the
Husbands though Popish, unless such whereby the Wife might be aided or
confirmed in her Superstition: so that in this Case Books, written in a
Language or Style unintelligible to the Wife, are not within the meaning of
this Act, nor ought by color thereof to be taken from the Husband, who is no
Popish Recusant.

At the General Quarter Sessions.] Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7. General
Quarter Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1


And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 24. A Popish
Recusants Armor shall be seized.
That all such Armor, Gunpowder and Munition, of whatsoever kinds, as any
Popish Recusant Convict within this Realm of England has, or shall have in his
House or Houses, or elsewhere, or in the hands or possession of any other at
his or their disposition, shall be taken from such Popish Recusants, or others
which have or shall have the same to the use of such Popish Recusant, by
Warrant of four Justices of Peace at their General or Quarter Sessions to be
holden in the same County where such Popish Recusant shall be resident, (other
than such necessary weapons, as shall be thought fit by the said four Justices
of Peace to remain and be allowed for the defense of the person or persons of
such Recusants, or for the defense of his, her or their House or Houses) and
that the said Armor and Munition so taken shall be kept and maintained at the
Costs of such Recusants, in such places as the said Four Justices of Peace, at
their said Sessions of the Peace, shall set down and appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The forfeiture for not
delivering it.
That if any such Recusant, having or which shall have any such Armor,
Gunpowder and Munition or any of them, or if any other person or persons, which
shall have any such Armor, Gunpowder and Munition, or any of them, to the use
of any such Recusant, shall refuse to declare or manifest unto the said
Justices of Peace or any of them, what Armor he, she or they have or shall
have, or shall let, hinder or disturb the delivery thereof to any of the said
Justices, or to any other person or persons authorized by their Warrant to take
and seize the same, then every such person so offending contrary to this
Statute in this behalf, shall forfeit and lose to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, his and their said Armor, Gunpowder and Munition, and shall
also be imprisoned by Warrant of or from any Justices of Peace of such County,
by the space of three months, without Bail or Mainprize.

General or Quarter Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1 Where such Arms cannot be seized.
At their General or Quarter Sessions.] Vide Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

In the same County where such Popish Recusant shall be resident.] A Popish
Recusant lives in one County, and his Arms are kept in another County by one
who is no Popish Recusant, such Arms cannot be seized by force of this Act, by
the Justices of Peace of either County; not by the Justices of the County where
the Arms are kept, for the seizure or taking is here limited to be by Warrant
at the Sessions in the County where the Recusant resides, and the Statute must
be strictly pursued in that particular; nor by the Justices of the County where
the Recusant is resident, for the Arms are in another County, where they have
nothing to do: Power of a Justice of Peace out of his County:
And although in some Cases, where a Statute appoints a Justice of Peace to do
a thing, he may do it out of his County, Power of a Justice of Peace out of his
County:
as to take an examination upon the Statute of Winton of a Robbery, as was
resolved in the Case of Helier and the Hundred of Benhust, Pasch. 7. Car. 1. B.
R. Jones 239. Cro. Car. 213. yet he cannot exercise any coercive power out of
his County, as was resolved in that Case; for his potestas Jurisdictionis is
confined to his County, as well as that of a Bishop is confined to his Diocese:
Vide Palmer 473. Ascuithes Case. And here the taking of the Recusants Armor is
a coercive Act, and therefore can be executed by Warrant of the four Justices
of Peace, in that County only where they are Justices; So that this is clearly
Casus omissus, and not provided for by this Act. Vide postea.

Four Justices.
In such places as the said four Justices of Peace, etc. shall set down and
appoint.] And not where one Justice shall appoint, as is mistaken in the late
additions to Dalton, cap. 81. tit. Recusants Sect. 40.

Imprisoned by Warrant of or from any Justices of Peace.] Any two Justices may
grant their Warrant for Imprisoning the Offender, Two sufficient.
and it is sufficient in this Case, for pluralis numerus est duobus contentus:
But a Warrant from any one Justice will not serve, contrary to Wingate tit.
Crown numb. 145.

Of such County. County:
] That is, of the County where the Popish Recusant is resident, for no other
County was named before.

In what Case the party cannot be imprisoned:
A Popish Recusant lives in one County, and his Arms are kept in another County
by one who is no Popish Recusant. The Justices of Peace of that other County
cannot by force of this Act imprison him that keeps them, for they are not
named here; but the power in this Case is expressly limited to other Justices,
and no other can intermedle therein; neither will the Warrant of the Justices
of Peace of the County where the Recusant is resident, reach him who is in
another County: For the coercive Authority of a Justice of Peace Justice of
Peace limited to his County.
cannot exceed his limits or bounds, as is held in Plowden 37. in the Case of
the Sheriffs of London: And therefore in the Case of the Lord Say, it was
resolved, that if a Justice, of Peace of the County where the Felony was
committed, pursue a Felon into another County, and take him there; the Felon
must be imprisoned in the County where he is taken, and the Justice of Peace
who pursued him, has no power to carry him to the Goal of the County where he
did the Felony; for he is a Prisoner in the County where he was taken, and
there the Justice of Peace has no more to do, then an ordinary person, 13 E.
4. 8. Bro. Freshsuite 3. so that, as it seems, in this Case the party who keeps
such Arms cannot be imprisoned by this Act: But this likewise is Casus Omissus,
and not here provided for.

And yet nevertheless be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Stat. Sect. 25.
A Popish Recusant shall maintain his Armor.
That notwithstanding the taking away of such Armor, Gunpowder and Munition,
the said Popish Recusant shall and may be charged with the maintaining of the
same, and with the buying, providing and maintaining of Horse, and other Armor
and Munition, in such sort as other his Majesty's Subjects from time to time
shall be appointed and commanded, according to their several Abilities and
Qualities; and that the said Armor and Munition, at the Charge of such Popish
Recusant for them, and as their own provision of Armor and Munition, shall be
showed at every Muster, show or use of Armor to be had or made within the said
County.

Provided always, That neither this Act, Stat. Sect. 26. Ecclesiastical
Censures.
nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to take away or abridge the
Authority or Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Censures, for any cause or
matter, but that the Commissioners of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, in
Causes Ecclesiastical, for the time being, Archbishops, Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical Judges may do and proceed, as before the making of this Act they
lawfully did or might have done: Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

Stat. vii Jac. cap. ii. An Act that all such as are to be Naturalized, or
restored in Blood, shall first receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
the Oath of Allegiance, and the Oath of Supremacy.
What they shall be bound unto who shall be Naturalized or restored in Blood.
FOrasmuch as the Naturalizing of Strangers, and restoring to Blood persons
Attainted, have been ever reputed matters of mere grace and favor, which are
not fit to be bestowed upon any others then such as are of the Religion now
established in this Realm; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, that no person or persons, of what Quality, Condition or
Place whatsoever, being of the age of Eighteen years or above, shall be
Naturalized or restored in Blood, unless the said person or persons have
received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper within one month before any Bill
exhibited for that purpose, and also shall take the Oath of Supremacy and the
Oath of Allegiance, in the Parliament House, before his or her Bill be twice
Read. And for the better effecting of the premises, Be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, for the time being, if the Bill begin in the Upper House, and
the Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament for the time being, if the Bill
begin there, shall have Authority at all times, during the Session of
Parliament, to minister such Oath and Oaths, and to such person and persons, as
by the true intent of this Statute is to be ministered. This Act to take place
from and after the end of this present Session of Parliament.

Stat. vii Jac. cap. vi. An Act for Administering the Oath of Allegiance, and
Reformation of married Women Recusants.
WHereas by a Statute made in the Third year of your Majesty's Reign,
entitled, Stat. Sect. 1.
an Act for the better discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants, the form
of an Oath to be ministered and given to certain persons in the same Act
mentioned, is limited and prescribed, tending only to the Declaration of such
Duty as every true and well affected Subject, not only by bond of Allegiance,
but also by the commandment of Almighty God ought to bear to your Majesty, your
Heirs and Successors, which Oath such as are infected with Popish superstition
do oppugn with many false and unsound Arguments, the just defense whereof your
Majesty has heretofore undertaken and worthily performed, to the great
contentment of all your loving Subjects, notwithstanding the gainsayings of
contentious Adversaries.

And to show how greatly your Loyal Subjects do approve the said Oath, they
prostrate themselves at your Majesty's Feet, beseeching your Majesty that the
same Oath may be administered to all your Subjects. To which end we do with all
humbleness beseech your Highness that it may be Enacted, Every person above the
age of 18 years herein intended shall take the Oath of Allegiance and before
whom.
And be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That all and
every person and persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, of what Estate,
Dignity, Pre-eminence, Sex, Quality or Degree soever he, she or they be, or
shall be, above the age of Eighteen years, being in this Act mentioned and
intended, shall make, take and receive a Corporal Oath upon the Evangelists,
according to the tenor and effect of the said Oath set forth in the
forementioned Statute, before such person or persons, as hereafter in this Act
is expressed, That is to say, All and every Archbishop and Bishop Archbishops
and Bishops.
that now is or hereafter shall be, before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal for the time being.

Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers.
And all and every Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer and Minister, of what Estate,
Dignity, Pre-eminence or Degree soever he or they be, or shall be, before the
Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop, or other Ordinary of the Diocese for the
time being, wherein such Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister ought to
exercise his said Office, Place or Function.

A Baron or Baroness or above that Degree. Privy Counselors. Presidents.
And all and every person and persons of or above the Degree of a Baron of
Parliament, or Baroness of this your Highness Realm of England, and all of your
Highness Privy Counsel residing in London or Westminster, or within thirty
miles thereof; and the Presidents of Wales and the North Parts, before any four
of your Highness Privy Counsel, whereof the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer,
Lord Privy Seal, or principal Secretary for the time being to be one: And if
such person or persons live and reside in the Country distant above thirty
miles from London, then before the Lord Bishop of the Diocese, or such other
person or persons, as the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for
the time being, shall thereto by Writ of Dedimus potestatem Authorize.

The sworn Servants of the King, Queen, Prince, etc.
And all and every the sworn Servants, ordinary and extraordinary, of your
Highness, the Queens Grace, or of the Household of the Prince of Wales, and of
the rest of your Highness Children, before the Lord Steward, the Lord
Chamberlains and Vicechamberlains to your Highness and the Queen, the Treasurer
and Controller of your Highness Household, the Master of your Highness Horse,
the Dean of the Chapel, and the Knight Marshal for the time being, the
Officers of the Green-cloth, or any three of them.

Temporal Judges, Ministers of Justices, They which receive any Fee of the King.
All and every temporal Judge, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators,
Feodaries, and other Officers and Ministers of Justice in this present Act not
specially mentioned, and every other person or persons that does or shall
receive any Fee of your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, before the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral, Lord
Warden of the Five Ports for the time being, or one of them, or before one of
the Chief Justices either of your Majesty's Bench, or of the Common Pleas, or
before Justices of Assize of the same County where the parties reside, or other
such persons as the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal shall thereto
Authorize.

Chief Officers of Cities and Towns Corporate.
And all Mayors, Bailiffs, or other chief Officers of Cities and Towns
Corporate, by what name soever they be called or known, before such person or
persons as usually administer the Oath to them at their first entrance into
their said Offices.

And all and every the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the Five
Ports of the Commons House of Parliament, Stat. Sect. 2. Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses and Barons of the Commons House of Parliament.
at any Parliament or Session of Parliament hereafter to be Assembled, before
he or they shall be permitted to enter into the said House, before the Lord
Steward for the time being, or his Deputy or Deputies.

The King cannot dispense with any Member of the Commons House of Parliament,
from taking this Oath: The Kings dispensation void.
For that he is here declared to be persona inhabilis, until he take it.
Vaughan 355. Thomas and Sorrel's Case.

And the Master of the Ordnance, Lieutenant of the Tower Stat. Sect. 3. Master
of the Ordnance, Lieutenant of the Tower, etc.
of London, and Mint-master there, the four principal Officers of your Navy
under the Lord Admiral, before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and the Lord Admiral for the time being, or any of them.

And all the Officers, Ministers, Officers and Servants in the Tower.
Servants and others within your said Tower of London, before the Lieutenant of
the Tower.

And all the Vice-Admirals, Captains, Masters, Officers, Ministers and
Soldiers, in your Highness Ships or any of them, before the said four
principal Officers of your Navy, or any two of them.

And all persons having charge of Castles, Fortresses, Captains of Castles and
Soldiers.
Block-houses or Garrisons, and all Captains who shall have Charge of Soldiers
within this your Highness Realm, before the Justices of Assize of the same
County, or before two Justices of the Peace of the same County, City or
Liberty, where the same Castles, Fortresses or Block-houses shall stand, or the
Charge of Soldiers shall be.

All Doctors, Advocates and Proctors of the Civil Law, Doctors, Advocates and
Proctors of the Civil Law.
and their Clerks, before the Bishop of the Diocese where they shall for the
most part dwell or reside.

And all and every person or persons Temporal that hereafter shall Sue Livery
or Ouster le maine Suers of Livery and Ouster le maine.
out of the Hands of your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, before his or
their Ouster le maine Sued forth and allowed, before the Master of the Wards
and Liveries, or before the Surveyor and Attorney of your Highness said Court,
in open Court.

Sergeants at Law, and the Judges Servants.
All the Sergeants at Law, Servants to the Judges in your Highness Courts at
Westminster, and all other in the Sergeants Inns, before the Chief Justice of
your Majesty's Bench, the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and the Chief
Baron of your Exchequer, or some or one of them.

Gentlemen of the Inns of Court. Principals and Treasurers of the Inns of
Chancery.
All your Highness Subjects in the Inns of Court, or that hereafter shall be
admitted thereinto, and the Principals and Treasurers of every Inn of Chancery,
before the Readers and Benchers of the several houses whereto they belong, or
four of them at the least in their open Halls.

All others of the Inns of Chancery.
All other your Majesty's Subjects, as well Ancients as other, not being
Principal or Treasurer, that now are or hereafter shall be admitted into any
Inn of Chancery, before the Principal or Treasurer and Ancients of the several
Inns of Chancery, or four of them in their open Halls.

Prothonotaries, Philizers, Officers, Attorneys Clerks.
All Prothonotaries, Philizers, Officers, Ministers, Attorneys and Clerks that
now are, or hereafter shall be admitted to write or practice in any of your
Highness Courts at Westminster, or in any other Court of Record, before the
Judge or Judges of the same Court.

Clerks and Officers of the Chancery.
All Clerks of the Chancery, and all their under-clerks, and all other Officers
of the said Court of Chancery, and their Clerks, before the Master of the Rolls
for the time being, or before two of the Masters of the said Court of Chancery.

Parsons, Vicars Curates, persons in Orders, Schoolmaster, Usher.
All Parsons, Vicars and Curats, and all other persons Ecclesiastical taking
Orders, and all and every Schoolmaster or Usher, before the Bishop of the
Diocese, or other Ordinary in the same sitting, in open Court.

The Vice-chancellors of both the Universities. Heads of Colleges and Halls,
Proctors, Beadles.
The Vice-Chancellors of both the Universities for the time being, and the
Presidents, Wardens, Provosts, Masters of Colleges and Halls, and all other
Heads and Principals of Houses, Proctors, and Beadles of the Universities,
publicly in the Convocation, before the Senior Masters there present.

Persons taking Degrees in School.
And all and every other persons whatsoever, that is or shall be promoted to
any Degree in School, before the Vice Chancellor of the said University for the
time being, in the Congregation house.

Fellows and Scholars of Halls or Colleges.
All Fellows of Houses, and all Scholars of Halls or Colleges, that now are
or hereafter shall be received into the same, being under the Degree of a
Baron, before the President, Master, Provost, Warden, or other head or chief
Governor of that College, Hall or House whereinto he shall be received, and
in the open Hall.

And all Doctors of Physic, Doctors and Practisers of Physic.
and all other who practice Physic that now are, or hereafter shall be
admitted into the College of Physicians in London, before the President of the
same College for the time being.

And all Aldermen, Sheriffs or Under-officers whatsoever, of the Cities and
Towns Corporate, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Underofficers and Freemen of Cities and
Towns Corporate.
and all such as hereafter shall be made Freemen of the said City or Town
Corporate, before the Mayor, Bailiffs or other Chief Officer of the said City
or Town, in the open Hall.

And to the intent that due execution may be had of the premises without
delay, When the said persons shall take the said Oath.
It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the persons
beforenamed, who have any certain time limited or expressed when to take the
aforesaid Oath, shall at the time therein prescribed take the same, and the
rest within six months next after the end of this present Session of
Parliament.

And be it further Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, Stat. Sect.
4. Who may tender the said Oath, and to whom.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for any one of the Privy Council of
your Highness, or of your Heirs and Successors, and to and for every Bishop
within his Diocese to require any Baron or Baroness of the age of Eighteen
years or above, to take the said Oath, and to and for any two Justices of Peace
within any County, City or Town Corporate, whereof one to be of the Quorum, to
require any person or persons of the age of Eighteen years or above, under the
Degree of a Baron or Baroness, to take the said Oath. And if any person or
persons of or above the said age and degree now stand, or hereafter any time
shall stand and be Presented, Indicted or Convicted for not coming to Church,
or not receiving the Holy Communion or Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, before the Ordinary, or other having
lawful power to take such Presentment or Indictment, Then three of the Privy
Council of your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, whereof the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, or Principal Secretary to be one,
upon knowledge thereof shall require such person or persons to take the said
Oath. And if any other person or persons whatsoever, of and above the said age
and under the said degree, now stand, or at any time hereafter shall stand and
be Presented, Indicted or Convicted for not coming to Church, or receiving the
Holy Communion or Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, before the Ordinary, or any other having lawful power
to take such Presentment or Indictment; Or if the Minister, Petty Constable and
Churchwardens, or any two of them, shall at any time hereafter complain to any
Justice of Peace near adjoining to the place where any person complained of
shall dwell, and the said Justice shall find cause of suspicion, That then any
one Justice of Peace, within whose Commission or Power such person or persons
shall at any time hereafter be, or to whom complaint shall be made as
aforesaid, shall, upon notice thereof, require such person or persons to take
the said Oath.

For any two Justices of Peace within any County, City or Town Corporate, etc.]
The two Justices of Peace may require this Oath of any person, that shall
happen to be within their Jurisdiction, although his habitation be in another
County or Liberty: For the Oath of Allegiance sequitur personam, non locum.
This Oath sequitur personam non locum.
Bulstrode 2. 155. The King against Griffith and al'.

To require any person or persons.] This is an enlargement of the power given
to two Justices of Peace Power of Justices of Peace enlarged.
by 3 Jac. cap. 4. For thereby they could have required the Oath, but only in
some particular Cases: vide that Statute Sect. 10. But by this Statute, they
may require it of any person whatsoever of competent age, and under the degree
of a Baron or Baroness.

Warrant to bring the party
The Justices of Peace in this Case, or the Justice of Peace in the following
Case, may make his or their special Warrant to the Constable, to bring the
party before the said Justice or Justices, to take the Oath: For the Statute,
by giving them power to require the Oath, does implicitly authorize them to
make such a Warrant: Quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, conceditur and id sine
quo res ipsa esse non potest; And it is against the Office of the Justices of
Peace, and the Authority hereby given them, to go and seek the party. Co. 12.
130.

But the Constable cannot, by virtue of such Warrant, break the House Breaking
the House.
where the party is: For he is no Offender before he refuse the Oath, or commit
some Contempt to the King. Ibid.

And if any person or persons of or above the said age and degreee.] That is,
of the said age, and above the said Degree of a Baron Persons above the degree
of a Baron.
or Baroness: For so the words must be taken, viz. conjunctively, and not of
such who are of the degree of a Baron or Baroness, and no more: For the
precedent words appointed, that the Oath may be tendered to such by any Privy
Counselor, or the Bishop of the Diocese in all cases, although they were never
Convicted, Indicted or Presented, But to such Noblemen or Noblewomen as are
above that degree, it cannot be tendered by virtue of this Act, unless they have
been before Convicted, Indicted or Presented for not coming to Church, or not
receiving the Sacrament; And in those Cases, no less then three Privy
Counselors, Quorum unus etc. can tender it. Co. 12. 130, 131.

And if any other person or persons whatsoever etc. under the said Degree.] A
Baroness, or any Woman above that Degree, Noblewoman by Marriage,
who is not Noble by birth, but only by Marriage, becomes a Widow, and takes a
second Husband under the Degree of Nobility, and is Convicted, Indicted or
Presented of Recusancy; or complained of by the Minister, etc. to a Justice of
Peace, who finds cause of suspicion; The Justice of Peace may require her to
take this Oath, although she were once Noble: For by her second Marriage she
has lost her Nobility and name of Dignity, together with the privileges of
her Nobility. Quando mulier Nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse Nobilis;
which is to be understood of Nobility acquired by Marriage: For that which was
gotten by Marriage, may also be lost by Marriage. Eodem modo, quo quid
constituitur, dissolvitur; And in such Case, she shall not be tried by
Noblemen, For they are no longer her Peers. Co. 2. Inst. 50. But if a Woman be
Noble by birth By birth.
or descent, whomsoever she marries, yet she remains Noble: For birthright is
Character indelebilis: vide Co. 4. 118. Actons Case. Co. 6. 53. Countess of
Rutlands Case. Dyer 6 and 7 E. 6. 79. Bro. Nosme de Dignity 31. 69. Co. 1.
Inst. 69.

And it is observable, that the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Stat. 21 H. 8. 13
provides, that a Duchess, Marquess, Countess or Baroness, Widows, which take
a second Husband under the Degree of a Baron, may notwithstanding such second
Marriage, take such number of Chaplains as if she were a Widow: which she could
not have done, if it had not been expressly provided for by the Statute; and the
reason is given in Actons Case, because by such Marriage her Dignity is
determined; But here, there being no such provisional Clause, she shall not
have the privilege of Nobility, but may be tendered the Oath of Allegiance by
the Justice of Peace, as in the Case of a Common person.

Shall stand and be Presented, Indicted or Convicted. Conviction not necessary.
] These words being in the dis-junctive, it is not necessary that the party be
convicted: But if he stand Presented or Indicted for not coming to Church, or
not receiving the Sacrament, and be under the degree of a Baron, the Justice of
Peace ought to tender him this Oath.

And the said Justice shall find Cause of suspicion. There must be cause of
suspicion.
] And not, if the party be suspected (as Wingate tit. Crown n. 150. mistakes)
for the bare suspicion of the Justice of Peace or any other person, is no
sufficient ground to require the Oath, or commit the party for refusal; But
there must be some good Cause for that suspicion, and the same must be alleged
in the Justice of Peace his Plea or Justification, if he be sued for committing
him to Prison for such refusal: So if a man be arrested on suspicion of Felony,
and bring his Action for false Imprisonment, the Defendant ought to show some
matter in fact, to induce his suspicion: For in these and the like Cases, a
bare suspicion is no sufficient Justification, it being a matter secret and not
traversable, but the Cause of suspicion is traversable. Bulstrode 3. 284, 285.
Weal versus Wells. 7 E. 4. 20. 17 E. 4. 5. 5 H. 7. 4. It shall be tried by the
Justices.
And whether the suspicion be just and lawful, shall be tried and determined by
the Justices. Co. 2. Inst. 52. 11 E. 4. 4.

That then any one Justice of Peace.] What was said by Coke Chief Justice B. R.
in the Case of Griffith and others, Bulstrode, 2. 155. viz. that any one
Justice of Peace One Justice of Peace.
may minister this Oath, is to be understood of some Cases only. Co. 12. 130.
which are no other then those here mentioned, as he explains his meaning in his
said 12th Part p. 132. where he says, that one Justice of Peace cannot commit
any for refusal of this Oath, unless they be Prosecuted, Indicted or Convicted,
etc. according to this Statute; Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 10. 11.

Within whose Commission or Power such person or persons shall at any time
hereafter be.] A person complained of, and against whom cause of suspicion is
found by the Justice of Peace, flies into another County: A person complained
of, and justly suspected, flies into another County.
Quaere, whether a Justice of Peace of that other County can require the Oath
of him, and commit him upon refusal: For he seems to be empowered thereunto by
the express words of the Statute, for that the party is fallen within his
Commission or Power. But yet I conceive, that by these words, any one Justice
of Peace within whose Commission or Power, etc. is designed or intended no
other Justice, then a Justice of that County where the party was complained of,
and suspected. The Justices there cannot proceed thereupon.
And that if he fly into another County, no proceedings can be there upon the
complaint and suspicion in the County whence he came, nor any one Justice
tender him the Oath or commit him for refusal, without a new Complaint and
cause of suspicion in the County whither he flies: For where the party cannot
be Indicted of a Praemunire, for refusing the Oath upon the second tender at
the Assizes or Sessions, there the Justice or Justices of Peace out of Sessions
cannot tender the Oath, or commit for refusal; For the Commitment is in Order
to a second tender, and an Indictment of Praemunire thereupon: But in this
Case, the party cannot be Indicted of a Praemunire in the County where he
flies, for refusing it upon the second tender; For the offense, for which the
party must be Indicted, is a complicated offense consisting of several
particulars: First, In giving just cause of suspicion, without which the party
complained of according to this Act, cannot be tendered the Oath by one Justice
of Peace; then, in refusing the Oath before the Justice of Peace who tendered
it; and lastly, in refusing it upon the second tender at the Assizes or
Sessions; all which must be comprised in the Indictment: so that the cause of
suspicion is pars criminis, and that arising in the County where the party
dwelt, and was complained of, cannot be punished in another County, unless the
Statute had expressly made it examinable there; Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap: 4. Stat.
5 Jac. 4.
Sect. 11.

True it is, that some Statutes do enable Justices of Peace to punish an
offense done in another County, but that is, where they enable them likewise to
examine the truth of the Fact, and take proofs and evidence thereof; so the
Statutes of 1 Jac. cap. 27. and 7 Jac. cap. 11. 1 Jac. 27. 7 Jac. 11.
empower the Justices of Peace where the party is apprehended, to examine and
punish the offense: But in our Case, the cause of suspicion arising in one
County, is not made examinable, and consequently not punishable in another
County; and if not punishable there, no Justice of Peace of that other County
can proceed upon that cause of suspicion, notwithstanding the party happen to
be within his Commission or power: But yet the party, so flying into another
County, may without any new complaint or cause of suspicion, be tendered the
Oath, But yet he may be tendered the Oath there.
and proceeded against there by two Justices of Peace, Quorum unus, etc. by
virtue of the foregoing words of this Clause, although he dwell in another
County, and that for the reason before given, viz. because this Oath sequitur
personam, non locum.

But Wingate, in abridging this Clause, tit. Crown numb. 150. saves us the
labor of this Question, for he erroneously restrains the power of tendering the
Oath in this Case to the Justice of Peace to whom the complaint is made, as if
no other Justice of Peace of that County could proceed therein, which is
contrary to the express words as well as meaning of the Statute.

Note, that Dalton, V. cap. 45. tit. Recusants speaking first of the
Certificate to be made by force of 3 Jac. 4. Stat. 3 Jac. 4 Certificate of
taking the Oath.
says, It seems requisite, That the Justice or Justices of Peace do make like
Certificate, at the next Assizes or Quarter Sessions, of such persons as have
taken this Oath before them by force of this Statute of 7 Jac. 6. But upon what
ground Mr. Dalton thought this requisite to be certified at the Assizes, I know
not seeing there is no such Certificate to be made by the Statute of 3 Jac. 4.
to the Assizes, but only to the General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace; and
as for the Sessions, I conceive neither the Justices of Peace, if they proceed
upon this Statute and not upon 3 Jac. are bound to make such Certificate, nor
the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk to Record it; for it is not here required
to be done.

But yet in such Cases, where the same persons are empowered by both these
Statutes to require and Minister this Oath, as where the party is Convicted or
Indicted of Recusancy, in which Case two Justices of Peace Quorum unus etc. may
require the Oath, by force either of the special words in 3 Jac. or of the
general words in this Clause of 7 Jac. viz. any person or persons of Eighteen
years or above, under the degree of a Baron or Baroness; And it does not appear
upon which of these Statutes they proceed, as it may sometimes so happen,
There, if the party take it, it will be safest for the two Justices to make
such Certificate to the next General or Quarter Sessions, as is appointed by 3
Jac. and for the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk to Record it.

Stat. Sect. 5. The penalty for refusing to take the said Oath.
And that if any person or persons, being of the age of Eighteen years or
above, shall refuse to take the said Oath duly tendered to him or her,
according to the true intent and meaning of this Statute, That then the
persons, authorized by this Law to give the said Oath, shall and may commit the
same Offender to the Common Gaol, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize,
until the next Assizes or General Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said
Shire, Division, Limit or Liberty, where the said Oath shall be again in the
said open Sessions required of such person, by the said Justices of Assize or
Justices of the Peace then and there present, or the greater number of them;
And if the said person or persons, of the age of Eighteen years or above, shall
refuse to take the said Oath, being tendered to him or her by the said Justices
of Assize or Jail-deliver in their open Assizes or Jail-deliver, or the
Justices of Peace or the greater part of them in their General or Quarter
Sessions, Every person so refusing shall incur the danger and penalty of
Praemunire mentioned in a Statute made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of
King Richard the Second, (Except Women Covert, who shall be committed only to
Prison, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, till they will take the said
Oath.)

If any person or persons.] This Clause is general, and extends to all before;
so that if any of the Nobility The Nobility may be committed.
refuse this Oath, they may be committed to the Common Gaol, etc. by such as
are by this Act authorized to tender it. Co. 12. 131.

Shall refuse to take the said Oath duly tendered to him or her.] If the persons
authorized to tender this Oath, What is a good tender, what not.
ask the party whether he will take it, and he says he will not; Quaere,
whether this be such a tender and refusal, as shall make the refuser liable to
be imprisoned and proceeded against by force of this Act, unless he or they who
tender it have in readiness both the form of the Oath, and the Book to swear
on: For it is to be presumed, that the Act intends all requisite circumstances
ready, to enable the one to minister, and the other to take the Oath.

And it is held by some, The Oath read
that before there can be any such refusal of this Oath as is here intended, it
ought to be read, or offered to be read to the party, especially if he be
illiterate, or if he be not, yet that at least it ought to be offered to him
for himself to read it: For perhaps the party never saw or heard it; And in
such Case it would be against reason, that the refusal should be penal; And
therefore in 9 Jacobi, upon the tender of this Oath at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, it was read by Order of the Judges there.

To the Common Gaol.] The Justices of the Court of Kings Bench Refusal in the
Kings Bench.
have used to tender this Oath in Court, as Justices of Peace of Middlesex, and
upon refusal the party is to be committed to the Prison of the Marshalsie,
(which is the Ordinary Prison of that Court) until the next Sessions. Bulstrode
2. 155. The King against Griffith and others. Vide Dyer 297.

General Quarter Sessions, Sessions. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.
etc. and General or Quarter Sessions.] What Sessions are here meant, vide
Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 7.

Praemunire. Indictment of Praemunire. Stat. 3. Jac. 4.
] For the form of the Indictment upon refusal of this Oath, Vide Stat. 3 Jac.
cap. 4. Sect. 11.

And be it further Enacted, That every person, Stat. Sect. 6. Disabled to
execute or practice certain Offices or Sciences.
refusing to take the said Gath as above, shall be disabled, to all intents and
purposes, to execute any public place of Judicature, or bear any other Office
(being no Office of Inheritance or Ministerial Function) within this your
Highness Realm of England, or to use or practice the Common Law or Civil Law,
or the Science of Physic or Surgery, or the Art of an Apothecary, or any
Liberal Science for his or their gain, within this Realm, until such time as
the same person shall receive the same Oath, according to the intent of this
Statute.

Stat. Sect. 7. The penalty of a married woman who is a Popish Recusant
convicted.
And be it further Enacted, That if any married Woman (being lawfully Convicted
as a Popish Recusant for not coming to Church) shall not within three months
next after such Conviction, conform her self, and repair to the Church, and
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the former Laws and
Statutes made and provided in that behalf touching Recusants, that then she
shall be committed to prison by one of the Privy Council of your Highness, your
Heirs or Successors, or by the Bishop of the Diocese, if she be a Baroness, or,
if she be under that Degree, by two Justices of the Peace of the same County,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, there to remain without Ball or Mainprize,
until she shall conform her self, and come to Church, and receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, unless the Husband of such Wife shall pay to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for the Offense of his said Wife, for every
month ten pounds of lawful money of England, or else the third part (in three
parts to be divided) of all his Lands and Tenements, at the choice of the
Husband whose Wife is so convicted as aforesaid, for and during so long time as
she, remaining a Recusant convicted, shall continue out of Prison, during which
time (and no longer) she may be at liberty.

What Conviction is here meant. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1.
Being lawfully convicted as a Popish Recusant.] That is, upon Indictment at
the Kings Suit, or a popular Action or Information on the Statute of 23 Eliz.
1. or an Action of Debt at the Kings Suit alone according to the Statute of 35
Eliz. 1. 35 Eliz. 1.
In which two last Cases the former Laws are somewhat altered by this Statute;
For by the former Laws, if a person had been convicted of Recusancy any other
way then by Indictment, no more could have been demanded, either by the King or
Informer, then for the months mentioned in the Information or Count, And the
penalty should not have run on in such Case: For that the Statutes of 29 Eliz.
6. and 3 Jac. 4. 29 Eliz. 6. 3 Jac. 4.
which appropriate the penalty to the King after Conviction, intend no other
Conviction then by Indictment, as has been there said; Baron and seem.
But by this Statute, if a popular Action or Information, or an Action of Debt,
etc. at the Kings Suit alone, be brought against the Husband and Wife for the
Recusancy of the Wife, and Judgment be had against them, the Husband shall not
only pay for the time contained in the Information or Count, but the Wife shall
be imprisoned ever afterward, unless she conform, or the Husband pay ten
pounds per month, or yield the third part of his Lands to the King.

And yet this Statute does not, after such Conviction of the Wife in a popular
Suit Suits upon former Statutes not taken away.
or Action of Debt, etc. at the Kings Suit, take away the popular Action or
Information from the Informer, or the Action of Debt, etc. from the King for
the time to come, but that they may be brought against the Husband and Wife,
for the Recusancy of the Wife, for any month or months wherein she is absent
from Church after such Conviction: For this Statute and 23 Eliz. 1. and 35
Eliz. 1. Stat. 23 Eliz. 1 35 Eliz. 1
are all affirmative Laws, and may well stand together, so that any of the
three remedies given by these Statutes may be pursued: This Statute not
abrogating any former Law, but only providing another way of punishment for the
Wife after she is once convicted, Howbeit she shall not be punished by any more
then one of these three ways. Co. 11. 63, 64. and Rolls 1. 94. Doctor Fosters
Case. Cro. Pasch. 17 Jac. 529. Parker versus Curson; And therefore if the King
bring an Action of Debt, etc. upon 35 Eliz. against the Husband and Wife, Where
the Wife shall not be imprisoned.
or the Informer sue them upon 23 Eliz. for any absence of the Wife from Church
after she is once convicted by either of those ways, and recover, the Privy
Counselor, Bishop, or Justices of Peace here mentioned, cannot imprison her by
force of this Act for the non-payment of the ten pounds per month by the
Husband, for those months for which the King or Informer has recovered, or for
his not yielding the thirds of his Lands to the King: And the reason is, for
that when the Husband stands charged with the penalty of twenty pounds per
month for the absence of the Wife, the intent of the Act is satisfied in
respect of those months of her absence for which he stands so charged: For, if
he pay not the twenty pounds per month so recovered, the King or Informer has
the ordinary remedy after Judgment by Process of Capias against them both both;
And the intent of the Act was no more, then that the Husband should pay for the
Recusancy of his Wife, or the Wife be imprisoned.

And if in this Case the Privy Counselor, Bishop or Justices of Peace should
have power to imprison the Wife, unless the Husband would pay ten pounds for
the months for which the King or Informer has recovered, it would follow that
the Husband has his Election whether he will pay ten pounds per month to the
King by force of this Act, or the twenty pounds per month so recovered against
him by the King or Informer; For he shall not pay both the one and the other,
for that were bis puniri pro uno delicto: And if he shall have his Election,
the King or Informer might by this device be eluded of the penalty of twenty
pounds per month so recovered, which could not be the intent of the makers of
this Law.

The King and Informer barred by her Imprisonment.
But if the Wife be after such Conviction imprisoned by force of this Act,
neither the King or Informer can so sue the Husband and Wife for the Recusancy
of the Wife; For she is already punished by this Act, and must remain in Prison
until the Husband pay the ten pounds for every month, or yield the thirds of
his Lands to the King, or the Wife conforms.

Or if the Husband yields the thirds:
So if the Husband yields the thirds of his Lands to save his Wives
imprisonment, he is already punished by this Act and shall not again be
punished or Sued by the King or Informer either upon 23 Eliz. or 35 Eliz.

Or pay Ten pounds per month.
And, if after such conviction of the Wife, he pay Ten pounds per month to save
her imprisonment; he cannot be sued with his Wife for the Twenty pounds per
month, upon either of those Statutes, by the King or Informer, for those months
of her absence from Church incurred after her conviction, for which he has
paid the Ten pounds monthly to the King; for he shall not Bis puniri pro uno
delicto.

Hitherto has been spoken of the Conviction of the Wife at the Suit of the
King alone by Action of Debt, etc. or by the Informer Qui tam etc. which does
not appropriate the penalty to the King by 29 Eliz. 6. or 3 Jac. 4.

Conviction upon Indictment.
If the Wife be convicted of Recusancy upon an Indictment, it has been much
debated, whether that does not so appropriate the penalty of Twenty pounds per
month to the King for the time to come, by the said Statute of 29 Eliz. 6. and
3 Jac. 4. Stat. 29 Eliz. 6 3 Jac. 4.
that the King cannot bring an Action of Debt, or the Informer any popular Suit
against the Husband and Wife for any offense of Recusancy committed by the
Wife, after such Conviction; see for this Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 1. 23 Eliz. 1
Sect. 9. and 3 Jac. cap. 4. Sect. 6. However, admitting they may, yet now if
the King take advantage of this Statute, and the Wife be either Imprisoned, or
the Husband yields the third part of his Lands to the King, there is no
question but the King and Informer are both barred The King and Informer barred.
to sue for the Twenty pounds per month, for any time incurred after her
Conviction, For the King has made his Election to punish her this way, and the
Informer cannot sue her, for she is punished already at the Suit of the King:
And if the Husband pay the Ten pounds per month, the King and Informer are
likewise barred, for those months of her absence from Church incurred after her
Conviction, for which the Husband has paid the Ten pounds monthly to the King,
for he shall not be twice punished for the same offense.

Of all his Lands and Tenements.] By Tenements, Tenements, what.
are to be understood Offices, Rents, Commons, Profits apprender out of Lands,
Advowsons and the like, wherein a man has any Franktenement, and whereof he is
seized ut de libero tenemento; for all these are included under the word
Tenement, as well as Lands and other Inheritances which are holden, Co. 1.
inst. 6. Perkins Sect. 114, 115. 11 H. 6. 22: Bro. Grant 143. Finch 130. Woman's
Lawyer lib. 3. 188. Anderson 2. 4. But, Tenement, extends not to a Chattel, or
Lease for years, Bro. Done. 41. and Grant 87. Bulstrode 1. 101. Turpine against
Forreyner. So that the Husband need not yield to the King the third part of his
Leases for years, for the Recusancy of his Wife.

Shall continue out of Prison.] A married Woman, Imprisonment of the Wife for
other cause
convicted as a Popish Recusant, is (after her Conviction, and before any
further prosecution, or any Election made by the Husband whether he will pay
the Ten pounds per month or yield the third part of his Lands) imprisoned by
process of Law, or for some other Cause not relating to such Conviction, and
afterward is set at Liberty: It seems that the Husband shall not pay the Ten
pounds per month for the time she was in Prison, for the Act speaks only of the
time during which she continues out of Prison; and although she were not
imprisoned for her Recusancy, yet seeing she had not during such her
Imprisonment the benefit intended to her in consideration of the Ten pounds per
month, or third part (viz.) her Liberty, the Husband shall not for that time
pay the penalty here appointed to save her Imprisonment, but if he pay it for
the time after she is set at Liberty, that is sufficient to satisfy the intent
of this Act.

But if after such Conviction, Covinous Imprisonment.
the Wife be imprisoned by Covin upon some pretense not relating to such
Conviction, that shall not save the Husbands payment of the Ten pounds per
month for the time she was imprisoned; but, after she is set at Liberty, she
may be again Imprisoned by force of this Act, unless the Husband pay the Ten
pounds per month, or satisfy to the King the third part of the profits of his
Lands, as well for the time of such covinous Imprisonment, as for the future;
for the covinous Imprisonment was upon the matter her own Act, and no person
shall take advantage of an Imprisonment covinously caused by him or her self,
16 E. 4. 5. And here, she continued out of Prison in the sense of this Act,
because her Imprisonment was not by Process of Law in invitam.

Outlawry by Covin.
And so if a Man be Outlawed while he is in Prison, yet the Outlawry shall not
be avoided for that Cause, if the Imprisonment were by Covin or consent of the
party Outlawed. Co. 1. Inst. 259. 38. Assiz. Pl. 17.

Stat. iii Car. i. cap. ii. An Act to restrain the passing or sending of any to
be Popishly bred beyond the Seas.
FOrasmuch as diverse ill affected persons to the true Religion established
within this Realm, Stat. Sect. 1.
have sent their Children into Foreign parts to be bred up in Popery,
notwithstanding the restraint thereof by the Statute made in the first year of
the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James of famous memory; Be it Enacted
that the said Statute shall be put in due execution. And be it further Enacted
by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
that in Case any person or persons under the Obedience of the King, his Heirs
and Successors, He that goes himself, or sends any other beyond the Seas to be
trained up in Popery, etc. shall be disabled to sue, etc. and shall lose all
his Goods, and shall forfeit all his Lands, etc. for life.
at any time after the end of this Session of Parliament, shall pass or go, or
shall convey or send, or cause to be sent or conveyed any Child, or other
person, out of any of the Kings Dominions into any the parts beyond the Seas,
out of the Kings Obedience, to the intent and purpose to enter into, or be
resident or trained up in any Priory, Abbey, Nunnery, Popish University,
College or School, or House of Jesuits, Priests, or in any private Popish
Family, and shall be there by any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, Friar, Monk, or
other Popish Person instructed, persuaded or strengthened in the Popish
Religion, in any sort to profess the same, or shall convey or send, or cause to
be conveyed or sent, by the hands or means of any person whatsoever, any sum or
sums of money or other thing, for or toward the maintenance of any Child or
other person already gone or sent, or to go or to be sent, and trained and
instructed as is aforesaid, or under the the name or color of any Charity,
Benevolence or Alms toward the relief of any Priory, Abbey, Nunnery, College,
School, or any Religious House whatsoever; Every person so sending, conveying,
or causing to be sent and conveyed, as well any such Child or other person, as
any sum or sums of money or other thing, and every person passing or being sent
beyond the Seas, being thereof Lawfully Convicted in or upon any Information,
Presentment or Indictment, as is aforesaid, shall be disabled from thenceforth
to sue or use any Action, Bill; Plaint or Information, in course of Law, or to
prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be Committee of any Ward, or
Executor or Administrator to any person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed of
Gift, or to bear any Office within the Realm, and shall lose and forfeit all
his Goods and Chattels; and shall forfeit all his Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Rents, Annuities, Offices and Estates of Freehold for and during
his natural Life.

Stat. Sect. 2. He that conforms shall not incur the penalties aforesaid.
Provided always, That no person sent or conveyed as aforesaid, that shall
within Six months after his Return into this Realm conform himself unto the
present Religion established in this Church of England, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Statutes made concerning
conformity, in other Cases required from Popish Recusants, shall incur any the
penalties aforesaid.

Within Six months after his return.] And not within Six weeks, as Wingate tit.
Crown numb. 157. erroneously.

Stat. Sect. 3. What Justices shall hear and determine these offenses.
And it is Enacted, That all and every of the offenses against this Statute may
be inquired, heard and determined before the Justices of the Kings Bench, or
Justices of Assize or Goal delivery, or of Oyer and Terminer of such Counties
where the Offenders did last dwell or abide, or whence they departed out of
this Kingdom, or where they were taken.

Or of Oyer and Terminer.] Justices of Peace Justices of Peace here excluded.
cannot take an Indictment upon this Statute, for no inferior Court shall take
Authority by any Statute unless it be specially named, Savile 135. C. 212.
Agard and Candish. And, although Justices of Peace have in their Commission an
express Clause ad audiendum and terminandum, and by that are Justices of Oyer
and Terminer, yet forasmuch as there is a Commission of Oyer and Terminer known
distinctly by that name, and the Commission of Peace is known distinctly by
another name; they shall not be included under the general words of Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, as was adjudged, Hill. 30 Eliz. B. R. in the Case of Richard
Smith, who was Indicted at the Sessions of the Peace in the County of Oxon upon
the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 14. Stat. 5 Eliz. 14
of forging Deeds, which impowers the Justices of Oyer and Terminer to inquire
of, hear and determine that offense; and yet the Indictment before the Justices
of Peace was quashed, as taken coram non Judice. Co. 9.118. Co. 3. Inst. 103.
Cro. Eliz. 87. vide Cro. Mich. 39 and 40 Eliz. 601. Wilsons Case. Ibid. Mich.
41 and 42 Eliz. 697. Hunts Case.

Or where they were taken.] Vide Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 4. 3 Jac. 4.
Sect. 21.

Provided also, That if any person or Child, Stat. Sect. 4. In what Case the
offenders Lands shall be restored again.
so passing or sent, or now being beyond the Seas, shall after his return into
this Realm conform himself to the present Religion established in this Church
of England, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the
Statutes made for or concerning conformity in other Cases required from Popish
Recusants, for and during such time, as he or she shall so continue in such
conformity and obedience occording to the true intent and meaning of the said
Laws and Statutes, shall have his or her Lands restored to them again.

Addendum. Stat. xxv Car. ii. c. ii. An Act for Preventing Dangers which may
happen from Popish Recusants:
FOR preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, and quieting
the minds of His Majesty's good Subjects, Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That all and every person, or persons, as well Peers, as
Commoners, that shall bear any Office or Offices, Civil or Military, or shall
receive any Pay, Salary, Fee, or Wages, by reason of any Patent or Grant from
His Majesty, or shall have Command, or Place of Trust from, or under His
Majesty, or from any of His Majesty's Predecessors, or by His or their
Authority, or by Authority derived from Him or them, within the Realm of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in His Majesty's
Navy, or in the several Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, or shall be of the
Household, or in the Service or Employment of His Majesty, or of his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, who shall inhabit, reside, or be within the City of
London or Westminster, or within Thirty miles distant from the same, on the
first day of Easter Term that shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred seventy three, or at any time during the said Term, all and every the
said person and persons shall personally appear before the end of the said
Term, or of Trinity Term next following, in His Majesty's high Court of
Chancery, or in His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, and there in public and
open Court, between the hours of Nine of the Clock, and Twelve in the Forenoon,
take the several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which Oath of Allegiance is
contained in the Statute made in the third Year of King James, by Law
established; and during the time of the taking thereof by the said person, and
persons, all Pleas, and Proceedings in the said respective Courts shall cease;
And that all and every of the said respective persons, and Officers not having
taken the said Oaths in the said respective Courts aforesaid, shall, on or
before the First day of August One thousand six hundred seventy three, at the
Quarter Sessions for that County, or place where he or they shall be, inhabit,
or reside, on the Twentieth day of May, take the said Oaths in open Court,
between the said hours of Nine and Twelve of the Clock in the Forenoon: And the
said respective Officers aforesaid, shall also receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, according to the Usage of the Church of England, at or before the
First day of August in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and
seventy three, in some Parish Church, upon some Lords day, commonly called
Sunday, immediately after Divine Service, and Sermon.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person or persons, that shall be admitted, entered, placed, or taken into any
Office or Offices, Civil, or Military, or shall receive any Pay, Salary, Fee,
or Wages, by reason of any Patent, or Grant of his Majesty, or shall have
Command, or Place of Trust, from, or under his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or by his or their Authority, or by Authority derived from him or
them, within this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or in his Majesty's Navy, or in the several Islands of Jersey and
Gernsey, or that shall be admitted into any Service, or Employment in his
Majesty's, or Royal Highnesses Household, or Family, after the First day of
Easter Term aforesaid, and shall inhabit, be or reside, when he or they is, or
are so admitted, or placed, within the Cities of London, or Westminster, or
within Thirty Miles of the same, shall take the said Oaths aforesaid, in the
said respective Court or Courts aforesaid, in the next Term after such his or
their Admittance or Admittances into the Office or Offices, Employment or
Employments aforesaid, between the hours aforesaid, and no other, and the
Proceedings to cease as aforesaid; And that all and every such person or
persons to be Admitted after the said First day of Easter Term, as aforesaid,
not having taken the said Oaths in the Courts aforesaid, shall at the Quarter
Sessions for that County or Place where he or they shall reside, next after
such his admittance, or admittances into any of the said respective Offices or
Employments aforesaid, take the said several and respective Oaths as aforesaid,
and all and every such person and persons so to be admitted as aforesaid, shall
also receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Usage of the
Church of England, within Three Months after his or their admittances in, or
receiving their said Authority and Employment, in some public Church, upon
some Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, immediately after Divine Service and
Sermon. And every of the said persons, in the respective Court where he takes
the said Oaths, shall first deliver a Certificate of such his receiving the
said Sacrament, as aforesaid, under the Hands of the respective Minister and
Churchwarden, and shall then make proof of the truth thereof, by two credible
Witnesses at the least upon Oath; All which shall be inquired of, and put upon
Record in the respective Courts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
person or persons aforesaid, that do or shall neglect or refuse to take the
said Oaths and Sacrament in the said Courts and places, and at the respective
times aforesaid, shall be ipso facto adjudged incapable, and disabled in Law,
to all intents and purposes whatsoever, to have, occupy, or enjoy the said
Office or Offices, Employment or Employments, or any part of them, or any
matter or thing aforesaid, or any profit or advantage appertaining to them, or
any of them, and every such Office and Place, Employment and Employments shall
be void, and is hereby adjudged void.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every such person or persons that
shall neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths, or the Sacrament as aforesaid,
within the times, and in the places aforesaid, and in the manner aforesaid, and
yet after such neglect and refusal, shall execute any of the said Offices or
Employments, after the said times expired, wherein he or they ought to have
taken the same, and being thereupon lawfully Convicted, in, or upon any
Information, Presentment, or Indictment, in any of the Kings Courts at
Westminster or at the Assizes, every such person and persons shall be disabled
from thenceforth, to Sue, or use any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information in
Course of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court of Equity, or to be
Guardian of any Child, or Executor, or Administrator of any person, or capable
of any Legacy, or Deed of Gift, or to bear any Office within this Realm of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and shall forfeit
the sum of Five hundred pounds, to be recovered by him or them that shall Sue
for the same, to be prosecuted by any Action of Debt, Suit, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall lie.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the names of all
and singular such persons and Officers aforesaid, that do or shall take the
Oaths aforesaid, shall be in the respective Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench,
and the Quarter Sessions Enrolled, with the day and time of their taking the
same, in Rolls made and kept only for that intent and purpose, and for no
other; The which Rolls, as for the Court of Chancery, shall be publicly hung
up in the Office of the Pettybag, and the Roll for the Kings Bench, in the
Crown Office of the said Court, and in some public place in every Quarter
Sessions, and there remain during the whole Term, every Term, and during the
whole time of the said Sessions, in every Quarter Sessions, for every one to
resort to, and look upon, without Fee or Reward; and likewise none of the
person or persons aforesaid shall give or pay as any Fee or Reward to any
Officer or Officers belonging to any of the Courts as aforesaid, above the sum
of Twelve pence for his or their Entry of his or their taking of the said Oaths
aforesaid.

And further, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the respective Courts
aforesaid, to give and Administer the said Oaths aforesaid, to the person or
persons aforesaid, in manner as aforesaid; and upon the due tender of any such
person or persons to take the said Oaths, the said Courts are hereby required
and enjoined to Administer the same.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons not bred up by his or
their Parent or Parents from their Infancy in the Popish Religion, and
professing themselves to be Popish Recusants, shall Breed up, Instruct, or
Educate his or their Child or Children, or suffer them to be Instructect, or
Educated in the Popish Religion, every such person being thereof Convicted,
shall be from thenceforth disabled of hearing any Office or Place of Trust or
Profit in Church or State: And all such Children as shall be so brought up,
instructed or educated, are and shall be hereby disabled of bearing any such
Office or Place of Trust or Profit, until he and they shall be perfectly
Reconciled and Converted to the Church of England, and shall take the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance aforesaid, before the Justices of the Peace, in the
open Quarter Sessions of the County or place where they shall inhabit, and
thereupon receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, after the Usage of the
Church of England, and obtain a Certificate thereof under the Hand of two or
more of the said Justices of the Peace.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at the same time
when the persons concerned in this Act, shall take the aforesaid Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, they shall likewise make and subscribe this
Declaration following, under the same Penalties and Forfeitures, as by this Act
is appointed;

I A. B. do Declare, That I do believe that there is not any Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at,
or after the Consecration thereof by any person whatsoever.

Of which Subscription there shall be the like Register kept, as of the taking
the Oaths aforesaid.

Provided always, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend, be judged or interpreted any ways to hurt or prejudice the Peerage of
any Peer of this Realm, or to take away any Right, Power, Privilege or Profit,
which any person (being a Peer of this Realm) has, or ought to enjoy by reason
of his Peerage, either in time of Parliament, or otherwise, or to take away
creation-money, or Bills of Impost, nor to take away or make void any Pension
or Salary granted by His Majesty to any person for valuable and sufficient
Consideration for Life, Lives, or Years, other then such as relate to any
Office, or to any Place of Trust under His Majesty, and other then Pensions of
bounty, or voluntary Pensions; nor to take away, or make void any Estate of
Inheritance granted by His Majesty, or any His Predecessors, to any person or
persons, of or in any Lands, Rents, Tithes, or Hereditaments, not being
Offices; nor to take away, or make void any Pension or Salary already granted
by His Majesty to any person who was Instrumental in the happy preservation of
His Sacred Majesty after the Battle at Worcester, in the year One thousand six
hundred fifty one, until His Majesty's arrival beyond the Seas; nor to take
away or make void the Grant of any Office or Offices of Inheritance, or any
Fee, Salary or Reward for executing such Office or Offices, or thereto any way
belonging, granted by His Majesty or any his Predecessors to, or enjoyed, or
which hereafter shall be enjoyed by any person or persons who shall refuse or
neglect to take the said Oaths, or either of them, or to receive the Sacrament,
or to subscribe the Declaration mentioned in this Act, in manner therein
expressed; Nevertheless so as such person or persons having or enjoying any
such Office or Offices of Inheritance, do or shall substitute and appoint his
or their sufficient Deputy or Deputies (which such Officer or Officers
respectively are hereby empowered from time to time to make or change, any
former Law or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding) to exercise the said
Office or Offices, until such time as the person or persons having such Office
or Offices, shall voluntarily in the Court of Chancery, before the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being, or in the Court of Kings Bench,
take the said Oaths, and receive the Sacrament according to Law, and subscribe
the said Declaration; and so as all and every the Deputy and Deputies so as
aforesaid to be appointed, take the said Oaths, receive the Sacrament, and
subscribe the said Declaration from time to time, as they shall happen to be so
appointed, in manner as by this Act such Officers whose Deputies they be, are
appointed to do; and so as such Deputies be from time to time approved of by
the Kings Majesty under His Privy Signer: But that all and every the Peers of
this Realm shall have, hold, and enjoy what is provided for as aforesaid, and
all and every other person or persons before mentioned, denoted or intended
within this Proviso, shall have, hold, and enjoy what is provided for as
aforesaid, notwithstanding any incapacity or disability mentioned in this Act.

Provided also, That the said Peers, and every of them may take the said Oaths,
and make the said Subscription, and deliver the said Certificates before the
Peers sitting in Parliament, if the Parliament be sitting within the time
limited for doing thereof, and in the intervals of Parliament, in the High
Court of Chancery, in which respective Courts all the said proceedings are to
be recorded in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, That no married Woman, or person under the age of Eighteen
years, or being beyond, or upon the Seas, or found by the lawful Oaths of
Twelve men, to be non compos mentis, and so being and remaining at the end of
Trinity Term, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy three,
having any Office, shall by virtue of this Act, loose or forfeit any such his
or her Office (other then such married Woman during the life of her Husband
only) for any neglect or refusal of taking the Oaths, and doing the other
things required by this Act to be done by persons having Offices, so as such
respective persons within Four months after the death of the Husband, coming to
the age of Eighteen years, returning into this Kingdom, and becoming of sound
mind, shall respectively take the said Oaths, and perform all other things in
manner as by this Act is appointed for persons to do, who shall happen to have
any Office or Offices to them given or fallen after the end of the said Trinity
Term.

Provided also, That any person who by his or her neglect or refusal, according
to this Act, shall lose or forfeit any Office, may be capable by a new Grant of
the said Office, or of any other, and to have and hold the same again, such
person taking the said Oaths, and doing all other things required by this Act,
so as such Office be not granted to, and actually enjoyed by some other person
at the time of the regranting thereof.

Provided also, That nothing in this Act contained, shall extend to make any
Forfeiture, Disability, or Incapacity in, by, or upon any
non-Commission-Officer or Officers in His Majesty's Navy, if such Officer or
Officers shall only subscribe the Declaration therein required, in manner as
the same is direted.

Provided also, That nothing in this Act contained, shall extend to prejudice
George Earl of Bristol, or Anne Countess of Bristol his Wife, in the Pension or
Pensions granted to them by Patent under the Great Seal of England, hearing
date the Sixteenth day of July, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty and nine, being in lieu of a just Debt due to the said Earl from
His Majesty, particularly expressed in the said Patent.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to the Office of any High Constable, Petty Constable, Tithingman, Headborough,
Overseer of the Poor, Churchwardens, Surveyor of the Highways, or any like
inferior Civil Office, or to any Office of Forester, or Keeper of any Park,
Chase, Warren, or Game, or of Bailiff of any Manor or Lands, or to any like
private Offices, or to any person or persons having only any the before
mentioned, or any the like Offices.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Abjuration; See Baron and Feme. IN what cases the offender against 35 Eliz. 1.
of Conventicles, and the Popish Recusant confined by 35 Eliz. 2. are to abjure
the Realm, and in what cases not, 115. 116. 123. 134, 135, 136, 137, 138. 143.
Who may require such Abjuration, 116. 135. Before whom it must be made, 116.
135. Refusing to abjure, or staying, or returning without license, is Felony,
116, 117. 139, 140. What he who abjures, or refuses to abjure, forfeits, 124.
The form of the Oath of Abjuration, 138, 139. He that abjures, yet owes to the
King his ligeance, 139.
Absolution. What Absolution is not within 13 Eliz. 2.50. Where absolving of
the Kings Subjects, or being absolved, is High Treason, 57, 58. 184, 185.
Actions Popular, see Informations Acts of Parliament; See Statutes
Administration and Administrators: See Excommengement. Executor. Probate.
Recusants.
Who is disabled to be an Administrator, 212. 234, 235. 258. 263. The Mother
shall administer before the Brother or Sister, 225.
Advowson. See Covin. Recusants. University.
An Advowson is comprehended under the word, Hereditament, 106. 171. 172. It
may be seized for Recusancy, 106. 171, 172. Where the King has seized the
Advowson of a Popish Recusant, whether the King or University shall present,
172. 231, 232. By the Kings seizure of two parts of a manor, two parts of an
Advowson appendant are seized by consequence, 172. 233. In such case the King
shall present alone by his Prerogative, 172. 233. His two parts shall not pass
from him by general words, 173. Where upon reversal of an utlawry, the Patron
of an Advowson shall be restored to his Presentment, and where not, 180.
Age, 198. Agnus Dei, etc. Where the bringing in, offering, delivering, or
receiving of an Aguns Dei, etc. is a Praemunire, and where not, 51, 52, 53.
Where the offender must be apprehended, or his name disclosed, and to whom, 53,
54. The Penalty for concealing the offenders name, 55, 56.
Aid. see Notice. Aiders, Maintainers, Relievers, etc. of offenders, where and
how punishable, 12. 17. 34, 35. 42. 47. 50, 51. 59. 90, 91. 93, 94. 184, 185.
Alien. An Information lies against an Alien, and a Writ of Error for him, 76.
An Alien, though indenized or naturalized, is no natural, Subject, 185.
Indictment of High Treason against an Alien by birth, 185. It shall not be,
contra naturalem Dominum, 185. An Alien indenized or naturalized in Scotland or
Ireland, is still an Alien here, 189. Where an Alien shall forfeit 12 d. per
Sunday or Holiday for not coming to Church, and where not, 190.
Allegiance, see Oath of Allegiance Appearance. See Baron and Feme. What
appearance upon Proclamation shall save the Recusants default, and what not,
108. 164, 165. Where he cannot appear by Attorney, 164. His Remedy, if his
Appearnce be not recorded, 164.
Appropriation. Where the King may make an Appropriation, 7.
Archbishop. See Bishop. Archbishop of Canterburies concurrent jurisdiction
abrogated, 5.
Armor. See Justices of Peace. Where the Arms of a Popish Recusant convict may
be seized by force of 3 Jac. 5. and where not, 237, 238. The penalty for
refusing to discover, or hindering the delivery of such Arms, 237. A Popish
Recusant Convict shall maintain his Armor, 239.
Arraignment. See Witnesses. The party must be first arraigned and convicted,
before he can be fined and imprisoned at the Kings pleasure, 97.
Assent, see License Attainder, see University Attorney, see Appearance Audita
Querela. Audita Quaerela against the Informer, 148. It lies not against the
King, 148.
Averment. See Covin. Indictment. Iointure. License. Quare Impedit.
Bail. SPecial Bail, where not necessary. 75.
Baptism. The penalty, where the child of a Popish Recusant convict is
baptized, contrary to 3 Jac. 5.222, 223.
Baron and Feme. See Conformity. Covin. Custom. Oath. Plea. Sacrament.
A married woman is liable to the Penalties for Recusancy, 26. 68. And may
(...) imprisoned for non-payment thereof, 86. 252, 253. She ought in such case
to have hard and close imprisonment, 86. Where the Husband may save her
imprisonment, by paying 10 l. per month, or yielding the thirds of his Lands to
the King, 252, 253, 254, 255, 256. Where the Husband is chargeable for the
Wives Recusancy, and where not, 68. 75, 76. 79. 122, 123. 167. And may be
imprisoned for non-payment of the Forfeiture, 86. 253. Where the Wife cannot
appear or plead without her Husband, 75. The penalty by 7 Jac. 6. of a married
woman convicted as a Popish Recusant, if she conforms not, 252. Where she shall
forfeit the profits of two thirds of her Jointure and Dower, and be otherwise
disabled, if she conform not in her Husbands life time, 212, 213. 214. Of what
Dower she shall not forfeit any profits, 215. Where a Woman may have Jointure
and Dower both, 213, 214, 215. Whether the Conviction of the Wife on an
Indictment of Recusancy shall bar the King of his action of Debt, and the
Informer of his popular suit, 79. 167. 254. A Feme Covert is within 1 Eliz. 2.
of depraving etc. the Common Prayer, 24. And punishable by 35 Eliz. 1. of
Conventicles, and by 35 Eliz. 2. of Popish Recusants, save as to Abjuration,
123, 124. 146. In what cases she may be punished upon 3 Jac. 4. and in what
cases not, 195. Where the Wife of a man abjured, may sue without her Husband,
and shall have her Dower or Jointure in his life time, and where not, 124, 125.
Where the Husband of a Popish Recusant convict shall not bear any office, 111,
112. The penalty on a Popish Recusant convict, who is married contrary to 3
Jac. 5. 220, 221, 222. In what case the Recusant so married cannot be punished
by 3 Jac. 5. 222.
Bar. See Baron and Feme. Informers. King.
Good Behavior, see Recusants. Benefice. See Cura animatum. Nomination.
Recusants.
Birth. Birthright is Character indelebilis, 247.
Bishop. See Archbishop. Conformity. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
Excommengement. Ordinary.
Before whom Archbishops and Bishops shall take the Oath of Supremacy, 8. And
the Oath of Allegiance, 241, 242. To whom an Archbishop or Bishop may tender or
minister the Oath of Supremacy, 39. 186. Where an Archbishop or Bishop may
associate himself to the Justices of Over and Determiner, or of Assise, 29. But
they (...) associate themselves to Head-officers of Corporations, 30. Where a
Schoolmaster, may be license^ (...) allowed by the Archbishop or Bishop, 64,
65, 1^5^. Submission to an Archbishop or Bishop, in what case, 95. Submission
and Conformity before the Bishop of the Diocese, in what cases, 69. 92. 186.
The Penalty on an offender who is required by the Bishop of the Diocese, and
yet refuses to conform and submit himself, 118, 135, 138. Where (...) and
Conformity must be certified to the Bishop. 119. 145. Where the Bishop of the
Diocese nay (...) and ^^^^^ter the Oath of Allegiance, and to whom, 174, 175.
186. 196, 197, 198. 242, 243, 244, 245. And may commit the Party refusing it,
174. 250. Where he may imprison a married woman convicted as a Popish Recusant,
and where not, 252, 253, 254. Where his assent to a license for a Popish
Recusant to travel out of his compass of five miles, is good, and where not,
206. 208, 209, 210.
Blood. See Corruption of Blood. (...)
What they ought to do, who are to be restored in Blood, ^40.
Books. Books maintaining the Authority of the Bishop or See of Rome, 34.
Popish Books prohibited, and the penalty for bringing them in, etc. 236.
Bulls. The effect of Bulls brought from Rome, 49. Getting ^^ putting them
iniure, is High Treason, 49, 50. Bull, why so called, ^^.
(...) The Penalty, if a Popish Recusant be buried contrary to ^ Jac. 5.223.
Ceremonies. Who may ordain Ceremonies and Rites of the Church, 31, 32.
Certificate. See Bishop. Certiorari.
Certificates, in what cases, how to be made, and within what time, 35. 37, 38.
40, 41. 60. 96, 97. 100. 116. 119. 135. 145. 174. 183. 186. 201. 217. 249, 250.
263.
Certiorari. What Courts may direct a Certiorari immediately to another Court,
and who must certify, 217. Where a Certiorari to certify a Record shall be
awarded de novo, 217.
Chattels. Money secured upon a Mortgage is within the word (Chattels) 137.
Children, see Seas Church. See Alien. Ceremonies. Conformity. Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction Ornaments. Recusants.
Where the repairing to Church must be to Morning and Evening Prayers both,
190. How the party ought to behave himself there, 27. He ought to continue
there during Service and Sermon, 27. The Penalty for not coming to Church, 26.
59, 60. 188, 189. The party may be punished both for his monthly and weekly
absence from Church, 27. 190. The 12 d. for absence from Church is due, and may
be sued for as soon as the Sunday or Holy Day is over, 27. 190. Not necessary
to go to a man's Parish Church, so he go to some other, 27, 28. Where the
Ecclesiastical Court cannot judge what is a man's Parish Church, 28. What is a
Parish Church, 118. The penalty for persuading others to forbear to come to
Church, 113, 114.
Church of England, see King Cinque Ports. The Warden of the Cinque Ports may
take the Bond, and minister the Oath of Allegiance to such as pass beyond Seas,
198. He is not liable to the Penalties inflicted for not certifying them, 198,
199.
Clerk of Assizes and Peace. See Recusants Clergy. See Ecclesiastical persons.
Clergy, in what case to be allowed, 183.
College, see Seminaries Commission. See Courts. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
King.
Where a Recusants Lands are upon his death to be discharged of the seizure, a
Commission shall issue to inquire, 111.
Common Prayer. See Baron and Feme. Judgment.
What form of Common Prayer is injoined by the Laws in force, what not, 21. 32.
The penalty on the Minister who uses not, or depraveth the Common Prayer, or
uses any other open Prayers, 20, 21, 22, 22, 24. What Ministers are there
meant, 21. What open Prayers are excepted, 21. The penalty for depraving the
Common Prayer, or hindering it to be said, or procuring or maintaining any
other open Prayers, 24, 25, 26. Hearing of Mass is a maintaining within the
Statute, 24, 25.
Concealers. Concealers of offenders and offenses, where punishable, 51. 55,
56. 59.
Confirmation. Whose confirmation of a Lease by the incumbent is necessary,
228. 230.
Conformity and Submission. See Baron and Feme. Bishop. Indictments.
Informations. Relapse. Sacrament. Seminaries.
What is Conformity, 129. Conformity, where it discharges the penalties for
Recusancy, 28. 68, 69. 147, 148. Where Conformity for some part of the time
shall not excuse the offender, 61, 62. Conformity will not help him upon 1
Eliz. 2.27. What is a Conformity and Submission before Judgment, 69. Conformity
before the Bishop, how to be made, and where pleadable, 69. Conformity after
Judgment will now discharge the Recusant of all penalties, 148. The Recusants
Remedies, upon his Conformity, as to the King and Informer, 148. Conformity of
the Husband of a Popish Recusant convict, 212. In what cases Conformity is
necessary before an Indictment, Utlawry, etc. for Recusancy can be avoided or
reversed, and where not, 179, 180, 181. Where the Recusants Conformity shall
discharge the Arrears of the 20 l. per month, and where not, 108, 109. The
profits taken before Conformity, not restorable, 109. Where the Conformity of
the heir of a Recusant, shall discharge the Arrears incurred in the Ancestors
life time, and where not, 148, 149, 150. Conformity and Submission by such as
return from any Seminary, etc. 91, 92. 154, 155. 258, 259. Submission by a
Jesuit, Popish Priest, etc. 94, 95. Oaths and Submissions upon 27 El. 2. where
to be certified, 97. The penalty for not certifying, 97. Submission by a person
reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome, 186. In what case submission is not
available, 187. What Conformity and Submission discharges the offender against
35 Eliz. 1. of Conventicles, 115, 116, 117, 118. Who may require it, 115. And
within what time, 116. The penalty for refusing to make it, 116, 117. In what
cases it must be made in some Parish Church, 117, 118. What is a Parish Church,
118. The form of the Submission, 118, 119. It must be registered and certified
to the Bishop, 119. What Conformity and Submission discharges the offender
against 35 Eliz. 2. of Popish Recusants confined, 135. Who may require it, 135.
And within what time, 135. 137, 138. The penalty for refusing to make it, 135.
It must be made in some Parish Church, 143, 144. The form of the Submission,
144, 145. It must be registered and certified to the Bishop, 145. Two several
submissions required, 144.
Conventicles. See Conformity. Conviction.
The penalty for going to Conventicles, or persuading others so to do, 113, 114.
Conviction. See Baron and Feme. Indictments. Informations. Recusants.
What is meant by Conviction, 61. 216. 252. Conviction of Recusants, etc.
before whom, 65, 66, 67. 84, 85. 100, 101. 108. 162. Where to be certified,
100. What is a sufficient conviction of the Recusant within 23 Eliz. 1.60. What
is a good conviction of the Recusant upon Proclamation and default, and what
not, 163. How to be convicted upon Proclamation, etc. 107. 162. Where by
Recusants convict, shall not be intended Recusants convict upon Proclamation,
etc. 165. Conviction upon Proclamation, etc. is no Judgment, nor shall operate
as a Judgment, 69. 108, 109, 110. 152, 153. 165. What Conviction is sufficient
upon 35 Eliz. 1. of Conventicles, 115.
Copulative. Where a Copulative shall be taken for a Disjunctive, 184.
Copyholds. Whether Copyhold Lands may be forfeited for Recusancy, 106, 107.
Where they shall not pass by general words, 106. To whom to be forfeited by 35
Eliz. 2. 133.
Coroner. Where the Coroner may give the Oath of Abjuration. 135. 138, 139.
Corporations. What offenses Mayors, and other Head Officers of Corporations
may hear and determine, and in what manner, 29, 30.
Corruption of Blood. Where there shall be no corruption of blood, 42. 124. 194.
Costs, see Informers Covin. See Informations. Covin shall not bar the King,
79. 105, 106. A man becomes a Popish Recusant convict by Covin, how it shall
operate, 228. Covinous grant of an Advowson by a Popish Recusant, shall not bar
the University of their presentment, 231. Where the Covin must be averred, and
found by the Jury, 228. 231. Imprisonment of the Feme by Covin, shall not avoid
the payment of the 10 l. per month during such imprisonment, 255, 256.
Imprisonment by Covin, shall not avoid an Utlawry, 256.
Council, see Praemunire Privy Council. What offenses are to be disclosed or
signified to the Privy Council, or some, or one of them, 51. 55, 56. 96 97.
What Privy Counselors may grant a License to go beyond the Seas, 94. 155. 224.
A Popish Recusant may go out of the compass of five miles, if required to
appear before the Privy Council, 141. Three Privy Counselors may grant him a
License to travel out of that compass, 206, 207, 208. The nature of such
License, 207, 208. The Privy Council may send for a Popish Recusant confined,
to come to Court, 201. To whom Privy Counselors are to give the Oath of
Allegiance, 195, 196, 197. 242. 245, 246, 247. They may commit the party to
Prison for refusing it, 250. Where a Privy Councellor may commit a married
Noble woman convicted as a Popish Recusant, and where not, 252, 253.
County. See Justices of Peace. Trial.
Court, see Recusants Courts. See Certiorari. Ecclesiastical Courts. Informers.
Justices.
Courts of Record, what Courts are meant, 82, 83. 85. What Courts are the Kings
Courts, 142. In what Courts the King may sue for the penalties given him by 23
Eliz. 1. 122.
Court of Kings Bench. See Informers. Marshalsie.
The Justices of the Kings Bench are the Sovereign Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, and Jail-delivery, 66. What offenses they may hear and determine, 35,
36. 94. 188. 193, 194. 258. To whom they may give the Oath of Supremacy, 261,
262. To whom they may tender and give the Oath of Allegiance, 251. 261, 262.
Court of Exchequer, see Exchequer High Commission Court. Taken away by Act of
Parliament, 8.
Cura animarum. A Donative may be cum Cura animarum, 233. A Deanery,
Archdeaconry, Prebend, are not Benefices with cure of Souls, 233.
Custom.
Custom for the Wife to have a part of the husbands goods, where in force, 222.
Day. FRactions of a day, rejected in Law, 198.
Death, see Recusants Default. See Appearance. Conviction.
Denizen. Who, 128. Naturalization includes Denization, 128, 129.
Deprivation. See Notice. Pardon.
Deprivation ipso facto, 12. 22, 23. Sentence declaratory by the Ecclesiastical
Judge, where not necessary, 22, 23. Where a sentence of Deprivation by the
Ecclesiastical Judge, ought not to be questioned by the temporal Judge, 31.
Deputy, see Officers Deputy Lieutenant, see Licenses Dignities Ecclesiastical,
see Cura animarum Disability. See Plea. Recusants.
A Popish Recusant convict is disabled as a person Excommunicate, 193. 215,
216. 223. Is disabled to sue, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220. Such Disability is
but quousque, etc. 216. Disabled to bear office, 211, 212. To be Executor, 212.
234, 235. Or Administrator, 212. 234, 235. Or Guardian, 234. To be a witness,
216. Or surety for the good behavior; 64. To present or nominate to a Benefice
or Donative, or to grant the next avoidance, 226, 227, 228, 229. Where disabled
to be Tenant by the Courtesy, 220. Or to have Dower, 220. Or Jointure, 220,
221. Or any Goods by Custom, 212, 213. 220. 222. The Husband of a Popish
Recusant convict, where disabled to bear Office, 211, 212. A Recusant convict,
to what intents disabled, 211. Disabilities inflicted on such as go beyond
Seas, without License, 223, 224. Or educate their Children in the Popish
Religion, or are so educated, 264. Or send any person beyond Seas to be so
educated, or are so sent, 257, 258. Or who refuse the Oath of Supremacy, 10.
43, 44. Or the Oath of Allegiance, 243. 251. Or execute any Office, without
taking the Oaths and Test injoined by 25 Car. 2.2.263, 264.
Discharge. See Conformity. Indictments. Seizure.
Discontinuance, see Informations Discovery. See Justices of Peace. The reward
of him who discovers the entertainer or reliever of a Jesuit, or Popish
Priest, or Mass to have been said, etc. 200, 201. To whom, and within what time
the discovery must be made, 200, 201. How the Reward shall be recovered, 201.
Disjunctive. Where a Disjunctive shall be taken for a Copulative, 184.
Dispensation. Dispensation by the King, where void, 44.243.
Distribution, see Penalty Donative. See Recusants. A Donative may be cum cura
animarum, 233.
Dower. See Baron and Feme. Dower, in what cases saved, 43.124. 194. Where a
woman shall be disabled to have any Dower, 220.
Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdiction. See Church. Deprivation. Heresy.
King. Parish.
Foreign Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction abrogated, 4, 5. The Ecclesiastical
Judge, ought not to usurp upon the Temporal Law, 6. The nature of his offense,
if he so usurps, 6. The Queen might grant Commissions for the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, 7, 8. And that, without the aid of 1 Eliz. 1.8.
Archbishops and Bishops shall punish absence from Church, and other offenses
against 1 Eliz. 2. by Ecclesiastical Censures, 28. 30. Ecclesiastical Court not
restrained by 1 Eliz. 2.31. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction saved to Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. 88. 194. 239.
Ecclesiastical Laws, see Laws Ecclesiastical Persons. See Common Prayer.
Clericus, what it implies, 21. Every Priest or Minister is Clericus, 45.
Election. See Executors. King.
Enquiry. See Justices. What is meant by (Enquire) 68.
Equity, see Statutes Examination, see Justices of Peace Error, see Alien
Exchequer. Principal Officers of the Court of Exchequer, who, 71. Principal
Officers of the Receipt of Exchequer, who, 71.
Excommengement. See Recusants. Where the Sheriff or other Officer may break
the House, to take one Excommunicated for Recusancy, 193. Recusant
Excommunicate, i. e, actually Excommunicate, 223. Excommunication cannot be
pleaded by the Bishop, who Excommunicated the party, and the reason of it, 217,
218. A person Excommunicate cannot sue as Executor or Administrator. 218.
Executors. See Excommengement. The offender has his Election to pay the
Forfeiture, or be imprisoned, and dies; Quaere, whether his Executors shall be
charged, 25, 26. A man grants the Administration of his Goods and Chattels to
J. S. thereby J. S. is made Executor, 235. Who is disabled to be an Executor,
212. 234, 235. 258. 263.
Failer of Records. WHere Judgment shall be given on Failer of the Record, 217*
Where the not having the Record at the day, shall be no Failer of the Record,
217.
Felony, 90, 91. 117. 139, 140. 181, 182, 183. 194. See University Feme, see
Baron and Feme Fine, see Justices Forfeiture. See Abjuration. Baron and Feme.
Copyholds. Penalty. Recusants.
Forfeiture, how a gift in Law, 232. Forfeiture given, without saving to whom,
shall be to the King, 61. 70. Forfeiture in a Praemunire, 46. 152. Forfeiture
for Treason, 152. Forfeiture of Lands generally, shall not include intailed
Lands, 46. 152.
Foreign, see Jurisdiction Fraud. See Covin. Recusants.
Fraudulent Conveyances, void, 86, 87. 99, 100. 105. 231.
Gaol, see Imprisonment. Goods. See Seizure. What is included within the word
(Goods) 105.
Grants by the King, see King Grants by a Recusant. See Covin. Recusants.
Guardian. See Kin. Recusants.
Who is disabled to be a Guardian, 234. 263. Who shall be Guardian, where the
Recusant is disabled so to be, 234, 235.
Heir. Where there shall be no disherison of the Heir, 42. 124. 194. Where the
Conformity of the Heir of a Recusant, shall discharge the arrears incurred in
the Ancestors life time, and where not, 148, 149, 150.
Hereditament. What passes by (Hereditament) 106. 171, 172.
Heresy. What the Ecclesiastical Commissioners might adjudge to be Heresy,
16. What shall not be deemed Heresy or Schism, 16.
House. Where a man may keep a Recusant in his house, and where not, and the
Penalty, 191, 192, 193.
Ieofailes. Informations on penal Laws, within which Stat. of Jeofailes, and
within which not, 73.
Jesuit. See Justices of Peace. Seminary Priest.
Imprisonment. See Baron and Feme. Covin.
Imprisonment, in what cases, 12, 13, 14, 15. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 59. 64.
70. 79. 86. 96, 97. 107. 114. 162, 163. 174, 175. 182. 189. 193. 198. 211. 216.
237. 250, 251, 252, 253, 254.
Incapacity, see Disability Incertainty, see Informations Indictments. See
Alien. Conformity. Justices of Peace. Parish. Peers. Recusants. Sessions.
Witnesses.
Where it is necessary that the Indictment for the second offense, domention the
first Conviction, and where not, 22. Two Indictments before several Justices
for the same offense, the first Judgment shall stand, 66. Where an Indictment
must conclude contra formam Statuti, and where contra formam Statutorum, 65.
125, 126. Indictment for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, 40, 41. Indictment of
Praemunire for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, where it must be special, and
where it may be general, 176. It must be directed by the Mittimus, 176.
Indicting a man of High Treason, where actionable, 58. Indictment for
Recusancy, the form of it, 107. 129. It need not mention, that the party was
within the Realm, 107. Where such Indictment, or the Proceedings thereupon, may
be avoided or discharged without Conformity, and where not, 179, 180, 181.
Existens aetatis 16. annorum, shall refer to the time of the offense, and not
of the Indictment, 60. In an Indictment on 1 Eliz. 2. for not coming to Church,
not necessary to aver that the party is an Inhabitant within this Realm, 26. Or
that he had no lawful or reasonable excuse, 26, 27.
Informers, Informations, Actions Popular, etc. See Alien. Audita Querela.
Baron and Feme. Conformity. Ieofailes. Plea. Sunday.
In an Information tam, etc. quam, etc. Conviction thereupon, is a sufficient
Conviction within the intent of 23 Eliz. 1. 60, 61. In what Courts an Informer
Qui tam etc. may sue, and in what not, 82, 83, 84, 85. 100, 101. 122. 160.
Where an Informer may sue by Bill in the Kings Bench, and where not, 85, 86.
Within what time an Informer Qui tam etc. must sue, 73, 74. 122. 160. Popular
suit, when depending, 76. Where a Popular Action or Information becomes
appropriated to a particular person, 76. 78. Such Suit may be appropriated
before Process, 76. Two Informations for the same offense, 76, 77. The
Defendant in an Information pleads, that a prior Information is depending, but
mistakes the day of exhibiting it, and yet good, 76, 77. Two Informations
supposing the same offense to be done at several times, where the first may be
pleaded in bar of the second, 77. How that case differs from the case of
Recusancy, 77. Two Informations exhibited the same day for the same offense,
are both void, 78. When an Information may be delivered, 78. When it must be
dated, 78. Action Popular, brought by Covin, no bar, 79. Tam pro Domino Rege,
etc. material, 71. In an Information for Recusancy, what the Informer is to
demand for himself, 71. His demand must be certain, 72. He demands less then
appears to be due, yet good, 62. He demands for 13 months, and the Jury find
for 12. Quaere, whether the verdict be good, or void for incertainty, 62, 63.
Judgment of one moiety to the King, and another to the Informer, good, 72.
Where an Information may conclude contra formam Statuti, and where it must be,
contra formam Statutorum, 72. Where the particular Statute must be named, 71,
72. Where upon the demise of the King, the proceedings in a popular Suit shall
be discontinued and void, and where not, 80, 81. Scire facias against an
Informer, 82. Where an Informer shall pay Costs, 82. But he shall not find
Sureties for Costs, 82. In an Information for not receiving the Sacrament,
after Conformity, the conviction of the Recusant must be showed in certain,
158, 159. Where the Defendant may lose his advantage in that case, 158, 159.
But his Conformity may be showed generally, 159. An Information lies in that
case for the third year, although the party were never convicted for the first
or second year, 159, 160. Where an Informer is barred, and where not, 76, 77,
78, 79, 80. 163. 166. 167, 168, 253, 254, 255. An Informer Qui tam etc. may be
nonsuited, 81.
Inquisition, see Office Inquiry, see Enquiry Intent. In what cases material,
35. 52, 53.
Iointure. See Baron and Feme. Where it may be averred, that the Lands were for
Jointure, and where not, 214. Where a woman shall be disabled to have a
Jointure, and what Jointure, 220, 221. What is a good Jointure within 27 H. 8.
cap. 10. and what not, 213, 214. 221, 222.
Ireland. See Alien. Laws. Treason.
Issue. See Plea. General issue, where it may be pleaded, 194.
Judgment. See Conformity. Conviction. Failer of Records. Informations.
The Judgment on 1 Eliz. 2. of the Common Prayer, 25. The Judgment in a
Praemunire, 46. The Judgment on 23 Eliz. 1. shall be absolute, 86. Where
Judgment must be given for the first offense, before the party can be punished
for the second offense, and where not, 25. 159, 160.
Jurisdiction. See Archbishop. Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. King.
The penalty on him who holds with, or maintains any foreign Jurisdiction
within this Realm, 11, 12, 13. 33, 34. 36. 41, 42. Within what time the
offender must be prosecuted on 1 Eliz. 2.13, 14, 15.
Justices. See Indictments. Trial.
The Justices shall fine and imprison the offender, 97.
Justices of Assize, and Jail-deliver. To whom they may tender, and give the
Oath of Allegiance, 175, 176. 242. 250. What offenses they may hear and
determine, 28, 29. 65. 107. 158. 162. 188. 193, 194. 258. What offenses
Justices of Assize can only enquire of, 35, 36, 37.
Justices of the Kings Bench. See Court of Kings Bench Justices of Oyer and
Terminer. See Justices of Peace. What offenses Justices of Oyer and Terminer
may hear and determine, 28, 29. 36. 65. 258.
Justices of Peace. Justices of Peace shall not be comprehended under the
general name of Justices of Oyer and Terminer, 258. What offenses Justices of
Peace may hear and determine, and what not, 65, 66. 162. 193, 194. 258, 259.
They may hear and determine the offense of not coming to Church, 66. 162. What
offenses they can only enquire of, 35, 36. 65. 101. Where they cannot meddle,
68. An Informer Qui tam etc. cannot sue before Justices of Peace, 82, 83, 84,
85. 160. What Acts a Justice of Peace may do out of his County, and what not,
238, 239. 249. His Potestas Jurisdictionis is confined to his County, 238, 239.
The power of Justices of Peace, in reference to the Oath of Allegiance,
twofold, 196. Their power enlarged by 7 Jac. 6. 176. 245. The Justice of Peace
empowered to tender and give the Oath of Allegiance, may grant his Warrant to
bring the party before him, 246. But the house cannot be broken by virtue of
such Warrant, 246. To whom one Justice of Peace may tender or give the Oath of
Allegiance, 224. 245, 246. 247, 248, 249. Where he may commit the party
refusing it, 250. To what Justice of Peace the person offering an Agnus Dei,
etc. must be brought, or his name disclosed, 53, 54. The Justice of Peace not
declaring the same, incurs a Praemunire, 55, 56. Next Justice of Peace, who
meant, 54. Certificate of Recusancy, to be made by a Justice of Peace, 60. One
Justice of Peace may take the submission of a Jesuit, or Popish Priest, 95. He
may examine a person suspected to be such, and commit him, if he refuse to
answer, 140, 141. Discovery of a Jesuit, or Popish Priest to a Justice of
Peace, 96. What the Justice of Peace is to do thereupon, 96. The penalty, if he
neglects so to do, 96. What Certificate he shall have for his discharge, 96,
97. Discovery of the entertainer or reliever of a Jesuit or Popish Priest, or
of Mass said, must be to a Justice of Peace, 200. One Justice of Peace may
require the submission on 35 Eliz. 1. of Conventicles, 115. And may require the
offender to abjure, 115, 116. One Justice of Peace may require the submission
on 35 Eliz. 2. of Popish Recusants confined, 135. One Justice of Peace may
cause the 12 d. per Sunday to be levied, for absence from Church, 188, 189.
Within what time the party must be called into question, 189. Where the Justice
of Peace is sole Judge of the parties excuse, 190. One Justice of Peace may
give the Oath to a Popish Recusant confined by 35 Eliz. 2. 210, 211. Any two
Justices of Peace may take the submission of a person returning from a
Seminary, 91, 92. And of a person reconciled to the Pope, or See of Rome, 186.
And minister to him the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, 186. Where they must
certify the Oaths so taken, 186. To what other persons, any two Justices of
Peace may give the Oath of Allegiance, 243. They may require the offender
against 35 Eliz. 2. of Popish Recusants, to abjure* and may give him the Oath
of Abjuration, 135. Where they may imprison him who keeps the Arms of a Popish
Recusant Convict, or hinders their delivery, and where not, 237, 238, 239. To
whom two Justices of Peace, ( Quorum unus, etc.) may tender and give the Oath
of Allegiance, 174. 196, 197, 198. 245, 246. 249, 250. Where they must certify
the taking of it, to the Sessions, 174. 249, 250. And commit such as refuse to
take it, 174, 175. 250. They have their Election to commit the party to the
Assizes or Sessions, 175. Where they may imprison a married woman convicted as
a Popish Recusant, and where not, 252, 253, 254. Four Justices of Peace may
grant a License to a Popish Recusant to travel beyond five miles, 206, 207,
208, 209, 210, 211. And no less then four, 208. Where four Justices of Peace,
by warrant at their Sessions, may seize a Popish Recusants Arms, and where not,
237, 238. What arms they may allow Popish Recusants to have, 237. The power of
the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, revived in the case of Recusancy, 66,
67. 101. 162. They may now proceed there, to convict the Recusant upon
Proclamation, and default, 108. 162. At what Sessions they may hear and
determine Recusancy, 67. In what case they are to discharge the Recusant, 68,
69. They may, at their Sessions, give the Oath of Abjuration on 35 Eliz. 1. of
Conventicles, 116. And must record, and certify it, 116. Where upon Conviction
before them, they are to give a Certificate to the discoverer of the offender,
201. Popish Recusants are to be presented at the Sessions of the Peace, 160,
161. The Presentiments are to be entered, and recorded there, 161. To whom the
Justices of Peace in their Sessions, are to minister the Oath of Supremacy,
262. 264. 266, 267. And the Oath of Allegiance, 262. 264. 266, 267. They are to
tender the said Oath at their Sessions, to such as have before refused it, 175.
250. And are to commit Women Covert, till they take it, 175. 250. They may
there tender it to any of competent age, and under the degree of Nobility, 175,
176. 196.
Kin.
In what case, and how long the next of Kin shall have the Lands and Goods of
him who goes beyond Seas without License, 224, 225. Whether he shall have the
Lands, or only the profits, 225. In whom the state of the Land vests, 225. The
Mother of Kin to the Child, and shall be preferred before the Brother or
Sister, 224, 225. Next of Kin or Blood shall be accounted as in the case of a
purchase, 225. Jus Propinquitatis, and Jus Representationis, 225. Where the
next of Kin shall be Guardian, and where not, 234, 235.
King. See Advowson. Baron and Feme. Courts. Forfeiture. Informations. Pardon.
The King is the supreme Head of the Church of England, 2. 5, 6, 7.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction restored to the Crown, 5. The Kings ancient
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, 5, 6. The King is Persona mixta, and unita cum
Sacerdotibus, 6. He is the supreme Ordinary, 6, 7. He is Arbitrator between
spiritual Persons, touching their Jurisdiction, 6. He may do, what the Pope
might by the Canon Law, 6, 7. He may grant a Commission of Review,
notwithstanding 25 H. 8. 19. 7. He may make an Appropriation, without the
Bishop, 7. A resignation made to him of a Deanery, good, 7. The Penalty for
persuading others to impugn his power in cases Ecclesiastical, 113, 114. He
cannot be nonsuited, 80. Covin shall not bar him, 79. 105, 106. An Audita
Querela lies not against him, 148. King, where it includes his Successors, 95.
Who is a man's natural King, 185. Within what time the King is to prosecute upon
poenal Laws, 74, 75. 121, 122. Where he is barred of the Forfeiture, and where
not, 79. 81, 82. 253, 254, 255. The Recusants remedy upon his Conformity, as to
the King, 148. Where the King may pardon, release, etc. the Forfeiture upon a
poenal Law, and where not, 80. How he may grant a Recognisance, or Obligation
forfeited, 106. He cannot grant the Penalty on a poenal Law, to a Subject, 165.
Action of Debt, etc. given to the King, 120. In what Courts the King may sue
for the Penalties given him by 23 El. 1. 122. Where the Penalty for Recusancy
shall run on, and be appropriated to the King, and where not, 102, 103, 104.
166, 167, 168. 219. 252. 254. The King may seize two thirds of a Recusants
Lands, presently after Conviction, 168. Election given to the King, to take the
20 l. per month, or two thirds of a Recusants Lands, 170, 171. 173. 219. But he
shall not have the two parts, and the 20 l. per month both, 219. Where the
King, having seized an Advowson as part of his two parts, shall present, and
not the University, 231, 232, 233. The King is Patron in that case, 232, 233.
And shall present alone, 172. 233. Difference between a Bond to the King, and a
Bond to the Kings use, 182. Licenses by the King, 116. 139. 155. 206. 223.
Dispensation by the King, where void, 44. 243. Fine and Imprisonment at the
Kings pleasure, by whom to be inflicted, 97.
Lapse, see Notice Laws. See Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Statutes.
What is meant by the Kings or Queens Laws, 95. The Ecclesiastical Laws are the
Kings Laws, 5, 6. Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws are to be administered
distinctly, 6. The Laws of Scotland or Ireland, not obligative to England, 189.
Lease. See Confirmation. Trust.
License. See Abjuration. Bishop. Council. Justices of Peace. King.
Schoolmaster.
What License a Popish Recusant may have to travel out of the compass of five
miles, and from whom, 206. 208. To what Popish Recusants such License may be
granted, 206, 207. What is a good License, and what not, 206. Where it may be
granted without any particular cause showed, and where not, 206, 207, 208. 210.
Where it ought to be averred, that the cause contained in the License is true,
211. Where the License must be under hand, and where under hand and seal both,
206, 207, 208. Where there must be a person to assent, as well as persons to
License, and where not, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210. Where the Lieutenant, or a
Deputy Lieutenant may assent to such License, and where not, 206, 208, 209,
210. They who License, and he who assents must be all distinct persons, 209.
The License and Assent may be both in one writing, 209. The person assenting
must be resident in the County, 209, 210. Where the Recusant Licenced must take
an Oath, and what Oath, and before whom, and where not, 206, 207, 208, 210, 211.
Lieutenant, see License Ligeance, see Subjection London, see Recusants Mayor,
see Corporations Mansion. See Recusants. Mansion House, what, 173.
Marriage, see Baron and Feme. Marshalsie. Is the ordinary Prison of the Court
of Kings Bench, 251.
Mass. Saying and hearing of Mass, and the Penalties, 24, 25, 26. 45. 59.
200, 201.
Miles. How to be accounted, 130, 131.
Minister. See Common Prayer. Ecclesiastical Persons.
Misprision of Treason, 51. 59.
Mittimus, see Indictments Month. How to be accounted, 13, 14. 61.
Mortgage, see Chattels Mother. See Administration. Kin.
Naturalization. See Alien. Naturalization is a Fiction in Law, 185. Its
effect, 185. It includes Denization, 128, 129. What they ought to do who are to
be naturalized, 240.
Natural King. Natural King, and natural Subject are Correlatives, 185.
Next of Kin, see Kin Nobility. See Council. Nobility by Birth, is Character
indelebilis, 247. Nobility gotten by Marriage, may be lost by marriage, 198.
247. Where a Nobleman or Noblewoman may be committed to prison, for refusing
the Oath of Allegiance, 250, 251.
Nomination. See Recusants. University.
The Presentment is in him who has the right of Nomination to a Benefice, 229.
He is in effect the Patron, and may have a Quare Impedit, 228.
Nonsuit. See Informers. King.
Notice. Aiders, or Relievers of an offender, not punishable, unless they had
notice of the offense, 17. Where a lapse will incur upon Deprivation, without
notice to the Patron, 23. All men are bound to take notice of an Act of
Parliament, 23. To what cases only, the clause in 13 Eliz. 12. of notice to the
Patron, extends, 23.
Number.
Pluralis numerus est duobus contentus, 238.
Oaths. See Bishop. Council. Indictments. Justices of Peace. Nobility.
Oath of Abjuration, see Abjuration and Coroner. Oath of Supremacy, 9. Called
the Oath of Obedience, 147. How to be expounded, 43. Who must take it, and
before whom, 8, 10, 11. 38, 39, 40. 43, 44. 92. 95. 149. 186. 240. 261, 262.
264. 266. The Penalties for refusing, or neglecting to take it, 9, 10. 40. 42,
43, 44. 263. see Disability. He that has an Office of Inheritance, if he
refuse it, and afterward take it, shall be restored, 11. The penalty for not
certifying the refusal of it, 40. Where the party refusing it, is to be tried,
41. Where the Refusal of it upon the second tender, is not Treason, 45. Who,
not bound to take it, 44. Oath of Allegiance, 176, 177, 178, 179. Sequitur
personam, non locum, 246. 249. Who is to give it, and who must take it, and in
what cases, 173, 174, 175, 176. 181, 182, 183. 186. 195, 196, 197, 198. 215.
224. 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248. 261, 262. 264. 266, 267.
Where the party taking it must set to his name or mark, 179. Where, and whither
the taking of it is to be certified, and the Certificate recorded, 174. 249,
250. The penalties for refusing it, or not taking it, 174, 175, 176. 181, 182.
195, 196. 215. 224. 243. 250, 251. 263. see Disability. The party refusing it,
shall be committed to Gaol, and by whom, 174, 175. 250, 251. He may be
committed either until the Assizes or Sessions, at the discretion of him who
tenders it, 175. In that case sureties cannot be taken, 175. Where a married
woman refusing it, shall be imprisoned, till she takes it, 175. 250. What
tender and refusal of it shall be binding, and what not, 251: Refusal of any
word of it, is a refusal of the whole, 179. Serving or going to serve a
foreign Prince, etc. without first taking the said Oath, is Felony, 181, 182.
What service is there meant, 182. Who shall give the Oath in that case, 183.
198. The penalty for not certifying it, and on whom, 183, 184. 198, 199. The
penalty for not certifying the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, taken by a
person submitting, 186. Certificate of Oaths taken by a Jesuit, etc. or a
person returning from a Seminary, see Conformity. An Office of Inheritance
saved to him, who takes not the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, 265, 266.
Where, and before whom, persons who are to be restored in Blood, or
naturalized, are to take the said Oaths, 240. Oath by a Popish Recusant,
licenced to travel, 206, 207, 208. 210, 211.
Obedience. See Oaths.
Persuading or withdrawing the Kings Subjects from their Natural Obedience, or
being persuaded or withdrawn, is High Treason, 57, 58. 184, 185, 186. What is
Natural Obedience, 185. A Jesuit, etc. submitting, must continue in his due
Obedience, 95.
Obligation. See King. Service.
Offense, see Judgment Office. Where necessary before seizure, 104.
Offices, and Officers. See Excommengement. Oaths. Port. Recusants.
Where the Husband of a Popish Recusant convict, shall not bear any Office,
211, 212. Officers of the Exchequer, 71. Officers shall answer for their
Deputies, 184. What persons are disabled to bear office, and in what cases, 10.
43, 44. 211, 212. 243. 251. 257, 258. 263, 264. The penalty on him who executes
any Office, and does not receive the Sacrament, and take the Oaths and Test
injoined by 25 Car. 2. 2. 263, 264, 265. A saving of some Offices, 265, 266,
267.
Ordinary. See Probate. Ordinary, who, 45. The King is supreme Ordinary, 6, 7.
The name, etc. of the person offering an Agnus Dei, etc. shall be disclosed to
the Ordinary of the Diocese, 53, 54. A Schoolmaster may be allowed by the
Ordinary of the Diocese, 64. What the Ordinary may take for such allowance, 65.
Ornaments. What Church Ornaments shall be used, 31.
Outlawry, see Vtlawry Pardon. Where the King may pardon the forfeiture upon a
poenal Law, and where not, 80. His pardon will not restore an offender deprived
by 1 Eliz. 23.
Parish. See Church. The Ecclesiastical Court cannot try the limits or bounds
of Parishes, 28. The Parish the Recusant is of, need not be named in the
Indictment, 71. How the Parish is to recover that part of the penalty given by
23 Eliz. 1. to the Poor, 71.
Parliament.
When the Parliament of 1 Eliz. began, 24. Every Member of the Commons House,
must take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, 43, 44. 243.
Patron. See King. Nomination. Recusants. Vtlawry.
Notice to the Patron, where necessary, and where not, 23.
Peers. See Praemunire. By, and before whom to be indicted. 88. 188. By whom to
be tried, 16. 29. 44. 56. 87. 93. 96. 188. Provision in Acts of Parliament, for
trial of a Peer by his Peers, where ex abundanti, 16. In what cases only, a
Peer shall be tried by his Peers, 198. Saving of the Privileges of Peers, 265,
266.
Penalty. See Baron and Feme. Cinque Ports. Forfeiture. King. Parish. Recusants.
Penalties given by 23 Eliz. 1. how to be recovered by the King, and where 120,
121, 122. Penalties given by 23 El. 1. and 35 El. 1. how to be distributed, 70.
111. 123. The subsequent distribution of a Penalty shall be good, although the
whole be at first given to the King, 70, 71.
Penalties For refusing to abjure, see Abjuration. For absolving, persuading or
withdrawing the Kings Subjects from their Obedience, or the Religion
established to the Romish Religion, or reconciling them to the Pope or See of
Rome, or being absolved, etc. See Absolution. Obedience. Religion. Rome.
For bringing in etc. any Agnus Dei, etc. See Agnus Dei.
For concealing the offenders name. See Agnus Dei.
On such who aid, maintain, relieve, etc. offenders. See Aid.
For refusing to discover, or hindering the delivery of a Popish Recusants Arms.
See Armor.
If the Child of a Popish Recusant convict be baptized contrary to 3 Jac. 5.
See Baptism.
On a Popish Recusant convict, who is married contrary to 3 Jac. 5. See Baron
and Feme. Recusants.
On a married woman, convicted as a Popish Recusant, if she conforms not. See
Baron and Feme. Recusants.
For bringing in etc. Popish Books. See Books. For getting, or putting in ure
Bulls from Rome. See Bulls. If a Popish Recusant be buried contrary to 3 Jac.
5. See Burial. For not coming to Church. See Church, Recusants. For depraving,
hindering, or not using the Common Prayer, or using or maintaining any other.
See Common Prayer. On Concealers of Offenses, See Concealers. For going to
Conventicles, or persuading others so to do, or to impugn the Kings
Ecclesiastical power, or to forbear to come to Church. See Church.
Conventicles. King.
For not certifying the submission required by 27 Eliz. 2. See Conformity.
For refusing to make submission according to 35 Eliz. 1. or 35 Eliz. 2. See
Conformity.
For keeping a Recusant in his house. See House.
For maintaining any Foreign Jurisdiction within this Realm. See Jurisdiction.
For saying or hearing of Mass. See Mass.
For refusing, or not taking the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance. See Oaths.
For not certifying the Refusal, or the taking of the Oath of Supremacy. See
Oaths.
For not certifying the taking of the Oath of Allegiance. See Oaths.
For serving, or going to serve a Foreign Prince, etc. without first taking
the Oath of Allegiance. See Oaths.
For executing any Office, without receiving the Sacrament, and taking the
Oaths and Test injoined by 25 Car. 2. 2. See Offices.
For not certifying Presentiments of Offenses against 5 Eliz. 1. See
Presentiments.
For not presenting Popish Recusants at the Sessions. See Recusants.
For not entering and recording such Presentiments. See Recusants.
On a Popish Recusant confined, and offending against 35 Eliz. 2. See Recusants.
For keeping, or maintaining Recusants. See Recusants.
On a Popish Recusant convict, who comes to Court. See Recusants.
On a Popish Recusant, who departs not out of London, and ten miles compass.
See Recusants.
On a Recusant, convict, for exercising certain Offices and Functions. See
Recusants.
On a married woman who is a Popish Recusant convict, and conforms not in her
husbands life time. See Recusants.
For maintaining the Bishop or See of Romes Authority. See Rome.
For Educating Children in the Popish Religion. See Rome.
On the Popish Recusant who conforms, and receives not the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper yearly. See Sacrament.
For keeping or being a Schoolmaster contrary to 23 Eliz. 1. or 1 Jac. 4. See
Schoolmaster.
For suffering Women or Children to go beyond Seas without License, and on such
as go, or send them. See Seas.
For a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, etc. to be within this Realm. See Seminary.
For not discovering them. See Seminary.
For not giving Information of such discovery. See Seminary.
For relieving or maintaining such, or any Popish College, Seminary, etc. or
such who abide there, or in any Popish Family beyond the Seas. See Seminary.
For going or sending any thither. See Seminary.
For returning from a Seminary, without making submission. See Seminary.
For serving, or going to serve a foreign Prince, etc. without first entering
into Bond. See Service.
For not certifying such Bond. See Service.

Pensions. Saving of Pensions and Salaries, 265. 267.
Petition. Petition to the King, 148.
Plea. See Baron and Feme. Excommengement. Informations. Issue.
Plea to an Indictment for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, 39. Plea to an
Information for being married contrary to 3 Jac. 5. 221. In a Suit for Tithes,
its a good plea to say, he stands convicted on 1 El. 2.23. Where ipsi non sunt
culpabiles is a good plea by Baron and Feme, 75, 76. Plea in disability of the
person of the Recusant, in what cases allowable, and in what not, 215. 217,
218. The conclusion of it, 216. Such plea is peremptory, 216. Where in a
popular Suit, the Kings Attorney is to reply, and where the Plaintiff or
Informer, 79, 80. Plea after Judgment, in what case allowable, 148.
Poor, see Parish Pope, see Rome Port. Officers of the Ports, what they are
empowered to do, 155. 183. Where punishable, 155. 183, 184.
Power. See Jurisdiction. King.
Praemunire. See Indictments. University.
Praemunire, 6. 12. 34. 36. 40. 51, 52. 56. 93. 175, 176. 196, 197, 198. 248.
In a Praemunire, no trial of a Peer by his Peers, 198. Nor Council allowed,
198. The Judgment and forfeiture in a Praemunire, 46. 152. Not lawful to slay a
man attainted in a Praemunire, 46. How a man attainted in a Praemunire, is out
of the Kings Protection, 46, 47.
Prayers. See Church. Common Prayer.
Prayers in the Pulpit, before Sermon, 21.
Prerogative. See Advowson. King.
Presentation. See Advowson. Nomination. Recusants. University. Vtlawry.
Presentment. Presentment, what, 37. What Presentiments of Offenses against 5
Eliz. 1. are to be certified into the Kings Bench, 35, 36. The penalty for not
certifying them, 35. Where Popish Recusants are to be presented, 160, 161. see
Recusants.
Priest. Every Priest is Clerieus, 21. 45. And is bound celebrare coenam
Dominicam, etc. 21. Popish Priest, see Seminary.
Printers, 34 Prison. See Imprisonment. To what Prison the Justices of the
Kings Bench use to commit him, who refuses the Oath of Allegiance, 251.
Privy Council, see Council Probate. Upon Probate of a Will, Administration is
committed, not granted, 235. What is granted by the Ordinary, upon Probate of a
Will, 235.
Process, see Informations Proclamation. See Appearance. Conviction. Seminary.
Proclamation for Recusancy, where it may be waved, 67. 162. In what case the
Recusant cannot be proclaimed, 122. Proclamation of the Recusant, where
erroneous, 163. To whom the Recusant is to render himself upon Proclamation,
107. 162, 163, 164.
Prohibition.
In what cases, 6. 28.
Proof. See Witness. What proof allowable, 47.
Protection. See Praemunire. Protection natural, and Protection legal, 47.
Protection by the Law of nature, whether indelebilis and immutabilis, 47.
Punishment. A man shall not be twice punished for the same offense, 31. 189.
253, 254, 255.
Quare Impedit. See Nomination. University.
Recital. Where a Statute need not be specially recited, 24. Imperfect recital
of a branch of 35 Eliz. 2. 206, 207. Imperfect recital of an Act of Parliament,
shall not impeach the Act recited, 208.
Recognisance. See King. Recusants.
Recognisance in another name, forfeited, 105.
Reconciliation, see Rome Record. See Certiorari. Failer of Records.
Courts of Record, what Courts are meant, 82, 83. 85.
Recusants. See Church. Justices of Peace. King. Parish.
Abjuration by a Popish Recusant, see Abjuration. Seizure of the Advowson of a
Popish Recusant, see Advowson. An Alien Recusant, see Alien. A Recusants
appearance upon Proclamation, see Appearance. Arms of a Popish Recusant, see
Armor. Baptism of the Child of a Popish Recusant, see Baptism. Married women
Recusants, see Baron and Feme. Bishop. Council.
Licenses to a Popish Recusant, see Bishop. Council. Licenses.
Burial of a Popish Recusant, see Burial. Conformity of a Recusant, or of the
Husband of a Popish Recusant, see Conformity. Conviction of Recusants, see
Conviction. Forfeiture of Copyholds for Recusancy, see Copyholds. Covin by a
Recusant, see Covin. Recusants Excommunicate, see Excommengement. Indictment
for Recusancy, see Indictments. Information for Recusancy, see Informations.
Plea in disability of the Recusant, see Plea. Proclamation of a Recusant, see
Proclamation. Seizure of a Recusants Lands or Goods, see Seizure. Trees.
Rendering a Recusants body to the Sheriff, see Sheriff. Trust of or for a
Recusant, see Trust. Presentatlon, where the Patron is a Popish Recusant
convict, given to the University, see University. Wast in a Recusants Lands,
see Wast. What is Recusancy, 129. To what time it shall have relation, 228. It
consists in omitting, not committing, and no place need be alleged, 60. 73.
And yet in some sense, it may be said to be committed, 74. Recusancy is not
within 31 Eliz. 5. of laying the offense in the proper County, 60. The
penalties for Recusancy, see Church. The Recusant may forfeit for 13 months in
the year, 61. Where, and when the penalty of 20 l. per month for Recusancy,
shall be paid into the Exchequer, 102. 104. 165, 166. Where it shall run on for
the time to come after Conviction, and where not, 103, 104. 166, 167, 168. 219.
252. 254. Where a Recognisance, and all debts and personal chattels and actions
are Goods, and forfeited by the Recusant, 105. But not before seizure, 105. A
Rent, or Advowson may be seized for Recusancy, 106. 171, 172. The third part of
a Recusants Lands shall be left to him, 102. 268. His chief Mansion house shall
be left to him, as part of his two parts, 173. By 29 Eliz. 6 the profits of the
two parts of his Lands should not have gone toward satisfaction of the 20 l.
per month, 105. 110. 151. The Law altered in that point, 105. 110. 150, 151.
Assurances of a Recusants Lands, made bona fide, are not to be impeached, 211,
112. A Recusant outlawed, is not within that Branch of 23 Eliz. 1. touching
fraudulent conveyances, 87. In what cases the death of the Recusant shall
discharge the arrears of the 20 l. per month, and in what not, 109, 110, 111.
148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153. see Commission. The forbearance from Church must
be for a whole month, or the 20 l. are not forfeited, 63. Divine Service in a
man's house, in what case it shall excuse him from the penalty for Recusancy,
86. Where the Recusant forfeits nothing before Judgment, 104. At what Sessions
a Recusant may be indicted, 67. Recusants are to be bound in the Kings Bench,
to the good Behavior, 60. 63. But Popish Recusants Convict are not to be taken
for sureties, 64. What Offices and Functions a Recusant convict is disabled to
exercise, 211. The penalty, if he exercise such Office or Function, 211. Where
he cannot be Executor, Administrator or Guardian, 234, 235. What Conviction
disables or incapacitates him, 216. The penalty for keeping or maintaining
Recusants, 191, 192, 193. see Service. Where it must be averred, that the party
is Papalis Recusans, 129. Presentiments of Popish Recusants, where, and by whom,
and what the Officers are to present, and what not, 160, 161. The penalty for
omitting it, 161. The penalty on the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk, not
entering and recording such Presentiments, 161. The Officers reward for making
such Presentiments, 161, 162. Popish Recusants may be punished on 35 Eliz. 1. of
Conventicles, save as to Abjuration, 114, 115. What Popish Recusants are to be
confined within five miles, and what not, 128. 130, 131, 132, 133. 136. What a
Popish Recusant confined must do, 134. Where, and what he shall forfeit, and
where not, 128. 131. 134. Where he may travel above five miles, and where not,
141, 142. 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211. What Proviso of 35 Eliz. 2. giving him
leave to travel, is repealed by 3 Jac. 4. and what not, 205. To what intents a
Popish Recusant convict shall be as a person Excommunicate, and to what not,
193. 215, 216. 223. Whether a Popish Recusant convict, may, qua such, be
attached upon a writ of Excommunicate capiendo, 216. Where he is disabled to
sue, and where not, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220. Or to be a Witness, 216. Or
to exercise any Office, 211, 212. A Popish Recusant convict is disabled to
present or nominate to a Benefice or Donative, or to grant any Avoidance, 226,
227, 228, 229. And yet, where his grant of such Avoidance shall be good, 228.
Notwithstanding such disability the Recusant is still Patron, 230. And may
grant the Advowson in see, or tail, or for life, or years, and good, 230, 231.
Such disability respects his voluntary acts only, 232. The Kings Wards are not
to be granted to a Popish Recusant convict, 234. The penalty on a Popish
Recusant convict, who comes to Court, 201, 202. Or departs not out of London,
and ten miles compass, 202, 203. Tradesmen and dwellers in and about London,
not excepted at this day, 203, 204. The penalties on a married woman who is a
Popish Recusant convict, and conforms not in her Husbands life time, 86. 212,
213, 214. 252, 253.
Refusal. See Abjuration. Conformity. Oaths.
Relapse. Makes the submission void, 119. 145. Where to be certified, 145:
Relation. See Indictments. Recusants.
Release, see King Relief. See Aid. Seminary.
Relieving of offenders, where not punishable, 17. 44.
Religion, see Rome Rent, see Recusants. Repeal. See Statutes. Of two branches
of 35 Eliz. 1. 191. Of a branch of 35 Eliz. 2. 205.
Replication, see Plea Resignation, see King Reversal, see Vtlawry Review, see
King Reviver, see Statutes Reward. See Discovery. Recusants.
Rites, see Ceremonies Rome, Pope, Popish Religion, etc. See Books. Bulls.
Great Exactions by the Sea of Rome, 1. Maintaining or Extolling the Bishop or
See of Romes Authority, where a Praemunire, and where Treason, 34. 41, 42. What
is a maintaining or extolling within 5 Eliz. 1. 34. 42. Withdrawing the Kings
Subjects from the Religion Established to the Romish Religion, or being so
withdrawn, is High Treason, 57, 58. 184, 185, 186. Reconciled to the Pope, or
See of Rome, what meant, 187. Reconciling or being reconciled to the Pope or
See of Rome, is High Treason, 49, 50. 57, 58. 184, 185, 186. A person so
reconciled, and submitting afterward, 186. What reconciliation to Rome is not
within 13 Eliz. 2. 50.
Sacrament. See Baptism. Informations. Offices.
The penalty on the Popish Recusant, who after Conformity receives not the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper yearly, 157, 158. Where a married woman may be
punished for not receiving the said Sacrament during her Marriage, and where
not, 195. 212, 213. 252. Persons to be restored in Blood, or to be naturalized,
must receive the said Sacrament, and when, 240. What other persons are to
receive it, 211, 212. 215. 263, 264. 266.
Saving. See Power. Peers. Pensions.
Schism, see Heresy Schoolmaster. The penalty for keeping or being a
Schoolmaster, contrary to 23 Eliz. 1. or 1 Jac. 4. 64. 155. By whom a
Schoolmaster is to be licenced, 64, 65. 155. What may be taken for such
License, 65. Conformity, or allowance by the Bishop or Ordinary, either of them
sufficient, 64. What a Schoolmaster must do by Stat. 14. Car. 2. 64, 65. An
Usher is within the word (Schoolmaster) 64.
Scire facias, see Informations. Scotland. See Alien. Laws.
Seas. See Council. Kin. Seminary.
The penalties for suffering Women or Children to go beyond Seas without
License, and on such as go, or send them, 94. 155. 223, 224. 226.
Seizure. See Advowson. Commission. King. Office.
Where a Recusants Lands may be seized, or the seizure continued after his
death, and where not, 100. 102. 104. 106, 107. 109, 110, 111, 112. 150, 151,
152, 153. 168, 169. 170, 171. Where his Goods may be seized, and where not,
100, 102. 105. 168. 172.
Seminary, Popish College, etc. Jesuit, Popish Priest, etc. See Conformity.
Discovery. Justices of Peace.
Its High Treason for a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, etc. to be within this Realm,
90. Not necessary to show in what particular place he was born, 90. Nor where
ordained, 90. Relieving or maintaining such, is Felony at this day, 90, 91. The
penalty for not discovering a Jesuit, or Popish Priest, 96. Or for not giving
Information of such discovery, 96. A person suspected to be a Jesuit or
Seminary Priest, examined, and refusing to answer, 140. To whom examinable,
140. By what questions he is bound by 35 Eliz. 2. to answer, 141. Submission by
a Jesuit, Popish Priest, etc. 94, 95. He must continue in Obedience to the
Laws, 95. They which are in Seminaries, etc. shall return upon Proclamation
made in that behalf, 91, 92. If they return, and submit not, it is High Treason,
92. They ought not to come into any other of the late Queens Dominions, before
they have submitted here, 92. Where the benefit of submission was lost, if the
party submitting came within ten miles of the Court, 98. The penalty for
sending Children to a Popish College, Seminary, or Family beyond the Seas,
153. 257, 258. And on such who go thither, 153, 154. 257, 258. Or relieve any
there, or any Popish College, Seminary, etc. 93, 94. 257, 258.
Sentence, see Deprivation Service. See Trial. Divine Service, see Recusants.
Where serving, or going to serve a foreign Prince, etc. without first taking
the Oath of Allegiance, and entering into Bond, is Felony, 181, 182. see Oaths.
What kind of service is meant, 182. The form of such Bond, 183. It must be
Domino Regi, 182. Who shall take it, 183. 198. Who shall certify it, and the
penalty for not certifying, 183, 184. Where a man may keep a Recusant in his
Service, and where not, and the penalty, 191, 192, 193.
Sessions. See Justices of Peace.
At what Sessions a Recusant may be indicted, 67. General Quarter Sessions, and
General or Quarter Sessions, what Sessions meant, 67.
Sheriff. See Excommengement. Sheriffs shall take the Oath of Supremacy, 38.
Sheriff of the County where the Kings Bench is, 40. Where a Recusant proclaimed
ought to render his body to the Sheriff, 107. 162, 163. Where a Popish Recusant
may travel above five miles, if required to tender his body to the Sheriff,
142. The Sheriff is to pay him who discovers certain offenders, 201.
Statutes. See Baron and Feme. Ieofailes. Informations. Notice. Recital. Repeal.
Reviver of several Statutes of H. 8. and E. 6. 2, 3, 4. Stat. 5 Eliz. 1. when,
and where to be published, 43. The Statutes of 23 Eliz. 1. 29 Eliz. 6. 35 Eliz.
1. and 7 Jac. 6. against Recusants, are all affirmative Laws, and do not
abrogate one the other, 120, 121. 162, 163. 253. Who are within the Act of 35
Eliz. 1. of Conventicles, and who not, 114. Rules in construction of poenal
Statutes, 21, 22. 64. 221. Where they shall not be construed by Equity, 199.
221. 229. Where they may be construed by the intent of the makers, besides, or
beyond the letter, 21. 229. What is given by an Act of Parliament, shall not be
divested by a subsequent Act, without express words 23^. Where a later Act of
Parliament shall be guided by a former, 85. A private clause in a general Act
of Parliament, 230. The difference between a Statute discontinued and revived,
and a Statute never discontinued, 125, 126. All men are bound to take notice of
an Act of Parliament, 23.
Statutes of, West. 2. c. 1. De donis conditionalibus, 46. 152, 153. West. 2.
c. 5. of Advowsons, 13. 2 E. 3. c. 3. of Armor, 97. 25 E. 3. c. 22. of
Provisors of Abbeys, 46. 25 E. 3. of Provisors of Benefices, 229. 50 E. 3. c.
6. of Fraudulent deeds, 87. 16 R. 2. c. 5. of Praemunire, 6. 46. 152. 2 H. 5.
c. 3. of Jurors, 136, 137. 3 H. 6. c. 3. of the Kings Customs, 70. 184. 23 H.
6. c. 10. of Sheriffs, 86. 3 H. 7. c. 4. of Fraudulent deeds, 87. 3 H. 7. c. 7.
of the Kings Customs, 70. 4 H. 7. c. 20. of Actions popular, 79. 21 H. 8. c.
13. of Pluralities and Non-residence, 22, 23. 82. 85. 233. 247. 23 H. 8. c. 4.
of Brewers, 82 85. 24 H. 8. c. 8. of Obligations to the Kings use, 182. 25 H.
8. c. 19. of Delegates, 7. 26 H. 8. c. 1. of the Kings Supremacy revived, 2. 26
H. 8. c. 13. of Treason, 152. 27 H. 8. c. 10. of Jointures, 213, 214. 215. 221,
222. 32 H. 8. c. 1. of Wills, 171. 32 H. 8. c. 30. of Jeofailes, 73. 33 H. 8.
c. 9. of unlawful Games, 83. 33 H. 8. c. 39. of Debts to the King, 150. 152,
153. 182. 35 H. 8. c. 2. of Trial of Treasons, 92. 188. 35 H 8. c. 3. of the
Kings Supremacy revived, 2. 35 H. 8. c. 17. of Woods, 83. 37 H. 8. c. 9. of
Usury, 73. 1 E. 6. c. 7. of Discontinuance of Suits, 81. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 2. of
Soldiers, 188. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 13. of Tithes, 13. 5 E. 6. c. 1. for Uniformity
of Common Prayer, revived, 19, 20. 5 E. 6. c. 4. of drawing weapons in the
Church, 53. 5 E. 6. c. 7. of buying Wools, 77. 5 E. 6. c. 11. of Treason, 152.
5 E. 6. c. 14. of Forestallers, Ingrossers, and Regrators, 83. 7 E. 6. c. 5. of
selling Wines, 83 85. 1 Mar. c. 2. of Repeal, repealed in part, 19. 1 and 2 Ph.
and Mar. c. 8. restoring the Popes usurped Authority, repealed, except touching
Praemunire, 1. 2. 15. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. c. 10. of Trial of Treasons, 92. 4
and 5 Ph. and Mar. c. 5. of Woollen Clothes, 82. 5 Eliz. c. 4. of Trades and
Apprentices, 83. 5 Eliz. c. 9. of Perjury, 67. 126. 5 Eliz. c. 14. of Forgery,
258. 13 El. c. 5. of Fraudulent deeds, 87. 13 Eliz. c. 12. of Reading the
Articles, 22, 23. 233. 18 Eliz. c. 5. of Informers, 76. 78. 82. 85. 18 Eliz. c.
14. of Jeofailes, 73. 29 Eliz. c. 5. of Suits on Poenal Laws, 75. 31 Eliz. c.
5. of Informers, 60. 73, 74. 121. 160. 31 Eliz. c. 6. of Simony, 229. 31 El. c.
10. of Suits on poenal Laws, 75. 35 Eliz. c. 6. of Buildings, 131. 35 El. c.
14. of General Pardon, 108. 43 Eliz. c. 2. of the Poor, 118. 1 Jac. c. 11. of
having two Wives living, 188. 1 Jac. c. 27. for Preservation of Game, 249. 7
Jac. c. 11. for Preservation of Game, 249. 21 Jac. c. 4. of Informers, 83, 84,
85. 21 Jac. c. 13. of Jeofailes, 73. 14 Car. 2. of Uniformity, 21. 64, 65.
Subjection, Subject. See Natural King. Obedience.
Kings Subjects, who, 185. Subject of this Realm, who intended, 189, 190. Local
Subject, who, 189. Natural Subject, who, 185. 190. Natural Subjection is not
local, 186. 190. Where a man born out of the Kings Dominions, yet may be his
natural Subject, 186.
Submission, see Conformity Successors, see King Suit, see Recusants Sunday. An
Information may be exhibited on a Sunday, 78.
Superstition. Superstitious things brought into the Realm, see Agnus Dei.
Supremacy. See King. Oath of Supremacy.
Sureties. Where to be taken, 60. 181, 182. Where not to be required, or taken,
82. 175. Where Popish Recusants convict cannot be Sureties, 64.
Suspicion. See Seminary.
A bare suspicion is not sufficient Justification, 247, 248. Suspicion not
traversable, but the cause of it, 248. By whom to be tried, and determined, 248.
Tail, see Forfeiture Tenant by Courtesy. Where a man is disabled to be Tenant
by the Courtesy, 220.
Tender, see Oaths Tenement. Quid, 255.
Term. When the Term is open, 37. When full Term, 37.
Test, see Transubstantiation Testament, see Probate Time. See Discovery. The
several times limited for prosecution, 13, 14, 15. 29, 30. 65. 73, 74, 75. 121,
122. 160. 189. No time limited, in case of Treason, 65.
Tithes, see Plea Town Clerk, see Recusants Tradesmen, see Recusants
Transubstantiation. Who shall take and subscribe the Test or Declaration
against Transubstantiation, and the penalty if they neglect so to do, 265, 266.
Treason. See Alien. Time. Trial. University.
High Treason, 13. 36. 42. 45. 50. 57, 58. 90. 92. 184, 185, 186. Forfeiture
for High Treason, 152. Where the refusal of the Oath of Supremacy, upon the
second tender, is not Treason, 45. Indicting a man for High Treason, where
actionable, 58.
Trees. Trees cut down not seizable for Recusancy, 168, 169.
Trial. See Peers. Where he that refuses the Oath of Supremacy shall be tried,
41. Where an offender shall be tried in the County, where he is imprisoned,
188. Serving or going to serve a foreign Prince, etc. contrary to 3 Jac. 4. in
what County it shall be tried, 194. Where the Trial shall be in the County,
where part of the offense happened, 194. Treason done in Ireland, may be tried
in England, 92, 93. Where Treason committed out of the Realm, cannot be tried
upon the Statute of 35 H. 8. 2. 188. Suspicion shall be tried by the Justices,
248. The Ecclesiastical Court cannot try the limits or bounds of Parishes, 28.
Offense, where not triable, 139, 140.
Trust. Lease to a Recusant in Trust, whether seizable for Recusancy, 169.
Whether a convicted Recusant be incapable of a Trust, 169. Whether Lands
conveyed in trust for a convicted Recusant, may be seized, 169.
Value. Clear yearly value, 136. Where Lands and Goods shall be valued
together, and where not, 136, 137.
Verdict. See Covin. Informations.
University. See Advowson. Covin. Where the University of Cambridge or Oxford
shall present or nominate to an Ecclesiastical living, etc. whereof a Popish
Recusant convict is Patron, and where not, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232. What
is thereby given them, 229, 230. Whom they may Present or Nominate, and whom
not, 227. 233. Chancellor and Scholars, where a good description of the
University, 229. They shall not Present, unless the Recusant remained convict
at the time of the Avoidance, 230. Not necessary that he remain convict, when
they bring their Quare Impedit, 230. What acts of the Recusant shall bar the
University from presenting, etc. 230, 231, 232. Whether his being attainted of
Treason, Felony or Praemunire shall bar them, 232, 233.
Void, see Informations Usher, see Schoolmaster Vtlawry. See Conformity. A Term
sold upon Utlawry, shall be restored upon Reversal, 179, 180. Where upon
Reversal of an Utlawry, the Patron shall be restored to his Presentment, and
where not, 180. Imprisonment by Covin, shall not avoid an Utlawry, 256.
Wast. See Guardian. Recusants.
Warrant, see Justices of Peace Wast. Where security must be given, not to
commit Wast in the Recusants Lands, 173.
Will, see Probate Witness. Where no Indictment or Arraignment, without
sufficient proof, 16, 17. 47 The Witnesses to be produced face to face at the
parties Arraignment, 17. A Popish Recusant convict, is disabled to be a
Witness, 216.
Women. See Baron and Feme. Seas.

FINIS.
WHereas since the Expiration of the late Act for Printing, many Persons do
unjustly take liberty to Print the Copies of other Men, to their great Damage;
and least we should be censured to be guilty of the like illegal and unjust
Practice, These are to satisfy all Persons, Booksellers, and others, That the
Statutes concerning RecusantS, Printed in this Book, were not done without the
leave of the Proprietors first obtained, and satisfaction to them given for the
same.

John Wright. Ric. Chiswell.


ERRATA.
Preface, read concern.

Instead of Goal, and Goal delivery, read Gaol, and Gaol delivery.

PAge 6. l. 4. r. C. p. 14. l. 20. r. Put. p. 19. l. 5. r. Whereas. p 22. l.
41. r. Statutes. p. 23. l. 30. r. until alter. p. 24. l. 35. r. tent. p. 25. l.
39. r. this. p. 26. l. 7. r. him. l. 34. r. 41. p. 30. l. 7. r. Assize. p. 31.
l. 30. r. Leppingwells. p. 37. l. 37. r. the full. l. 41. r. c. 193. p. 38.
Margent, r. Eliz. p. 41. l. 15. r. disallowed. p. 60. l. 27. r. Plaintiff Qui
tam etc. p. 61. l. 10. r. or for. p. 62. l. 28. r. two hundred and twenty
pounds. p. 67. l. 17. r. here given. p. 69. l. 29. r. C. 138. p. 76. l. 24. r.
Co. 11.65. p. 81. r. cap. 1. l. 36. r. Information, etc. p. 83. l. 35. r.
before cited. p. 85. l. 16. r. Keymer. p. 86. l. 19. r. Manwood. p. 87.
Margent, r. Sect. 12. p. 89. l. 3. r. disobedient, p. 90. Margent, r. Sect. 3.
p. 99. Margent, r. Sect. 1. p. 100. Margent, r. 23 Eliz. l. 38. r. Reports. p.
103. l. 32. r. 20 l. p. 104. l. 5. r. without Proclamation. p. 107. l. 9. r.
and that. p. 125. r. Stat. 35 Eliz. p. 127. l. 3. r. places. p. 130. l. 6. r.
conclusion. p. 131. Margent, r. Sect. 3. p. 153. Margent, r. Sect. 5. p. 160.
l. 5. r. afterward. p. 172. l. 30. r. Sect. 20. p. 175. l. 20. dele Bishop or.
l. 24. r. that case. p. 178. l. 17. r. in my Conscience. p. 183. l. 31. r. are.
p. 184. l. 38. r. of. p. 188. l. 19. r. of Trial. p. 190. l. 4. r. on. p. 196.
l. 12. r. other person. p. 207. l. 34. r. on such. l. 35. r. talis. p. 208. l.
4. r. this recital. p. 222. Margent, r. Sect. 16. p. 223. l. 33. r. of
disability. p. 229. l. 43. r. Provisors. p. 260. r. 261.

In the Table, title Seminary, r. By whom examinable, and, To what questions.


