DIATRIBE TRIPLEX: OR A Threefold Exercitation, Concerning 1. Superstition. 2.
Will Worship. 3. Christmas Festival.


With the Reverend and Learned Dr HAMMOND.

BY Dauiel Cawdrey Preacher of the Word, at Billing-Magn. in Northamptonshire.

Col. 2.4.8. 4. This I say least any man should beguile you, with enticing
words.

8. Beware least any man spoil you, through Philosophy, and vain deceit,
after the Tradition of men, after the rud^ments of the World, and not after
Christ.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley. 1654.

The Preface.
WHat was said of old, "That in the accusation of Heresy, no man ought to be
silent; may well be applied, to a charge of Superstition, and Will Worship, The
one is a crime against the Truth of God, the other two against the worship of
God; and the question is, which is the greater sin, "To corrupt the Doctrine,
or the worship? That, Heresy is a great and a damnable sin, all men
confess; That Superstition, and Will Worship, are as criminal, and
abominable to God, (though some men account them rather their virtues, than
their crimes) is as demonstrable; and has been demonstrated elsewhere. The
words (and things imported by them) have so long heard ill, in the Reformed
Churches, that men must either deny themselves guilty of the things, or study
to defend, and vindicate the words from the evil sense and savor put upon
them. Pref. to 6. tracts.
The Reverend Doctor (with whom I deal) takes it very hainously, "that the
crimes of Superstition and will worship, should be charged upon the late
Government and Discipline of the Church, and the ceremonies and observances,
either prescribed or customary among us. Particularly, Of Fest. s. 26.
that any should charge his Christmas Festival (as it was of late observed)
with those two crimes, besides the Riot attending on it. He will not (by his
good will) grant, that (...), or (...), that is, Superstition and will worship,
in the Scriptures, are to be taken in an ill notion; much less to be
accounted crimes; or if they be so, to be justly charged, upon his Christmas
Festivity. And no mervail, if the matter be as he makes it seem to be; For
first, Of Superst. sect. 2.
for Superstition he says, it is most clearly according to the use of the
word, Superstitum cultus, the worship of some departed from this World, alive
in another, which though he grants, justly charged on Heathens and Papists,
and properly called Superstition; Yet not on Protestants at all: Or if
Protestants be guilty of any Superstition, it is only of one kind, that is, To
affirm (as a false Teacher) God to command, Sect. 46, 47, 48.
when he does not command, or to forbid when he does not forbid. And secondly,
as for VVil-worship, that's far from a crime, in his opinion; its nothing but
voluntary worship, as innocent, as the Freewill-offerings, allowed by God in
the time of the Law; Sect. 9.
the more voluntary, the more acceptable. Which assertions, if they be true; it
will be easy for him, to vindicate his Festivities, from those charges laid
against them, as the grounds of laying them aside. But that I may, at once and
together, both show and remove the grounds of the Reverend Doctors mist^kes,
and facilitate the way to the reading of the following Discourses; I shall here
very briefly recapitulate, what I suppose to be the causes of his Miscarriages,
in this whole business. And they are these four misprisions.

1. That a man cannot be too Religious: This he confidently asserts, Sect. 33.
both of the intention or degree, and of the extension or number of rites and
ceremonies, taken into the worship of God, sect. 34. A distinction or two, will
clear the way. A man may be said to be too Religious, either because he gives
more to God than he deserves, but so he cannot be too Religious; or because he
gives more than he requires, by the rule of worship; and so a man, may be too
Religious. 2. In regard of worship commanded, especially natural worship, a
man cannot be too Religious, in reference to the intention of the Devotion; as
in love, fear, trust in God: (though in instituted worship, a man may be too
Religious: as if he pray, or Fast to the wasting of his health, or neglect of
his calling, etc.) Put in uncommanded worship, the least Addition to the Rule
of Worship, is too much, and such a man, may be said to be too Religious. This
I prove.

1: If a man, or Church, may add to the Rule of Religi^n, then he, or they may
by too Religious: But a man or Church may add to the Rule of Religion, ergo.
The consequence is clear. The assumption is proved by Deuteronomy. 4.2. where all
Additions to the word are prohibited.

2. Religion, (says the great Schoolman) is a moral virtue (or very like is)
and stands between 2. extremes; ergo. a man may as well be too much Religious,
as too little.

3. The Doctor himself grants, there may be a Nimiety or excess of Religion,
in adding to the commands of Christ, the Gospel rule, those things which
belong not to it, and so is not an exceeder in the fear and service of God. Of
Superst. sect. 46. And this is the first ground of the Doctors mistake.

4. The second is, That excess in Religion, is not well called Superstition; or
that Superstitiis on not an excess of Religion. Sect. 27. etc. which is proved
to be so.

1. Because it is an Addition to the Rule of worship, and so an excess, as
Super statutum. Though the original of the Word was Heathenish to signify
Superstitum cultus, yet its well applied by Divines, to those Additions made to
the Rule of worship. That which the old Testament calls Addition to the word,
the new calls Doctrines, traditions of men, VVil-worship and Superstition.

2. As the defect in Religion is called profaneness, so the excess is called
Superstition, as standing in opposition to it.

3. By the Doctors own concessions. For first he grants, Superstitious may
denote such an excess Sect 31.2. The worship of Angels is an excess or
Addition to the object of worship, and by him styled, that crime of
Superstition. 3. Superstitum cultus, the worship of the worthies departed, by
Heathens, or of Saints and Angels, by Papists, is called Superstition, Sect.
3. most properly, why? but that it adds to the Rule of worship. 4 Slavish fear
of God, is granted to be Superstition, because Fear of God, being worship
commanded in the first Commandment, Slavish fear is an excess of that Fear.
sect. 24.25. 4. To affirm God to command when he does not, is granted to be
Superstition, under the notion of Nimiety or excess, because that man adds to
the commands of Christ. Sect 46.5. To place more virtue in things, than God or
nature has put in them, is granted to be an excess, because it adds to the
promises of Christ, and called Superstition. sect. 45. That's the second ground
of mistake.

3. The third is. That (...), or will worship, is nothing but voluntary
worship, as innocent as the Freewil-offering, etc. Which seems a contradiction
in adjecto; that voluntary worship and uncommanded, should be innocent. For 1.
Its expressly against the second Commandment; which forbids all worship not
commanded by God. 2. Voluntary Worship is an Addition to the Rule of worship,
and eo nomine, Superstition, and that's sinful. 3. Why is the worship of
Angels, of Saints, etc. criminal? but because it was worship invented and
added by the will of man; but that's granted to be sinful. Yet they do not urge
it as a Commandment of God. 4. If Will Worship be innocent, I cannot see, how
all that rabble of Superstitious worship at Rome, can be condemned; for they
are not held out as Commandments of God, but as the Traditions of men.

4. The last ground of Mistake is, that the Doctor takes for granted, That a
Church or particular person, has power to institute and observe, worship not
commanded by God. Which remains, upon him to prove; before he can vindicate
his Festival, (as he and others maintain it) from the double crime, of
Superstition, and Willworship: which I prove by this one argument; If all
Additions to the word in matter of worship, be criminous and sinful, as
prohibited by God Deuteronomy. 4.2. and elsewhere; then no man or Church can without
sin add any worship, to that commanded by God; But the first is true: ergo.
These (I take it) are the principal grounds of the Doctors Misprisions, and
are more largely showed in the Tracts themselves: To shut up this, If
Superstition be an excess of Religion, (as already it is proved to be, and
more hereafter) if Willworship or uncommanded worship, be an Addition to the
Gospel Rule (as cannot well rationally be denied) I see not how the Doctor can
wash his hands, or his Holiday, from those two crimes. For he makes the
consecration and observation of the day, to be a part of (uncommanded) worship;
the day to be more holy than other days; as holy as the Lords day; places
virtue in it by pleasing God by it, and of more acceptance because voluntary,
and. (all which and more, appear in the Tract it self) which if they be not
Additions, and excesses against the second and fourth Commandment; I leave to
the judgment of the indifferent Reader, when he has seriously considered and
weighed, what has been, and shall be spok^n hereafter.

OF SVPERSTITION.
Section 1.

IN a just and Methodicall order of Translation, the Discourse of Superstition
should precede that of Will Worship; that being more general, this last a
Special under it. Which that we may discover, we shall (before we debate it
with the Doctor) enquire, and (as well as we can) resolve, what Superstition
is; And this cannot so well be found, by searching into the Monuments of
Heathen Authors, Latin or Greek, (which is the Doctors way) from the Names
and senses by them given; (they being apt to misleade themselves and us, in
this search,) as by the judgment of Divines, the matter belonging to Religion,
the chief and last of all Arts: They that never knew what true Religion meant,
are all judges of Superstition, which is the work and worker thereof, in the
excessive part.

. 2. Superstition, in the general notion of it, is not unfitly defined, by the
learned Schooleman, A vice contrary to Religion, Aquin. 22. q. 92. a. 1.2.
in the excess, (as profanesse is the other contrary, in the Defect.) Not that
a man can be too Religions indeed, in the commanded worship of God, Dr. Ames.
in medul. on second Commandment: Aquin. ibid.
with respect, or in order to the formal virtue of Religion; but (as one
explaines himself) in order to the Acts, or external means of worship,
superadded by the wisdom, or will of man; when a man tenders worship, either
to whom it is not due, or not in that manner, which he ought. Now, in Religion,
or worship of God in general (as distinct from Justice, or Charity in the
second Table,) four things are considerable, according to the four
Commandments of the Table. 1 A right Object, God alone; 2 a right Matter,
commanded worship; 3 a right manner, with all due Reverence; 4 a right Time,
his own appointed Day: and answerable Superstition may extend to the whole
first Table, Superstition is that which adds humane endeavors to divine
precepts. Vrsin. in 2 precept. More then is appointed by the law of God. D.
Fulk in Act. 17. s. 4. Worship without Gods commandment. M. ^erk. on the
second Command.
when there is a Nimiety, or excess in any of these. For the Discovery
whereof, we must observe, that the Commandments of God, having every one of
them, a Negative, and an Affirmative part, (expressed or understood) the Duties
of Religion do stand in the midst, as virtues, between two extremes: As e. g.
there is a double error against the first Commandment, one in the Defect,
that is Atheism, having no God at all; the other in excess, that is Polytheism,
having too many. 2 In the second Commandment, there is, first a Defect, not
observing Gods prescribed worship, than an excess, in adding and observing
devised worship. 3 So also in the third Commandment, there is a Defect, in
want of Reverence due to the Divine Majesty (which is sometimes partly called
profanesse) and an excess in additions of Ridiculous rites and ceremonies or
gestures, and the like. 4. In the fourth Commandment, there is a Defect, in
observing no Time, when Gods designed Sabbath is neglected, and an excess,
when men institute other Holy Days and Times, as Jeroboam did, 1 King. 12.32.
He ordained a Feast, -- like unto the Feast that was in Judea. Thence it is
apparent, that in this general sense, there may be Superstition, in, or
against all the Commandments of the first Table, in the excessive part; and it
were easy to observe, that many (Divines especially) do call the excesses of
any Commandment, by the name of Superstition.

. 3. And hence it may appear, that some are too short, in designing the
Species or kinds of Superstition; As first the learned Schooleman; who makes
but three kinds of it, Idolatry, Illegitimate worship, and Divination. The
first and last whereof, Ibid a. 2. in corp.
are referred by Divines to the first Commandment; and the other, illegitimate
or uncommanded worship, to the second: For Idolatry, properly so called, is
either the worship of a false God, instead of the true; or of many, or other
Gods with him: And Divination, being a consulting with the Devil, is a giving
of that honor to him, which is due only to God, and so the worst kind of
Idolatry; So he limits Superstition, D. Ames. Medul. on the second Commandment.
only to two Commandments. But I find another Reverend Doctor, restraining it
to one Commandment, viz. the second, when he designs it thus. Superstition is
(a vice) whereby undue worship is tendered unto God. He means that worship to
be undue (which the Schoolman called illegitimate) which is not commanded by
God, but instituted and appointed by men: But this limits it only to the
second Commandment, which is more properly called, VVillworship, (...).
and is but one Species of Superstition: Whereas there may be Superstition
against any of the four first Commandments. For instance: The worshipping of
many Gods, by the Athenians, and other Nations against what Commandment was
it? Surely against the first; yet this by the Apostles is called Superstition,
Act. 17.22. I perceive you are (...), too Superstitious: He means (says our
Doctor) they worshipped more Gods than other people. Sect. 11.
And the Worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. with the true God, is an Excess
against the first Commandment, Will worship. sect. 20.
yet by the Doctor himself, is called, that crime of Superstition. Again, when
Baals Priests used those barbarous Ceremonies in their worship, leaping and
cutting themselves; and when Papists use as many and more ridiculous Rites and
gestures in their worship; this is an Excess against the third Commandment,
yet who would not call these Superstition? as taking Gods Name in vain. And
lastly, when Jeroboam made a Feast day of his own head, and Papists dedicate
Holy days to Saints; So called by Plutarch. sect. 19.
yea when the Jews were so scrupulous in observing their Sabbath, that they
would not stand up to defend themselves, were not these Excesses of Religion,
against the fourth Commandment? yet justly called their Superstition.

. 4. Superstition then, in this general notion, as an Excess of Religion,
has as many species, or kinds, as there are Commandments of the first Table;
But it is no easy matter, to discover all the kinds and ways, whereby it is
committed in particular; or when we have found them, punctually to determine to
what Commandment they do belong. And therefore the courteous Reader will
easily pardon us, if we be not so logically accurate, as we would be in setting
down the particular kinds. We shall labor to express some of them, as we find
them held out by Divines and others, upon several occasions. There may be
therefore 2. Heads of Superstition.

. 5.1. Negative, when men abstain from somethings, under a notion of Religion,
or worship of God, which are not forbidden by God, but left free, and
indifferent: either not forbidden, or, if once they were, now antiquated, or
outdated, as our Doctor says: And of this sort was that, Col. 2.21. Touch not,
taste not, handle not; which was Superstitious Negative willworship.

. 6.2. Positive, when men of their own hearts and Heads, set up ways of
Religion, to worship God by, which he never commanded; And this, (as was said)
may be committed, against any of the four first Commandments. This
distinction, the Doctor ownes, (of Negative, and Positive Superstition,) and
makes use of it against others hereafter, Sect. 29.
thus: In things indifferent, it is as criminous and superstitious, to place
piety in the Negative, as in the affirmative; in not kneeling as in kneeling,
in abstaining scrupulously from ceremonies, as in using them as scrupulously.
Thus far then we have his consent, for more ways than one, for men, at lest
Protestants to be superstitious; which hereafter he does almost deny: Sect. 47,
48. of which in its place. Now this Positive Superstition, may be exemplified,
in many particulars.

. 7.1. In that which is properly called (...), rendered by our Translators, by
Superstition: Act. 25.19. and elsewhere; The worshipping of these (as amongst
Papists) is most properly called Superstition: Sect. 3.
And this may be, either when men worship many Gods, or only one (with the
true) and for this the Athenians are called too superstitious, Act. 17.22. or
else, when they have an excess of fear, or being afraid of God, when they need
not, as thinking themselves bound, as from God, when God neither commands, nor
forbids; Of this kind, is the doing or abstaining Religiously (i. e. upon
pretense of Divine precept, or prohibition) from those things, which the word
does neither command, nor interdict. They are the Doctors own words, Sect. 46.
below. Only he is short, in short expressing, Religiously, by pretense of
Divine precept, or prohibition, for it signifies also, a pretense of worshipping
God thereby: When men have a slavish fear, or hard opinions of God, then they
are justly called Superstitious.

. 8.2. That which is more strictly called (...), Willworship, which is, the
placing the Worship of God, in those things which are the mere inventions, and
institutions of men; never commanded by God: The Papists can give us instances
enough; In the Sacrifice of the Mass, in habits, Eremiticall and Monastical
life, Pennances, Pilgrimages, etc. which they esteem, and practice, as special
worships of God, and are by the reformed Churches, styled justly Superstitious.

. 9. 3. When men institute any rites or ceremonies, Ridiculous ceremonies turn
it into evil: willworship, sect. 25.
for the service of God, which are ridiculous (as the Baalites did) or
unbeseeming the simplicity of Gospell-worship; This is no better, than
Superstition, and a taking of Gods Name in vain. The Church of Rome can afford
us good store of these. These, though they be not Worships invented by men,
yet are Additions to the worship commanded by God, and so an Excess in
Religion, and justly branded as Superstition.

. 10.4. When men put Holiness upon things, which God has not sanctified by
their own consecration; as in Days, Churches, Vestments, etc. Jeroboam was
deeply guilty of this Superstition. First in consecrating Chappells and
Priests, for his Golden Calves, in Dan, and Bethel, and then in consecrating an
Holy Day, and Annual Feast, unto his Gods, like unto the Feast in Judah (of
Gods appointment) the month which he had devised of his own heart: 2 King.
12.9.32, 33. or as the word is, created, (...) An ordinary misdevotion, in the
Church of Rome, and in some of late amongst our selves: Though the Doctor
grudge to grant it the name of Superstition, as we shall hear at Sect. 50.

. 11.5. The placing of perfection in an high degree, in some states and
conditions of life which God never placed in them. As in that store house of
superstition, the Church of Rome, in voluntary Poverty, Virginity, Celibate and
voluntary Martyrdom, when God does not command, or call unto them. And this
last of Martyrdom, the Doctor seems to make the highest degree of perfection,
in his Tract of VVillworship. Sect. 44. For either he must mean it of voluntary
Martyrdom, when a man ambitious of it, shall rush into it, (as many in the
primitive times did) without a call from God, and then it is so far from an
higher degree of perfection, that, in the judgments of the best Divines, it
deserves not the name of Martyrdom: Or else he must intend it of Martyrdom,
when God calls a man to suffer, and then it is a duty, (or at most, but a
privilege) rather than any state of perfection.

. 12.6. When men think by their own, uncommanded worship, and services of God,
either to merit pardon of their sins, against other Commandments; as she
Pro. 7.14. etc. I have peace offerings with me, this day have I paid my vows,
which were free willing offerings, as not commanded; Come let us take our fill
of love, etc. q. d. though I have run into debt, by my former whoredoms, I
have now satisfied God with freewill-offerings, and have quit the score. Or to
purchase Glory, at least a greater degree of Glory for themselves, and to
supererogate for others, by doing something not commanded, as Papists plainly
do. How near the Doctor comes to this kind of Superstition, we shall show anon,
VVillworship, Sect. 50. etc.

. 13.7. When men place more pleasing of God, and expect more Acceptance from
God, for services or worship uncommanded, than for those commanded by God. The
Apostle intimates some such conceit in men, 1 Cor. 8.8. when he says, meats
commend us not to God; for neither if we eat, are we the better (in our selves,
or better accepted with God) neither if we eat not, are we the worse (or are
less, and less accepted with God) yet such as abstained from some meats, had
such thoughts of themselves. And this shall be manifested to be the opinion and
expectation of the Doctor, for his voluntary worship (worship not commanded by
God) to be better pleasing, and to find better Acceptance from God: Tract of
Willworship. Sect. 16.19. and here Sect. 52.

. 14.8. Lastly (to add no more) the placing of more virtue and efficacy, in
things, than either Nature, or the Institution of God has placed in them: This
is acknowledged to be an Excess, and so Superstition by the Doctor, sect. 45.
The placing of more virtue in some things, than either Naturally, or by the
rule of Gods word, or in the estimation of purer ages of the Church may be
thought to belong to them, is guilty of a Nimiety. His instances given, are
very pertinent and considerable. 1. Placing virtue or force in the sign of the
Cross, which is done, not only by Papists in crossing themselves to scare
away the Devil, but also by many ignorant, and ill-taught Protestants, who
require crossing of their Children in Baptism, as thinking them not well
baptized, without. 2. The women's parvula evangelia. 3. opus operatum, the
common Superstition of all natural men, and Hypocrites. Concerning which, his
judgment is good. The doing of which, is either groundless, and then it is
folly: or else it fastens some promise on Christ, which he has not made in the
Gospel, etc. But why he should add, See infra. sect. 34.
In the estimation of the purer ages of the Church, I do not well understand,
but shall consider in its place.

. 15. Having thus made way for our debate with the Doctor, by showing the
Nature of Superstitiion; we shall now enter the lists, Sect. 1.
and consider what he says about it. And to his first Section, we say: It may
be true, that some may unjustly be charged with the crime of Superstition, by
ignorant or malicious defamers of others best actions. But it is as true, that
some that think themselves assured in conscience that they are far enough
from the guilt of it, may justly be charged with it. Commonly those that are
most Superstitious, are most confident of their Innocence, and piety; Many of
the Romish Proselytes, do think they are far enough from this crime, in
their highest willworships, and rather to deserve Commendation from men, and
more Acceptance from God, than blame from any. And no marvel, if they
understand Superstition, in the same sense, that the Doctor does, in this
discourse. That is,

. 16. Superstition in latin, is most clearly, Sect. 2.
superstitum cultus, the worship of some, departed from this world, supposed to
have life in another. Sect. 2. That the Heathens so defined it, is true, and
that the worshipping of such then, and by Papists now, is one kind of
Superstition, So the Dr: in sect. 3.
we have already granted; as being the Worshipping of Creatures, with, and
besides the Creator, which is Idolatry against the first Commandment. But the
Doctor will not say, (I think) that this is the only superstition to be found
in the World, either then, or now. For he grants (...), an Excessive fear of
the Deity, to have been another kind of Superstition amongst the Heathens; and
other kinds also among Christians, as we shall hear anon. Some there are (and
they no mean ones) that derive it from super, and sto, or statuo, as supra
statutum, some worship instituted by men, above the statute law of God; But we
rather rest in the definitiion of the Schoolman; Superstition is a vice
contrary to Religion, in the excess; which may extend to the other
Commandments, whereas this limits it to the second.

. 17. The Greek word for Superstition, (...); though it seems to come nearer
the Doctors sense, of superstitum cultus, yet the Etymology of the word, does
not import so much; but rather a slavish fear of a Deity, by imagining it,
Cruel, Tyrannical, etc. as the Doctors words, dreading the Gods, as so many
Tyrants, sect. 13. a cowardly trembling fear; a care and fear of evil spirits,
sect. 9. For though the latter part of the word signifies demons, or Spirits
departed, yet the former part does not signify worship, but fear: not that
fear, which in Scripture, is often put for the whole worship of God, but a
slavish fear of that God whom they worship; whereupon they (not knowing, or not
contented with prescribed worship) devise some way of worship of their own
heads, For fear of vengeance: as sect. 24.
to please and propitiate their God; which may well be called Superstition, or
willworship; the one against the first, the other against the second
Commandment.

. 18. The Doctor from the 4. Sect. to the 10. having delivered the many senses
of the word (...); he says, (...) referres to the three first, Poetical Gods,
Angels, or Dead-men, or indeed any thing, but the one Supreme God. This clears
what I said before, that this word and worship is rather Idolatry against the
first Commandment, which forbids the worship of any God but the one true God,
or any others with him, which is Polytheism, than that kind of Superstition,
which is the giving of false, that is uncommanded worship, to the true God,
against the second Commandment.

. 19. But he adds, Sect. 11. When Paul tells the Athenians, Act. 17.22. they
were (...), he means they worshipped more Gods or Demons than the Romans,
etc. or were more devout, more pious, in their worships than any others. If
(say I) they were so called, because they worshipped more Gods, then they were
Polytheists against the first Commandment; If, because they were more devout
or pious ( impious rather) in worshipping the true God ignorantly, in a false
manner, then their sin was against the second Commandment; and in both it
was Superstition, in several kinds.

. 20. What Festus meant by (...), Act. 25.19. is not much material; its like
he spoke it with scorn enough, not of Paul's only (as the Doctor seems to limit
it) but of the whole Jewish Religion; Sect. 12.
(for so the words may import, and are so translated by ours.) But to make the
latter part of the verse, to expound the former; of one Jesus that was dead,
putting him under the vulgar notion of a (...), or dead Heroes, and so meaning
the worship of him by (...), is, I doubt, a strain of the Doctors Criticism;
compounding things, which are in the Text distinct. For Festus says, they had
many questions, both concerning their own Religion (Superstition) and also,
concerning one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive, but not a
word there, of worship of him, as a (...), or Heroes: which may the better be
believed, because he was accused of questions of their Law. cap 23.29. (...),
and chap. 24. where Tertullus lays in his charge against Paul, there is not
one word of this, but other grievous crimes, Sedition, Seducement, profanation
of the Temple, etc. v. 5.6. But the Doctor having taken liberty (as often he
delights to do) to vary from the common Translation of (...), their, rendering
it by (his) and of (...), reading Religion; to qualify, at least,
Superstition; he goes on to make his Comment suitable; that Paul's Religion was,
in worshipping of Jesus as a (...), or dead Heroes: Whereas Paul affirmed him to
be alive, not in part, as those departed Demons were supposed; but in the
whole man, as raised from the dead.

. 21. What Epicurus Doctrine was, or what Heathens thought of the word (...),
we are not much Sollicitous; The Doctor having showed a great deal of Reading
and Learning, for many sections together, from the 14. to the 27. to little
purpose, except to cloud the business now in hand, to lead us away, in a mist
of his own making, from the true and proper sense of the word, Sect. 17, 18,
19.
amongst Christians. Yet it seems the Heathens did often take the word in an
ill sense, and branded Religions which they did not like, by that name.
Plutarch taxes the Jews for their Superstition, in two things remarkable: 1.
That they were tied by their Superstition, as with a net; that when they were
invaded, they would not rise from their seats, on their Sabbath day, which was
an Excess against the fourth Commandment, and gross Superstition. For
necessity was privileged to break the Sabbaths Rest. 2. Their killing and
sacrificing their Children to Moloch, which being a horrid superstition, was
(as the former) intended as a worship of the true God, and yet was interpreted
no better, than sacrificing to Devils, Psalm. 106.37. as all Idolatry was by
the Apostle 1. Cor. 1^.12. which though in other respects, it was against the
first Commandment, gross Idolatry, so in making it a worship of the true God,
(when he commanded it not, neither came it into his heart, as somewhere he
says) it was a kind of Superstition, against the second Commandment. And in a
word, the Etymologist speaks fully our sense. The word among the Heathens is
taken for a good thing, but among Christians for impiety. Sect. 23. cited by
the Doctor.

. 22. From that large discourse about the word, at last, Sect. 27. the Doctor
comes to apply it to his purpose, and to discover three inconsequences, in our
customary use of the word, Superstition. Sect. 27.
First that it is inconsequent, that Superstition simply and abstractly taken,
should be resolved in all Authors, to signify somewhat which is evil, that
since particularly, which is false worship. But, (with his favor) this is not
the question between us; but, whither in the Scripture, and Orthodox Divines,
commenting upon that word, it do not always signify something evil, and
particularly, excessive and false worship. What the Etymologist thought of it,
as the common opinion of Christians, we newly heard: And this is the more
probable, because even most of the Popish Commentators do take the word in an
ill sense, Vulg. superstitiones Act. 17.22.
and render (...), by Superstition; without any pretense of a good sense of it;
which, no doubt, they would be glad to hear, to color, and cover their own
Willworship, and Superstition. The Doctors reasons for his opinion, have been
considered before, but briefly now again; 1. Those that use the word, to
express their own worship, conceive it to be a creditable word, or else would
not call it by that name. No doubt, but Heathens did think well of their own
worship: But it being a false worship, it was never the better for that. See
Quaer. of divorce. sect. 58. Blaming this in another.
And it is observable, that in all the Doctors former large discourse, he
brings only Heathens, to show the meaning of the word (bad enough sometimes)
but not one Divine, Greek or Latin Father, or any Modern writer, Papist, or
other, who take it in a good sense; which was not, I believe for want of good
will, but something else. 2. His next reason is when Saint Paul's Religion was
called by that name, Act. 25.19. it appears not that Festus did use that word
as an accusation, or in an ill sense, but in general to signify Paul's
Religion, etc. Something has been said to this above, Sect. 20. and now we
add; It appears rather to signify something ill, in his opinion; For Festus
was not a man of so much Religion, or had any such esteem of the Jewish
Religion, as to give it any credit; and therefore spoke of it, Superstition was
made matter and reproach to the Romans. sect. 22.
as of a Superstition, as men use to call all, not of their own Religion, by
way of defamation, as the Doctor says, Sect. 24.3. The third reason is, Saint
Paul himself, Act. 17.23. says of the Athenians, they did worship the true God
though ignorantly taking him for a (...). And is not worshipping of the true
God, ignorantly, with their own devised worship, a Superstition justly to be
condemned? was it not gross Idolatry, and sinful Superstition in the
Israelites, to worship the true God, in the Golden Calfe? 4. Than other men, is
the Doctors gloss; it may as well signify, more than is meet, and that's too
Religious in the excess.
He calls them (...), more Religious than other men, not in relation to any
vicious rite, but to their worshipping the unknown God, which worshipped others
not. But this, as it begges the question, so is it against the text it self. I
perceive that in all things you are too Superstitious, both in their worshipping
of so many false Gods, ((...)) and a God in their ignorant worship of the true
God, and in their vicious rites of worship. And this sense, the Doctor himself
gave, Sect. 11. I consider and behold you in all things (or in all that I see
in you) as men more superstitious than others, though the word imports, too
Superstitions, too Religious; which is a Nimiety or Excess in Religion, and so
justly called Superstition, in an ill sense, unless the Doctor think, that to
worship many false Gods, and to worship the true God ignorantly, be worthy the
name of true Religion, which the Apostle there censures, by the name of
Idolatry, ver. 16. He saw the City (...), given to Idolatry, or full of
Idols. And the vulgar rendering the word, ver. 22. by Superstitiosiores, too
Superstitious, cannot intend it in a good sense; yea the Doctor Sect. 31.
grants that Superstitiosus in the Positive, signifies Excess more then in the
Comparative.

. 23. The second Inconsequence (he says) is this: Sect. 28.
That the use of Ceremonies, or rites in the worship of God, if not distinctly
prescribed, either by the example or precept of Christ, should be called
Superstition, and for that condemned. But I believe, this is a mistake; None
that I know, make such a consequence; but rather thus: That what rite or
ceremony soever, is made a part of worship, without such example or precept of
Scripture, is Superstitious, and therefore condemned.

. 24. The third inconsequence, Sect. 29.
is a worse mistake; That men on pretense, and in the name of Piety, should
abstain from some observances (indifferent) as Superstitions, either because
commanded by lawful authority, or abused by Papists. For the first charge, I
believe he cannot give an instance of any one understanding Christian, that
ever did abstain from observance indifferent, because commanded by lawful
authority? but rather because they were thought not indifferent, but obtruded
on them as parts of worship. For the other, that they have been used by
Papists, is not all, but that by them they have been abused, and accounted
parts of worship, and may easily return to be so accounted by others.

. 25. We acknowledge this assertion, Sect. 30. 31.
that Superstition may, and does in some authentic writers, sacred especially,
signify a Nimiety, or Excess in Religion. What says he to it? First he
confesses Superstitiosus may denote such excess, but so also does Religiosus,
but then Superstition denotes it no more, than Religio. Agreed, for Religion it
self is sometimes taken for Superstition, when it is applied to a false
Religion: And all such Excess in worship not prescribed, is a Nimiety, and
culpable, what ever A. A. Gellins. Sect. 32
Gellius dreamed, as an ill Judge of Superstition.

. 26. If so used by some Authors, yet he can say much against it, Sect. 32.
as 1. That some, not of the meanest ancient Heathens did it, on the ground of
Epicurean Divinity. We profess we regard not, what the best of Heathens say
in matter of worship, who never knew, what true worship of God meant. 2. For
Christian writers, the use of a word in that sense, is so slight and casual,
that not sufficient to fasten an ill character upon it, etc. It is no slight or
casual thing, as he makes it; for all Divines that speak of this matter, do
generally condemn it, as a thing of ill name and fame, even Papists themselves:
and its proved by this Topic, by most of them, because it is an Excess in
Religion, and illegitimate worship. 3. That those that come home to the point,
are so few and modern, and of so small authority, that scarce worth producing,
with slighting and skorne enough spoken; But why then does not the Doctor in
all this discourse give us the names of those many, Ancient, Authentic
Fathers, etc. that take it in a good sense? He uses not to be so sparing,
where he has such plenty of Authorities. 4. The last is something nearer the
question; which supposing it to be taken in an ill sense, for excess, etc.
says, Then it must be reduced to these two sorts, as consisting either in the
degree, or in the number of Actions, in quality or quantity, we consider what
he says to both.

. 27. First, in the first kind, Sest. 33.
he denies there is any such excess; There is no possibility of being
Religious in too high a degree, praying too fervently, too often, etc. But what
says he to the arguments of the great Schoolman, Aquin. 22.9.92. a. 1.
who proves Superstition to be an excess in Religion? and withal shows how he
means it. Not because Superstition does yield more to divine worship, than
true Religion; but because it exhibites Divine worship, either to whom it ought
not, or in that manner it ought not. We say (as before) in prescribed worship,
there can be no Excess of degree: The want of the highest degree there is a
Defect; A man cannot pray too earnestly (what ever he may do too often) for
that is natural and prescribed worship: But if a man shall tender to God,
devised worship, the least degree here is too much: As for too often praying,
the Euchitae were unjustly condemned, if this was not a fault: Yes (says he)
their fault was not their excessive practice, but the laying that obligation
upon themselves and others. And why not both these? For God having prescribed
all men Callings to be waited on; he that shall pray continually to the
Interruption thereof, sins as well, as he that prays not at all. But (says
he) the fault is the neglect of the duties of our calling, not the excess of
devotion. We say the neglect of their Duties, is caused by the Excess of this
constant, uncommanded Devotion: and so one sin is the cause of another. As for
their laying it on themselves or others as an obligation, its true, that's a
fault; but suppose they had laid no such obligation, but only thought it a
matter of greater perfection, more pleasing, and acceptable to God; had not
this been Superstition also? His supposition of separating that Excess, from
these neglects or omissions, and then it would not be criminous, to pray
continually, is not feisable in this life; unless he could find a man, that
had no Calling to labor in. If any man might have been allowed to pray or
serve God continually, Adam in innocence might have been the man; and yet he
was set to a calling, to dress the Garden. That the frequency of prayer could
not be Superstitious, unless the worship and institution it self were
Superstitious, which he collects from Sa^nt Austin, shall give us a double
inference; First that an institution of worship (by men) may be Superstitious:
2. That he seems to contradict himself; For in worship commanded, as prayer
is, a man may be Superstitious, if he pray constantly, and neglect his calling;
which latter he cannot but do, if he do the former.

. 28. If the Excess be in the extension, as taking in too many rites and
ceremonies, Sect. 34.
into the service of God, when he says, 1. By this it is granted, the rites
and ceremonies themselves are not superstitious, but only the multitude. But
first, we shall say, that multitudes of rites and ceremonies, are prejudicial
to the simplicity of Gospel worship, and therefore either are, or will be
quickly Superstitious. 2. We say further, that rites and ceremonies, be they
never so few, if introduced as parts of worship, are Superstitious, and will
worship: as certainly in the old Law, the least rite and ceremony prescribed by
God, was a part of worship, whither they were significant or not: and so they
would be now, if any such be found prescribed: but if made parts of worship by
men, they were Superstitious; as will not be denied of many rites in the Church
of Rome. 3. Though some rites and ceremonies must necessarily be in Religion,
yet they are such as pertain to Order and Decency, 1 Cor. 14.40. which yet are
not left to the wit and will of man, to appoint what, and as many as shall
seem decent or orderly to them; but are determined partly by the general
precepts of God; partly by the nature of the things themselves, and partly by
circumstances which occasionally offer themselves; and are rather called
circumstances of worship, as time, place, gesture, which are mon adjuncts of
Religious and civil affairs, (instanced by himself) than properly Religious,
in ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies; much less to be accounted parts of
worship,

. 29. Our Divines, though they do allow some rites or ceremonies, (or rather
circumstances) in worship, Sest. 35.
such as before; yet they do condemn significant Ceremonies, in the Church of
Rome; unless they be such, as either Christ has appointed, as in the
Sacraments, or such as naturally signify such a thing; or such as the
Scripture gives instances of; as lifting up the hand in taking an Oath; or the
Eyes to Heaven in prayer, etc.

. 30. Of this kind, are those three sorts of significant ceremonies specified
by him; 1. Sect. 36.
When it naturally signifies the thing, or flows from it, as lifting up the
eyes to Heaven, signifies zeal. 2. When custom has made it significative, as
kneeling signifies humility. 3. When it is set to signify something else,
either matter of doctrine, as standing between Easter and Whitsuntide to
signify the Resurrection, or matter of fact, etc. These and such like, as they
have degenerated into Superstition, so in themselves, they are not any parts of
worship; which they would be, if taught or practiced as necessary, or making
the observers more Religious than others, or more acceptable to God, etc. But
their significant ceremonies are Superstitious, when neither in their nature,
nor by any instituted of God, they are instituted by men to signify some grace
to be procured from God, in the use of such ceremonies: of which sort the
Church of Rome has many.

. 31. But herein the Doctor is again mistaken, that he says, The sole reason
why the old Jewish ceremonies are interdicted us Christians, is, Sect. 36:
because the observing of those who foreshewed Christ, and teaching the
necessity of them, would be the denying of Christ to be come. This indeed, was
our reason, but not the sole one; just such an answer Bellarmine gives to an
argument from Christian liberty against imposition of new Ceremonies by men:
Christ (says he) would have us free from old ceremonies of Moses, Cham. Tom.
3. l. 15. c. 16. sect. 8, 9.
because they were figures of the new Testament, and so to cease when the thing
is come: But it follows not, we must have no ecclesiastical Ceremonies or
laws, because we have not those. To which the learned Chamier replies: There
was another cause of abrogation of those ceremonies (though Bellarmine conceald
it) viz. because they did load the Conscience, with a yoke of multitude of
Ceremonies: and this is common to those, and to the Traditions of men. But we
say further, 1. The false Apostles did acknowledge Christ come in the flesh,
joining Circumcision, etc. with him; and yet are blamed for observing of them:
2. Or was it the teaching of them only as necessary, that procured their
blame? Nor that only, but for putting the yoke of them, upon the Disciples
necks, when Christ had taken it off, Act. 15. Gal. 5. 1 etc. 3. Unless
observing of them, and teaching them as necessary, be one and the same thing,
here are two causes of their interdiction to Christians: And if so, then I ask,
whether, if he had observed some Jewish Ceremony which did not foreshew Christ
to come, (some such there were) but significant only of some things past,
(though they had not taught it necessary) the Apostle would not have blamed
them for that, as Superstitious? or had they devised any new rites and
ceremonies, etc. would not the Apostle have blamed them for that also, as too
Superstitious?

. 32. But the Doctor gives his vote, to the old Rule; Ceremonies must be few
and wholesome. Few, for many reasons, which we approve as good. Sect. 38.39.
But then at last, in a manner grants, they may be many, if they be wholesome,
not only negatively, as harmless, but positively as tending to edification,
and then little reason to accuse them of excess: for then more probably help
devotion, then encumber it. But this is to unvote the old Rule in part: For if
they be Salubrious, wholesome, no matter how many they be: yea, "if but
negatively as harmless, which is a door wide enough to let in most of the
Romish Superstitions; what harm is there in many of them? good innocent
Ceremonies, as some have called them: But if positively for edification (as all
willworshipers think of their own inventions) is that a plea to bear men out,
in the multitude of Ceremonies, added to the worship of God? And suppose them
few and wholesome, in the judgment of men; if they be imposed as parts of
worship, or efficacious to procure grace, or Acceptance from God; are they not
too many, be they never so few, and thought never so wholesome? Lastly, who
shall be the Physician to judge of their number and salubrity? not every
private man, to be sure, Sect. 55, 56. he is not allowed to be a competent
judge, of indecency in them, much less of the number or wholesomenesse of
them. Who then? the higher powers, Sect. 55. whether Ecclesiastical or Civil,
he expresses not; But if men, or any number of men, may be competent Judges in
the worship of God, will not the Wisdom and wit of man expatiate here, and
grow wanton? One man or Church, thinks, this is very wholesome, for edification
and devotion; another as wise as he, will add another, till the Church have a
yoke put upon her neck, as heavy, or heavier than the Jews. Who knows not
the multitude of wholesome Ceremonies of Rome, came in at this door.

. 33. This question of a competent Judge in such matters, is the matter to be
resolved, because the Doctor makes so many distinctions about these wholesome
Ceremonies, Sect. 42.
that vulgar wits are not capable of them: You distinguish of such Acts,
wherein that excess is supposed to be: that they are either ordinable, fit, or
proper to that end, the service of God, or inordinable, unfit, etc. What
ordinary man (who yet has a Conscience to be satisfied in the worship of God)
is capable of these distinctions? He confesses there are great store
inordinable, unfit, unproper, of these in the Church of Rome? Yet they are not
of the Doctors opinion; but think them all, both fit and necessary. But yet he
has a salve for such. In this case, though any one may be a Nimiety, and that
a fault, yet still this not the fault of Superstition; but rather of folly and
vanity, etc. And I pray what is Superstition, but folly and vanity, in the
worship of God? Are not Idols and all false worship called vanities, and folly?
many such like things ye do; Mar. 7, 8, 9. full well ye reject the
Commandment of God that ye may keep your own Tradition: In vain do they
worship me. Let the Doctor show his dislike of such, as he will, yet if men may
be Judges, what are fit for number and wholesomness, every after-comer will
think himself as wise, as he that went before, till they have loaded the
Christian above the Jew. Besides, as the learned Chamier well observes; there
may be many mischiefs in a few, if the Authority to institute them be in the
Church, or any man, or men: For suppose they be but few now, yet we must
consider, how many they may be hereafter; seeing the Authority is given to
every succeeding Church or Pope, to constitute ceremonies or ecclesiastical
laws, as they shall think fit; and so the yoke never certain, but always
growing; as experience tells us: To pass this: if Superstition be so named,
because it is Super statutum, above the Statute Law of worship; or because it
is an Excess of services added to the worship of God; certainly these unfit,
improper Ceremonies may well be deemed such, Sect. 43.
and the Doctor need not grudge the child the name of Superstition. As for
those that charge such trifles, (they are to the Doctor, belike, but trifles)
with the title of Superstition, and then extend it to those things which have
no such fault, and so run the circle. Let them for me, see how to get out. I
only still say, what ever deserves the name of Superstition, is a Nimiety and
Excess in Religion; and what ever is an Excess in Religion, is Superstition:
Let Us hear wherein the Doctor is pleased to place it.

. Sect. 45.
34. The placing of more virtue in some things, than either naturally, or by
the rule of the word, or in the estimation of purer ages of the Church, may be
thought to belong to them: as in the cross, etc. We spoke something in
general to this, Sect. ^4.
but now we shall assume, of all those Ceremonies of the Church of Rome,
unfit, improper, etc. and of all superadded parts of worship what ever; They do
place more virtue in them, than either naturally, or by the rule of the word
belongs to them; ergo they are Superstitious. The Assumption I prove thus: They
place in them virtue to please God by them, to procure more acceptance from
God, and his blessing upon them; which neither naturally, nor by the rule of
the word, the institution of God, they have in them: ergo. more might be added,
but I forbear.

But what means the Doctor to add, to his disjunction, or in the estimation
of purer ages of the Church? Had the purer ages of the Church (after the
Apostles) any power to put virtue into things, which they had not, either
naturally, or by the Rule of Gods word? If he denies this, the addition was
superfluous: If he affirm it, he begges the question; For we say, the purest
Church has no Authority in matters of Religion, to put virtue or efficacy
into them, but God only, in Nature, or by his institution, in the word: Or if
any, the Purest Church, shall take upon her to do it, I shall make bold to
add the Doctors words, in part. The doing of such, is either groundless, and
then it is folly; or else it fastens some promise on Christ, which he has not
made in the Gospel. And what is that but a lie, and an Addition to the word: a
Nimiety, or excess of Religion, as he calls it, that is, sinful Superstition,
and that would impure the purest Church.

. 35. The Nimiety must be an excess of fear, or being afraid of God, when we
need not; as thinking our selves bound, when God neither commands, nor forbids;
absteining religiously, etc. We take what he grants, this is one kind of
Superstition, (as we noted above in stating of the question, at Sect. 7.) but
not the only; there are many more. And I like the Doctors reason well, here;
because such a man adds to the Commands of Christ (as the former to the
promises) annexed to the Christian Religion, those things which belong not to
it, and so is an exceeder in the fear and service of God, etc. And this is
Superstition. Sect 47. And this he confesses is a culpable and criminous
excess, not in doing what God commands not (for that may be innocent enough)
but in affirming God to command or forbid, what he does not, etc. True, in
things left indifferent and free by God, he is not guilty of this kind of
Superstition; if he do them, or abstain. But yet he may, of another kind: that
is, if he place more virtue in them, (in doing or abstaining) than either
naturally or by the rule of the word, is due to them, (as he said before.) But
in matter of worship it is not so; For there, it is a Nimiety and excess, to
do what God has not commanded, as we have often said.

. 36. When as he concludes, That this way of dogmatizing; Sect. 47: 48.
or imposing as necessary such things as the Law of Christ has not made
necessary, is the special and only kind of Superstition, which he believes,
any kind of Protestants to be guilty of; it is a great mistake. For 1. he
granted another kind. Sect. 45. In placing more virtue in things, than
naturally, or by the rule of the word, belongs to them. 2. All Willworship
devised by men, and added as parts of Gods worship, has been proved to be an
Excess in Religion, and so Superstition; besides the rest, which we have noted
above. As for his addition, of observing ominous, inauspicious events, unluckie
days, etc. they fall under his first kind of Superstition, Sect. 45. Placing
anl putting more Virtue in them than God in Nature, or by his Institution has
put into them. Which though they be not properly Excesses of the Christian
Religion, (being common to Heathens, and not properly worship) yet are they
Excesses in Christians, that use them, and a kind of Superstition, call it
Religious, or Civil, as he pleases.

. 37. And now we are come to another consideration, of the last way, that he
supposes, may be called Superstition; and that is, Because men place holiness
in some observances, amongst us, Sest. 49
which (what ever may be said of it in thes^^) in hypothesi or application to
the particular cases, is generally very false, or impertinent. We shall
consider what he says for it.

. 38. 1. He asks, what is meant by holiness? real inherent holiness, or
only separation from common uses? The latter only, we would answer:
Separation to holy, from common uses: that is, such a separation to holy uses,
that the things may no more be alienated to common uses: this is proper
holiness.

. 39. But then the only inquiry will be, By whom, and how far any thing, is
thus separated; either by1 Christ, Sest. 51.
or2 the Apostles, or the3 universal Church, in purest ages, or the4
particular Church (and rulers thereof) wherein we live, or 5 if free, by our
own Act. He tells us here, by whom the separation is made, but not a word, how
far, or in what difference, a thing separated, by the several Authors, is made
holy, or whither it be equal in all. That a thing made holy, by a private
person, is equally holy with that, done by a particular Church; and so upwards,
that of the general Church, equally with that of the Apostles, and that of the
Apostles equal with that of Christ himself: this would first have been
resolved. He seems to make the difference of the Holiness, from their
several Seperations, to be only graduall; but we suppose it to be
specificall, at least, between the Separation of God or Christ, and that of
the Church (to say nothing yet of the Apostles.) And withal, we say, we
desire a proof, that any but God, or Christ, or his Apostles guided by his
Spirit, can make any thing properly Holy: Now to make a thing properly holy, is
not, to separate it only to holy uses from common, (as the Doctor defines it.
Sect. 50.) but to make it, 1. a part of worship, 2. to be efficatious to work
and convey holiness, to him that rightly uses it: 3. to make the service and
person, more accepted. 4. To give a ground of expectation of a Blessing, upon
some promise thereof in the word, etc. In this sense none but God alone, can
Sanctify and Separate any thing, to Holy, from common uses. All which the
Doctor either takes no notice of, or takes as granted, others may do. For he
says, The way to discern, whither we exceed (that is, be Superstitious) in any
of those before, and place more holiness than is due to them, is to account them
holy, in a degree proportioned to the authority of him that separated them. We
shall speak something considerable to this. For 1. The difference between
Christ and his Apostles, and the rest is not well, or not distinctly laid out:
For the Apostles authority was also Divine, by Christ's commission. 2. Then it
follows, that the Authority of the Apostles, in their Separation, differed
much from that of the Universal Church, and the rest, as much as Divine and
humane. 3. The precept or example of the Universal Church (as it cannot be
demonstrated ever to have concurred, in making any thing holy, there never
having been an Oecumenicall Council, truly so called, so) cannot make any
thing properly holy, with the respects before said; but only improperly, with
respect to holy things or duties, so made by God: e. g. In times or places
separated, by God or men; there is this difference (besides those above) that
Time or Place, sanctified by God, require holy duties, to till them up. But
separated by men, they are to wait upon Holy duties. In the first, the duties
are appointed for the Time, or Places sake: In the other, the time or place,
are appointed for the Duties sake: but this is to make any Time, or any Place,
when and where those duties are performed, as holy as all other times or
places, that is, the one no more Holy than another. We therefore deny, that
either the Universal Church, or any particular Church, or any private man, can
make any thing properly Holy: which the Doctor does not at all undertake to
prove. Only thus he goes on; If that which is thus separated, be by Christ
himself, I shall count it holy in that degree, and my self obliged by virtue
of Divine precept, and so of the rest; and then I offend not. But 1. I suppose
the Doctor will account himself obliged to an Apostolical institution, by
Divine precept also: I had thought Apostolical Hoe thought and said so, in his
first Quere, sect. 22. The Apostles Doctrines and institutions, are so owned by
Christ himself, that what is truly A postolicall, is immediately and by
necessary consequence, divine and infallible Sect. 52.
and Divine, had been both one with the Doctor; but I perceive he makes them
differ, and yet differences Apostolical from Ecclesiastical; as if the
Apostles were neither Divine, nor Humane; but something between both. 2. By
this distinction of his, the Papists may excuse their grossest Superstition, in
placing Holiness, in things, times, places, etc. by borrowing the Doctors
answer; They may say, they account them holy, but either by the authority of
the general, or particular Church of Rome, and that is no Superstion, says
he, say they.

. 40. But he goes on, If my voluntary oblation, I perform as a voluntary
oblation, and only expect that God that has promised to accept such, will
accept it; all this while I am not blameworthy. But 1. what means he by his
voluntary oblation? If his willingness in tendering commanded worship, he
cannot do that worship aright, without respect to the command: If voluntary
worship of his own, without a command, he has no promise of acceptance, and so
can expect none. Yea, he may rather expect, or fear punishment, threatened in
the 2d. Commandment, to such worship. 2. The Dr. may remember, that Sect. 45.
he blamed that for Superstition, when virtue is placed in some things, which
naturally, or by the rule of the word, does not belong to them, and gives the
reason Sect, 46. because that adds to the promises of the Gospel, and fastens
a promise on Christ which he has not made. Now how will he free himself from
Superstition, in his voluntary oblation, that is, his uncommanded worship,
unless he can show a promise in the Gospel, for such acceptance. For
naturally there is no such Virtue in a Willworship; and Institution he cannot
plead; for that were a Contradiction; viderit ipse. But he says still; In
case of resolution, and vow, add that respect in my performance, which is due
to such, and I am not blameworthy. If he mean, that his resolution and vow,
makes his voluntary oblation more accepted; he adds to his Superstition, to
second Willworship with a vow, and so profanes his vow, as well as the worship
of God. If he mean, that his vow is a further degree of worship; what will he
answer to the Papists, who make vows of single life, and poverty, etc. to be
a special worship of God; which he rejects. If he say, their Vows are of
things unlawful, but mine of things lawful: I grant this difference, but then
say, that in making those vows, or things vowed to be parts of the worship of
God, they both agree, and both are Superstitious.

. Sect. 53.
41. It is not then the straining of these any degree above their rank, as
elevating an ecclesiastical constitution into a Divine precept, etc. That
only makes him faulty, and that perhaps (says he) capable of the title of
Superstition. For if either the Church or he, place divine worship, acceptance
(more acceptance because not commanded) or more perfection, etc. in such
performances, it is, and will be Superstition still what ever they think.
Besides, in devised worship, it is not enough to free from guilt of
Superstition, to say or think, I account this or that holy, only by the
Authority of the Church, and not of Christ; For whosoever is the Author of such
Holiness, he places more in it, than God allows, and so must needs be
Superstitious.

. 42. Obj. Papists and other Superstitious persons have don so, and so the
thing is Superstitious, and must be forborne, Sol. 1. Sect. 54.
The ill use of a thing will not corrupt a thing commanded or an innocent
thing. True, but we suppose your voluntary oblation, not to be a thing
commanded, but to be a thing forbidden, as all Willworship is: and therefore to
be forborne. 2. He says, there is nothing to oblige me to abstain, from that,
which they have Superstitiously used, unless danger of being thought
Superstitious as they, or making others be so; which is not Superstition, but
scandal. To be thought Superstitious, when I may avoid it, is a wrong to my
credit; to cause others to be so, is a wrong to their Souls: But these are not
consequent of that we speak of, that is, of Willworship, which is one of the
worst kinds of Superstition; tendering that to God, as worship, which he
commanded not.

. 43. And now the Doctor may be pleased to review, and if he will recall, his
bitter, false, uncharitable conclusion, Sect. 57, 58. unbeseeming both his
piety and gravity; For now it will appear (and shall do more hereafter) that
the charge of Superstition upon some men, is no Mormo, nor yet unjust; but what
is avowed by himself and party, to be their opinion and practice; and what is
proved to be really Superstitious, according to the true Notion of the word
Superstition, amongst Reformed Orthodox Divines: which if it be not
sufficiently yet manifested, shall more fully be made good, in the following
Exercitation of Willworship.

EXERCITATION THE SECOND, OF WILL WORSHIP. WITH DOCTOR HAMOND, BY D. C.

Math. 15.8, 9. This people draws nigh unto me, with their mouth, and
honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines, the commandments of
men,

August. de consens. Evang. lib. 1. c, 18. De um sic colere oportet, quomodo
ipse se colendum praecepit. London Printed for John Wright at the sign of the
Kings Head in the Old Bayley.

OF WILL WORSHIP.
Section 1.

HAD the Reverend and learned Doctor (as it became him) distinguished the
words; either (...) in Greek, or Willworship in English, before he began his
Defense of them; we should better have been able, to judge of his Discourse
about them. For the words, in both languages, may be taken in a double sense.
1. For Voluntary, Spontaneous, or willing worship, that is willingness and
freeness, in worship commanded by God; and then they were too blame, that put
an ill notion upon them. Or 2. For worship devised by the wit, and appointed by
the will of man, as contradistinguished, to the wisdom, and will of God; and
then it was not so much the ill-Fortune (as he calls it) as the just punishment
of them, to pass under an ill notion, and to be taken for somewhat
reproveable, as well in a Christian, as in an Heathen. For the sum and scope
of the second Commandment, August. de consens. Evang. l. 1. c. 18.
in the Affirmative part, being this. God must be worshipped with his own
prescribed worship, and in the Negative part, to forbid all devised worship of
God, This is acknowledged by the Doctor: God is to be worshipped in a manner
peculiar to him, and appointed by him. Apend. on 2d. Commandment.
by the wit, or will of man. The very name of will (of man) put to worship of
God, as opposed to the will of God, the only Rule of worship, is as a brand in
the forehead of it, to characterize it, as condemnable in all.

. 2. How often, or seldom the Greek word is used in other Authors, or the
Translators of the old Testament, we shall not trouble our selves to enquire;
when the thing signified by it, (in the second sense above, in which sense the
Reverend Doctor does and must take it, or he has no Adversary,) that is,
devised and imposed worship, by the will of man, is so much decryed, and
declaimed against, in Scripture, as an high Indignity and affront, to the
Divine Majesty. This is something, little to the credit of it; That the simple
word (...), and the verb (...), are but twice a pe^ce, used in the book of
wisdom, and always in an ill notion: 2. That (...) it self, being but once
used in the New Testament: it is, (by the judgment of most Interpreters,
Protestant and Popish) taken in an ill notion, as shall appear hereafter.

. 3. What the word (...), in the place, Col. 2.23. signifies, may indeed be
gathered from the Contents: But the Reverend Doctor, seems too short, in
laying of it out: The Apostles discourse in that place, is (says he) of (...),
Doctrines of men, teaching some things to be forbidden by God, that he
forbids not. This is in part true; some false teachers might impose some
Doctrines upon their brethren, as Gods Commands, when they were not, as being
now outdated by Christ; but the scop of the Apostle is, Bez. in locus.
to dispute, in this Chapter, against the corruptions that were creeping in, in
their Christian worship; which was the use and end of those Doctrines; and to
stablish the Colossians against them: Which that it may appear, let us review
the context, from the 4. verse downwards. Thus he begins: This I say, that no
man should beguile you, with enticing words. In the Greek, they are more
significant; (...): Put upon you Sophistical Paralogismes; In locum. The word
Philosophy seems to me to be all one, with worshipping of Angels, v. 18. says
the Doctor; Superstition. Sect. 7.
probabilitate sermonis, by probable arguments, as Beza; by Rhetorical
insinuations, or sophistical subtleties, as D. Davenant, explaines it, to lead
you away from Christ. Now the Apostle goes on, to discover some of those
toiles, and ways, whereby Seducers did beguile their followers. 1.
Philosophical speculations, having a show of much wisdom; ver. 8. Beware
least any man spoil you through Philosophy; an instance whereof is given in
the 18. ver. in voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels. 2. Traditions
and Inventions of men, superadded, or continued in the worship of God; an
instance whereof is in the 20.22. ver. Why are ye subject to Ordinances, after
the Commandments, and Doctrines of men. 3. Mosaical Ceremonies, revived, after
they were abrogated by Christ: of which he speaks, ver. 16.17, His scope in
all, is to dispute against all rites and Ceremonies, obtruded upon the Church,
as parts of Divine worship, D. Daven in locum.
as necessary duties of holiness, and righteousness and as binding Conscience.
As that learned and judicious Professor, expresses it. And the Apostle opposes
this only against them, ver. 8. " They are not after Christ, but invented and
imposed by men; Not after Christ, i. e. not after the Doctrine, or Commandment
of Christ, in the Gospel; which he express^s in another phrase, ver. 19. Not
holding the head, but after the Commandments, and Doctrines of men, ver. 22.
Whence it appears, that the Reverend Doctor seems mistaken, when he says;
Where yet you must observe, he does not speak of Commands, but Doctrines, i.
e. not of the prohibition of the Magistrate, etc. but of false teachers,
imposing them as the commands of God. For the Apostle speaks expressly, these
impositions, Touch not, taste not, etc. were after the Commandments, and
Doctrines of men, ver. 22. and ver. 8. "after the Traditions of men, to worship
God, by the observation of them: The worship of God, did once consist in these
observations, and Abstinencies; and the false Teachers put them upon their
followers, as still useful to this end: Having done this, he sets an ill
Character upon those Doctrines of worship; which things have indeed a show of
wisdom, in Willworship, etc. But are after the Commandments and Doctrines of
men, not any Doctrines or Commands of Christ: and so no better, than
Willworship, etc, The Doctor seems to place the illness of this practice in
this; That they urging some abolisht ceremonies as still in force by divine
precept, should thereby deny Christ to be come in the flesh. Which though it
be true in part, yet is not all that the Apostle here intended: but this he
also adds, that they, placing the worship of God, in those observances, not
after Christ, but after the Commandments and traditions of men, did fall into
Willworship; which had a show of wisdom, but no more. For it is not only
(sinful) Willworship, to teach and observe the Old Ceremonies as parts of Gods
worship, when they are abolished; but also to invent a new way of worship (as
that of worshipping Angels was for certain ver. 18.) and to put it upon God, as
an acceptable worship.

. 4. That we have not mistaken the Doctors meaning, will appear by that which
he adds, about the difference betwixt making of positive humane Laws, in
indifferent things, and urging or teaching things for Divine commands, which
either never were commanded by God, or else are now outdated by Christ: The
Apostles discourse proceeds of the latter, etc. This is true, the Apostle has
here no reflection on the Magistrates making laws, in indifferent things: but
yet, if the Magistrate, or Church should invent and impose any new way of
worshipping God (as the Church of Rome, has done many) would not the Apostles
arguing conclude them to be Will Worship, as well as if they had urged and
taught some antiquated ceremonies to be observed, as a part of the worship of
God The Doctor grants and asserts, Sect. 3.
That if the Magistrate should teach or impose Doctrines of men, upon others,
as the Commands of God when they are not, he should thereby incur the censure
of a false teacher also; And if he should teach or impose some antiquated
worship, upon his people, though not as the command of God, would he not be a
Teacher of false worship also? As for his instance of David, who appointed the
Levites to serve from the age of 20. years, whereas God by Moses had appointed
it, but from 25. years old etc. It is first Impertinent, for he brings it as
an instance of a Magistrates power in a thing indifferent, whereas this was in
a matter of Religion, and more then so, in a matter formerly Commanded by God;
wherein, what he did, is not imitable by any Magistrate now: who has no power
to order any thing in Religion, against a former Order of God, as in the case
in hand, there was. What then may be said, for David's altering the appointment
of God (as in some other things besides? Divines do answer, that David was a
Prophet, inspired by God, or directed by some other Prophet, how to Order the
affairs of the Temple, and worship of God. And this to me is evident, by
texts of Scripture. 1 Chronicles. 28.19. All this (said David) the Lord made me to
understand in writing, by his good hand upon me, even all the works of this
pattern, which he ascribes to the Spirit of God, ver. 12, 13. and cap. 23.27.
by the last words of David, the Levites were numbered from 20 years old, of
which he says, the spirit of the Lord spoke by me, 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. But this by
the way.

. 5. The full importance of the words, ver. 22. (he says) is this; That when
those abstinencies are imposed and taught, as divine obliging precepts, this is
an abuse of them (which were otherwise innocent things) and that abuse of them
dangerous or destructive. But 1. why does he refuse our Translation of those
word, which all are to perish with the using? For the verb, from whence (...),
is derived, signifies sometimes, simply, to use. Estius in locum.
And the Civil Lawyers take Abusus, for the consuming use, ordinarily: 2.
Whither the Apostle speaks of the meats, or of those ordinances of abstaining,
both may be said to perish in the using: The meats apparently, and the
Ordinances themselves, in this sense, that whereas whilst they were under Gods
command, they were profitable to the observers; now being outdated, they perish
with the using, without any spiritual advantage. 3. There is little or nothing
in the text, to import, that they were imposed and taught by the False
Treachers, as Divine obliging precepts (though if so, that had been an abuse
of them) but rather that they were the Commandments and Doctrines of men; as
the next words following are: and herein the Doctor places the danger, Sect. 6.
as we shall see. Just as that Doctrine, ver. 18. concerning worshipping of
Angels, in a voluntary humility, etc. was the Doctrine, or command of a man
"vainly puffed up in his fleshly mind, but could not be pretended, much less
imposed as a Divine command. So the Doctrines and Traditions of the Pharisees,
were not pleaded to be the Commandments of God, but expressly called the
Commandments of men, Math. 15.9. and opposed to the Commandments of God, ver.
3.6. And in this Chapter, ver. 8. Those Doctrines are called the Traditions of
men, and rudiments of the World. 4. I would ask the Doctor, whither the placing
of the worship of God, in observation of those Ordinances of Abstinence, though
not taught nor imposed as Gods Commands, upon a man's self, or others, were not
an abuse of them, and being a self-devised Willworship, were not (...). as
destructive, as the urging them still as Gods Commands? His great mistake is,
that this was the only abuse of them, and that otherwise they were innocent
things, for so he says: which now he may see, they were not. And lastly the
following words ver. 23. seem to imply, the abuse to have been, not that they
imposed them, as Divine Commands, but as parts of Divine worship (which the
word (...) imports) in a pretended humility, and not sparing of the body, etc.
For he says, they have a show of wisdom, not as the Commands of God, but in
Willworship, etc.

. 6. Yet let us hear, wherein the Doctor, places the danger and
destructivenesse of them. That they were after the Commandments, and Doctrines
of men; which words point out that, wherein the danger does consist, to wit,
imposing on men humane Ordinances or Doctrines. Stay there a while: Then (say
I) they did not impose them as Commands of God; nor did the danger lie in that;
But I desire to know, what it was that they imposed, by those Ordinances and
Doctrines? was it not, a way of worshipping God by those Abstinencies, touch
not, etc. The abstinences they teach Sect. 7.
I think the Doctor will not deny it: For it is not to be meant of imposing of
Humane Ordinances, about indifferent things, by the Magistrate; he has
cautioned against that, Sect. 3. and 4. but of Teachers, imposing them as
Ordinances of worship, in Religion: and therein the danger did consist; because
they imposed on men, humane Ordinances and Doctrines, to worship God by. The
Doctors gloss of his own former words will now prove his own, that is,
singular, when he adds i. e. those things which though they were not commanded
by God, are yet by men affirmed, pretended and taught, (though without proof)
to be so commanded. The danger and destructivenesse rather consisted in this,
that they were but the Commandments and Doctrines of men, placing the worship
of God, in those observances, which either he never Commanded, or were now
outdated.

. 7. And now we are come to the 23. Verse; which the Doctor makes to be, A
description of the doctrines themselves, or the abstinences they teach,
abstracted from all such accidental abuse. But this may prove a mistake; for
the words rather contain a description of the reason of that danger and
destructivenesse, in them: viz. because they were no other, no better than
Willworship, with a fair pretense of Wisdom, because the Worship of God, was
lately placed in them: and they carry a great pretension of Humility, and
Selfdeniall, in abstaining from things pleasing to the body, which they thought
no doubt, would be pleasing unto God, and an acceptable service. The words
indeed may be variously rendered by Interpreters, but without any great
difficulty or difference. For the most part, they agree in the sense, though
they differ in words. And I believe the Doctors Interpretation of it, is
singular, without any precedent, either Ancient, or Modern, Protestant, or
Papist. Thus he paraphraseth the words. Which things have some true, at least
appearing notion of wisdom in them (wisdom in Scripture signifying piety) i. e.
have either some real matter of piety in them (for so (...) signifies) and
this would be more clear, if we should read, (...) in two words, thus, which
things have somewhat of piety in them, or being considered in some respect,
have piety in them, or as the Fathers rather understood it, some color, some
appearance of piety, to wit, in voluntary worship and humility, etc. But this
is a strange Liberty, in Interpreting scripture, not only that it waves the
Interpretation of all our own Translators, of all the Ancients, and even of
Papists themselves for the most part (whom this gloss would much please) but
also that he does not bring his mind to the Scripture, but strains the
Scripture to speak his sense and meaning. To examine it a little. 1. That (...)
here signifies, some real matter (what ever it does elsewhere) is gratis
dictum, and against the stream of Interpreters: Some render it Imaginem, as
Jerome; some speciem, some pretextum: And the Greek Fathers, oppose against it,
truth and power: what is it then, but a show or appearance? 2. That he renders
(...), by piety, is as strange, in this place, (however in these Proverbs, and
elsewhere, D. Davent in locum.
it may signify so) when most interpret it 1. by Wisdom: that is, a show of
some excellent doctrine, rather brought from Heaven, than found out by men.
Which to be the sense here, is most probable upon these grounds. First from the
context, ver. 8. the Apostle calls it Philosophy, and ver. 18. he says) the
Worshiper of Angels, was puffed up in his fleshly mind, that is, in a carnal
conceit of his own wisdom, in finding out that way of worship: For Superstition
and Willworship ever pretends to Wisdom, Vid. Irenaeum lib. 3. c. 2.
to be wiser than God, in prescribing his worship: and this makes it so
dangerous and destructive, that men set their wisdom against, and above Gods;
Secondly it may very well be parallel, to that place, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5, 6. where
the Wisdom of God, and men are so flatly opposed, in preaching of the Gospel.
Not with entising words of man's wisdom; but in the demonstration of the spirit
and power: the wisdom of God, etc. And this pretext of wisdom in Willworship
arises from a double ground, 1. From the fraud of Impostors, who always boast,
that their Traditions proceed from the Spirit of wisdom; as the Pharisees, and
Montanus did: 2. From the carnal minds of Superstitious men, who are much
pleased to seek for righteousness and salvation, and to put holiness in
external rites and exercises; as that learned professor, on the place, has
well observed. 3. To assert that those things (those Abstinences, as a worship
of God) have somewhat of true and real wisdom or piety in them, is a plain
begging of the question, now between us. For we say, (as almost all
Interpreters do) they have only a show of wisdom, but no truth, nor reality,
and that the Apostle condemns them as Willworship, which yet the Doctor only
denies, by asserting the contrary, but proves not. 4. what presum ption is
this, to read the words asunder, (...), for (...), contrary to all Greek
copies, and Latin Interpreters, only to make out his own gloss? And yet let
him take his choice, and read as he please; it will not advantage him at all;
for still it comes but to this, which things have (...), some show of wisdom,
or piety, not somewhat of wisdom, much less some true real matter of wisdom
in them. The Apostles scope being (as we think, and he must not beg the
contrary) not to hold out somewhat of wisdom or piety in them, but rather of
folly and impiety, as we shall show hereafter. Lastly, (as to this Section) he
leaves out the particle (...), quidem, Estius inlocum.
which is ^n extenuating particle: They have indeed a show of wisdom, but not
the truth: Or they have indeed a show of wisdom, but in Willworship and
Willhumility, etc. It Is true, Interpreters differ about the placing of the
Adversative (...). Some understand it to be understood before Willworship, as
before; some at those words (...): they have a show of wisdom, but are yet of no
price or worth. Beza.
Herome thinks the particle (...) is redundant, others think something is
wanting; thus (after the manner of the Hebrews) which things have a show of
wisdom, but not the truth. Much like that place 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of
Godliness, but denying the power of it. However, the Doctor did not well to
conceal this particle; and to render (...) by voluntary worship, having not yet
told us, what he means by it: of which anon.

. 8. That the last part of the verse, not sparing of the body, not in any
honor, to the satisfying of the flesh, is added to show, that there is
somewhat of true or pretended piety, in those former Doctrines, by the
contrariety, to that tending and filling of the flesh, which is so unlike
piety, is another gloss like the former, an assertion without proof. For the
neglecting, or punishing of the body (as the Doctor phrases it) by Abstinence
from things allowed by God, they placing the worship of God in it, has indeed
a show of pretended wisdom or piety, as preferring the worship of God, before
the belly, or body; but no truth, and is equally condemned, as a Will worship,
by the Apostle; At least, this is the question, and must not be begged.

. 9. Yet this the Doctor does: For he takes it as granted, with not a little
confidence; That this interpretation which he has given, is the most prompt,
proper, and genuine rendering of the verse, that will be met with, and thereupon
inferres, and resolves, " that there is no ill character set upon (...) or
Willworship, by the Apostle in this place, which we shall examine, when we
have heard, what in his judgment is noted by it, which is this; That voluntary
Worship, or acts of Religion, which the Hebrews call (...) Nedabah, the
Freewill-offering, which was not required of them, by any obligation of
particular law, and yet was not wont to be condemned, or suspected, but
accounted as acceptable to God: under which head, the Abstinences here spoken
of, may not unfitly be comprehended. But there is a great mistake, in
comprehending these Abstinences under the Freewill offerings. For both, the
Freewill offerings were something Positive, and these Abstinences were
Negative, rather not-offering, than offering, Touch not, taste not, etc. and
also these Abstinences were commanded by special Laws, but Freewill-offerings
(he says) were not required of them, by obligation of particular Law: This
difference is enough at present, we shall say more hereafter. And now we
attend his discourse, consisting in three things.

. 10. First (he says) he will give his reasons, for his first Assertion, That
(...) is here used in a good creditable sense, which he endeavors by 6.
Arguments, Sect. 11. Because Willworship, is here joined with two, not only
lawful, but laudable Christian virtues. Before I come to the particulars, I
cannot but note in general, that taking the word here, in a good sense, the
Doctor complies too much with Papists (most of them taking it in an ill sense)
who use to take off the force of the Objection by protestants, from this place,
(against their Willworship, in their many Traditions of worship) by answering
that it is taken here in a good sense, and that (as the Doctor does) for
voluntary Religion, Panstrat. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 5.
or worship. Which good sense, the very learned and acute Chamier professes, he
never saw, in any Interpreter of the place. Only he says, he found Justinian
the Jesuit, distinguishing the word, to signify (as the simple word, (...)
does) sometimes Superstition and Impiety, and sometimes pious and religious
worship, voluntarily undertaken; but yet, in this text, asserting it to
signify Superstition, or as Ambrose says, counterfeit Religion. But he
shakes this distinction as groundless, as we shall hear anon. And now to the
Doctors Arguments, to prove it taken in a good sense. First, because it is
joined with Humility, which being by Calvin, (a man not much regarded by the
Doctor in other things) interpreted in this place, the Reverence both of God
and men, is no doubt a Christian virtue, and cannot defame the Willworship, to
which it is associated, etc. But by his favor, In affectataque humilitate,
quae affectatae Religioni conjuncta est. Estius in locum.
Humility here, is not that true and laudable Christian virtue, but a mere
counterfeit, a pretended Humility, fit for a pretended Willworship: For the
first words, signifying only a show, not any reality of wisdom, exemplifies
it, first by Willworship (which is affected Religion, having a show of piety,
but not the substance) and then in an affected and counterfeit Humility. And
the Doctor may remember, the same word is used in the 18. ver. Sect. 23.
of which he says hereafter, it was an impious kind of Mistaken Humility, and
why may not this be so too? being both alike pretended, in a Will Worship, not
commanded by God, but invented and imposed by men; And sure such impious
mistaken Humility, is no Christian, or laudable virtue: But of that place more
anon.

2. The next Pretense for his good sense, is, Because it is joined with
punishing or not sparing, or (as Calvin) mortifying the body; which as an act
of selfdenyall, cannot be acceptable to Christ, and as a species of of Revenge,
2 Cor. 11.7. In praepostera and in solita quadam obstinenti^ and afflicticne
corporis. ibid.
Will deserve to be numbered among the effects of godly sorrow. But to this we
say again, there may be such a punishing, not sparing, or mortifying of the
body, and selfdenyall, which has a show of wisdom or piety, but is not only a
counterfeit, but an impious mistaken mortification, or selfdenyall, viz. when
this punishing of the body, is made a part of the worship of God. What thinks
the Doctor of the Baalites launcing and cutting themselves? What of all the
Romish ridiculous pennances, pilgrimages, fastings, etc. Does he not justify
them, in all their Wilworships, and that from this text? have they not a great
show of Wisdom, Piety, Devotion? of selfdenyall, and mortyfication of the body?
are these acceptable to Christ: Are their selfpunishments, worthy to be numbered
with that Revenge, or accounted among the effects of godly sorrow? If he say,
not, I ask, what is it that makes them impious mistaken mortification, etc. He
cannot say, because they held those forth as Commands of God, for that they
deny: then it must be, because they make them worships of God; Voluntary
worship, yet that the Doctor, endeavors to justify, by this text. I shut up
this thus; These two virtues (as he calls them) are there so far from
justifying Willworship, to which they are associated, that they fare the worse
for it, and are made unchristian, and impious by its company. For though
Humility and selfdenyall, in the commanded worship of God, be excellent
virtues; yet when they precede, or accompany the constitution of false, that is
devised Willworship, nothing is more impious and abominable to God.

. 12. The second reason of his good sense, is this, Because these Doctrines are
here said, in respect of the VVillworship, to have (...), somewhat of wisdom or
piety in them: which somevvhat, if real, then it is parallel to that of 1 Timothy
4.8. bodily exercise is a little profitable still, or profitable for a little.
Before I add the rest, I say to this: 1. This somewhat real matter of
wisdom, in willworship, in the judgment of most Interpreters, is nothing but
a mere show and appearance, and indeed real folly and impiety, as was
manifested on Sect. 7. And for the parallel place, the gloss corrupts the text;
when he thus expounds it, Bodily exercise profits a little, or for a little.
For the Apostle opposing bodily exercise, to Godliness, which is profitable to
all things, he means, that such bodily exercise, (abstinence from marriage, and
meats) made a service or worship of God, is profitable for nothing, or rather
(by a (...)) is hurtful and abominable; and so is the VVillvvorship in this
place. The Doctor seems to place the illness of those bodily exercises, in
this; when they are taught as necessary, to the defaming of marriage and meats,
he means, I suppose, necessary, as commanded by God: But (say I) if they taught
them (as they did, some of them) only as Commands of men, not necessary, no
defaming marriage, etc. but as an acceptable worship of God; would the Doctor
say, they were not hurtful, and abominable, but profitable a little? I think
not; or if he do, he justifies some Papists, who make them a special worship
of God, not necessary, etc. But we said before, the words here signify only a
show of wisdom or piety. Then says he, the argument will be still of
validity, For can any thing be said to have so much as a show of Wisdom, in
respect of VVillworship in it, if that Wilworship pass confessedly, either for
foolish, or impious? Let him ask all Interpreters, who render the words, a
show of VVisdome in Superstition or affected Religion, how this can be: But I
cannot but wonder at the Doctors question: For cannot a thing have a show of
wisdom or piety, which is confessedly foolish or impious? and if so, may it
not be so in respect of the VVillworship in it? The Baalites launcing and
cuttiug themselves in their devotions, had it not (to them at least) a show of
piety, and yet that worship was confessedly impious? say the like of the
Papists whipping themselves, and other ridiculous and heathenish pennances;
have they not to them and others of their superstition, a great show of
wisdom, and piety, and yet to us, are confessedly foolish and impious? Cannot,
does not the doctrine of False teachers hold out a show of wisdom and piety,
in their worship, and yet to all orthodox known to be foolish and impious. Does
not on the one side, the Wisdom of God in the Gospel, hold out a show of
foolishness to natural wise men, and yet is the wisdom and power of God, to
salvation? on the other, does not, is not the wisdom and piety of Hypocrites
and Idolaters, folly and impiety to God. But (says the Dr.) Can any thing be
represented to me, as having so much as a show of piety, in respect of rage or
lust discernible in it? This comparison is ill laid; For rage and lust are for
kind confessedly wicked things. But worship may be true or false; and so as
true worship may have a show of folly to natural men; so may false (and the
refore impious) worship have a show of wisdom and piety in it, to the same
men: And the one, though it have a show of folly, yet may have none in it, but
is the very wisdom of God: So the other, though it have a show of wisdom or
piety in it, yet has none, but is both folly and impiety. Let me put it a
little more home to him: May there not be zeal (which may be nothing but rage,
(...) in Saint James) which may have a show of true zeal, and yet be nothing
but rage and madness? must I needs suppose somewhat really of wisdom or piety,
in that passion, or else it cannot have so much as a show of wisdom, or piety?
To conclude may not the Devil himself transfer himself into (and so have a
show of) an Angel of light? Vid. Append.
and must I suppose necessarily, that there is somewhat really of light or
piety in him, or else cannot he have so much, as a show of them?

To conclude this argument, let the Doctor note it once for all, that the words
are not; Which things have a show of wisdom and of Willworship, and of Humility
and of not sparing the body. For then, as wisdom was good, and taken in a good
sense, so might the rest be taken; and the fault be, that they had only an
appearance, not the truth or power; but the words are, They have a show of
wisdom, in Willworship, and in Humility, etc. And if they were faulty, because
they had only a show of wisdom, they will be more faulty, that they had but a
show of piety, or worship, or Humility. So that, the words, (...), etc. do no
more enforce us to take it in a good sense, than, when we say, Judas made a
show of love to his Master, in his traitorous kiss; and the Papists devotion,
in bowing to stocks and Images. In both which sayings, love in the one, and
devotion in the others, are taken in a good sense; but the ones traitorous
kiss, and others bowing to Images, are not at all taken in any better sense
for that show, or appearance of love and devotion; but are rather so much the
worse. And this shall suffice for his second reason.

. 13. A third reason is, because the Greek fathers, though they interpret (...)
only of appearance, as contrary to power and truth, yet they paraphrase
Willworship, etc, by words, of Good Savor: (...), etc. First this is well that
the Greek Fathers agree with us (or we with them) in exposition of the first
words. a show (not as he, somewhat real) of wisdom, or piety: Nay they
expressly oppose against it, power and truth: and can that which has neither
power nor truth, in the worship of God, be taken in a good sense? And do not
the Fathers imply as much: Chrysostom. (...): He seems to be Religious, but is
not so: Oecumenious; (...), pretending (as Hypocrites) Religion in worship, and
is there any gooduesse in Hypocrifie? But the interpreter of Clemens Alex.
renders the word, in Religion: Why? is not Religion it self of various senses?
The simple word (...), often signifies false Religion, and superstition, as
well as true. But the composition, makes it worse, and alters the sense,
because it adds the work of man's Will to Worship, which is abominable to God:
Do not all Idolaters pretend wisdom, in their Inventions, Piety in their
Devotions? Ps. 106.39 Went a whor^ng with itheir own inventions.
and does not this pretense make it more odions to God, as taking upon them to
be wiser than he, and more Devout than he requires? But why did not the Doctor
tell us, how the Latin Fathers, and other later Interpreters render the word?
Ambr. Simulatam Religionem, Hierom, Superstitionem, Theodoret, (a Greek Father)
(...), pro^eo quodest proprium decretum introducunt, non legis scopum and
institutum sequuntur. Vulgar latin (and all Popish Commentators take it
thence) Superstitionem, Salmeron, and Estius, omnem affectatam and voluntariam
Religionem significat, cum quis fingit sibi cultum ex cerebro suo, volens
videri Religiosus. It signifies all affected and voluntary Religion, which a
man forges out of his own brain, willing to seem Religious. I spare our own
Divines. In locum.
In a word, Estius gives this interpretation of the words, out of Augustine and
Thomas: Which have a show of wisdom, not true, but such as is placed in
Superstition and humility, which is false wisdom. I leave all to the Doctors
consideration.

. 14. The fourth reason, because by this way that very obscure place, may be
conveniently understood, which has posed so many: viz. That such Doctrines are
destructive of Christian Religion in obtruding humane out daded judaicall
constitutions, for Divine precepts; as still obliging, and yet in some respects
have piety in them, at least a show of it, to wit, in Willworship, etc. To
which Interpretation of his, enough has been spoken before, on Sect. 7. but we
add. First, for my part, I have not observed amongst Interpreters, any such
difficulty or obscurity of this text: I dare say, the Doctors exposition makes
the greatest obscurity that ever I met with: They generally agree in the sense
of the words, taking them in an ill sense; Only himself and some Papists,
Bellarmin, and and some others, take them in a good sense.

2. That such Doctrines as he speaks of, are destructive to Christian
Religion; is true, but not such only; nor are such only meant in his text,
viz. outdated Judicial constitutions obtruded for Divine precepts, still
obliging; but all Humane Institutions of worship though never known before, are
equally destructive to Religion; though they pretend not to be Divine precepts
or prescriptions: The Apostle therefore brands them as destructive, because
they are but Willworship, not because they are outdated, or Judicial: And
those as well as these, however they may have a show of wisdom and piety, to
carnal hearts, yet to understanding Christians, have not in any respect, piety
in them, but are vain and sinful Inventions of men, that is, Willworship.

. Vide Append. ad sect 15.
15. A fifth reason, because Hesichius renders the word by (...) voluntary
Worship, the very notion of (...) the (...), voluntary gifts or offerings; as
(...), is (...), etc. That he renders the word so, is no advantage to his
cause, for the words may both signify the same thing, viz. Will-devised
worship, in an ill sense. And though it be true, that in humane Authors, the
derivatives, and compounds of this word, do express the Freewillingnesse of
the person; as (...), etc. yet that will not help the Doctor, Any thing else
beside what God has commanded. Sect. 16.
who does not understand (...) with respect to the willingness of the person,
in a commanded worship of God; but voluntary Worship, that is, Worship not
Commanded by God, but offered to him by the Freewill of man, as we shall see
anon. And it is as true; that though the word be taken in other Authors for
voluntary worship, and be but once used in the Scripture: yet the spirit of
God, the Master of all languages, does use words, (whither once or oftener) in a
sense clearly different from other Authors, (and I think the Doctor makes use
somewhere of such a Criticism) As for instance, the Greek word (...) in
Scripture is taken for a vice, Ephesians. 5.4. which in Aristotle is used for a
virtue. And the word (...), is so taken in the best judgments. Nor is this,
the notion of the (...), used by the 72. for Freewill-offerings, voluntary
gifts, etc. as shall appear in a place more convenient.

. 16.6. Reason it self assures us, that things done in the service of God, are
not therefore ill, because they are spontaneous, but on the other side, when a
man shall out of a pious affection do any thing else beside what God has
commanded by any particular precept, this action of his, is to be accounted so
much more commendable and acceptable to God, etc. Before we go any further, we
must remember the distinction of voluntary worship, which the Doctor confounds;
voluntary may be applied to worship in a double sense; First as it is a a
modus, or manner of worship; that is, it is willingly performed, and so it is
necessary, not arbitrary, attendant upon worship: or secondly, Voluntarium
cultum, non m^ndatum a deo, sed illi oblatum humama voluntate, etc. D. Davent
in loc. Deus amat cultorem voluntarium, sed odit cultum voluntarium. I Would. vide
plura:
as voluntary implies the efficient cause constituting the worship, viz. the
Will of man, as contradistinguished to the Will of God. In short, there is a
vast difference, between voluntary worship, and Willworship; the one
presupposes the Worship commanded by God, the other constitutes the worship,
out of his own brain. Now its true, Worship of God commanded, is not ill,
because it is spontaneous, that is willingly performed, but ill, if it be not
spontaneous or voluntary; because in all service, God requires the Will or
heart: But in worship devised by man, the Will bears all the blame, and the
more voluntary, in that sense, the more abominable: and herein, (contrary to
what the Dr. here asserts) the voluntarinesse of it, defames the worship, it
being the (...), the irregularity of it, and imputable to the action it self;
Math. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, etc. Again, when a man out of pious
affection, shall do any thing beside what God has commanded (in such worship
as is invented by himself or other men) this action is to be accounted, so
much more (not commandable or acceptable, as the Doctor, but) odious and
abominable to God. But the Doctor adds; there being no universal negative in
Scripture, prohibiting all things and degrees of things, besides what are in
particular commanded. Yes, we say, there is an universal negative prohibition
in the Scripture (beside special ones) in the second Commandment, forbidding
all things, that is, all worship, and all degrees of that worship, besides what
are particularly commanded. Hence it follows, that there is no general
command or doctrine of the Gospel (which is another caution of the Doctors) to
which such Willworship can hold conformity. Nor will it salve the matter, which
he brings from an Heathen, or the Apocrypha, that piety is one of those
virtues, which have such a compass, that the larger they be, they are so much
more commendable, and the more spontaneous, the more acceptable. For this must
be meant only of commanded worship, and the degrees or intention, of the Will
in those services: therein, you cannot exceed the general command, to love the
Lord (and so to serve him) with all thy heart and strength; But in Willworship,
that is, of men's own devising, the first step in it, and least degree of it,
is far from commendation, or acceptance; because you are so far from being
obliged to to do it, that you are strictly obliged not to do it.

. 17. We have done with the first undertaking; we are coming to his next, to
point at the cause of the mistake of the sense of the word; which he supposes
to be.

. 18. 1. That the vulgar Latin renders it Superstition; annd Calvin and Jerome
follow them; whereas the truth is, (...), is the word for Superstition: and
(...) signifies it no more than (...), which is used in a good sense. But might
not a man say as much for (...) it self, as the Doctor says for (...), and
bring the Doctor himself for his voucher? Does not he tell us, in his other
Tract, that (...) sometimes is taken in a good sense. Of Superstition. Sect. 22.
For Religion or worship of God without any mark set upon it of true or false,
and rendered by Superstition, Religion, etc. It seems then, (...), and
Superstitio are both taken in a good sense, sometimes for Religion, and in a
bad sense other times, and so (...), and they agree in an ill sense sometimes,
and this helps not at all; to vindicate the word.

Secondly, (...) it self is taken sometimes in an ill sense, (as the Doctor
knows) as well as a good; why then may they not both equally signify
Superstition? especially when applied to false or mendevised worship.

3. The worshipers of Angels cannot be freed from the crime of Superstition
says he.
Superstition or Will Worship, is more general than (...), that's but one
species of Superstition, if taken (as the word imports) for Daemonum cultus;
But all false worship is Superstition: and the rather, because it is
Spontaneous, voluntary, that is, Will-devised Worship. Lets try the next.

. 19. Another reason is, that among the Jews, all was to be done according to
the pattern in the Mount: so some have resolved, that no rite or circumstance,
no degree of worship may be used in the Christian Church, but what has Christ's
example or particular precept to authorize it, etc. But the Doctor much
mistakes the question himself, while he is laboring to show others mistakes.

For 1. it is not about a rite or circumstance or degree of worship commanded,
(as Time, Place, Gesture, not prescribed) but of the Worship it self; and
herein we say we are equal with the Jews, and all the people of the world; we
may not vary from the prescription on the mount, in the second Commandment, to
constitute any part of worship; but what we have the authority of Christ for,
in the new Testament. And we do say, and that truly, that what ever worship is
not commanded by Christ, or justified by his example, is censurable under the
title of Willworship, though otherwise in respect of the matter of it, it would
not be censurable. And we have for our ground, both the second Commandment in
the old, and this text (beside others) in the New Testament to justify our
assertion.

2. That saying of the Doctor, We may justly conclude those actions
justifiable, because not prohibited, and not only so, but also acceptable and
the more acceptable for the voluntarinesse, etc. is most unsound; For in
worship, it will not justify a man, that it is not prohibited (in particular)
but rather, it is condemned, because it is not commanded; though all
VVillworship (in our sense) is prohibited, as we often said. As for his gloss
upon the words of Photius, I say little; I only note, that he seems to make
it a fault, to sit at the readding of the Gospel, which the Ecclesiastical
Canons did not command; and yet makes it no fault, to add a VVillworship of a
man's own, which (...), the Divine lawdoth forbid.

. 20. A third ground of the abuse of the word, is the affinity of the 18 verse
of this Chapter; and so the VVilworship here, is guilty of all the same
charges, etc. The distance pretended between them, is so little, that they may
easily be reconciled; That respecting a new devised worship only, and this the
reviving of an old and outdated worship, as we shall see. I only observe what
Maimonides observed, That the error that brought the greatest part of Idolatry
into the world, was, that men conceived and taught, that vain worships and
superstitions, were the will and pleasure of God; that is, pleasing and
acceptable unto God. This is exemplified abundantly in the Church of Rome,
whose Superstitions are grounded upon this, that they are very pleasing to God;
let the Dr. take heed, he do not justify, or imitate them.

21. But he goes about to make good this distance between the verses; only he
forbears not, to weaken his following proofs by the Interpretation of Clem.
Alex. who compounding these verses, reads thus. Let no man beguile you of your
reward in VVillworship of Humility, and in neglecting of the body, etc. and
makes it very certain, that he understood them both as one, and very
suspicious, that they are at no such distance, as the Doctor pretends.

. 22. You must (says he) observe these two things. 1. That the words are not
in the Original (...), but (...), etc. Now the word (...) has with the 70. a
sense, which ancient writers have not taken notice of. viz. pleasing himself
in worshipping of Angels, or proud of a feigned humility as Hierome, etc. But
this comes to nothing; for 1. the sense is the same, whither the words be
joined, or parted: a voluntary humility, as the ground of that worship of
Angels: They (good men) were so modest and humble, they would not rush upon
God immediately (though he Command it, and so it was gross pride, masked with
humility) but they would go by Angels, as Media tours: Is not this the very
plea of Papists at this day, for their, Invocation of Angels and Saints?

2. Take (...) asunder, and for pleasing or delighting, In iis quae non vidit
(...) festuosus incedens. Eras. in v. 18. Qui jussa tantum facit nihil agit non
vulgar qui transcendit praecepta, hic Angelus est etc. hic Deum sibi obaeratum
facit D. Davent in loc. Vid. Append. s. 23.
or proud of a feigned Humility: Did not these false teachers do the same? were
they not much pleased, delighted, proud of this new-old-revived worship, as
applauding their own wisdom in the Invention of this worship, and their
Humility, and devotion, in their abstinence from such meats, etc. Did not
Jeroboam (think you) much please himself, and pride himself, in his politic
Religion of the Golden Calves? Are not all Superstitious and Idolatrous
worshipers, delighted with their VVillworship, especially the first Devisers of
it? insulting not over others only, as more Religions then they. Lo, I thank
thee, I am not as other men, etc. I fast twice a week, etc. But also over God
himself, as making him beholden to them, by going beyond what he commands?

3. Why may not (...) in Composition, signify the same with (...), asunder?
self-pleasing worship or Religion; His Clemens, joins them together, (...);
will worship of Humility. That is observable, which Estius notes, on the place,
the 18. verse; that (...) is referred to (...) also; volens in humilitate, i.
affectans humilitatem, and volens in Religione Angelorum, 1. affectans, etc. a
voluntary humility, that is, affecting humility and a voluntary worshipping of
Angels, that is, affecting that worship: For this the Apostle signifies, in
the 23. ver. by composition of the words, in (...): And it is as if he had
said, let no man beguile you, (...): In Will-humility and willworship of
Angels; which the Doctor allows us to call, Willworship and an unlawful
thing, a mistaken impious Humility, Sect. 23. and Sect. 20. That crime of
Superstition. And so in this ver. 23. we may apply (...), to all the 3.
Willworship, Estius in loc.
Wil-Humility and Wilpunishing of the body: And it is very reasonable to
conceive, that though it was praeter usum Greci sermonis, so to place the word
(...), yet the Spirit of God so directed Saint Paul; to separate the words in
the 18. verse, and to join them in the 23. on purpose, that he might teach
us, not only (what Estius observes) that (...) in the 18. ver. was to be
referred to (...) also; but to teach us also, how to understand (...) in the
23. ver. viz. for Worship affected, and sinful; and humility affected, etc. as
well as in the 18. verse:: that is, in the Doctors own words, unlawful,
Superstitions, impious, worship and Humility.

. 23. But he adds the second observation, The will or delight in the 18. ver.
is fastened on unlawful things, viz. worshipping of Angels, etc. including an
impious mistaken kind of Humility, (call this will worship, or what you please)
yet is it true still, that voluntary worship, where the matter is perfectly
lawful, not forbidden, nay, approved by a general command, is far enough from
having any tincture of ill in it, But 1. its true, the matter of these two
worships differ, considered in themselves, but they differ not at all, in the
unlawfullness, one being more expressly forbidden in the first Commandment,
the other by consequence, or more generally in the second. It is no more
lawful, to revive a Worship, which God has laid aside, than it is to begin a
worship, which God never Commanded or forbad: 2. The matter of this worship in
the 23. verse, was about meats which God had given precepts of before, but now
voided: the matter was in it self lawful: they did but worship God in a
lawful matter, why does the Apostle blame them for this? (as he does) if the
Doctors assertion be true, That voluntary worship, where the matter is lawful,
is far enough from any tincture of ill? It will not help him to say, if not
forbidden, nay approved by a general precept, for let the matter be never so
lawful, yet in Willworship it cannot have any general precept to approve it,
Being the willing of that, which God forbids: his own words in this sect.
but rather has general and particular precepts to forbid and condemn it. The
Doctor still deludes us, by the sense of voluntary worship; which if he take
for willingness in commanded worship, we shall not contend with him; but if
for worship invented and constituted by the will of man, (as he does) not only
we, but God himself observes it.

. 24. The 4. occasion of the mistake, he says, is the use the word (...), in
Epiphanius, attributed to the Pharisees. This is generally taken in an ill
notion, yet finds a patron of the Doctor, to defend, or palliate it: I shall
not much labor about it; but truly, if (...) hear so ill, the addition of
(...) superfluous, to it, will make it here worse. Lets hear what he says for
it.

. 25.1. If it were a denotation of some ill, it would not prejudice (...), for
the addition in the middle, noting Superfluity, (perhaps, some unlawful, or
luxuriant matter, Supervacaneam religionem sponte assumptum, sive affectatam
si^ Estius in ver. 18
taken into that worship either prohibited object, or noxious, at least
burthenous ceremonies in number or quality) might turn that into evil, which
the voluntariness, or uncommandednesse of them, were not able to do. To this I
say; The superfluity of them consisted not only, in the number, burden,
quality, of them; but even in the voluntary constitution of them, as worship of
God; For so our Savior charges them, " In vain do they worship me, etc. and
that's Superfluous worship: And the uncommandednesse (if there were nothing
else) in a matter of worship, turns them into ill, and abominable. For this
is the sum of the second Commandment, God must be worshipped, with his own
prescribed worship; and consequently, all uncommanded worship is superfluous,
vain and sinful; as has often been said.

. 26. "But secondly he says, I cannot acknowledge that word is taken by
Epiphan: in an ill sense: though that was the Interpretation of their name;
they might be ill men, yet the name might not signify any ill thing. etc. who
would think the Pharisees should find an advocate, being such notorious
Hypocrites? The very name of their Religion, argues them proud, vain,
superfluous worshipers, both for number, and burden of their ridiculous
ceremonies, and all of their own devising, as parts of worship; and yet the
word cannot be yielded to be taken in an ill notion: Epiphan: is describing the
Heresy of the Pharisees (awing others) and calls it (...), as offending, both
in Willworship of their own devising, and also in the abundance and
superfluity of them; and yet the word has no ill notion: let him enjoy his own
sense of it: Sure, our Savior would not have condemned them so often, so
sharply, for both these, if the words might have had a good sense or notion.

. 27. The truth is, the main crime of the Pharisees, was their censorious proud
despising of other men, whom they thought not so godly as themselves. This is
another of the Doctors mistakes. Their main crime was that, which was the
occasion of that despising of other men, Math. 23.
which was their Hypocrisy, which was cloaked with their mancle of Devotion,
in the Superfluity and Supererogation of their Traditions, and Willworship,
which making them proud (as all Willworshipers are, with a show of wisdom) they
despised others, whom they thought less godly than themselves: Luke 18. 1.
trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised others. Their
strictness in some particulars, neglected by others, was not so much in
moralls, as in ceremonialls of their own devising, in washings and Fastings,
and placing the worship of God in them: as Papists do, and therefore the Doctor
mistakes, when he applies that Scripture to these, " these things ought you to
have done, for there it meant of things commanded by God; but then their fault
was, that they were exact in the least commands, and loose in far greater
matters: Or if they ought to have done their own Traditions, why does our
Savior so bewoe them, so often, for doing of them? And yet the Doctor says,
Their strictness in Religion, is far from being it self any ill character or
blemish upon their voluntary religious performances, wherein their superlative
strictness did consist: Their Superlative strictness consisted chiefly in the
observation of their own Traditions, even to the avoiding of the Commandments
of God by them, Mat. 15, 6.
and does this leave no blemish upon them? I say no more, let him consider it.

. 28. His third answer for the Pharisees is; That the Original of them, was
from the Hasidaei, so called for their excess of charity, (...)
and voluntary performances above what the Law required of them, and so
differed from the Karraim, who did that only which was commanded by the Law,
etc. Its likely to be so: But when he says, these were called (...), which he
renders, such as in their obedience performed voluntarily some things, which
the Law required not, and so differed from the Karaei. I know not what he
means: for the word signifies only, such as were devoted voluntarily, or (as
our English Translation reads it) wellminded to the Law that is the Law of God:
But I think his intention is, to fetch hence a color for the Pharisees and his
own voluntary worship: whereas the word (...) signifies only the freeness or
willingness of the Soul, in the prescribed worship of God: For all was to be
voluntary, and willing service; and Gods people, a willing people. Ps. 110,
Populus volunta tum.
Now in this sense the Karaej, were also (...) wellminded, or voluntarily
devoted to the Law: But this word, differs much from (...), a will-worshiper,
which signifies rather (as we have proved) a Deviser of worship, than one
voluntary in gods prescribed worship: Or if he take (...), for those Freewill
offerings allowed in the Law, as the 70. render the word: yet in this sense,
the Karaej, I doubt not; were as well devoted, and as wellminded to the Law, as
the Hasidaej: The difference then between them, was rather in this, that the
one, in their worship, kept close to the Rules of the Law; the others would
Supererogate and devise worship, above or beside the Law: and so the Doctor, I
think, intends it; Now I believe, our Savior would not have blamed the
Pharisees for their Freewill offerings, or voluntary performances in that
sense, because the Law allowed and approved them: but he blames them, for their
Traditions, their voluntary worship devised by themselves; which the Doctor
calls, their voluntary performances above the Law. And therefore, however
Scaliger may justify the Karaei for doing only what was commanded of them. He
can never justify the Hasidaei for doing more (in the worship of God) than was
commanded them, unless he will condemn our Savior for condemning them: For
the rest of the discourse in this Section, I shall only note the progress of
Willworship. At first the Hasidaei, (afterward Pharisees) were only men
devoted, or well minded to the Law, it seems, in words of Charity; Afterward,
they (finding applanse from men) they began to perform some voluntary worship,
which the Law required not. Then at last, their (...) (as Scaliger says) came
to be (...), their voluntary worship came to be necessary, and formed into
precepts; Then from pious men (The sidem) they became Dogmatizers, laying
obligations upon all to do as they did; and not being obeyed, discriminated
themselves from all others, as the only obedient servants of God; and so
called themselves Pharisees, etc. The application is very easy, and very
observable in the new Pharisees of Rome, Testivalls of the Church, sect. 16. ad
fin.
and all Superstitious Willworshipers, as shall be exemplified in Hypothesi, in
another place. Yet the Doctor thinks by this means to vindicate the word
(...), from any ill sense; as they that offended not in the Wilworship, but in
Dogmatizing; which yet is not imported in the word; and he does indeed condemn
it; we may justify the (...), but not the (...): But I desire to know whether
Willworship, I mean, devised worship, in any one man, be not sinful, though he
never come to Dogmatize, or lay obligations upon others, to do as he does? But
the mischief is, that Willworship, if not ever, yet commonly, ends in
Dogmatizing: especially in men, of place, and piety, and learning, as is
evident in the Histories of the Church, in all ages and places.

. 29, And now we are come to the third part of his undertaking, concerning
those voluntary oblations under the Law, to which he has often paralelled his
voluntary Worship, by him understood in this text, sect. 9. etc. wherein he
propounds three observations.

But before we deal with those observations in particular, we shall lay down
the Nature of a Freewill-offering, and show wherein the Formality of it did
consist, which the Doctor has neglected to do. A Freewill-offering may be so
called, two ways.

1. In regard of the Freewillingnesse of the mind of the offerer; Exodus 35.29.
every man and woman brought a willing offering, whom their heart made willing
to bring it, etc. But this Willingness of the person, was required, in the
most necessary commanded worship, yea every act of obedience to God, in both
Tables, is to be done most willingly, by that general Law, Thou shall love the
Lord with all thy Heart, etc. And in this sense, the Offering or worship is
presupposed to be commanded by God: This not here meant.

2. With respect to some Liberty or free choice, De Repub. Habr. l. 4. c. 17:
left to the Will of the offerer, as standing in contradiction to such
offerings or worship, as they were bound to, either by Law, or vow, as Sigonius
well observes. (Though there was not so great a difference between a vow, and a
Freewilloffering, but that, an offering by vow, might be called a
Freewilloffering, in this sense, that it was free to vow, See Ainsw. in Levit.
7.16.
or not to vow; though it was not free to pay, or not to pay it; And the same
may be said of a Freewilloffering that it was not free t^ offer it or not, when
once it was promised, though it was free to promise or not to promise it: The
difference seems only graduall, a vow being a more solemn promise, and a
Freewilloffering, voluntarily promised, (as the Hebrews express it) being a
less solemn vow. But this by the way) The Liberty left to the offerer, was of
2, sorts.

1. Libertas specificationis (as they call it) when it was left to his choice,
what he would offer of several things allowed by the Law: Not an unlimited
liberty, to offer what kind of things he would, a Bear, or a Lion, of beasts,
or a Vulture or Eagle of Fowls; But only some one or other of those three
kinds of beasts. Beeves, Goats, Sheep, Ainsw. on Levit. 1.2.
or of those two kind of fowls prescribed by the Law, Pigeons, or Turtles:
(which choice, was allowed in other sorts of offerings, as well as, in those
that were properly called Freewillofferings, which is observable.) And this
Liberty was not (I say) unbounded, but much limited, as in these particulars.

1. It was not left free to any man, in the least kind, to appoint the kind of
his own offering, not appointed by God; but to choose amongst things instituted
by God, that which did best agree, with his own condition, and ability: So that
God, it seems, had respect to the several abilities of men; some were rich,
and able to offer a greater sacrifice; a Sheep, or a Goat, or a Bullock: others
were poor, and had not any of those, and then allowed to offer a pair of
Pigeons, etc. which is the express reason, of that Law, Levit. 12.6.8. A lamb
was required for an offering for a woman's Purification, with one Pigeon, or a
Turtle dove: But if not able to bring a Lamb, then two Turtles, or two Pigeons:
To teach us, that if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to what
he has, not what he has not. The widows two mites accepted, etc.

2. There was a general Law, that the Freest offerings, were to be, according
to the measure of Gods blessing, Deuteronomy, 16.10. whence it had been a sin for
any Israelite, whom God had plentifully blessed, to offer a pair of Pigeons
instead of a Bullock, upon his own mere pleasure. And this law, is renewed in
the Gospel, Act. 11: 19. See sect. 32.
1 Cor. 16.2. Let every man lay by him in store, as God has prospered him,
viz. for the poor.

3. Where the choice was allowed, and taken, as of a Goat, or a Sheep, etc.
that choice was no formal worship; but a circumstance in a commanded worship.

4. It had not been lawful in that choice, for the Priests to require, or them
to offer necessarily one of them, as a more special worship, than the other:
e. g. when liberty was left, to offer a Sheep or a Goat; a Pigeon or a Turtle
dove, etc. to make it necessary to offer a Sheep, and unlawful to offer a
Goat, etc. had been plain Willworship; So that here is little liberty left to
man, to appoint a worship of Ged, which he commanded not; and the Formality of
a Freewill offering, did not consist in that.

5. In that liberty of choice, yet God gave rules and directions, how they
should be ordered, Levit. 22.20. not maimed or blemished, etc. And that of the
first kind of liberty; there is another.

2. Libertas exercitij; when it was left free, in some cases, for a man to
offer, or not to offer; beyond what was positively required by the Law: If thou will offer a Nedabah, a Freewilloffering, etc. And herein only, or chiefly
stands the Formality of a Freewilloffering, as contradistinguished to those
offerings which were commanded by the Law: and the Leviticallnesse or
Ceremoniality of them, seems to lie here, whereby they are now abolished: God
did than by special allowance, give liberty for Freewilofferings, not only in
regard of the Specification of the offering, of this or that kind, but also the
Liberty of exercise, to offer or not to offer, excepting in cases commanded: If
they offered not, they did not sin, and if they offered, it was the more
accepted. And of this kind of Freewillofferings the Doctor intends his
discourse; when he paralells his voluntary oblations with those of the Law, and
calls them voluntary worship, not commanded by God, and yet accepted by him; as
shall appear in considering his three observations, beginning at sect. 29.

1. That they were a part of the worship and service of God, when they were
performed, and therefore avowed by those general precepts, which respect that
worship of his. To which we say, 1. That they were parts of the worship of God,
in those times, is true, not (or not only) because they were avowed by the
general precepts, which respected that worship; but rather, because they were
allowed by special Proviso's of God himself. For, I ask; If God had not
declared his allowance (befides his directions and regulations) of them,
whither it had been lawful for the Jews, to have offered them or no? I
believe not, as shall be showed anon: 2. I desire it may be observed, that
those voluntary oblations, were a part of Gods worship: so, by proportion, must
his volunluntary oblations in the Gospel, be accounted a part of worship, not
rites, or degrees, or circumstances of worship: Let it be remembered against
anon.

2. That they were not particularly commanded, by any particular command of
Gods Law, but were left to every man's liberty (except in case of a vow, which
yet it was free for him not to make) and so were spontaneous, not necessary.
This is also true in part, they had no particular command, but they had a
special allowance of God, which was as good, and aequivalent to a command,
though not to necessitate the doing, yet to authorize them being done:
otherwise men were at liberty; But why does, he except a vow? I conceive,
because if a man had vowed, it was now necessary for him to perform it; but so,
if he had devoted a freewill offering, it was not free for him, to withold it:
There is a Law, Levit. 27.13. that if he would offer to change his oblation,
he must add a sift part more to it.

3. There is a Law, Levit. 22.20. not to offer them mained, or blemished,
whence appears they were voluntary, and yet allowed and accepted. They were to
be offered, because allowed, and because allowed, therefore accepted, not
because they were voluntary only. Bur what will the Doctor infer from all
this? That he cannot see, why there may not be somewhat in Christianity, of the
same constitution also, voluntary, and not particularly imposed, and yet
allowed by, and acceptable to God. This inference, I fear, has toomuch of the
(...) spoken of in the text, a show of Wisdom, but neither substance, power,
nor truth, in it: For this plausible argument has deceived Papists, into an
(...), an abundant superfluity of willworship, it was so in the old Testt:
therefore it may be so in the New: There was an High Priest over all, ergo there
must be an universal B. now: They had their sacrifices then, so must the Church
now; In a word, thus Bellarm argues, in a case near ours, if not the same;
vows and freewiliofferings were part of the worship of God then, therefore
they are so now: And this seems reasonable to the Doctor in the present case:
He cannot see, but there may be somewhat of the same constitution now, Chamier
T. 3. l. 20.7. c. 5. s. 25.754. Chemint. Exodus A. 3. p. 50.
etc. When as Divines resolve against them, that the worship of God then, was
far different from the Worship of the Gospel; 1. And conclude the contrary, it
rather follows, they are not parts of worship now; because that Levitical
worship is abolished, therefore we must have a certain and special word in the
new Testament, to make any thing a part of worship, whence his second inference
is like the former; He cannot see, why he that does any such thing, may not be
called (...), and the oblation or action it self, (...). He may, we grant, be
so called, a Will-worshiper, not a God-worshiper; and the oblation, Willworship
(in an ill sense) not a worship of God; as wanting Truth, command, or allowance
of the New Testament, which those had in the Old: Yet, we shall not stick to
grant, that whatsoever may, by the Doctrine of the Gospel, appear to be
acceptable to Christ, and yet is not commanded, by any particular command; or
which is commanded for the act, but not for the specification of it, to time,
or place, or degree. For this first is certain, that no worship (mark that,
we speak of Worship) is acceptable to Christ, which he has not commanded;
either in particular, or by general allowance. 2. Our question is, not about
circumstances, of time, place, or degree, of worship commanded; but about
voluntary worship (as he calls it Willworship, (as we) devised by men
themselves. Now his Instances will be easily answered.

. 30. God commanded not David to build him a Temple, nor to make tender of that
service, 2 Samuel 7.5. Yet David's intention in that design, though exceeding Gods
Command, is very acceptable to God; 1 King. 8.18. This is one of Bellarmines
arguments, for their Religious vows; and its fully answered by learned Chamier
thus: 1. Vbi super.
This was in the time of the Law or before Christ; but the times of the Gospel
give no such allowance; Freewill-offerings were then allowed, it appears not,
they are so now: 2. God does not absolutely deny, that he had Commanded, but
says, he had not Commanded it to David, or any before him, not because he
would not have it done, but because not yet, and therefore foretells that
Solomon should build it. 3. The house that David would build, was not to be a
part of worship properly, but by accident, as it serves for the Commodity and
convenience of the worshipers: no more than the House of Obededom, or the place
where David settled the Arc and Tabernacle before, was a part of worship, or
our Churches now; God had said by Moses, that he would choose a place for
himself to dwell in; and then, when he had chosen and sanctified it, it was a
part of that legal worship: David had read this, and thought, that time was
now at hand, he therefore prepares materials for the House; but could not make
it a part of worship, without Gods command: and then it is nothing to our
present question. It was only a circumstance of worship, not any part of
worship.

2. The instance of Saint Paul, not taking hire of the Corinthians, when he
might, and calling it matter of boasting, etc. is as little to the purpose, if
not less; for it is not in a matter of Worship, but an action of common life
(as himself speaks) yet it is also a mistake, to call it a (...) a free will
offering, when it was a due debt: For so Chamier answers Bellarm. objecting
this place for works of counsails, as they call them: And he proves it by a
distinstion, that he did that which was above or beside the general command,
or allowance, That they that preached the Gospel should live of the Gospel,
but not above what he was bound to do, by a special call, from the
circumstance of time and place: for he was bound, not only to Preach the
Gospel, but also to take heed that he did nothing to hinder the success:
which he confirms from the words of the Apostle there, 1 Cor. 9.18. That I make
the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel.
But to abuse his power, is to sin: which he had done, if he had received his
hire to the hindering of the Gospel. His glorying and boasting therefore, was,
in respect to the general command, not to the special occasion: It was
therefore no Freewill offering.

. 31. The like may be answered for the other instance: He might (says he) have
abstained from going up to Jerusalem, Act. 21. a Prophet told him, that bonds
expected him there, ver. 11. and in that case to fly was justifiable, by Math
10.23. yet Paul would needs go up, ver. 13. that was his (...) again. Some
answer, this was an Instinct or Heroical motion of the Spirit, (which the
Doctor discourses against, Sect. 35. etc.) but we need not that help, It is
enough to answer as before; By the general allowance; Paul might have fled,
(for there is no command, whereby Preachers are bound, to be bound, beaten,
stoned) but yet, if he should have refused to suffer with the retarding of the
Gospel, he had surely sinned, and so, this was no Freewilloffering, neither.

. 32. The next of works of mercy, that though they be commanded in general,
yet the quantum, how much every rich man should set apart, is not defined, etc.
May be answered by what is said before in part, viz. that it is not the
question, which is, of worship, not of actions of civil life: But we add;

1. It may be said, that the question is not of the degree of an Act of
obedience, commanded, as Almsegiving is, but of the Act it self, if not
commanded now allowed in special, or in general.

2. Sect. 42. see pract. catech. p. 141. 2. Edit.
The Doctor himself confesses its possible for a man to offend (in charity)
either in too prodigal a giving, against prudence, or in too parsimonious
sparing, against piety. But then, may it not be said, there is some middle
rule, that binds men, from both the excess and the defect? which if it be
resolved on, there is a debt, and no (...) no Freewill offering: Besides, in
his section, the Doctor says, that there was a proportion, among the Jews,
which they were obliged to, which was called their Righteousness, which
performed, satisfied the obligation of the Law, and that which exceeded, was
abundance or excellency of goodness, or mercy. True, there was a proportion
set, by a special Law, (least men should give nothing) but there was also a
general Law, to give according to Gods prospering of them, See practic.
Catech. 2. Edit. Deuteronomy. 16.10.17.
and their ability; as 1 Cor. 16.2. cited by the Doctor, as an apointment of
Saint Paul, and so obliging, to which, if we add, the circumstance of time and
place, and persons, in regard of Necessities of the poor; there will be little
cause to think or boast of a (...), a Freewill offering, but it may prove a due
debt, and, and sin, if it be not done.

. 33, 34. As for his Instance of prayer, for the manner, Orall, or mental,
public or private; the frequencie, etc. we answer very briefly; Prayer is no
doubt a part of worship, commanded by God, and therefore is so far, to the
question; but as for the manner, Orall, or Mental, with such and such gestures
of body; for time when, how often, etc. (except any of these be by God himself
commanded in special;) they are not to be accounted properly worship, but
circumstances, Rites, etc. and Worship, left to the liberty of every person;
and so again, though they be Free, yet are not parts of worship: For these
being helps unto worship, or testifications of inward or outward worship, if a
man should make any one way necessary, or any one of them, more holy and
Religious, in themselves, or more efficacious, to himself, or more acceptable
to God; no doubt it would be in him, Willworship; because God has left them
free and indifferent; and nothing makes them worship but Gods Command: Now the
Doctor must again be remembered, that he defends voluntary worship; not
voluntariness in prescribed worship (which is necessary as we have again said)
but worship devised by the wit, or constituted by the Will of man; and not
commanded by God. Which if we will maintain to be lawful, and place the
worship of God in them, or pleasing of God by them; I know not, how he will
avoid compliance with Papists; who have made many worships of God, which he
never commanded, as caelibate or single life; pennances, pilgrimages, set
hours of prayer, and innumerable such things, and are condemned by our
Divines, as the greatest Willworshipers, and Idolaters, in the world.

And whereas the Doctor says, Sect. 34. concerning frequent prayer (as 7.
times a day, etc.) The matter of it is commanded, to wit, prayer, but not the
frequent reiterating of it daily. If he mean it, of the particular number, of
seven times a day, its true: but if in general, of frequent prayer, and that
every day, it is against the very scope of the text, pray continually: and so
will prove a debt, and not a (...) Freewill offering. Himself seems to
expound it, by twice a day, morning and evening, at least, and says that a
Christian now may do well to improve it in public and private to six or seven
times a day. But I think, the sense of the precept, pray continually, has
respect to the frequent necessities and occasions of men, every day, and binds
men to pray so often as need shall be, with ejaculatory prayer at least; and then
again, it is a debt, and no (...), Nedabah, no voluntary oblation.

. 39. We wave the 4. following Sections, after the 34. because we wave that
answer, which in them, the Doctor disputes against, But we cannot let pass,
what he adds about the difference, between a Precept, and grace, which he
makes to be very great.

1. In that the precept belongs to all, the grace to none but him that has it
(and not obliging him neither, unless the matter of it, be sub praecepto all
ready, and he obliged to it, by some other command.) The difference between a
Precept, and a Grace, is granted; but that a Grace should not oblige, unless
the matter be commanded him, by some other command, is not true. For Grace
given, being a Talent, is given on purpose to improve, as well as a precept;
This is clear as in 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit, is given to
every one, to profit withal, and in 1 Pet. 5.10. So in the Parable of the
Talents, the scope whereof is, That whatever Talent any man is be-trusted with,
the intention of the Doner is, that he should improve it, to his advantage,
though he lay no command particularly upon him: And the not using of it, is
punished severely: Take him, and cast him, etc. for he acknowledges his Lord
did expect the improvement; I knew, etc. what is the second difference?

2. Because it is the design of a precept, to lay an obligation, and that sub
periculo animae, if not obeyed; but of grace not so, but only to strengthen
and incline, which he that makes use of, as he should, is promised a reward,
etc. This is strange Divinity: Does God give Grace only to strengthen and
incline, and leave men free to use it, or not use it? so grace might be given
in vain: But does not Saint Math. say, Take him and cast him into utter
darkness, for not using his Talent? and is he not threatened with loss of his
Talent, for not using it? and is not that a punishment for some sin? yes, but
its clear by Saint Luke, 19.13. that there was a precept of occupying; to which
the punishment was apportioned, True, but had here been no such particular
precept, yet the Gift it self employed that duty of employment, and therefore
Matthew leaves that out; And there he acknowledges presently, I acknowledge,
that the bringing God no rereturn of all his grace, is a great and a damning
sin. That's true, say I, when he gives any grace, (though he say nothing) even
by the Law of Creation, whereby the rational Creature is bound to be
subservient to the glory of his Creator: But this last grant, he in a manner,
takes away again in the next words; But then, that comes not home, to to prove
it a sin, to omit the doing of any one particular, in that degree, which Gods
grace enables me to do; there being no obligation ad semper, or ad gradum; to
do it always, or in such a degree. But surely, as grace it self, so any
measure or degree of grace (being a Talent also) requires a proportionable
return, to that degree.

The Lord, in the parable expected an increase of of one Talent, for his one
Talent, as well as two, for two, and five for five; and he was punished as well
for not improving his one, to two, as for bringing in no increase; And if he
that had received five Talents, had brought in the increase but of two, I
believe he had heard of it from his Lord, and been Chidden, if not punished
for it. Though it be true also, that there is no Obligation ad semper, yet
semper, as opportunity is offered; Gal. 6.10. As, as long, as much, while we
have opportunity, lets do good, etc. and so the degree of the grace, binds to a
graduall improvement: To whom more is given, of him more is required, is
express Scripture; And this expression of the Doctor, that there is only an
obligation ad speciem, not ad gradum, that is, that the thing be done, for
kind, not to the degree of Grace received Savours too much of the Romish gloss,
to say no more.

. 40.41. Object. Prudence will require us to do that which is fittest to be
done, and so nothing is free, etc. He answers, That every man is not bound
under pain of sin, to be prudent, or pious, or merciful, in such a degree,
etc. Truly every man is bound to be prudent, to that degree of prudence; which
he lost by sin; and every man is bound to be pious, in the highest degree; the
Law requires perfection of holiness, (say we) and the Gospel requires yet
Greater perfection, (says he; pract. catech. 2d. Edit. p. 94, 95.) and every
man is bound to be merciful to his ability, as our Heavenly Father is
merciful, (which sure is the highest degree) though every man be not bound to
the same degree, of mercy, with other men; because every man has not, either
the same measure, of abilities, or the same opportunities. But these supposed,
as a man in extreme need, and my abilities considered, I am bound to give so
much as will supply his need; and to give less, were neither, prudent, nor
pious, what ever it were to give more

. 42. And here he confesses, Its possible to offend against prudence in too
prodigal a giving, and in too parsimonious, against piety; but yet would evade
the decision of the just proportion, two ways.

1. The possibility and danger of such faults in the extremes, proves not the
unlawfulness or necessity of any other degree within those extremes, but
allows a latitude, within which a man may be more or less merciful still, and
yet prudent too. To which I say, Virtue (and Charity is such a virtue) consists
in a middle point between two extremes; therefore, if it swerve from that
point to either extreme, it is more or less a fault, though not observed,
perhaps not observable by men, yet justly punishable, by a righteous God. And
in strict and rigorous Justice, in such deviations, a man will be found
neither merciful, nor prudent, but he says,

2. Though prudential considerations do direct, yet do they not always
command, or lay obligations upon us, and therefore still compatible with
voluntary oblations. Yes, Prudence it self being a virtue, in our created
nature; then certainly it commanded, and obliged to do what was fittest; and so
it does still; that what is short of the Rule, by our imprudence, is a fault,
though pardonable by Grace.

Sect. 43.44. Another objection he starts, from hence. That prudence, knowing
the greatest perfection, to be most gloriously rewarded, would advise and bind
a man to aspire to perfection, and not to content himself with any thing but
the best. This seems at first sight, to touch upon the mercenarie, or
meritorious way of Romanists; and we should not have framed such an objection:
For there being a twofold perfection, the one of Grace, or holiness, the
other of Glory; true Prudence looks first at the perfection of Holiness, and
by the by, or secondarily at the perfection of Glory: leaving that to God;
though God is pleased to give us this help to provoke us to perfection of
holiness. Now when prudence looks first and primarily at perfection of Glory,
it seems misplaced. For true Prudence should first look at the command of God,
and the beauty of Holiness, and should advise us, to seek that first, and for
it self: Not to look at Glory, to make us Holy, but at Holiness to make us
glorious: And this is true prudence indeed, which advises a man to do the best
to arrive at the perfection of Grace, upon the command of God, etc. But let us
consider his answers.

1. Though prudence do advise one to this, yet does it not lay any command,
which has power of obliging, so as not to obey it, will be presently sinful,
etc. What Prudence does he mean? If it be a carnal Prudence (for it is no
better) advising only, or first, to look at the perfection of Glory, that
indeed does not lay any obligation upon us. But if it be true divine Prudence,
looking at the perfection of Virtue, required by the commands of God, it does
lay strong obligations upon us; so as if we obey it not it is sinful. Nor
does it thereby cease to be prudentiall, because of that command, which makes
it necessary, but is prudentially necessary.

2. He says, Though it is prudent to use those means which may advance us
highest in glory, and perfection will do that, yet 'twill not always be
prudence to undertake the way of perfection, because that being an high steep,
may be also a dangerous way; every man cannot receive it, etc. What perfection
does he mean will be dangerous to undertake as a steep way, etc.? The
perfection of Virtue, or Holiness required in the Commandments of Law, and
Gospel? Sure that, though it be steep and high, yet it is no dangerous way at
all; but the most safe, peaceable, and easiest way, if the Word may be
believed. But I guess by that phrase, Every man cannot receive it, that he
means it of the Romish caelibate, * or Virginity, or Martyrdom, the rather
because he adds, For him that cannot overcome the difficulties to resolve upon
the course, Which is not commanded, any but looked on as the greatest degree of
perfection.
may perhaps be precipitious, etc. That is, every man has not that gift, and
for him to undertake that way (of perfection) may be dangerous, and
precipitious indeed. Now to undertake the way of perfection in Holiness,
cannot be dangerous to any, but is the duty of all, and every man may receive
it, that in sincerity looks after it, at least to acceptance. And then that
which he adds is as strange: Quaer. of Divorse sect 36. It may be a duty
sometimes not to aspire to some perfection. Sect. 45.
That in the undertaking of the way of perfection, even the precept of God may
interpose sometimes, and trase us, and make it unlawful for us to aspire to
the most perfect state. I pray does the precept of God interpose at any time,
or (as he speaks) trase us in the way of perfection in Holiness? Do Gods
precepts cross one another in that way of perfection? Or rather is not perfect
obedience to the precepts of God holiness and perfection it self? Does Gods
precept make it, unlawful for us to aspire to the most perfect state, which
calls us to it? What strange Divinity is this! But hear him speak, and explain
himself. As if the discharge of a duty of our calling should await us on one
side, and an opportunity of martyrdom, on the other side, then in that case
obedience is better then that richest Sacrifice, as in Cyprians case, etc. By
this its evident, he means not the perfection of Holiness according to the
Commandments of God, but a conceited perfection of martyrdom as Papists do:
But does God call all men, at all times to martyrdom? Is there any command for
all men to be Martyrs? Yet there is a command for all men to obey God, to be
perfectly holy; and no command of God interposes, or trases us in this: Yea if
a man, ambitious of Martyrdom (his highest perfection) should with neglect of
obedience to a command of God, in discharge, but of a duty of his calling,
aspire to Martyrdom, he would scarce deserve the name of a Martyr, but of
something else which I will not name. See pract. Cat. 2 Edit. page 98.
The Providence of God indeed may interpose and trase us, (by denying us
abilities to do more good, or leaving corruptions to buffet us, that we cannot
do the good we would (as Paul complains) for reasons best known to himself.
But then, who knows not, That if there be a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to what a man has, not according to what he has not. And his reward
(for ought we know) may be accordingly; equal with those that have more
abilities and opportunities of doing good, or suffering ill for Christ. Any
man, all men, are always bound to aspire to the perfection of Holiness, not
to the perfecto n of Martyrdom. And now we go on.

. 46. But then thirdly, the perfection we are commanded by Christ to aspire to,
is capable of degrees; as in charity or mercifulness, Mat. 5.48. for so
expounded Luke 6.36. We shall grant him this, and yet deny his voluntary
oblations still: For we say, there are degrees of, or rather to perfection
here; upon condition, that he will grant, that every degree, even the highest,
is required by the Law of God, and what is short of the highest degree, is so
far culpable; and then it will follow, that there can be no (...), no
voluntary oblation. Epist. 62.
Let him hear St. Hierom speak our sense in this, Charitas quae non potest
augeri, etc. Charity which cannot be increased as long as man lives here, is
in no man; but as long as it may be increased; truly what is less then it ought
to be, In vitio est.
is faulty; by which faultiness there is no just man on earth, who does good,
and sins not. It is spoken in general of the Love of God and man, but
easily applied to Charity strictly so called. But the Doctor goes on. If there
be any perfection attainable in this life, 'twill be capable of degrees, and
growth also. Whether he be of their mind who hold perfection possible in this
life, I cannot say; but this I can say, he speaks contradictions; for
perfection admits of no degrees or growth; but rather degrees and growth in
Grace (which are often commanded) argue there is no perfection in this life. The
Doctor goes on still. If it be not acquirable in this life, it is certainly not
under Evangelicall precept now; that light and supportable burden, that rod of
not grievous, i. e. possible commands, which Christ, and his grace brought into
the world. This is strong and strange confidence. For first, does not the Law
it self (still in force under the Gospel) require perfect obedience of
Christians? Did it not ever do so, as the eternal Rule of righteousness, and
ever will? All Orthodox Divines have ever thought so, and maintained it against
the Church of Rome. Only, the Doctor, I find, is of the same judgment with
them of Rome, and sticks not to charge the Law, before Christ, with
Imperfection. Hear his words, Pract. Catech. page 94. 2 Edit. The Law and
Commandments of God had before some mixture of Imperfection, but now have
none; had before some vacuities in them, which now are filled up by Christ.
Viderit ipse.

But secondly, does not the Gospel also call for the perfection of the Law? Be
ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, are the words of Christ
himself. But least he should say, as here sect. 46. by perfection there, is
meant mercifulness (though that will little advantage him) what says he to
that place of the Gospel, Be ye holy, as he is holy? 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Which is
taken out of the Law, Levi. 11.44. etc. Did God then or the Gospel now, call
men to an Imperfect Holiness and set God for their pattern? But does not the
Doctor himself say, Christ came to perfect the Law? in his Catech: supra page
93. and to set it higher, than before? And yet is he certain and confident,
perfection is not under evangelicall precept now? And is not that perfection,
the perfection of the Law still, though it be required by the Gospel? Does not
the Gospel call for the perfection of the Law, upon new motives, of the
Covenant of Grace, of the merits and death of Christ? upon indeed better
terms; as mediating, that if we do (as we do) fall short of that perfection,
yet we shall be pardoned all our failings.

And thirdly, I ask, what it is, that makes the burden of Christ, (requiring
the same, (the Doctor says, greater) perfection of the Law) so light and
supportable, the rod of command, so not grievous, i. e. possible? let the
Doctor answer the question himself, in his Catech. p. 95. It is made lighter
by Christ, 1. in taking off that unprofitable burden of ceremonies, that had
nothing good in them (durius dictum.) 2. in respect of the damning power of
every least sin or breach under the first covenant, to the believer taken away
in the second. 3. in regard of greater strength given. etc. It was was not then
the lightness of the burden, that he required not perfect Holiness under
the Gospel (for that he does 2 Cor. 7.1.) but that, if by repentance, faith
and love, we sincerely endeavor after perfection, first our failings shall be
pardond, 2. and our weak works accepted, through Christ our mediator. But
still perfection, (though not acquirable here) is under Evangelicall precept.

. 47. Whence it is apparent, that that so plausible assertion (as the Doctor
calls i^) that every one is bound to do that which is best, is not (as he)
disernibly false; but visibly true; For if the Law (and Gospel also) require
perfection of obedience, in every Commandment, then it bends every man to do
that which is best: And his arguments against it, are little worth: 1. For the
Testimony of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.28. He that gives in marriage does well,
and he that gives not, does better. For 1. well and better there, do not
refer to moral goodness but Worldly good, in regard of the prevention of
troubles, in those afflicted, and persecuting times: Marriage is, in it self,
a thing indifferent, and so it may be good for some to marry, and better for
others not to marry.

2. The matter is, how the parties are disposed; If a man have not the gift of
continence, it is not only good, but necessary for him to marry, rather than
to burn: and here it cannot be said, he that gives not in marriage does
better, but does very ill. If a man had the gift of continency, is was better,
(in those times, for the present distress, ver. 26.) not to marry, but still
with respect to Worldly, not moral good. 2. His other argument is as weak;
That the best, being a superlative, supposes the positive to be good; whereas
if all were bound to do that which is best, that which were only good, were
evil; for so is whatever comes short of what we are bound to do. I hope the
Doctor will not deny, but works done by faith are Good; and yet, that they are
not perfect in this life, that is, come short of what we are bound to do, if
not by the Law, yet by the Gospel; will he now say, Greg. moral. lib. 9. c. 1.
they are evil? They are called good, by the indulgence, and acceptance of
God, in Christ; but not strictly or perfectly good: He knows who said it.
Omnis humana justitia injustitia esse convincitur, si districte judicetur.

. 48. The next Objection raised by him, helps to confirm the former answer;
The Law is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, soul,
strength, etc. which implies the utmost endeavor, to perfection, in all our
obedience, He answers, that that phrase denotes only two things. Sect. 49.
1. sincerity of his love of God, as opposed to partial divided love or
service: 2. the loving him above all other things, not admitting any thing in
competition with him, or in such a degree of love. But we say, 1. That both
these are noted and required, we grant but deny that only these are required,
for the Law required perfect love. ( John 4.18. perfect love, casts out fear)
such as was in Adam in innocence; but that is not acquirable in this life: 2.
If he will but grant, that whatever comes short of that perfection, needs (and
by grace shall find) a pardon, and be accepted; we contend no farther. For let
it be supposed, yea granted, that sincere love, is capable of degrees, whither
in the same man, at several times, or two men at the same time, and so both
obey the precept; yet those degrees, and growth of love, do argue love not to
be perfect (and so not strictly answerable to the Law) and so far faulty, in
vitio, as Hierome said, above.

But what shall we say to that Instance of Christ himself; Who, we know, did
never fail, in performing what was man's duty in prayer, or any thing else; yet
at that time, Luke 22.24. prayed more earnestly; which is a demonstrative
evidence, that the lower degree, is not necessarily sinful, when the higher is
acceptable to God, which when it is granted, there will be no doubt but these
freewill-offerings, will be reconcilable with that command; and so room left
for a voluntary oblation. But we say to this, This example of Christ, will not
be applyable to men. For Christ was above the Law; and did more then the Law
required, and did supererogate in many his actions, and passions; and so in the
degree of affection in prayer, if not in the prayer it self: But men are so
far from Supererogating by any service, prayer, or the like; that they fall
many degrees short of what is required, and due from them, and so no room left
for freewil-offerings, as his voluntary oblations. Yet thus much that example
holds forth, that greater pressures and necessities, call for enlargement of
affections not as voluntary oblations, but as duties.

. 50. etc. And this makes way for another, and the last objection; That if it
be granted possible for a Christian, to do more, than he is commanded, he may
then supererogate, as the Romanists teach. The Doctor answers.

1. There is a great difference, between offering, that a man may do more than
is commanded; and that, he may do something which is not commanded; The former
supposes him to have done all commanded, the second may be true, though in
most, or all other things, he have been wanting: He asserts the second, not
the first. But is not this new distinction, sometimes coincident? For he that
does somewhat not commanded; does also something more, than is commanded;
though he has not in other things, done all that is commanded; and so to do
more than is commanded, does not suppose, he has done all that is commanded,
nor do the Romanists suppose that, to their supererogation: so this is nothing.

2. He adds therefore; That to supererogate supposes one of these two things,
1. either that the person spoken of, has paid God all that is due to him, by
way of perfect obedience, i. e. has never sinned; or 2. that having sinned,
and so become a debtor, he has paid that debt, by satisfaction, by doing
something else, which may satisfy God, for his sin, etc.

But the first of these, is just the same with the former, that by doing more
than was commanded, was supposed, he had done all that was commanded, i. e.
had never sinned; which himself says, the Romanists do not own. It must then
lie all upon the second, that though he have sinned, yet he may satisfy God so
for his sin, by some other work not commanded (for duties pay no Debts, much
less supererogate) not only for himself, but also for others, ex abundanti,
etc. Now says the Doctor; from both these, the present Doctrine is free: For
the first, its true, the Doctor does not say, that the person never sinned; or
has perfect obedience; but yet this he says, (with the Romanists) that he
may do something not commanded, that is (say I) something more than is
commanded, which sounds ill, in an Orthodox ear; and yet this is that, which
the Doctor has been laboring to prove for many sections together. As for the
second, the Doctor disclaimes the Doctrine of satisfaction, and so
consequently, (so far) that of Supererogation: But yet cannot free his
doctrine from some kind of Supererogation. For, works of Supererogation, have
not their denomination, from satisfaction made by them; but they are therefore
thought to be satisfactions, because, they do something more than the Law
required; Supererogare, is as much, as, super quod erogavit lex: Yea in many
respects such works may be said to Supererogate.

First, with respect to the Law it self, when men think they have done more
than the Law required, which makes them not Supererogatorie, but Derogatory,
from the perfection of the Law of God, and lays imperfection upon it, (as the
Doctor has plainly done above.) 2. With respect had to other men, men, who
attain not to that perfection (as they call it) to do something more than
commanded; as that Pharisee, that said (with scorn and pride enough) " I am
not as other men, I fast twice a week. And this was the note of discrimination,
between the Hasidaej, and the Haraej, as we heard above. 3. With respect to the
over-pleasing and acceptance of God: They that think that they can do
something not commanded, do think, and expect to find more, and greater
acceptance from God, than they themselves or others do, for doing only what is
commanded: Papists do indeed, think they can merit which God by such works, for
themselves and others: Ours are not come so far yet, but they do think to find
(or procure) more acceptance for their voluntary oblations here, and if not
glory it self, yet a greater reward, and greater glory hereafter for such
works. For more acceptance the Doctor speaks expressly; Sect. 16. When in the
service of God, a man out of a pious affection shall do any thing else, beside
what God has commanded, by any particular precept, this action of his, is
accounted so much more commendable to God. And elsewhere, The more voluntary
the service, the more acceptable. What exceptions may be made to this, see
above at Sect. 16. and add, If the Doctor should mean it of voluntarinesse in
a prescribed worship of God, it is not to the purpose; for even the highest
voluntarinesse, is there required. If he mean it of a voluntary, will devised
worship, I have said, and say again, The more voluntary, the more abominable.
As for the other, that by their voluntary oblations, they do think and expect
to find greater glory, and reward hereafter, the Doctor is not so express;
Yet when he makes it a part of prudence, to aspire to the most perfect state,
that is, (as he implies) Martyrdom, for his reason, because that is the way
and means, to advance us highest in glory; Sect. 43, 44. Knowing the greatest
perfection, to be most gloriously rewarded; he comes very near to think, that
voluntary oblations, such as voluntary Martyrdom, may procure, greater reward,
than commanded worship. To draw to a conclusion of all; when the Doctor says,
His Doctrine forbids any the most justified man, to pretend toward
satisfying for others, but to work out his own salvation, with fear and
trembling, i. e. with all the Humility in the world. This may be true in the
Doctrine; but in the Practice, I fear it tends to pride, and scorn, to teach
men, That to do things not commanded, will make a man more acceptable to God,
and purchase him a greater measure of glory hereafter, than to do things only
commanded by God: We have too much experience of the success, of such
Doctrine, not only in the old Hasidaej, and later Pharisees, but palpably in
the Church of Rome, at this day; and our own late Superstititious
Willworshipers, and Formalists, who did overlooke others (who like the
Karaeans, kept close to the Rule of the word, for their worship) with abundance
of contempt and insolence; as all that knew the times, can sufficiently
testify.

FINIS.
EXERCITATION THE THIRD, OF The FESTIVALS of the CHURCH.

And particularly of CHRISTMAS.

By D. C.

Gal. 4.9, 10. But now after you have known God, or rather, are known of God,
how turn you again to the weak and beggarly elements whereunto ye desire again
to be in bondage?

You observe days, and months, and times, and years.

Cypr. Epist. 73. Frustra nobis, qui ratione vincimur, consuetudinem opponunt.
LONDON, Printed for J. Wright at the sign of the King's Head in the Oldbayley,
1653.

OF CHRISTMAS, AND other FESTIVALS of the CHURCH.
Section 1.

IT is true indeed, that when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man seem
to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. From
hence may be made, 1. Negatively; we, or the Churches have no such custom:
ergo they are contentious that would induce any new practice into the Church.
2. Affirmatively, we Apostles, and the Churches of Christ have such a custom;
ergo they are contentious that oppose, or reject it. But the force of the
consequence is far stronger in the Negative (which is the inference of that
Text) than in the Affirmative, unless some other considerations be put in: For
example, the Apostolical Church had no such custom as the Sacrifice of the
Mass, praying for, or to the dead, worshipping of Images, etc. ergo they are
contentious and superstitious who bring them into the Church: On the other
side, it will not follow the Apostolical Church had a custom, to observe the
Sabbath of the Jews (when they came amongst them) to circumcise, sometimes to
abstain from blood, etc. to avoid offense, and win the Jews; ergo they that
go about afterward to lay down these, are contentious; this will no ways be
admitted. The reason is, because the Apostles afterward repealed those Jewish
customs. Two cautions therefore must be added to make the Affirmative
constringent.

1. That the custom which is pleaded for, be brought into the Church by the
Apostles themselves, for Gospel worship: For he says, We (we) have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. The Gospel Churches by us planted.

2. That the custom pleaded be grounded truly (if not so clearly) upon the
Word of God: For this is no good argument against a rational Disputant. The
present Church (of Rome, suppose, or any Church, some centurie, or more of
years after the Apostles) has such or such a custom; ergo we must receive it,
unless we will be counted contentious. But this is thought a good inference:
The Apostolical purest Church had a custom to observe the Lords day, the first
day of the week, Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. instead of the old Sabbath; ergo
that day was instituted by the Apostles, and they that reject it, or profane
it, are more then contentious, even sacrilegious. And upon these considerations
fiderations the Doctor has consulted ill to his own cause, to produce this
Text for his Festival: For he dare not say it was instituted by the Apostles,
nor can prove it was observed by the prime, and purest Church (though he often
assert it) then the inference is strong against him. The Apostle, and prime
Apostolical Church had no such custom as the observation of Christmas; ergo
they are contentious who plead for its continuance. It matters not then what
the ancient usage of the Church of England has been; if it began not with the
Apostles in the first Churches: Which, of the Feast of Christ's Nativitie,
cannot, I think, be proved; I am sure is not performed by the learned Doctor.
Nor yet that the Church of England was extant in the Apostles times; or if it
were, that this custom of Christmas was from the beginning of the plantation of
the Gospel amongst us, which yet he undertakes to manifest.

. 2. The latter he first begins with: And that it is thus ancient he will
prove, By one objection against, viz. the retaining of some heathen usages, in
the observation of it, which are undeniable Testimonies of the Antiquity and
un-interrupted continuance of this practice, even from the time of our first
conversion: For otherwise, it is not imaginable how any heathen usage should be
found adherent to it. But this is no way constringent: For they might be added
(together with the Festival it self) some good while after the first
conversion, of some part of this Island, the better to win the rest to a
liking of Christian Religion, by conforming to them in celebration of
Festivals; as the like was done to win the Jews in observing the old
Sabbath, Pentecost, etc. The Apostles (says the Doctor) to attract the Jews to
the Christian Religion, Sect. 71.
did gratify them in retaining many of their customs. That was for a time, but
after cast them off. And this Festival being substituted instead of the old
Saturnalia, in the same Month (as is confessed by many, Sect. 63.
and the Doctor himself) no marvel if some heathen usages stuck close to it,
and could not since be gotten out: For those heathen usages continued by the
ruder multitude (and others too) though they have been no part of the office of
the Feast, yet do they fully hold out these two things;

1. How easy a thing it is for such ill usage, to creep into humane Ordinances.

2. How hard it is, to get them out, when once got in, being ready to plead
prescription. Seeing after so long a time as fifteen, or sixteen hundred years
continuance (as the Dr. thinks they still attend the Festival; people being
more tenacious of customs, received by the Tradition of their Fathers, 1 Pet.
1.18
then of the very Institutions of God.

. 3.4. For the former, that the conversion of England was early, is very
likely, but not so early, as is pretended, but not proved: For as the Histories
and Monuments are very obscure and doubtful, differing much one from another;
so the Doctor himself is very uncertain, where to place the beginning, or who
was the Instrument of our conversion. It may be believed, either Apostolical,
or very near the Apostles times. Feign would he have us think it was by some
Apostle, if he knew how to make it out. Some affirm it was Simon Zelotes, Sect.
6. And there was some color for the affirmation of Simon Metaphrastes; That
St. Peter stayed in Britain sometime, converted many, and constituted
Churches, and ordained Bishops in the twelfth year of Nero's reign. But he
slurs his Author thus: The authority of this Writer is not great. He might have
said, Nothing worth, being contradicted by so many others, and by the Doctor
himself, by and by. Yet it might be near the Apostles times by some
Apostolical men; some say rather by Joseph of Arimathea; for so. Mr. Camden
reports (from as ancient Records, and credible as any we have; for we have none
very ancient or very credible, That Joseph of Arimathea planted Christianity
here coming out of France. Belike Crescens sent him hither to convert she
Britains; if he did not come, and do it himself: For so the Doctor would have
it, and proves it out of Scripture, 2 Timothy 4.10. Crescens ( sent by St. Paul
was gone into Galatia; where Galatia may signify France, as some Authors take
it, and the Doctor is willing to believe it: For presently (though others
contradict) he takes it for granted, when he says, What is so early affirmed
in Scripture of the communicating of the Gospel to France ( i. e. by Crescens)
which is so near to us, removes all improbabilitie from those Histories which
record the plantation of the Gospel in these Islands in the Apostles times. Its
easy to believe, that Crescens, if he were in France, might quickly step over
into Engl. but the former is yet to prove: For the Doctor knows very well, that
very learned men deny, that Galatia was there taken for France; but for a part
of Asia, which is far enough from England. Yea they demonstrate it (as they
think) that it was not meant of France; for which I refer him to Estius on
the place, 2 Timothy 4.10. However, whether Crescens were ever in France or no,
sure he was not in England to convert the Nation. Hear the Doctors own words:
"This (which he had said before) is an evidence, that neither Peter nor Paul,
nor Crescens, nor any of those that usually accompanied either of those two
Apostles, did bring the Christian Faith to this Island. He might have added,
Nor Joseph of Arimathea, nor Simon Zelotes, upon the reason there by him given.
The Affirmation of Gildas, that this was in Tiberius's Reign, was mere
Tradition, and far from probability: For then England should be converted,
within four years after Christ's death; In the 18. of Tiberius, our Lord
suffered, and Tiberius reigned but 22. in all: No Authors of any credit, lay it
so high. As for Tertullian and Origin; they lived both in the third Centurie,
above 200. years after Christ, And its very likely, Christianity was planted
here, in some parts, some time before them. But its very observable, that
neither of those Ancients, nor any before them, in all their writings, ever
mention the Feast of the Nativity, as then in observation, though they often
speak of other usages of the Church, before, and in their times. The most
probable opinion is, that, though some persons, of this, as of most Nations,
were converted early to the Faith, yet the Nation, or any considerable part of
it, was not converted till King Lucius his time, (about the year of Christ,
180.) the first Christian King, in the whole world, (which is a great honor to
our Nation.) This was done (say Historians) in the time of Eleutherius, then
Bishop of Rome, who lived toward the end of the second Centurie. And his
Epistle to King Lucius (if that be Authentic, Sir Henr. Spilm. council. Brit.
p. 16.
for the Doctor doubts it, and well he may, if he do but remember what a
learned Historian says) does not say, that Britain, had long ago (before
Lucius his time) received the Faith, but rather, nuper, lately; and so it was
in the Latin, in the Doctors Margin, but wisely left out in the English;
which why it was done, let others judge. Historians say, that King Lucius,
desired of Eleutherius, that he and his people, might have some sent to baptize
them; who accordingly, sent Fugatius and Damianus. Now if Christianity, had
been planted here from the Apostles times, or by Apostolical men, its not
probable, that they left no Presbyters here to baptize, but that they must send
to Rome for such: which would give Romanists a fairer plea, to subject England
to Rome; then that of Augustine the Monk; which the Doctor disputes so much
against hereafter.

. 5. Dioclesians persecution, falls in the beginning of the fourth Century,
after Christ, before which time, we hear of Christianity planted here; and it
may be, the Feast of the Nativity was set up, in some Churches, before this
time; but not universally in all, "till about 400. years after Christ, (as we
shall hear the Doctor confess, before we have done) though he pleads hard, to
prove it a custom of the Church, in all ages: And this may serve anon, to
answer that which will be produced, for the Festivitie, that Dioclesian slew
20000 Christians assembled together, on that day: though the Author of that
report, is of no great credit.

. 6. The celebration of Easter, by the ancient British Churches, contrary to
the custom of the Western Churches will give little light, to the maine
question, concerning the first Plantation of the Gospel here, by the Apostles,
etc. or the Antiquity of the Festival, pleaded for. It may indeed argue, that
England did not receive Christianity first from Rome, in Augustines time; but
does not prove, that those that planted Christianity here, were such as in the
Apostolical times, kept their Easter after the Jewish manner. For the Eastern
Christians commonly kept it so, but not in the Apostles times. Which the Doctor
takes for granted; but is denied him: and that upon these Reasons.

1. There is no mention of either the Institution, or observation of it, in
Scripture, nor any ground to found it upon. The Apostles did take advantage of
that, and the like Solemnities, to preach to the Jews, to convert them, (as
was said before) but so far were they from Institution of them, as Christian
Feasts, that they do expressly repeal them, and cry them down.

2. Lib. 5. c. 22.
Socrates the Historian says, The Apostles were not sollicitous, to appoint
any Festival days at all, then not this of Easter.

3. The difference of the observation of it, in the Eastern, See Lo Falk.
reply. p. 99.
and Western Churches, makes it evident it was not Instituted by the Apostles:
for then it would be uniformly observed in all places. And as for the Authority
of the succeeding Church, in such matters, we shall meet with it anon, yet this
we say, at present, that the observation of Easter, has better Antiquity, than
this of Christmas, though not Apostolical.

. 7. But the Doctor has found one Evidence of moment; Christmas day is called
in our old Monument, Midwinter day; whence it may reasonably be concluded, that
when that name was first applied to that day, Christmas day was in the
Calendar, either coincident with, or not far removed, from the Winter Solstice:
and we continue to call the 24. of June, Midsomer day; half a year from the
25th of December.

How sweetly all agree? John Baptist was conceived, six months before our Lord,
and and so born six months before him: Hence the Feastmasters, plead his birth
on the 24. of June, and his, and our Lords on the 25. of December.

1. But I would be satisfied, which is the Older Festival, that of John, or
this of Christ? Its observed by Chemnitius, that the Feast of the Nativity, was
not heard of, in the most ancient Church; till toward the 400. year; but no
mention of the Feast of John Baptist till toward the 800. year; Or it may be
they were both appointed about the same time: upon supposition then by the
Western Church, that our Savior was borne on the 25. of December (as the
Doctor says) and the Feast of Nativity settled upon that day, either they or
some others, placed the Feast of John Baptist on the 24. of June; that all
might correspond.

2. If the names of Midwinter day, and Midsommer day, were so called here,
while the Island was Heathen, they were far more ancient, than Christmas Day:
and then, Christmas day, was rather applied to Midwinter day, than Midwinter
day, to Christmas day: but however it was, it follows not (as the Doctor would
have it) that it must be soon after our Saviors times, that this day was
capable of that appellation, and consequently that the day was here celebrated
so early. For it might be, a good while after, so called, when the Island was
first converted, which was not, (as we have discoursed) till toward the end of
the second Century.

3. It is confessed by the Doctor, that Midwinter day is a fortnight sooner
than our Christmas day; the solstice being about the 11. of December. Then say
I, they kept not Christmas day, on Midwinter day; for that's a fortnight sooner:
So we keep it not on the same day, with our first converts, nor yet on the
day, that the Western Church now keep it, who keep it stilo novo, 10. days
before us: Which difference of observation, (as was said of Easter) argues it,
not to be Apostolical, nor soon after our Saviors days (as the Doctor
says.) For if they had instituted such a Feast to the honor of our Savior,
they would all have agreed upon the same day, in all places, as they did, in
observation of the Lords day, for our Christian Sabbath.

. 8. Upon those his premises, he draws out two Corolaries or Characters, set
upon this, or any other Christian Solemnity, Easter, Pentecost, etc. of
immemoriall usage, in this Nation. First that the antiquity of it, does no way
argue, that it has any thing of the corruptions of the Roman See, adhering to
it, but the contrary. To which we have partly spoken before; and now add; that
as the observation of Easter differently from the Western Church, does argue,
that we received not our Christianity from Rome; so the Antiquity of the
observation of Christmas, and some other Festivalls (suppose in the third or
fourth Century) may also argue, that they have nothing of the corruption of the
Roman See, (we mean, since it was judged Antichristian, about the year 600.)
adhering to them: But yet may have too much of the Corruption of those
Churches, wherein they were first invented; Corruption (we say) which crept
into those Churches, not long after the Apostles days. It Is known to all, that
read the Histories of the Church, how many Innovations and Superstitions were
crept into the Church, long before Rome began to be Babylon; And Romish
Religion, is a bundle of most of those Corruptions.

. 9. But for the second inference, That any such ancient usage of this
particular Church, if it had no other ground to stand on (as its foundation) or
concurrence of all other Churches (as pillars) to sustain it, were a very
competent Authority for the continuance of such a practice in this Kingdom.
We shall take leave to demur a little upon this. For grant (as we may) that
this Anglicane, or British Church be very ancient, by its foundation, and
(...), for its authority, as subordinate to no Foreign Patriarch, yet we justly
question, (though the Doctor do not) whither it be invested with such an
unquestionable power to institute what Ceremonies it please, which may not upon
good reasons, be changed and abolished. It is known sufficiently, that many
ancient Customs, and Ceremonies (as ancient perhaps as his Christmas)
instituted, or taken up, by this, and the concurrence of many, if not most
Churches, have "without temeritie been altered, and abolished: and others may
and must, when they be abused to Superstition and profaneness, (as this Feast
will appear to have been.) It will not be amiss, here briefly to consider, what
that unquestionable power of this or any Church is, to constitute Ceremonies
for its self, (as it shall judge most useful, most for edification, and most
agreeable to the Analogy of faith) which consequently may not, without great
temerity, be changed and abolished by any. And then, whither this Feast be a
Ceremony of that nature.

For the first, the Authority of the Church, to constitute Ceremonies for its
self; it is not justly called, unquestionable; for it has for many years
past, been the apple of contention, between the Prelates and the
Non-conformists: But before we debate it, we desire to know, and be satisfied
in two things.

1. What he means by the Church, whither 1. the Universal Church, for he
often speaks of that. Sect. 12.45. etc. and charges us with separation and
Schism, for departure from the Universal Church. If so, I would say two
things; First that the Universal Church, of the first ages (or since) never
met to institute any Ceremonies, for all Churches, nor in special, for this of
Christmas. Secondly, if they had met, yet that Church, had no power, to bind
after Churches, (if they met) if they saw cause to abolish them; for a reason
anon to be given. But 2. if he take it of a particular Church, (as this of
England: as here he does) then I say again; 1. We read of no such Cannons made
by the Church, at the first conversion, to make the usage so ancient, and to
bind all her Children, in after ages. 2. If we did find such, yet the
Succeeding Church, having the same Power, may annull if she see cause, what was
by them instituted.

2. We desire also to know what he means, by Ceremonies, for this is an
ambiguous word, under which the Romanists do shroud their Superstitious
Will Worship: Ceremonies then, are of two sorts. 1. Mere Circumstances of
commanded Worship, for the more orderly and decent performance of it: Or 2.
Parts of Worship, as the Jewish Ceremonies for certain, were. If the Doctor
mean it, in the latter sense (as I think he does) we must again distinguish of
such Ceremonies, they are either dumb and non-significant, as the Church of
Rome has many, or Significant, and that either, by Nature, or by Institution:
If significant by institution, then either by Divine, or Humane Institution.
These Distinctions being premised, we suppose the Doctor, does not mean of
the Ceremonial circumstances, or Adjuncts of commanded worship, for that will
not stand him in any stead; nor does any man deny the Church a Power to order
those. But he must mean it, of Ceremonial Worship, as opposed to Moral; And
that not, for Dumb or Non-significant Ceremonies: those he dislikes, in the
Church of Rome; but for Significant Ceremonies; not significant by Nature,
those need no Institution; but by Institution, not Divine, (that were little
less than a contradiction) but Humane Institution. Then the question is this,
Whither the Church, Universal for all Churches; or a particular Church, for
her own members, have an unquestionable Authority to institute Significant
Ceremonies, as parts of worship, which may not, upon just reasons, be changed,
or abolished. This was the Question to be proved; but is only taken for
granted; in these particulars, by the Dr.

1. That the Church whether Universal, or particular has such a power to
institute Ceremonies, (unless they be such as tend to Eutaxy, and Decency,
and the preservation or furtherance of Gods commanded worship) what and how
many she please, as she shall judge most useful, most for edification, etc. as
the Doctor says, but goes not about to prove, but takes it as unquestionable.
This we do deny, and we think upon good reasons, (besides the judgment of
Reformed Churches;) If the Church be allowed such a power, the mischiefs will
be many. As.

1. Its prejudicious to the simplicity of Gospell-worship. 2 Cor. 11.3. the
simplicity which is in Christ. That is, in the Gospel of Christ. Ceremonies
burthenous in the number, might turn it into evil Will worship. sect. 25.
It was spoken with respect to the false Apostles, who by their (...), subtle
persuasive words, did corrupt both the Doctrine and Worship of the Gospel; as
may appear by comparing this place, with Col. 2. The Worship of the Law, was
for the most part, Ceremonial, in external pomp and services: But the
Worship of the Gospel, is less ceremonious, and gaudie, and more spiritual;
Joh. 4. "in spirit and truth, opposed to those ceremonial, typical, shadows
and figures of the Legal worship. The Gospel Worship is for the most part
moral, praying, preaching, hearing, etc. without any thing like to that
ceremonial worship, except the observation of the Lords day, and the two
Sacraments, designed and instituted by Christ himself, or by his Commission:
But if the Church have a power to institute ceremonial Worship, she may bring
us back to a Legal worship, equal with the Jews: as the Church of Rome has
done.

2. If the Church have any such power, to institute Ceremonies; they must be
either Nonsignificant ones, but those Protestants disclaim as idle fooleries:
or significant; and then, either by nature, or Institution; Those of nature,
need no Institution; If Institution be pleaded, it must be either Divine, but
the Church has nothing to do with them, they are instituted to her hands: Or
Humane, but that's expreslly against the second Commandment; as has been said
elsewhere. God only can prescribe his own worship. Hence it was, that those
Traditions of worship, introduced by the false teachers, are coudemned, because
they were the Doctrines and commandments of men. Col. 2.22. which when our
Divines urge against such kind of ceremonial worship, in the Church of Rome,
as Humane Institutions, they have no way to avoid it, Vide Estium and Corn l.
A lapide in locum.
but to say; Ceremonies instituted by an humane spirit, (as ours are) are there
condemned, but theirs are instituted by the holy Ghost joining with their
Pastors, in the Regiment of the Church, as the Rhemists speak, on Math. 15.9.
and others more. And therefore Papists may better plead their binding power,
than ours can do. I shall add to this, That to institute significant
ceremonies, as a part of Worship, is a superstjtious excess, and so
Will Worship, which I prove from the Doctors own Concessions: To put more virtue
and efficacy into things, Of Superstition* sect. 45.
then either naturally, or by the Rule of Gods Word is in them, is a nimiety,
and so Superstition; but for men to institute significant ceremonies, for
edification, to teach, and instruct, etc. is to put more virtue and efficacy in
them then naturally, or by the Rule of the Word, (that is, Divine Institution)
God put in them; ergo. The Major is the Doctors own; the Minor is evident: They
have it not by Nature; nor by divine Institution (then they needed not humane
Institution) ergo, it is superstitious; and consequently the Church has no
such power.

3. Grant her but such power, and there will be no end of Ceremonies; no man
can tell where she will stay, Of Superstit. sect 38.
unless some bounds be prescribed in Scripture. The Doctors qualifications, "
That they be few and wholesome, have no ground to rest on. For who shall judge
of the number or unwholsomnes, without a Rule? Not any private man, that is
denied, and very reasonably. Not a particular Church; the Universal may judge
otherwise. Not the Universal Church of one Age; for the next Generation may be
wiser, and think them too few, or too many; not wholesome, or unwholsom, and so
may either multiply, or annul them. See more of this in the Discourse of
Superstition, Sect. 32.33. Upon this ground grow all those, more then Jewish
ceremonies of the Romish Church. That of the first.

2. The Doctor takes for granted also, that the Church has power to institute
Holy days (such as Christmas) and to make them equal with the Lords day: For
of this he is speaking, while he gives the Church this unquestionable power,
but he cannot but know this is denied by many Divines.

3. He also takes as yielded, That there is some ancient Institution of this
Church for his Christmas, from our first conversion; which must be the ground
for it to stand on, and " a competent Authority for the continuance of such a
practice in this Kingdom; but this he has not proved.

4. Once more, he takes as granted; That such ceremonies, or Festivals
established by a Church, That were to restrain our liberty, and to exchange one
burden for another. So the Dr. of Superstition sect. 56.
may not, without great temerity be changed, or abolished by any. What? not by
the Universal Church? not by the succeeding Church? That were to make the Laws
of a particular Church, like those of the Medes and Persians, unchangeable, and
equal with the Laws of God. Or else to cut short the succeeding Church from
the same privilege of the former; and so in time the Church may lose all power
to institute New ceremonies; or else ceremonies may be multiplied to the end of
the world. And so much of the first, the Authority of the Church, to institute
Ceremonies. A word of the next.

Secondly, we must enquire, whether if the Church have any power to ordain any
Ceremonies, this of Christmas, be such, as she may ordain. We have said, and
say again, to institute Holy days, and to make them parts of Geds worship, is
a privilege of God alone. If now the Doctor shall say, The Church institutes
this Festival only as a circumstance, or Adjunct of Worship commanded, it will
be little to his purpose, and makes it no more holy, than any other day, when
the same worship is performed. But its evident, that in the Church of Rome,
this, and other Festivals are not counted mere Ceremonies in that sense; but as
parts of Divine Worship, and so observed, with greater solemnities, and more
Ceremonies than the Lords day it self; which is both superstitious and
sacrilegious. And thus it has been with some, yea many of our Prelatical and
Cathedral men, esteemed and observed, not only as equally holy with the Lords
day, but with more solemn services, with more abstinencie from labor and
recreations; as we shall hear our Doctor confess anon. We now consider what he
says to prove the disusing of these Feasts blameable.

. 10. These are part of that establishment which the Reformation in this
Kingdom has enacted for us by act of Parliament. To this we say;

1. The Reformation formerly made in this Kingdom, we have good cause to
bless God for; but we know it was not so full and perfect as the Reformers
themselves could have wished, by reason of the times, new come out of the
darkness of Popery, and the tenaciousnesse of old customs, received by
tradition of their Fathers.

2. This seems to grant that the Reformation, and so the establishment of these
Festivals in this Nation, was made by the State, and not by the Church, which
now is pleaded for.

. 11. Secondly, This, and other Feasts of Christ, are in the Reformed,
especially the Lutheran Churches, still retained, and where they are taken away
in some Churches, by some sober members wished for. We answer to this; The
Churches that retain these Feasts (especially the Lutherans) are not reputed
the best Reformed Churches, nor by the Doctor himself (I believe) thought fit
to be compared with England, and some other Churches in Doctrine and Worship,
and so no fit presidents for our Reformation. What private persons wish or say,
is not much to be regardded; unless their reasons be constringent. However,
we are not alone, nor the first in this dis-usage of this Festival: Some
Protestant Reformed Churches, are with us, and before us. As for the Sermons
given to Christmas day, by some that now disuse it (wherein The whole body of
their public devotions, is falsely said, now to consist, their prayers being
as good, and as large as the Liturgies) it will afford him no more succor,
than this; That the Authority then in being, commanding Vacation from work,
they only took the opportunity to preach, to prevent disorders in their
people, which attend such Festivities; And the Authority now in force,
prohibiting, they do forbear to preach.

. 12.3. The laying down, or disusing the observation of this Festivity, is not
an act of Division or separation, from either the particular Church of England,
or from the Universal Church in all ages, especially that of the first and
purest times: Not the latter for certain; for we have proved before, the first
and purest ages of the Church, did not observe it. Not the former, unless he
will yield, that the Reformation of the Church of England, in former times, was
a Division or separation from the Church of Rome; or the Reformation in Luthers
time, was a division and separation from the Catholic Church, as Papists say
it was.

. 13.4. If Superstition and profaness may be ground sufficient to lay aside a
Custom; the complexion of the times have long since invited to the laying
aside the usage of this Feast. His pretenses to the contrary, are insufficient.

1. The omission of Christmas sermons and services, tends not to raze out of
the minds of the ignorant sort, the slender knowledge they have of the birth of
Christ, and consequent mysteries of Religion For the Gospel being read and
preached on, all the year long; they cannot but often hear of the Birth, Life,
Death, Burial, and resurrection of Christ. The Knowledge which the ignorant
people learned by some men's Christmas Sermons, Act 25:
was slender indeed, nothing but a Superficial (as he) Notionall, carnal
knowledge of one Jesus (as that Roman Deputy spoke) that was borne at that
time, to give men liberty to Feast, and be merry.

2. This cannot (as he charges it) gratify their worldly affections, and
assist Atheism, etc. but rather to keep it (as usually they did) in all
Festival delights, (like the Revells of Bacchus) did both mote gratify their
Worldly lusts, and tended to Atheism, and profanesse.

3. The Casuists (whose great reason he seems to applaud) affirming, that the
necessaries of belief, for the vulgar sort are no more than the great Holy
days of the year, spoke with as much, that is, as little reason, as their
fellows the Jesuits, who say and affirm, that Images are the best
laymens-books instead of the Scriptures.

4. The ejecting of these Holydaies out of the Church, will not any with
dispatch the opinion of any necessity of believing the Articles of faith; (the
Creed being still to be retained, in and with the Catechism) for the Ministers
preaching constantly of those Truths, may help not only in some degree (as
he) but very much, and more, than the great Holydaies of themselves can do.
And why not abundantly sufficient as it was, in the first planting of Churches,
before these Festivalls were invented? We have had enough experience, that in
those places (Cathedral Cities) where those Festivalls have been most
punctually and solemnly observed (taking in there Chrystmas Sermons too) there
have been found, less saving knowledge of Christ, more Superstition, and more
Profaneness, than in any Country Villages, where the Gospel has been
sinceerely preached.

. 14. The Impatience of sound Doctrine, and readiness to embrace what ever is
novel is not to be found in those of dee per, sound knowledge; but in the
ungrounded professors of former times, made formal Christians by external
Ceremonies, and outward Pomp of service: But those that endeavored to Reform
the abuses of Superstition and profaneness, are the men only, or chiefly, that
propugne and maintain sound Doctrine; whereas those that were the greatest
favorers of those Festvities, some of them, either are fallen into the
propagating of error, Arminianism, etc. or at least do little appear to
maintain the truth

As for Hospitality and charity at those times, its observable in many strong
pleaders for Christmas, that they are willing enough to abate the charge of the
Feast, both then, and all the year after; yet no body hinders them from being
Hospitable and Charitable.

. 15.5. What ever specious design was in the first institutors of this piece of
Service to Jesus Christ (as after it is called) it matters not much. Gideons
design, in making a Golden Ephod, was very fair, to leave a Monument of his
Victory, as a pious publik acknowledgement of his thankfulness, yet it proved
a snare, to him and his house and to all Israel. Many of the Superstitions of
the now Church of Rome, had no doubt a pious design, and a show of wisdom, but
the issue has been very mischeivous: Even so, it has happened to this
Institution now in hand.

. 16. There may indeed a threefold guilt and danger be charged upon the
Institution and continuance of this observance; 1. Of Will Worship because it
is not commanded in scriptures. 2. of Superstition, in observing dates, 3. Of
Riot frequent in such Festivalls. The two former, (he says) he has spoken to
else where, viz. both in his Treatises of Will Worship and Superstition, and
also in his practical Catechism: In the two former, though something be said
in general, or in thesi, yet nothing, that I observe, in special, or in
hypothesi, of this Festival. Indeed in his practical Catechism, he has
undertaken the vindication of it, from all these three charges, but more
largely, the two first there; aad here more of the last, that of Riot; we shall
consider what he says, in order.

First to free the Festival, from the charge of Willworship, he proceeds two
ways.

1. In respect of those, who retain the usage of it, they observe it in
obedience to the Laws of the Church, and so it proceeds from obedience to
Superiors, a duty of the 5th. Commandment. This argument should not have had
the first place, but the second, in a just method. The Doctor should first have
proved that they that instituted the Festival, had a lawful power to do it;
before he proved them that observe the usage, to be innocent. For may not
Papists plead the same argument, for observation, of not only their Holydaies,
but of their invocation of Saints, adoration of Images, and the Mass it self.
They do it in obedience to the Laws of the Church, and so it proceeds from
obedience to superiors, Vid. Append.
a duty of the 5th Commandment. But to the particulars we say many things.
Pract. Catech. on 4. Commandment.
1. Did he not a little before found the Times or days designed to public
worship, upon the equity or morality of the 4th Commandment? Hear what he
says, of the Importance of that 4th Commandment; It is a designation of Time,
for the special performing of Gods public worship, and again, It is not only
lawful, but necessary to set apart some times, for Gods service, he means by
that Commandment: Then say I, if the 4th Commandment, do necessarily require
a designation of some Time, for worship ( private as well as public; for so
he resolves, in answer to the next question there) does not the same
Commandment as necessarily require the observation, or sanctification of that
Time, but it must be reduced to the 5. Commandment? Let him remember what he
says, in his Treatise of Will Worship, Sect. 4. If the matter of the command
were before commanded by God, 'twere then no longer obedience to the Law of the
Magistrate, but only to God. The application is easy, and I add; must God be
beholden to men, either for the designation, or observation of his due Time, by
a duty from the 5th Commandment? What if Superiors be so profane, See
Sabbath. Redevivum at large these things.
as to set apart no time for Gods worship, or not to enjoine and require the
observation of that Time, is every man free, to observe some, or none, at his
pleasure? what if there be no Public Worship? what if a man be and live in
places where neither Time nor Public Worship, is appointed by Superiors, is
he now at liberty, to take all Time, as his own? so it seems, by this
Doctrine; if men observe Times, Lords day, and others, only as a duty to
Superiors in the 5th Commandment.

2. He takes for granted, that the Designation of the sufficient Time, due and
necessary by the 4th Commandment, is in the power of men, Church or state;
which we say, belongs only to God.

3. He also supposes, that the Church or State has power to Sanctify a Time,
so that it must not ordinarily be mixed with profane and common uses, which
we think, God only can do.

4. He also takes it as granted, that the Church may design, as little, or as
much, as few or as many Times, or Days, as they shall think fit, and that
ordinarily, in every week, or month, or year, without Sperstition, as an act of
piety, which we suppose they cannot do, without prejudice to the 4th
Commandment, and to Christian liberty; seeing the burden of Jewish Holidays
is taken off, by Christ, and we reduced to the 4th Commandment, as for one day
in seven to be holy, so for our allowance of six days, for our own works. The
result of this answer is this, that they that retain this usage of the
Festival, as a day made Holy by the Church, or state are both injurious to God,
in usurpation upon his prerogative, in the 4th Commandment, and also guilty of
Willworship, in holding up a Worship, not commanded by God, against the second
Commandment.

2. In respect to those who first instituted it, without command from others
(in whom only it is called Will Worship) they are free from guilt too. 1.
because among the Jews some Feasts were instituted, that of Purim, and of the
Dedication, without command etc. 2. Freewill-offerings of this Nature, are to
be the more, not the less acceptable, for being voluntary. To this we say, in
general, it may be Will Worship to observe what is commanded by others, as
well as to institute worship, without a command; In special, to the first
reason, the Feasts instituted by the Jews, we shall speak anon, here, sect.
29. To the second, of Freewill-offerings, we say.

1. These Holidays of men's Institution, are not like those Freewill-offerings
of the old Law, as we have showed, upon his Treatise of Willworship, sect. 29.

2. We add, it is not in the power of men, to institute any worship, not
commanded by God: and is flatly against the second Commandment: But these
Holydaies, are by him, made parts of Worship.

3. Suppose the Jews should have made more Holydaies, yearly, than God
commanded, would they have been accepted? should they not have heard, who
required these at your hands? we may guess by their Fasts which they
appointed; God instituted one Fast only, once a year; upon the Expiation day:
They, in their captivity, appointed more, in the 5. and 7. month yearly; but
what acceptance found they? see Zech. 7.5. when ye fasted and mourned in the
5. and 7. month, even those 70. years, did ye at all fast to me, even to me?
And may not Papists, who have a Saint and an Holyday, almost for every day in
the year, be justified by this arguing? Has it not a great show of wisdom,
Piety, Devotion, to devo^e most of their time to God? Are they not their
Free-wil-offerings, the more acceptable, because voluntary, and uncommanded?
Let no man say, they dedicate those days to Saints, and Invocate the Saints,
etc. and that makes them abominable: But suppose none of those, but the Holy
days be (as the Church of England expressed herself) devoted only to the
honor of God; but yet esteemed as more holy, aad as a Worship of God; and more
acceptable to God, because voluntary: even these, and that other, that its done
without command of God, will denominate them Will Worship and so odious to God.
And so much for that.

Secondly, he comes now to vindicate it from Superstition, and says; (...)
signifies Supestitum cultus, worshipping of Demons, or souls of dead men; but
its little less then blasphemy, to number Christ with them, etc. To which we
say: For the words (...), and Superstition; we have considered it in his
Treatise of Superstition; and have found him granting the sense of them to be
far larger, than the Worshipping of Demons: And we have proved it rather to
signify any false, Superradded worship, not commanded of God, A Nimiety or
excess of Religion.
as Super statutum, above the Law of God: In a word, any false worship of the
true God; which is exemplified in many particulars there: amongst which, this
is one, In placing the worship of God, or more holiness, in things, times,
places, etc. then God has placed in them. We shall consider what he says to
vindicate this Festival, from it.

1. The Birth of Christ, is a mercy of such excellent quality, that it can
never be overvalued, etc. This is granted; But to Institute a day as Holy,
without command of Christ, for an Annual commemoration of this, is above the
power of any Church, and a Superstitious presumption: and withal needless;
considering that the Lords day, (which includes the commemoration, not only of
his Birth, but his Resurrection, and the whole works of our Redemption by him)
was instituted by himself, or his Apostles, by him authorized and inspired, for
this very end; and comes about once in every week. To limit it therefore to one
day in a year, to remember that Mercy, is not an exaltation, but a derogation
from it. If this were done, on his own designed Day, we need not fix another
day.

2. The exercises done upon the day, are acceptable duties any day, therefore
upon this. True, but then any day, whereon these duties are done, is as holy a
Day, as Christmas day: or if he think, the duties are more acceptable for the
Days sake, or for the voluntary dedication of it by men, I fear they will be
so much less acceptable to God, and no better than Superstition.

3. There may be excess and Superstition in setting out a day every year, as
Holy, as a woship of God, as Super statutum: where God requires but one in
seven as Holy, for men to command more, is too much presumption: His reasons
against it are invalide.

1. Because a duty cannot be performed without time; True but without a set, a
fixed holy time, it may: Here Is a fallacy, from time as a natural and
necessary adjunct, of an action, to Time, as Holy, as Worship. Which yet is not
observed by the Doctor; For he, with others, seems to hold Time in the 4th
Commandment, to be only an Adjunct of worship, as of any other action; but we
think Time in the 4th Commandment, is a part of worship: And this I think they
do make it, in this present case: For they do not only make the duties,
praying, praising, preaching, etc. a part of worship, Sees. 48.
(which they are every day, when they are performed) but the very Dedication,
and observation of the Day it self, to be a voluntary oblation, a
Freewill-offering, an honor and service to Christ; as we shall hear.

2. Abraham (says he) rejoiced to see this day and the Angels rejoiced on the
very day, etc. So would we, if we knew the Day; but this does not prove, that
they intended to set that day apart as Holy, without command from Christ: the
Lords day being appointed for that end.

3. The abstaining from labors, is partly, though not only the excess; for
it makes it necessary, as a duty of an Holy day, when God has not made it
necessary having allowed 6 days for men's own works: and though Rest be
agreeable to holy duties, Festivities and Fasting days, of Gods command, yet
then it presupposes a Command of God for those Duties and Days: Or if the Time
be only an Adjunct of those duties, then Rest is necessary only naturali
necessitate, not moralj; because no man can solemnly for any time wait upon God
in holy duties, and his labors too. But this is necessary any day, when holy
duties are performed.

4. For the 25th. day of December to be the day of Christ's birth, we shall
speak to it hereafter, ad sect. 36. Only we observe what he says, upon the
mistake of the day: That the mistake will be very pardonable in those, who
verily think, they are not mistaken; They do perform the business of the day,
as completely and substantially on a mistaken day, as on the true one: and the
excuse of blameless ignorance, will wash away greater errors than this, if an
error. Does not this sound somewhat like the Papists Doctrine of venial
sins? It puts me in mind of a subterfuge of Bellarm. and others, when we
object (upon their own confessions) that there may be danger of Idolatry, in
the Sacrament, if the bread be not transubstantiated into the body of Christ:
They answer, There is no danger of it, to one that fimply believes it is, and
worshipping after his wonted manner? For in such things, humane certitude is
sufficient; So Jacobs lying with Leah instead of Rachell, ignorantly, was not
guilty of adultery, etc. This is, (saiesacute Chamier) not to take away
Idolatry, but to stupifie the Idolater; can any ignorance be blameless
against a Law of God, or wash away an Error without the blood of Christ? Would
not Christ have revealed the very day, if he had intended the day to be kept
holy, as a worship of himself? But I shall put him a case. Suppose the Jews had
mistaken the day of the week for the Sabbath, or the day of the month for the
Passover, had they not sinned because they thought they were not mistaken? Had
the business been as completely and substantially performed, on a mistaken day,
as on the true one. When the very day was as strictly commanded as the business
it self? Let him consider it.

I shall here insert the judgment of the learned Chemnitius, who, though he
allow the observation of this, and other Festivals (as a Lutheran) with a
reservation of Christian liberty, Exam. Conc. Trid. p. de diebus Fest. p. 265
without necessity of obligation, etc. yet he notes no less then thirteen ways
or kinds of Superstition, in Papists observation of Holy days. We note some of
them.

1. In placing Holiness in the days, which God has not placed in them.

2. Esteeming the services then done, better and more holy, and acceptable,
then if done on other days.

3. Placing the worship of God on them, in ceasing from labors, and
frequenting of Churches.

4. Forbidding of labors on those days when they hinder not the public
Worship.

5. " In the Necessity of observation.

6. In the multitude of them. To which may be added, that

7. They discriminate persons, to be more or less holy, as they observe or
neglect them.

And lastly, as more grace and blessing is expected from such voluntary,
uncommanded observances.

Now how far many men amongst us, are guilty of all, or some of these kinds of
Superstition, it remains to discover.

First, for placing holiness in them equal with the Lords day, and above other
days: It appears both by men's words and deeds. By word, in calling them Holy
days, and equalling them with the Lords day, See Sect. 59. To be esteemed
above other days of the year, etc. consecrating it from common to sacred uses.
as both of the Churches instituted. The Doctor himself, sect. 20. calls this
Festival most sacred; and sect. 24. tells us, The day has been observed, if not
much more, certainly as strictly as any Lords day in the year, etc. And so it
was, in all Cathedrals at least, with more solemn services; with stricter
cessation from sports then on the Lords day; on which, sports were permitted,
but "no touching cards, or dice that day, Sect. 77. being (more then lawful)
pious in it self.
Ibid.

Secondly, not only the services, but the observation of the day also, was
esteemed an higher piece of service than that of the Lords day; more
acceptable, then commanded worship, because more voluntary. So the Dr. often.

Thirdly, Sect. 59. An oblation to God in honor to him, etc. Treat. of
Wilworship, sect. 29. See sect. 59. people may not without offense to God
follow their lawful vocations on that day. Rest is made an oblation to God.
placing the worship of God in the observation of the day, as a voluntary
oblation, and parallel with the Freewill-offerings in the Law (which the Doctor
takes special notice of, * were parts of Gods worship) Offer it up a voluntary
oblation to Christ, in the service and to the honor of Christ, etc. Sect. 28.

Fourthly, Forbidding labors on that day, with greater zeal, and severer
penalties than on the Lords day: It was held and accordingly censured, as more
Piacular, to work upon this day, than on the Lords day.

Fifthly, In the necessity of the observation of it; in so much as he was
esteemed no good Christian that did not observe it.

Sixthly, It became a note of discrimination of people, as more or less
Religious. Just as the Doctor observed Willworship. s. 28.
of the Hasidaei, and makes it part of their Superstition, or Willworship, That
they first began to add to the law of God, voluntary performances of their
own; then they made them necessary, and laid the obligation of them on others,
to do as they did, and then not being obeyed, discriminated themselves from
all others, as the only obedient servants of God, and so called themselves
Pharisees. And was not this exemplified in the Institution of this Festival?
At first, after an Age or two from the Apostles, some began to set up this (and
other days) as a voluntary oblation to Christ, and a pious Addition to the
Lords day: others in time, made it necessary (as Socrates observed) and then
laid the obligation of it upon others, to do as they did; And if they were not
obeyed, they discriminated themselves from such as refused, as the only pious
and Religious men of the Times. That good Father Saint Austin was a little
faulty here; if that work was Austins: All that acknowledge themselves sons
of the Church observe the Festivalls of the Church cited by the Doctor. 35.
Sermon. de Temp. 250
To which the Dr. adds It Is consequent to this, that they which observe them
not, disclaim this sonship, and cast themselves out of this family: Pract.
Cat. And hear the Doctors own discrimination of himself and his party, by the
censure of himself and his party, by the Censure of the Refusers. The
fastidious rejecting, or not observing the Festivalls of the Church universal,
the great days, etc. must certainly be looked upon by every man, as an act of
affected departure from the universal Church of Christ in all ages, as well as
from the reformed Church of England his mother. Sect. 45. Which Sect. 12. he
had called an Act of Division and Separation from that Church of the first and
purest times: How justly or truly, let the Reader judge, by that which has,
and shall be said. In the mean time, the Doctor has handsomely given or taken
the name of Pharisees to himself and his parties, as volunteeres in worship,
above the law of God, and left the name of honest and modest Karaej, unto
others, who dare not venture to go beyond, or before the Law, in worship.

Obj. But he starts an objection: It has a semblance of that Mat. 5.9.
Teaching for doctrines the Traditions of men. He answers; Doctrines there, is
the affirming a thing to be the pleasure and command of God, (as if I should
put the Kings broad Seal, to a deed of my own) but this is no ways
chargeable on those that acknowledge this an Ecclesiastical institution, and
pretend it not to be prescribed by Christ. I reply, 1 Teaching for Doctrines
here, is not the affirming a thing to be a command of God, (or not that only)
but is expounded by Col. 2.22. after the commandments and doctrines of men:
That is, men out of their wisdom, prescribe, and by their authority command
such and such doctrines, either as very pious and pleasing, or more acceptable
to God, as a voluntary worship; not always affirming them to be the
commandments of God, but holding them out as the Traditions of the Elders, as
the Pharisees did. 2. Its so much more chargeable on them, (that acknowledge it
an Ecclesiastical Institution,) as a kind of Superstition; because those
Pharisees and false Teachers, (as he says) pleaded Gods Command, for their
doctrines; for what they did, in matter of worship: But these pretend only the
Churches command, which is worse then putting the Kings seal to a deed of
their own: For it usurps the very throne of God, to appoint his worship; which
is the highest Treason. Other things there are concerning this controversy,
which we shall take notice of hereafter, In pract. Catechism.
and now come to consider, how he can vindicate this Festival, from the Riot
and excess, commonly found there; which he acknowledges, a sin, and a greater
sin in a Christian, than in a Jew, whose promises were of an earthly plenty,
etc. To which we say.

. 17. The Jewish promises, being for the most part of earthly plenty (not
only, for they had also spiritual promises) they were permitted (like
children fed with milk and honey) a week of earthly joys and pleasures; But
the promises and exhibitions of them by Christ being all Spiritual to
Christians; (...). Chrysostom.
Spiritual joys (are as the Doctor says well) the "Christians eminent, if
not only portion; but these are not limited to one or twelve days in a year,
but daily joys, every day is a Christmas to a godly heart; "Rejoice in the
Lord always, again I say rejoice.

. 18. "Festivity and hospitality, (its true) are separable from riot: but very
hardly; And if gluttony and drunkenness were the prescribed worship in
Heathenish Feasts; we have found by long experience, they were the practiced
intertainement of this Festival; which many years preaching could not
reform. The heathenish usages in it (almost yielded sect. 2.) as they do
imply, that the Festival it self was instituted to gratify the Heathens, by
imitation of their feasts at the same time of the year: so God to show his
dislike, if not his detestation of it, has fuffered these Humane inventions
and institutions in his service, to be attended and celebrated, with the two
extremes of true worship, Superstition and Profaneness: we shall hear anon,
Sect. 21. That in the ancient Church on days of Festivitie, men began to
adorn themselves sumptuously to show their pride, and to fare deliciously, to
surfeting and drunkenness. So soon these abuses got into them; and all this
while for so many hundred years, could not be gotten out by all the Fathers,
and Children of the Church: The spiritual dainties of a Christian, peace with
God, and joy in the holy Ghost, (the quotidian Festival) are free from these
excesses. Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the
Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs,
making melody in your hearts to the Lord. Those that have most of these, care
least for earthly joys; and they that care most for earthly joys, (without
which the Festivitie, would be thought a time of Lent, and Fasting) (its
feared) least of those Spiritual dainties.

. 19. As some having left this custom of Christmas (so called) have used their
liberty of Feasting at other times; which argues, (says the Doctor) The good
cheer not to be the thing disliked in it:) So others that keep up, or cry up
the custom of the Festivity, have taken the liberty to lay aside Hospitality
and Charity, not only at that time, but all the year long; which shows it
was not so much the Hospitality that they liked, as an old Custom, received by
Tradition of their Fathers: which usually sticks (as Ivy to the tree) closer
to carnal hearts, then any truth of Religion, or Institution o^ God:

That good Cheer and Hospitality and better clothes, are the attendant upon
Gods Festivities, is a known and granted truth: But the Doctor must first
prove this, to be one of them Necessary or Lawful, and then talk of better
cheer and clothes Hospitality to friends, and Charity to the poor, have time
enough to be exercised all the year; But to make a Misers Feast, (as they say)
at Christmas, and to neglect both neighbors and poor all the year after, is
but a poor evidence of Hospitality or Charity.

. 20. If the Doctor will yield (as he seems to do) That when the Attendant
has destroyed the principal, and the External part shall devour the inward;
and when it shall appear that the excesses and vices of men, occasioned by the
Christmas cheer and sports, are more considerable to the raising of Souls,
than his forementioned uses are beneficial, etc. That then he will believe
there is place and season of Reformation in this particular; The time is long
ago past, when Reformation should have found a place and season, not only of
the excess aforesaid, but of the Festivitie it self, which has ordinarily,
if not inseperably been attended with such mischiefs without the least attempt
of Reformation.

. 21. When pride and surfeting, etc. got first into Festivities, in the Ancient
Churches (as is confessed) the Fathers had they endeavored the Removal of the
occasion, the Feasts themselves, they had prevented many grievous sins, which
to this day have been the concomitants of such Festivities, and had saved the
Reformers of latter times much work, which now they find by the opposition of
such as hate to be reformed. As for his Discipline to be exercised only upon
the riotous outward party; Saint Paul might have taught him a better way of
Reformation; who when the Agapae, the Feasts of Charity, (begun upon good
intentions, to relieve the poor, and testify brotherly affections) began to
be abused to surfeting and drunkenesse. 1 Cor. 11. did not exercise his
discipline only upon the outward Riotous party, but upon those Feasts
themselves, by distraction or abolition of them. Some man (perhaps the Doctor,)
would have said; must the abuse of a laudable custom take away the use thereof?
might not the Apostle have tried other remedies, to rescue a laudable custom,
from an impious appendage? as in the next section.

. 22. But yet see how Indulgent and tender the Doctor is, in his Reformation:
1. The eating and sporting part, that need not be abolished, save only in
case of great and general abuses. 2. Nor then, till the abuses are not only
so great, as decernible to out-ballance the good uses, but also so general,
that the whole Church in a manner runs madding into those very great abuses. So
that lesser and lesser general abuses need no Reformation; this is pretty
unntempered mortar: but we shall assume; The abuses have been long so great,
that they out-ballance the good pretended, and so general, that the whole
nation, (if not the whole Church) has run madding after them; (besides the
Superstition on the Churches part, almost equal to that in the brazen serpent,
of which before, and hereafter more.) Therefore its time they should be
abolished, in relation to this Festivity.

. 23. It is easily believed, that not only the loosly disposed, (as he says)
will turn the Lords day, into luxury and excess; but also the superstitiously
devoted to this day, who prefer it in opinion and practice, above the Lords
day. These latter will not labor or play upon Christmas day, no touching
either cards or dice that day, as sect. 24. But its known two well that the
Lords day, it was the ordinary practice of some great Rabbis, and
ceremonialists, after evening prayer (if not all the afternoon) to play at
cards, and so continue till night. And this is the common issue of all
inventions of men, in the service of God; as to prefer them before the
Institutions of God, "The Statutes of Omri are kept: So to make bold with Gods
Institutions, rather then their own. They (for the most part) that are most
strict and zealous in pleading for, and observation of the Festivalls are
commonly most remiss, and loose in observation of the Lords day.

. 24. For this, we have the Doctors own assertion, Christmas day it self, has
been kept, if not much more, certainly as strictly, as any Lords day in the
year, in frequenting the services of the Church, etc. in keeping at home, etc.
not touching either cards or dice, that day. The excesses have been on the
after days, etc. To which we say; First, this is part of the Superstition we
charge it with; that the day, has been esteemed and accounted more sacred,
most sacred, the Dr. calls it, sect. 20. and observed with more, much more, or
certainly as strictly as the Lords day, any Lords day in the year; we think
equal strictness of observation, were too much; to set their posts, cheek by
joale with Gods. But we know the ground of this, to be, that they make the
Lords day, and Festivalls, to be founded on the same See sect. 57. The Lords
day by the same authority appointed: yet sect. 31. he says the Apostles
instituted the Lords day.
Authority, viz. of the Church; and then why (as one of them says) should they
not have equal observation.

Secondly, the not touching of Cards or Dice, on Christmas day; (it seems the
Doctor alowes both, on the other days) may seem to add to their Superstition,
or Hypocrisy. Their Superstition (if cards and dice be lawful) in that they
forbid them on a day, that God has not forbidden them; which is to make it an
holy day, equal to Gods; (besides that noted in the former section, that some
would touch, and touch again, Cards on the Lords day) Their Hypocrisy (if they
be unlawful) that pretend to worship God one day, by touch not, handle not,
that they may take a dispensation or license to offend him all the twelve days
after. For I pray, why are Cards or Dice more lawful (I say not on the Lords
day) on Stephens or John's day, than on Christmas day? why more unholy, or
unlawful on Christmas day, than on the other?

Thirdly, that the excesses and riot, are only on other days after the
Nativity, is a poor excuse; For the whole twelve days are accounted part of
the Festivity, and ordered to wait upon it. Sect. 39. That feast consisted of
all the twelve days, says the learned Doctor. The Saturnalia were celebrated
about the same time. sect. 63.
And so the Day it self, is guilty in part, of all the excesses of the
following days; which are services fitter for the Revells of Bacchus or
Saturn, or for the birthday of an Herod, than for the Festivity of a Spiritual
Savior.

. 27. He now passes from the Authority of the particular Church of England, to
that of the universal Christian Church; to show upon what grounds, Festivalls
in general, and this of the Nativity in special pretend to stand and that he
does by certain degrees or steps.

. 28. First he acknowledges, it has not its beginning from any institution of
Christ, but either of the Apostles, or the succeeding Church. That it was not
instituted by the Apostles, the same arguments will conclude, which are used
against their Institution of Easter, sect. 6.1. There is no mention either of
Institution or observation of it in Scripture, nor any ground produced thence,
to found it on. 2. Socrates the Historian says expressly, Neither our Savior,
Lib. 5. cap. 22.
nor the Apostles commanded it, (the Feast of Easter) to be observed; and there
the scope was not (speaking of the Apostles) to settle any laws for Festival
days; but of a good life. If for no Festivalls, then not for this of the
Nativity. And its observable what he adds; There are some who think all
whoredom to be a thing indifferent, that do contend for Festival days, as
for life. It must then remain upon the succeeding Church. And there is no doubt
but this is true, the succeding Church, did set up Festivalls; but what Church
was that? not that of the Apostles age, nor that of Apostolical men, that had
lived some time with the Apostles: For the first Records of Fathers we have,
say not a word of any such observation. The succeeding Church, in the second or
third Centurie, it seems, began to take it up: and then Socrates adds; They
that received such rites, from their Ancestors, afterward transmitted, them to
their posterity as a Law, And here is the most likely Original of all
Festivalls. Hear what the learned Lord Faulkland says, in a like case, to our
purpose some of great authority (moved by a good meaning) might thus deceive
others, these thus deceived, might deceive others, till being generally spread,
other good men, being loath to oppose them, for the same reason, for which
others desired to spread them (thinking it an error that would increase piety)
they be at last taken to have been commanded by the Apostles, without
contradiction. To which may be added what he had said, in the end of the former
page, In those things which were believed very convenient, and yet feared that
unless men counted them necessary, they would be backward to practice, how
easy was it for them to be after taught, under pain of more danger then at
first they were delivered with. But Superstitious rites were never without a
show of wisdom as the Apostle says, Col. 2.23. (...) a fair pretense of
Reason. And the Doctor gives us one here. It being very reasonable, that those
who acknowledged the receipt of such a mercy from God, as was the gift of his
Son, etc. should desire to celebrate the remembrance of it, and offer it up a
voluntary oblation to Christ. But if this was so very reasonable, why did it
not seem so to the Apostles, and the Church of that and the next age? Or did
not they acknowledge the receipt of such a mercy? and were not their desires as
fervent for the celebration of a Remembrance of ir? etc. would not Christ
himself respect his own service, and honor? Nor his Apostles prescribe and
institute a voluntary oblation to Christ, if they had thought it so great an
honor to him? Are not all Superstious inventions of men, in the worship of
God, intended as voluntary oblations to him, because they would not have their
piety restrained within those narrower bounds of doing nothing in the service,
and to the honor of Christ, but what was distinctly prescribed, and
particularly instituted by him? which is expressly against the second
Commandment by the Apostle, under the word (...) Willworship. Col. 2.23. and
18. as we have said.

. 29. Such (says he) was the Feast of the Dedication of the Altar, among the
Jews, not instituted by God himself; yet the observation of it, was
approoved, and confirmed by Christ's presence at that Feast, Joh. 10.23. But
there may be many mistakes in this; and not applyable to the case in hand.
First, there were (which he takes notice of) three Feasts of the Dedication, 1.
by Solomon, 2. by Zerubbabell at the Repairing of the Temple. 3. by Judas
Maccabaeus, for the purging of it: Now he cannot but know, that learned men,
are divided, of which its here meant: Some of the first, Vide Tolet in Ioh.
10.23.
some of the second; though its probable it was not meant of either of them;
both because, we read not, that those two were ever observed above once, and
also because of the time of the observation specified, it was in winter: which
the other were not. 2. But grant it of the last; yet there are reasons to
think, that it was not a Religious Festival, but civil, as the Feast of Purim
seems to be, Esth. 9.21.22. A day of feasting and joy, and sending portions
one to another, and gifts to the poor. And so its said of the Feast of
Dedication, 1 Maccab. 4.59. They ordering it should be kept yearly, with mirth
and gladness: For though it be said, ver. 56. they offered burnt offerings;
yet that was ver. 53. according to the Law; and so was worship commanded. 3. If
it yet be said, it was a Religious Festival, and so observed, even the day it
self; then it may fairly be suggested, That they went beyond their commission,
in making this feast Annual and perpetual, which neither Solomon, nor
Zerubbabell did theirs, for ought we read. And so those were kept as
extraordinary days of thanksgiving for one turn, only which we grant lawful,
to be done by the Superior powers, as also we do, extraordinary days of
Humiliation: which the Doctor also approves; pract. Catech. Append. p. 304.4.
Another mistake is this; that that Feast was approved and confirmed by Christ's
presence at it. The t xt produced says no such thing, but only thus, It was
at Jerusalem, (mark that, not at the Temple) not elsewhere the Feast of the
Dedication; and ver. 22. Jesus walked in the Temple: So he did other days,
any day, when no Feast was: He was present in the Temple, not at the Feast;
for ought appears, which it seems, was kept with joy and Feasting in the
City.

. 30. The like may be said of the Festivities at marriage, which were not
indeed instituted by God, nor need to be, being that Marriage it self is a
Civil thing, and not Religious; and in things of that nature, if they were
soberly and temperately observed, Christ was never scrupulous, to conform to
the customs of the places, where he came. But Christmas day, is made a piece
of Religious service, and a voluntary oblation to the honor of Christ, by
others, and by the Dr. himself. sect. 28.

. 31. These Instances then are both impertinent, what has he more pertinent to
the present purpose? Why, that which I still expected to meet with; is his
strongest plea: for this he says, It must be remembered, that the weekly Fast
of the Resurrection (the Lords day) was not instituted by Christ, or God
himself; but by the Apostles of Christ: and that the mentions of the first day
of the week, are no prescriptions or Law, for the observing of it, etc. Before
we hear more, lets consider this: For first, there want not learned men, who
think that Christ himself did institute or design the day. But secondly, if
the Apostles did institute it (as the Doctor grants) that's more than some of
his Colleagues will grant, (and thank him for it) and more than he dare
peremptorily say, of his Christmas day: He speaks it doubtingly, either of the
Apostles, or succeeding Church. Secondly, if the Lords day was instituted by
the Apostles of Christ, do not their Institutions carry in them, a Divine
prescription or Law, for the observation of it? And if they instituted the
first day of the week, to be the Lords day, or Christian Sabbath, do not at
least some mentions of the first day, of the week, imply their Institution of
that day to be holy, and require withal the observation of it? as 1 Cor. 16.2.
in the judgment of some, no great Favorers of the Lords day Sabbath? Lets now
hear what he says more. If any thing of that nature (as a law) be there
sought for, it will rather appear to belong to the Annual, than weekly Feasts,
So 1 Cor. 5.8. (...) let us keep the paschall Festivity, is annexed
immediately, to Christ our Passover, etc. and to that also, the (...) or Lords
day, Rev. 1.10. is thought to belong. To which I say.

1. The vulgar Latin, authorized by the Church of Rome, (as willing to make
Easter of Apostolic Institution, as the Doctor) did not find this Law for it,
in this text: That renders it only epulemur, let us keep Feast; though the
word signify also, festum diem agere; and is by some, no mean ones glossed
thus; Because on Festival days, there were solemn Feasts of slesh observed;
Estius in locum.
hence this word is used, for to celebrate festum and solemn epulum, asolemn
Feast or Banquet; by allusion to the typical Paschall Feast. Before him the
learned Aquinas, In locum.
could not find Easter here. Epmlemur, scilicet manducantes Christum, etc. let
us feast, viz. eating Christ, not only Sacramentally but spiritually. Before
them Saint Chrysostom, was not so quick sighted to find a Law for Easter here,
but an every day Holyday, for so he says. The Apostle saying, let us keep the
Feast, he said not, because the pasch or Easter or Pentecost was present, but
showing that all or every time, is a Festival season to Christians. And
presently after, (...): every day is a Pestivall to us: yea all our life. Not
much unlike does Saint Ambrose interpret the word, Hoc est laetitiam habentes
renovationis, facta vetera fugiamus, That is, having the gladness of
renovation, let us fly our old works, etc. Sermon of Resurr.
I add but one thing more; The learned Bishop of Winchester, who pleads as
strongly for this Easter Feast, as any, yet founds it not upon this text,
though he had occasion to name it, but upon the Custom of the Church.

2. It is proved above, out of Socrates, that the Apostles instituted not any
Holydaies (except the Lords day) therefore nor this of Easter.

3. That the Lords day Rev. 1.10. should belong to the Easter day, is the
fancy of some, who of late have labored to depresse the honor of the Lords
day; contrary therein to all the ancient and modern writers. In a word, (as was
said before) the difference in observation of it, in the several Churches,
argues it not to be Apostolical. Which difference the Doctor notes in this
Section.

. 32. Its true that Aerius is by Epiphanius branded as an Heretic, for some
opinions, justly, if they be truly charged upon him: But it is well known to
the learned, that all is not Heresy, that Epiphanius calls so: Nor all Aerius
opinions justly censured as Heretical; Epit. Hist. Cen. 4. cap. 47.
as the Doctor, or any may see, if he consult with Osiander, the Epitomizer of
the Centuriators. And he is found, in some of those opinions to be seconded by
diverse ancient Fathers, as is asserted by some of our learned Modern Divines,
if it were not unnecessarie here to manifest.

2. As for the Festivities of the Martyrs, it is granted, they began betimes
(as Superstition ever attends Religion and Devotion) which though they were
intended for good ends, yet (as things of men's Inventions do) they produced in
time, much Superstition, not only in multiplication of Holydaies, but in
opinion of more Holiness, more As the Romans did, s. 67.
efficacy of prayers on such days, and at last, flat Idolatry, both in
dedication of the days to those Saints and Martyrs, and to Invocation, and
praying to them: Which at first were only times of commemoration, of their
vitues and encouragements of Imitation of them. And this might suffice for
answer to the next section.

. 33. Yet when he would infer, from this example of the Martyrs Festivities:
Where will be no reason to doubt, that so the days of the death or Martyrdom
of the Apostles themselves, were formerly solemnized by them; and that this
early, etc. he presumes too much upon his own reason; not able, it seems, to
produce any Testimonies, of those or former times, for such observations; which
I the rather take notice of, because the Doctor uses not to wave any
Testimony, that does but look that way; and also because I observe, that the
learned Chemnitius, a man of vast reading, having reckoned up the Festivalls,
Vbi supra p. 263.
that were in observation, in the first four hundred years, can find none, by
name, of any Apostle; but referres them to the time of Carolus Magnus, Anno
800. or at least to Constantines time; which was in the beginning of 400.

. 35. That Christmas, or the Feast of the Nativitie, was not Apostolical, has
been made appear before; That which he now alleges from the Constitutions
called Apostolical, will weaken his cause the more, because they are generally
accounted posthumous and spurious. And that saying of Nicephorus, (no very
credible Author) that Justinus the Emperor commanded it to be kept Festival
over the World. Shakes the Antiquity of it; For if the Apostles had instituted
it, it would have had an universal observation, over the world, long before
Justinus his days, ho lived in the 6. Century. As for Dioclesians burning so
many thousand on Christmas day, we have spoken before; and only now note,
that Nicephorus says, it was done by Maximinus; However this was, in the
beginning of the 4th Centurie; as was said above.

. 36. Though it be not much Material to the Festivities observation, whither
it was the 25. day of December, as now of late, Sect. 61:
it was kept, or some other day, (as he elsewhere says) yet the proofs for
that day, are not very cogent. Its probable they that first instituted the day,
did fix it, by some Tradition, on that day. Some, yea many things there are,
that may make us doubt of the truth of our Calculation.

First, the Doctor himself has given us one ground of scruple, sect. 7. when
he says, Christmas day is in our old Monuments, called Midwinter day, which is
the day of the Winter Solstice, confessed by him to be a fortnight distant,
from the 25. of December.

Secondly, it has been the opinion of many, if not most of our learned
Divines, that our Lord dyed, when he was about 33. and half years of age, (or
near unto 34. as the Doctor says) Now the death of Christ was at the time of
the Passover, about our March, Quaer. 1. Sect. 10.
or April; If now Christ died at 33. and an half; then count 6. months
backward, when he was just 33. years old, and that will fall about September:
If at 34. complete, then he was born and dyed just about the same time, that
is about April: That's another ground of scruple, in our Calculation.

Thirdly, the Arabic Codex of the Counsels, is of younger date, not able to
justify the Canons called Apostolical, to be Apostolical.

Fourthly, Sect. 37. the Doctor himself, is upon his ifs, and it is probable; If
it were framed by those that succeeded the Apostles, etc. so it is probable
they were first entitled, Canons of Apostolical men: Or if it were one of
those which in succeeding times were added and put into that volum, etc. This
is enough to shake the authority of those Canons, and so the Antiquity of the
Festival on such a day.

. 39. Its very like that Twelfe day is of the same Original, and same
Antiquity with Christmas day, or not not much younger, but both of them
Posthumous to the prime Antiquity. The observation of both, not much differing
in their solemnity. A special Holyday (imitating the custom of the Jews,
which kept the first and last days of every Feast, days of solemn assembly)
so special and solemn, that it outwent the Lords day, as Christmas also did;
which is usual, for men's inventions to out do the Institutions of God.

. 40. But there is something that weakens the Antiquity of this Twelfe day
Festival, viz. Vide Chemnit. Prolegom. 4. p. 14. a, in Harmon. and p. 15: a.
As baptized in the beginning of December.
that it is not certain.

1. whence it had the name of the Epiphanie: whither from the appearing of the
Star to the wisemen, or from the descending of the Holy Ghost upon Christ, at
his Baptism; or (as the Doctor himself adds, Sect. 41.) " From the first
appearing of Christ in the World.

2. It is made more uncertain, because Epiphanius affirms, that many orthodox
Christians, in Aegipt did keep the Feast of the Nativitie on that Twelfe day.
And the Doctor says, he is more inclined to the last of the three
conjectures, that is, that Epiphania, signifies the day, when Christ was born
in the flesh, as Epiphanius had said, which though the Doctor say, that it is
confuted by Saint Hierome; yet is enough to shake the Authority, of the
Institution, that certainly it is not Apostolical, nor by the Primitive purest
Churches, when the name was not agreed on, in Epiphanius time; (in the fourth
Centurie) nor the day it self distinguished, but Christmas day by some, was
observed on the same day. Whither the Mag^ came to Christ, the next twelfe day
after his Birth, or that day twelvemonth, I shall not dispute; only I shall
tell the Doctor, that Cheronicus is of opinion, that they came the twelfth day
after Christ's Birth, and seem to have reason for it; The 41, 42, 43. Sect. 45.
Harm in locum.
Sections may receive their solution, from what is all-ready said.

. 44. But now he will put it beyond all question, by the testimony of
Chrysostom, and other Ancients; out of the censuall Tables of Augustus, the
Registers of such as were enrolled at the Tax, Luc. 2.1. together with the
place and day of the month and year when it was done. This indeed would end the
question concerning the day of Christ's Birth, but makes yet nothing to the
maine question; That Christmas (so called) is of Apostolical Institution; or
of the next age. Lets hear what may be said to those Testimonies. To begin with
the most ancient, Justin Martyr he brings the Rolls to evidence the place of
Christ's Birth, but says not a word of the observation of the Festivitie of his
Birthday, in his time. The like may be said for Tertullian; He alleges the
Rolls, fidelissimum testem Dominicae Nativitatis: (mark that) a most faithful
witness of the Lords Nativity, (which Marcion denied) not Natalis Diei testem,
a witness of the Observation of his Birthday, as Festival in his time; or on
the 25. of December: for he makes no mention of that Festival at all, which is
probable he would, if any such Custom had been then in Being. The whole weight
then of the business must lie upon Saint Chrysostom, who in his Hom. of the
Nativity; says, We have received the day from those that accurately knew these
things, and which dwell in the City of Rome. Suppose we shotld grant this
Testimony to be true and Authentic, for the day of our Lords Birth; (which
yet is doubtful, by what has been said before, and shall anon) yet this will
not prove that Antiquity of the Festival, which the Doctor would thence
conclude. For besides, that Chrysostom lived in the fourth Centurie, when the
Tradition was grown to a Law, (as Socrates said) himself gives us occasion of
scruple, by the weakness of his proofs. He tells us of a threefold
demonstration, that the Day which they celebrated, Tom. 5. p. 512. l. 23.
was in the month of December, called by the Greeks (...); as the month wherein
Christ was conceived, was called (...): We shall consider his Demonstrations
in order.

1. The first is this, That this Festival was so suddenly published every
where, and that it arose and flourished to such an height. But does the Father
at all, go about to prove this? That which he says is, That the preaching of
the Gospel (so I think he means) or of Christ, by tent makers, fishermen, and
vulgar men, took the whole World, in few years, by the power of him that was
preached. But he says not a word, when the Feast of the Nativity first began
to be celebrated.

2. His second Demonstration is from the great Taxing of the World by Augustus,
when all went to be taxed, into his own City: At which time Joseph and Mary
going up to Bethlem, Christ was born, Luke 2.6.7. Now the time of this Tax, was
recorded in the Rolls of Augustus at Rome; and the good Father, was certified
from thence, by some that dwell there, that it was in such a Month, and such a
year. All this may be granted; but this proves only the truth and time of
Christ's birth; but not the observation of the day as Festival: Yes, may some
say, with the Doctor, for the Father adds, Those that lived there, did observe
that very day (that we do) (...), from their Ancestors, and from ancient
Traditions (as the Doctor renders the words) and sent us the knowledge of it.
This might well be, if we consider the time and Age that both they and this
Father lived in, which was (as we said) in the fourth Centurie: an 100. or 200.
years before, might be so styled, an ancient Tradition.

3. His last Demonstration, is from the consideration of the time of John's
conception, which was, 6. Months, before the conception of his and our Lord; as
the Scripture says expressly, Luke 1.26. Now the ground of all his large
discourse, is upon this Supposition, that the message of John's conception came
to Zacharias, in the month of September; from whence the sixth month, when the
Angel came to Mary, and she conceived her Son, was March, and as we
calculate it, the 25. day. From thence count 9. months more, and it falls to be
just our December, and the 25th day thereof. But how proves the Father, the
first, that Zachary was officiating in the Temple, in our month of December?
his discourse is very large: The sum of all comes to this: He takes for
granted, these two things.

First, that Zachary, was then high Priest, and secondly, That the time was,
the Feast of Tabernacles, and the day of expiation, on the 7th month, and 10th
day of the month, at which time only the high Priest and he alone went into
the most holy place. Now (says the Father) Zachary was at this time gone
alone into the most holy place, and all the people were without praying, Luke
1.9, 10. This he proves, because its said, when the Angel came to him, he saw
him standing on the right side of the Altar of incense; which Zacharies lot was
to burn, at that time: The Altar of burnt offerings (says he) was without, and
the Altar of incense within the Vail. But now, if learned men be not mistaken,
this is a great mistake in this Father. So in Ambr. in locum.
For first, the Author of the Notes upon the fifth Tome of Chrysostom; (Sir
Henry Savill, I suppose) makes this observation upon the Fathers words, page
515. l. 24. (...), From the premises of Chrysostom, no conclusion can be
collected, unless first it be proved, that Zachary, was the high Priest,
which yet was not true: allthough this Father, nourishes his same opinion, in
other places, by what probable argument at least, led to it, I know not. So
far he.

Secondly, Chemnitius is confident, he was not High Priest, by many reasons. 1.
Luke calls him simply Priest, and officiating in the order of his course, ver.
8. and that was, of the course of Abia, ver. 5. who was not of the High Priests
line, but an ordinary Priest, of the 8th course, of the 24. 1 Chronicles. 24.7.10.

2. He officiated, and burnt incense by Lot; but so did not the High Priest,
but by office. Exodus 30.7.

3. The Altar of Incense was not within the Veil, but without, and there
Zachary was ready at least to burn Incense, when the Angel stood on the
right side of it. The High Priest did offer his Incense indeed within the Vail,
but that was in a Censer, not upon the Altar; as is said, Levit. 16.12. but he
only took coals from the Altar of the burnt offering; and Incense from the
Altar of of Incense, and put them both in a Censer, and offered it within the
Vail: whereas the other Priests offered it daily, without the Veil. Now the
Supposition of the Father, being ungrounded, what he builds upon it, will be
far from a demonstration. But if all his proofs were good, that the month
was December, and the day, the 25. of that month, whereon Christ was born; we
ask again, what is this to prove the Antiquity of the Festival of the
Nativitie? Chrysostom himself has much shaken the Authority of the Church,
Universal, in constituting it, and celebrating of it, in all ages: For, it
seems, it was very questionable in his time; whither it was a new or an ancient
custom: Hear his own words, Tom. 5. p. 512. l. 15.
in the Homily where he so earnestly pleads for it. I know very well, that
many are even now doubtful amongst themselves, concerning this day; some
accusing, some defending: And there is much talk every where about this day,
some charging it to be new, and of late Original, and now brought in: Other
apologizing for it, that it is ancient, and from the beginning, famous and
manifest in many places; to those that inhabit Thracia, etc. So that it seems,
to be a Tradition indeed of some standing, and observed in many places, but not
universally, in Chrysostomes time, in the fourth Centurie: Yea questioned by
many; and so no universal, much less, an Apostolical Institution; which all
this while, the Doctor has endeavored to make the World believe.

. 45. His conclusion then, must needs be like his premises, weak and
insufficient, if not injurious: That, the fastidious rejecting, or not
observing the Festivalls of the Church Universal, the great days, etc. must
certainly be looked upon, by every man, as an act of affected departure, from
the Universal Church in all ages; and not only from the reformed Church of
England. An heavy charge, if it can be proved once, as it is asserted twice
here, and Sect. 12. before. But now, I can return him this answer.

1. That he has not at all proved, that the Universal Church of the first
Age, has observed any of them; nor the Universal Church, in many after ages,
has observed all those which he has named.

2. There was a time, when the Universal Church of some, yea many ages, and
this of England among them (I mean during the time of Antichrists revelling in
all Churches) observed may more Holydaies than the reformed Church of England
did observe, or he pleads for. Will he say the Church of England, and himself
are guilty of an affected departure from the Universal Church? If the Church
of England at her first Reformation saw cause, and had Power to throw away
some; may not the same Church of England, having the same power, upon just the
same or like reasons, cast off the rest? If he say; He speaks it of the
Universal Church of all Ages, and especially of the first age, we shalll
join issue with him therein; and and say, If he can prove (which I am
confident he cannot) that in rejecting, or not observing, these Festivalls, we
have departed from the Universal Church in all ages; we shall be content to
let his censure fall upon us; till then, we are safe. And for a closure of the
whole matter; we shall take into consideration his Rule, prescribed in his
first Quaerie, abour Resolving controversies, and be judged by it. It is this.
Quaere 1. Sect. 35
What ever has the concordant attestation of the Christian Church of the first
ages (the Scripture remaining obscure, or silent in the matter) that it, was
the Doctrine or practice Apostolical, there remains not to any that now lives,
any imaginable ground of sober or prudent doubting, or questioning the truth of
it. This resolution, and Case, the Doctor beginns with, and intends it as a
Rule, applicable to all the following cases; against Socinians, and other
Heretics and Schismatics, Sect. 40. He means, (we thank him) those that
reject this Festival, as Sect. 12. and 45. of this Quaerie, appears: But is
this Rule universally true? Are there no cautions, nor exceptions? yes, three
at least.

1. It must be in cases, where the Scripture is either obscure or silent in the
matter.

2. That it be not extended any further, than to the primitive Ancients.

3. And again to an accordance of those Testimonies (without any considerable
opposition) that this or that was delivered from the Apostles. We shall (by his
leave) apply this rule, to the case in hand; and dare venture to be judged by
it: First considering the Rule, and then the cautions.

And first for the Rule it self, we desire to know again, what he means, by
the Church of the first ages? If he take it inclusively, to take in the
Churches of the Apostolical time, while they were yet alive, we should not
stick to grant his rule to be good. What ever doctrine or practice has the
concordant attestation of that Church, it was Apostolical. The Negative
whereof being a surer Rule to jvdge by; What ever doctrine or practice wants
such concordant, universal, uniform Attestation, is not Apostolical. For they
being all guided, by on Spirit, would all agree, uniformly, in the same
Doctrine, or practice. But there are not many things so attested by the Church
of that age. On the other side, if he mean it exclusively of that age, and to
include only the after ages, it will prove a Crooked Rule; Many Doctrines, and
practices being taken up, which were not Apostolical, but mere Inventions of
men; which like a Gangreen, soon overspead the face of the Church: And by the
different Timing, and observation of them, proved by the best Divines not to be
Apostolical.

Secondly, for the concordant attestation, of the primitive Ancients, of the
second, or third Age, without considerable opposition. (which is one of the
Cautions) that this was delivered from the Apostles; I shall put in a just
exception, in the words of the learned and honored Lord Falkland; in his
discourse, Of the infallibility of the Church of Rome; who plead, the
universal Tradition of the Church, for their Religion, (as the Doctor does,
for his Christmas.) Thus he writes: If the Relation of one Pappias could cozen
so far, all the prime Doctors of the Church Christian, into a belief of the
celebration, of a thousand years after the Resurrection, so as, that not one of
those two first ages, oppose it, (mark that) till Dionysius Alexandrinus, who
lived at least 250. years after Christ: nay, if those first men, did not only
believe it, as probable, but Justin Martyr, says, he holds it, and so do all
that are in all parts, Orthodox Christians. Irenaeus sets it down directly for
a Tradition, and relates the very words that Christ used, when he taught this;
which is plainer than any other Tradition, is proved, or said to be, out of
Antiquity, by them (of Rome) If I say, these could be so deceived, why might
not other of the Ancients, as well be deceived, in other points? And then what
certainty shall the learned have (when after much labor, they think they can
make it appear, that the Ancients thought any thing a Tradition) that indeed it
was so, etc. The Doctors wisdom can easily apply this to the case in hand. And
I perceive he was aware of such an objection, and therefore labors to prevent
it, by saying, That Justin Martyr, Quaer. 1. sect. 38.
the prime assertor of it (that's a mistake, for he and Irenaeus also, had it
from Pappias, who was their Senior) confesses, other Christians, of pure and
pious intentions, to he otherwise minded. But for that, let him answer his
friend the Lord Falkland, Lo. Falk. reply p. 73.
who says, That Justin Martyr says, that in his time, all (all) Orthodox
Christians held it, and joins the opposers, with them who denied the
resurrection, and esteems them among the Christians, like the Saduces among the
Jews: and again says, It found no resistance, in above two Ages, by any one
known, and esteemed person. And what now is become of the Doctors Rule?

Thirdly, the Rule applied to the case in hand, will prove, (more then the
Doctor intended) a light to discover his Christmas far from an universal,
Apostolical usage; For.

1. The Rule must hold, only in things, " wherein the Scripture is obscure, or
silent: But for Institution of Feasts, (particularly this of Christmas) the
Scripture is neither obscure nor silent. For the Scripture is clear, and
speaks aloud against it; both in the Law, the fourth Commandment, which
requires peremptorily, but one of seven for God, allowing six for men's
occasions; and also in the Gospel, which clearly speaks, against observation
of days (except the Lords day, the the Christian Sabbath) whither Jewish,
Heathenish, or Christian. Festivalls of old, were part of the Ceremonial yoke,
upon the Jews, and therefore to give the Church a power, to institute
Holydaies, is to reduce the yoke again.

2. They have not the concordant Testimony of the Primitive Ancients; neither
of the Apostles themselves, nor of those that lived, in the same age with them,
as of Ignatius: nor in the second Centurie, of Pappias, Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, etc. which may the better be believed, because the Doctor brings not
one instance of any of those, so much as mentioning this Festival, except out
of the Constitutions of the Apostles, falsely so called; which Isodorus (by
Gratians report of him, Did. 16.) says, Where known to be corrupted by
Heretics, under the name of the Apostles, This Chemnitius further proves,
because the Fathers of the first Ages, do not so much as intimate any such
usage in their times. No mention there is, amongst the most ancient, of
celebrating the Feast of the Nativitie, till Basills, Nazianzenes, and
Chrysostomes time, who lived not till the fourth Centurie at least: They say
indeed, it was in practice, in some places, before their time; but that might
be, some 100. more or less years, and yet be far from the first ages of the
Church, or being Universal.

3. Another of the Doctors cautions is, it must be attested, without any
considerable opposition. But this, his Christmas found in the fourth Centurie,
as we heard, Sect. 44. In Chrysostomes time, there was a considerable
opposition; Many being doubtful, many charging the Festivity, with novelty,
and as of late brought in: For a conclusion, then of all; the Doctors Censure
is too harsh, and the Character too hard, that is set upon the refusing of it.
That it has nothing but the Novelty and contempt of Antiquity to recommend it
unto any. We shall only put him in mind of two places, in his own writings.
The one here, at Sect. 35. the other Testimony of Nicephorus; That Justinus the
Emperor first commanded it to be kept Festival over the world. Then say I, it
was not an Universal usage in all ages of the Church (which the Doctor has so
long pleaded for) for Justinus lived in the sixth Century: I know what he
answers to it: That belonging only to the edict of the Emperor for the
universal observation, does no way prejudge the Churches, whither
Apostolical, or Primitive Institution of it. Its enough to prejudge the
universal observation of it, in all Ages; and consequently it is not
Apostolical.

The other place is in his Practical Catechism, where he confesses, page 181.
It was not solemnized universally, till about 400. years after Christ. How
often has he charged us, with departure from the Universal Church, in
rejecting, and not observing the Festivities of the Universal Church: etc.
Sect. 12. and in that Sect. 45. I hope, upon second thoughts, he will be more
moderate in his Censures; and find that his rash zeal for the Authority of the
Church his Mother, and Tradition of the Ancients his Fathers, has carried him
beyond the bounds of Reason, and Religion.

. 46. The remaining part of the Doctors discourse, is spent in answering 16.
Quaries, propounded by another; But most of what he has said, may be taken
away, by what has above been answered: I shall not put my sickle into another
man's Corn; but leave it to the Author of them, or some friend of his, to
vindicate them.

. 74. The Doctor now, for a conclusion, draws out some Quaeres, of his own to
be considered and answered, by him, that shall undertake this business: as a
shorter way, to question and debate the truth, or supposed certainty of some of
his own principles: For an essay, this

. 75. Whither it be not lawful for the Church, either national, of one, or
Universal of all parts of Christendom, especially of that age nearest the
Apostles, of the first and purest time, to take upon it to institute one or
more days, upon any special occasion of some eminent mercy of Gods, toward
the whole Church, to be used yearly, in acts of Christian piety and charity,
Chemnit. Exam. de dieb. Fest. Ames. Medul. in 4. precept. D. Riv. in Exodus 20.
p. 206. 6.
by all the Children of that Church, and to expect obedience from them. But
under favor, this is not the question now between us; For not only the
Lutherans, but even the most rigid Calvinists, and Nonconformists (as they were
called) do grant, That the Church, or rather the State, has power, to set
apart any day to the acts of piety, and charity, not only upon extraordinary
eminent mercies, but upon ordinary occasions, provided 1. They be not too many,
for number; nor 2. Imposed as necessary, to the prejudice of Christian
liberty. Nor 3. made parts of the worship of God: and other like cautions and
conditions, by them prescribed: And if the Superior Powers shall appoint such
days, so qualified, this may secure both those that institute them, and those
that observe them, from any crime of Superstition. Its more then probable, that
they who first appointed those days, in memory of the Martyrs, in their
particular Churches, intended no more, but on such a day yearly, to
commemorate, the Faith and constancy of those holy Sufferers, as with thanks
to God, for his Graces in them, so to the Encouragement of other Christians, to
imitate their virtues; But after Ages soon grew Superstitions, in their Number,
in their use and end: Dedicating days to to Saints; Invocating them in their
prayers; Making the observation of them necessary: The days themselves holy,
holyer than other days, than the Lords day: placing the worship of God in
them; expecting more acceptance, more blessing from the services of those
days, as a voluntary worship. These abuses were foreseen by the Reformed
Churches, and thereupon, either the Days were rejected altogether, by some; or
cautioned against by others; especially, by this Church of England; as all do
know. But when this last generation of misdevout men, began to exceed in the
honor, estimation, and observance of those remaining Festivalls, especially
this of Christmas; equalling them with, if not preferring them above the Lords
day, (as was said before) etc. then those that were conscientious, and tender
of the Worship of God, began to oppose such inchroachments upon it, who
formerly did observe the days; and others, that thought they had Power in
their hands, did lay them aside, upon these reasons. It were too long, to
instance the particular Superstitions, not only of the vulgar people, but even
of many Divines, discovered in their Practices and Discourses against the Lords
day, and for the Holydaies: None that I know, or have met with, have manifested
more ways of being Superstitious, in this Subject of Holydaies, than the
Doctor in this discourse of Festivalls; as has been made appear, at the end
of the sixteenth Section; to which I refer the Reader, and proceed to his
second question.

. 77. Whither such an ancient Institution of the Church of Christ, by name, the
anniversarie feast of Christ's birth, though it be not affirmed to be commanded
by Christ, or instituted by the Apostles, or (in it self considered, without
respect to the Institution) absolutely necessary to the being of a Church; yet
being thus (more than lawful) pious in it self; proper in respect of the
ground, primitively Catholic, (if not Apostolic) in respect of the
Institution, may be lawfully abolished. etc. Wherein the Doctor takes for
granted, these things, which he has not proved.

1. That this Festival is of so ancient Institution, as primitively Catholic,
if not Apostolic Seeing it has been made appear to be, neither 1.
Apostolic, or 2. a Primitive Institution, nor 3. Of Catholic observation,
till at least the 400. year, by his own confession.

2. That it is more than lawful, pious in it self. When at most, it is but a
thing Indifferent in its use, and in its Abuse, by Superstition and
Willworship, more than unlawful; impious

3. That such an Ancient Institution (if it were proved so) abused to
Superstition and profanesse, may not by a particular Church, or Christian
Magistate be lawfully abolished, without regard to the Universal, the
Universal Church being never like to meet, or if they could (the greatest part
being Antichristian) unlike ever to consent to the abolishing of it. Till the
Doctor shall prove these things; a further answer is not needful.

And so I come to his last question, which is this: Whither by any obligation
of conscience it appear necessary to be thus abolished, on this only ground,
of truth, because the following days have sometimes been misspent in riot etc.
by some wicked men. But here again, the Doctor takes for granted, what he has
not proved, viz. That the only ground of truth, or only true ground of
abolishing this Festival, was the Riot committed, in the following days;
whereas the principal charge against it was, the Superstition, and
Willworship, attending the observation of it; though the Riot and profaneness
of the following days, might justly add an Aggravation to them; and call for
a Reformation.

And now, for a conclusion of all, we shall make bold, to propound some
questions to the Doctor, or any that shall undertake this cause; And they are
these.

1. Whither any Church, national, or universal (since the Apostles) have
power to institute any Religious Ceremonies as parts of worship, etc. (as it is
propounded, Sect. 9.) and in particular, this Festival of Christmas, making it
a part of Divine worship, the day equally holy as the Lords day, etc. and not
be Superstitious.

2. Whither if any Humane Institution in the worship of God be abused to
Superstition, and profaneness, it may not, ought not to be abolished.

3. Whither the Feast of Christmas in special, has not been abused to riot
and excess by the most part of vulgar people, and to Superstition also, by
them, and many Divines, and by the Doctor himself. if Superstition be an
excess of Religion, as we have proved it to be.

4. If so, then, Whither it was not necessary for such as have power in their
hands, to abolish such an Institution; as Hezekiah did the brazen Serpent
(which had a better Original and Author) for the Superstition and Idolatry
cleaving to it; and as Saint Paul did the Agapae, the Lovefeasts for the
profaneness crept into them.

D. Rivet in Exodus 20. pap. 205. a.

Hic existimamus Regulam illam habere locum: Adiaphora non necessaria, horrenda
Idolomania polluta, esse abolenda.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. l 2. for Translation. r. Tractation. l. 18. for all r. ill. l. 19. for
work and worker. r. worm and canker. p. 2. l. 14. put in First, before Table.
p. 3. l. 8. for partly r. particularly. p. 4. l. 12. r. defines p. 17. l. 21.
for since r. sin. p. 10. may r. Superstitiosiores. l. 19. r. others
worshipped. p. 19. l. 4. a fine dele a God. p. 25. r. l. 3. for when, r. then.
p. 27. l. 1. for their. r. then. l. 3. r. institution. l. 4. for our r. one. p.
28. l. 12. for bear they. p: 30. l. 5. for matter r. rather. l. 9. put in, must
did. l. 5. a f. r. Math. 15. p. 41: l. 19. for not. r. but. p. 45. l. last. r.
context. p. 46. l. 6. a f. for toiles r. wiles. p. 41. l. 18. r. Teachers. p.
45. l. 20. for these r. the p. 52. l. 23. for there r. here. p. 65. l. 17. r.
therefore. p. 66. l. 2: r. transform. p. 69. l. 1. r. outdated p. 78. l: 18.
for lo. r. Lord. p. 81. l. 9. r. abhorres. l. 18. r. hear. p. 82. l. 5. a f. r.
among p. 84. l. 11. r. voiding. p. 85. l. 3. r. (...) and l. 14 (...) p. 86. l.
11. r. works. l. 19. r. Hasidim. p. 88. l. 12. r. contradistinction. p. 96. l.
8. a f. r. distinction. p. 98. l. 12. for now, r. nor. l. 22. for his r. this.
p. 100. l. 5. for again r. often. l. 8. for we r. he. p. 102. l. 3. a f. for
there r. this. p. 108. l. 13. for trase, r. trash. so. l. 16. p. 111. l. 4. for
rod, r. rode. p. 113. l. 17. r. binds. p. 116. l. 7. a f. r. affirming. p. 119.
l. 3. r. Karaei. Title page at end for vincimur, r. vincuntur. p. 123. l. 6.
after mnde; put in, a double inference. p. 129. l. 11. for above. r. about. p.
132. l. 3. a f. for plead, r. placed. p. 166. for raising, r. ruining. p. 167.
l. 17. for distr. r. destruction. p. 175. l. 2. a fine, for is r. as. p. 176.
l. 1. for Fast r. Feast. l 13. put in I.


