CERTAIN POSITIONS CONCERNING The Fundamentals OF CHRISTIANITY, Which brings
SALVATION to all that entertain them.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for Richard Woodnothe next Door to the Golden Heart in Leaden
Hall Street, 1657.

The Preface.
THE end for which these Positions are thus put forth is this; that the Godly
wise in the Nation may be pleased to take them into their serious
consideration, and weigh these four Queries.

1 Whether therebe any untruths in any of these Positions, yea or no?

2 Whether they be all fundamental truths in Christianity, yea or no?

That is such truths as bring Salvation to the souls of those, that receive
them so, as is here-after explained.

3 Whether in Reference to the Salvation of our souls any of these truths be
superfluous, yea or no? that is, needless, or useless to build up a soul upon
the foundation unto Salvation.

4 And lastly all these Positions being found to be truths and fundamental
truths, and none of them useless to build up a soul unto Salvation; the
Question will be, whether they all as taken jointly in their coherence be
deficient to bring a soul unto Salvation, or are not sufficient to fit it to
have communion with God, yea or no?

If any that is Godly will without partiality show his sense of these
Positions, in reference to any or all of these Queries, he will do a very
acceptable service, and obliging work of Love to many of Gods people, Chiefly
if it be showed wherein they are deficient, either in the truth or in the
fundamentalitie of things useful or necessary unto Salvation, and if he will
address his meaning touching this matter to Mr. Samuel Hartlieb, dwelling near
Charring Cross, over against Angel-court in Westminster it will come to be
made use of for Gods Glory. But if these Positions shall be found sufficient,
and no ways deficient in that which is requisite to fit a penitent and
believing soul to have communion with God, then the further Question will be.

5 Whether it be not incumbent as a duty upon all those, who by these truths,
or by the chief of them, have communion, or pretend to have communion with God,
to have communion also one with another, by making open profession according to
Gods appointment of their joint dependence upon him.

6 And if any does conceive, that this is no duty, it is earnestly desired that
the reasons why it is not acknowledged to be a duty, may be alleged from God
word.

7 But if it cannot be denied to be a duty, and a great and fundamental duty
in the profession of Christianity, then let these Questions be seriously and
conscionably laid to heart. What the cause is why it is not practiced? and how
that cause may be removed?

Now to avoid mistakes concerning the different Notions which may be had
concerning a foundation, and concerning Salvation; the sense wherein they are
here taken is to be noted to be this.

1 By a foundation, is meant in this place some truth, upon which all other
truths are to be raised; to build up the souls of men to become an habitation
of God through the spirit: for the Christian Religion is that knowledge and
practice by which the souls of men are fitted to have fellowship with God, and
become a tabernacle of him through the spirit. Now the truth upon which all
other truths are to be raised, which build up the soul to this state, is none
other but this: That Jesus of Nazareth who is of the seed of David according to
the flesh, is the Christ, and the only begotten Son of God, the Savior of the
world, to be believed in according to the Testimony of the Apostles and
Prophets in the Scriptures, and to be followed.

This one truth is explicitly to be believed, and upon it all other truths
necessary or useful to build up the soul to Salvation, may be raised, and
without the explicit assent unto the truth thereof, no other truth fitting the
soul to have communion with God, can savingly be received.

2 The Notion of Salvation is here taken, as it is expressed by Christ unto
Paul, when he sends him to the Gentiles to preach unto them the Gospel, Acts
26.18. I send thee (says the Lord) To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sancrified
by Faith, which is in me. Whence I gather, that the soul whose understanding
is opened and freed from natural Ignorance to see the light of life, and is no
more a Slave to Satan and sin by Lust, but redeemed by the pardon of sins,
and set at liberty to serve the Lord by the free gift of Faith and Holiness,
and thereby is fitted to receive the inheritance of Glory: I say, that such a
soul is saved, and that Salvation in this life is nothing else, but such a
qualification of the souls of men which is wrought in them by the word, and
preaching of Faith and Repentance in the Gospel, whereof the following truths
are the fundamentalls in the sense, which in the close is explained.

Fundamental Truths.
1 WHosoever does believe in God through the Gospel, and does repent from dead
works, he shall be saved.

2 No man can be saved, except he repent from dead works, and believe in God
through the Gospel.

Of Faith.
1 NO man can believe in God through the Gospel; except by the Gospel he know
him to be the only true God, and jesus Christ whom he has sent.

2 No man can know God to be the only true God, except he believe him to be a
spirit alone before all things from everlasting; and above all things the
absolute supreme Being to everlasting: from whom, and according to whose will
all true being is in every thing; whose perfection in all goodness, in all
power, in all knowledge, in all truth and faithfulness, in all justice and
Mercy, in all glory, happiness, and Holiness, is infinite.

3 And no man does believe these things of God truly, who does not also
acknowledge him to be in respect of his being incommunicable to all creatures,
and unchangeably all-sufficient in himself: and in respect of his power the
all-present Governor of all his creatures at all times; and the, altogether
uncontrollable and irresistible Judge of all the world, which he has created.

4 No man can know God to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, except he believe him to be the Father of Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ
to be his only begotten Son, who came forth from the Father, as sent into this
world to manifest the Love of God to mankind.

5 No man can know the Father, or come to the Father, but by the Son; and
whosoever does seek to come to the Father, or to know him any otherway, cannot
attain to Salvation.

6 No man can know the Father and the Son to Salvation, except the spirit of
the Father and of the Son be given him and he reveal them to him.

7 No man can receive the spirit of the Father and of the Son, without the
Testimony of the word of God received by Faith.

8 The Testimony of the word of God is no where delivered to us infallibly, or
received by us savingly to beget Faith; but as it comes from the truth
expressed in the Scriptures of the old and new Testament.

9 The Scriptures of the old and new Testament are the oracles of God, the rule
of our Faith and Obedience, by which all spirits are to be tried, whether they
be of God or no?

10 If any man will know the true meaning of the Scriptures, he must do the
will of God, whose oracles they are; and no man can truly know him, and the
meaning of his oracles, except he keep his Commandments.

11 No man does know Jesus Christ according to the Testimony of the Scriptures,
who does not believe him to be of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
made of a woman, and made like unto us in all things, sin excepted; and who
does not also believe, that he is the true God over all blessed for ever Amen,
whose outgoings being from everlasting, he is still yesterday, to day and for
ever the same.

12 No man can know Jesus Christ according to the Testimony of the Scriptures,
who does not believe, that he is the Mediator of the new Covenant, the great
Prophet, the High Priest of the true Tabernacle, and the King of Saints.

13 No man can know Jesus Christ to be the Mediator of the new Covenant, who
has not learned the tenor of the Covenant from the truth expressed in
Scriptures; and who does not believe, that according to the Covenant God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and not imputing unto them their
trespasses.

14 No man knows Jesus Christ to be the great Prophet, who does not hearken
to him to be taught by him of the Father, and to refer the voice of all the
Prophets unto him.

15 No man knows Jesus Christ to be the High Priest of the true Tabernacle,
who does not believe, that God anointed him with the oil of Gladness above his
fellows, that he should be a Savior of his People: and who does not take
notice, that he gave himself on the cross to be an offering and a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling Savor of atonement, and a ransom for all through
Faith in his blood; that justification and remission of sins might be
obtained freely through the Grace of Faith in his Name, and not by works; and
that now the man Jesus is the alone Advocate and Intercessor appearing in
Heaven for his Elect.

16 No man knows Christ to be the King of Saints, who does not believe him
(the man Jesus of Nazareth) to be exalted at the right hand of the throne of
Majesty on high, to possess all power both in Heaven and Earth, and to be over
the Church as the head thereof, distinct in his person from all his members,
and set above every name, that is named not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come.

17 No man knows Jesus to be sent of the Father to be the Savior of the
world, who does not believe, that he (being a man) dyed for the life of the
world, and was buried and rose again from the dead, and ascended up into
Heaven; and from thence shall come again to Judge the quick and the dead.

18 No man receives the Holy Ghost, who does not believe, that he is the
sanctifier of mankind, and the Author of the New Birth, without which no man
can enter into the Kingdom of God; and the distributer of all the graces of God
unto the members of Christ in the Church, according to his own will.

19 No man knows Christ to be the head of the Church, who does not believe
that Christ has a Church in the world, whose members are united to him, and to
one another by one common spirit.

20 If any man acknowledge not that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead
at the last day, and an everlasting Judgment of the just and unjust, whereby
the Godly shall be received into everlasting joy and glory in Heaven; and the
wicked condemned unto everlasting torments with the Devils and his Angels in
Hell, this man's Faith and Hope is in vain,

Of Repentance.
1 No man can repent from dead works, except he know, that the works which he
does by himself as in his own strength, are dead and destitute of the life of
God.

2 No man does truly repent, who does not deny himself in all his own ways
and abilities, and turning to God in Christ, does cast himself only upon his
mercy.

3 No man can deny himself, and cast himself only upon Gods mercy, except he
acknowledge himself before God a sinner, and guilty of death and wrath for sin.

4 No man can acknowledge himself before God a sinner, except he know what the
Law and will of God is; and that all whatsoever is not conformable to the Law
and will of God is sin.

5 No man can know what the Law and will of God is, except he be taught it by
the truth, as it is revealed in the Holy Scriptures.

6 No man can know himself to be a sinner, except he call his conscience to an
account of his intentions and actions, and make a Judgment thereof according
to the Law of God.

7 No man does truly turn to God in Christ, who does not resign his will to
the will of God, through the love of Christ; and whosoever does not love God in
Christ more then his own life, and more then all things in the world besides,
is not truly turned to him.

8 No man does love God in Christ, who does not love his brother also for
Christ's sake.

9 No man is truly turned unto God in Christ, who does not walk out of this
evil world after Christ in all Gods commandments.

10 No man does walk after Christ out of this evil world, except he follow him
in godly simplicity by his grace, and not by worldly wisdom.

11 No man does partake of the joy of Gods Salvation in the peace of a good
conscience, who does not walk in Simplicity by the grace of God.

12 No man is truly turned unto God, who has not from his heart and in his
outward conversation denied ungodliness and worldly lust, to live soberly,
righteously and Godly in this present world.

13 No man does deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, who does allow himself to
live in any known sin whatsoever.

14 No man does live soberly, who does not mortify the deeds of the Body, to
bring it and keep it into subjection by the spirit.

15 No man does live soberly, who takes care to fare deliciously every day, and
to make provision for the flesh to fulfill the desires thereof.

16 No man does live Righteously, who does not love his neighbor as himself, by
doing to him that which he would have done to himself in the like case.

17 No man does live Godly in this present world, who does not worship God in
spirit and truth, according to his revealed will,

18 No man does worship God according to his revealed will, who does not call
upon him, and give him praises and thanks only in the name of Christ Jesus,
and for his sake.

19 No man does partake of Christ in truth, who does not persesere patiently
unto the end in well doing,

20 No man shall receive the Crown of life, who is not faithful unto death.

In what sense these truths are said to be fundamentalls.
THese truths are said to be fundamentalls of Salvation, not as if it were
absolutely necessary, to be in any favor, or any acceptance with God here, or
admitted unto life and glory hereafter; that every one should explicitly know
and understand the depth of all these truths, or be able distinctly and
knowingly to reflect upon himself in reference to all the duties, so as to
discern the power to practice the same effectually wrought in his soul; I say
this is not the meaning of denominating these truths to be fundamentalls of
Salvation, but they are said to be such implicitly, that is, by a material and
inward reference to the foundation, which is Christ Jesus, to be believed and
followed according to the Scriptures.

The meaning then is this, that all these truths have a direct relation and
connection to that main and only fundamental truth, Christ Jesus, to bring the
soul that believes in him and does follow him, unto that state of life in
him, by which it is set free from the bondage of corruption, which is in the
world through lust, and made partaker of the divine nature in a true conformity
unto his Image, that so far as any is made able through grace to know these
truths, and to practice these duties, he is certainly thereby built up
proportionally upon the true foundation, and consequently made capable to have
an entrance into the Kingdom of God, which is righteousness, peace and joy in
the Holy Ghost; and so far as any is not made able to know and practice these
truths, he is by that disability at a distance from the foundation, and
proportionally made incapable of entrance into the kingdom of God aforenamed.
As for the things, which are so necessary to be known explicitly and practiced
so, that without a full assent thereunto, no man can be in a capacity to be
built up in any degree unto Salvation, or freed from the guilt of death
eternal; it is conceived, that they are herewith expressed in the Bulck, and
perhaps cannot be precisely reckoned up and distinguished, because of the
different measures of conscientious capacities, which God has given to the
several understandings of men, which not being discernible by us, it is not in
the power of any man to say, what the measure of explicit knowledge is which is
requisite for the conversion of all souls to God.

But if we shall suppose the least capacity that may be in any, then so much
knowledge as does make the soul truly sensible, that there is a God, and that
he through love to mankind has appointed Jesus Christ a Savior of all the
souls that fly unto him for refuge in their misery; if they love God for
Christ his sake, and believing in him are willing to obey his commandments,
and do call upon his name; I say, so much knowledge as does make out these
truths unto the meanest capacities, although it be not received immediately from
the Scriptures, but from a secondary Testimony, yet being explicitly and
distinctly believed and obeyed, may suffice to bring a soul unto that state of
Salvation, although it may be ignorant of all the other fundamentals, which I
gather from the promise of God in Joel 2.32. Whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved, as it is confirmed and applied Act. 2.21, 23. Romans
10.12, 13, 14. So that, if, the Lord and his name as a Savior be known and
called upon, it may suffice.

FINIS.

