CERTAIN PROPOSALS OF DIVERSE Clerks and Attorneys Of the COURT of COMMON PLEAS,
For the taking away Fines upon Original Writs and damage clear, and Regulating
the Proceedings at Law, and remedying some Inconveniences.

Whereby the Client will be much secured, the Process shortened, the greatest
part of the charge of most Suits abated, and many unnecessary Suits in Law and
Equity prevented.

Which is the End and Desire of the Proposers.

Presented to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for J. Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honors,
THe humble Proposers observing some unnecessary charges and delay, introduced
by the corruption and multitude of Offices and Officers, which still increased,
besides some inconveniences that the corruption of time had produced, the same
being more obvious to them than others, by reason of their experience in the
practice of the Law: for remedy thereof consulted how to apply themselves to
the Parliament; and to that purpose had several meetings together, wherein the
Proposals now presented to your view were agreed on, as things that would
conduce much to the ease, benefit, and safety of the Suitor, make good
provision against the most general inconveniences, prevent many frivolous and
unnecessary Suits, shorten the process in many, and ease the charge in all; and
(which is not the least of their ambition) take away those Aspersions that seem
to blemish that Law, the Law of England, which they humbly conceive to be the
most perfect Law of any humane Law in the World; a Law that admits Nullum
absurdum, nothing against the Laws of God or Nature, against Reason, or
repugnant to any other Learning; wherein all matters of Fact are adjudged and
tried by Twelve able discreet and indifferent Neighbors to the place where the
Matter of Fact arises; and the Matters of Law are debated, adjudged, and
determined by as many of the most ancient, grave, and learned Lawyers of the
Nation, who for their great experience, integrity and wisdom, are first
deservedly called to the state and degree of Sergeants at Law, and after to be
Judges; and the process of this Law is so quick, that it seldom happens any
Cause at Law depends above three or four Terms: But Covetousness, the root of
all evil, having built some floud-gates upon the Channel thereof, whereby the
Course has been obstructed, stopped, or diverted out of its due course, and
thereby more care taken to catch the Fish for the benefit of the Officers, than
for the dispatch and advance of the Clients business; and the Proposers being
unwilling to trespass upon the Freehold of others by pulling down the Wares
themselves, have by the drawing the Channel a nearer way in some Cases, and in
other upon a lower flat, have nevertheless so ordered the business, as they
humbly conceive that most of the Grist will be ground without paying Toll at
those unnecessary Mills. And because Reformation wrestles with many
difficulties, it being hard to find an Ephesus without some Demetrius, or some
Critic that will conclude the Shrubs seek the fall of the Cedars, hoping
thereby to advance their own tops. The Proposers have been very tender not to
propose any thing that may in the least degree seem to advance their own
Interests, but many things that will turn to their particular loss, they
always preferring the public good before their own particular interests.
Neither have they rashly herein proceeded, having spent many months in the
Conception, digesting, considering, and composing of what they now present to
your more grave considerations; and as they are not the issues of rash brains,
so they have not passed without perusal and correction of many others of good
judgment and experience, and are now to live and die under your Honorable
censures: whereby if you shall receive any light to the furthering the good
work in hand, or the Republic any benefit, the Proposers have their wished
ends, and humbly therein submit themselves and these their poor labors to your
better judgments, by the hands of the most humble of

Your Servants.

THE HUMBLE PROPOSALS Of diverse of the CLERKS and ATTORNEYS Of His Majesty's
Court of COMMON PLEAS.
1. THey humbly propose and conceive, These Fines are the 200th part of the
thing demanded, beit land, debt, or damage, and must be paid at the Plaintiffs
entrance into his suit, though he never recover any thing.
That Fines upon Original Writs are against the Fundamental Reason of the
Common Laws of this Realm, which never imposes Fines but upon Offenders: But
these, Addere afflictionem afflict is, are exacted of the party injured, who
comes to sue for Justice, when the party delinquent too often escapes the
punishment. And therefore they humbly propose that the same may be taken away,
and no more paid or demanded.

2. This is proposed to prevent the charge and delay which the Client is now
at, who must be two Terms in suing to the Utlary, and is, besides the delay,
put to the charge of three Capias's, which are commonly sued forth altogether,
and returned altogether in the Sheriffs name, but by the Attorney; but by this
course of suing to the Utlary the process will be a Term shorter, and 5 s. 10
d. less charge, besides the Fine, if finable.
They humbly conceive, That the mean Process in suing to the Utlary are
unnecessary, and do tend only to charge and delay: And therefore they humbly
propose, that then the Exigent be awarded upon the return of the first Capias,
as formerly upon the Plur. Capias, and as it is now used after judgment.

3. The Common bar and new Assignment puts the Clients in every Action of
trespass Quare clausum fregit that comes to trial toat least twelve shillings
charge, and may be supplied by three or four words in the Declaration, and put
the the Client to no charge at all, and the recital of the Writ in many Actions
almost doubles the charge to the Client, and is useless.
They humbly conceive, That the common Bar and new assignment in Actions of
Trespass, Quare clausum fregit, and the recital of the Original Writ in Actions
of Trespass, and upon the Case, and several other Actions are superfluous
things, and infinitely increase the charge of the Client: They therefore humbly
propose, That in all Actions of Trespass, Quare causum fregit, the place may be
assigned in the Count. And that for the future there may be no more recital of
the Original Writ, other than in the form ensuing, that is to say; A. B.
attach. fuit ad respondend. C. D. de placito tr. or, de placito tr. super
casum, or the like, as is observed in the Kings Bench; and the Originals in all
personal Actions to be made accordingly without repetition of the special
matter.

4. They humbly conceive, that by reason Original Writs are not duly sued forth
and filed, many Judgments are daily reversed, and in the time to come are
subject to the like inconvenience by the carelessness, neglect, Many Judgments
are daily reversed for want of Originals, which sometimes happens, because the
Attorney rather than he will pay a post Terminum or more, which is 20 pence a
Term, he will hazard his Clients Cause, which Fee was originally intended as a
punishment upon the Attorney for his neglect; but it turns too often to the
destruction of the Client: and therefore the Proposers have proposed the
punishment to return to the Clients relief, and not destruction. Other times
this mischief happens, because an Attorney may perhaps forget in due time to
sue out the Original, and after when he sees the default, he would amend it,
but the Cursitors holding a course for their own benefit that no Original Writ
can be sued forth returnable of a former Term, but within the first week of the
ensuing Term, the Attorney is therefore restrained to do his duty to his Client.
or forgetfulness of the Attorney, or Clerk, or to save Post Terminums, which
turns much to the prejudice of the Client: And therefore they humbly propose,
That from henceforth there may be no restraint, but that the Plaintiff may at
any time before the want thereof assigned for Error, sue forth and file any
original writ, or other writ, to make good or warrant any judgment. And that
for the filing of Original Writs no Post Terminum be demanded or paid; and that
then, if any judgment happen to be reversed for default of Original Writ, the
Clerk or Attorney in whose default the same shall be, shall and may be fined in
such sum to be paid to the party grieved, as the Court shall (having respect to
the quality of the offense) think meet and impose.

5. They humbly conceive also, The Warrant of Attorney originally seemed of
good use, but now it is only filed by the Attorney, and is of nonuse at all,
but puts the Client to some charges and much hazard, for that the want thereof
is sufficient cause to reverse a Judgment, and the filing now of no use.
that the not due filing of Warrants of Attorney, which through forgetfulness
or carelessness is often neglected, is very dangerous to the Client, and yet of
no benefit or use at all; and therefore they humbly submit it to the judgment
of the Parliament whether the same be not fit to be discontinued, and the penal
Statutes for the enjoying thereof repealed.

6. This is the most unreasonable charge upon the Client that can be invented,
which is the tench part of what damage soever the Plaintiff recovers: as if the
Defendant upon a bargain, promise to give the Plaintiff a 1000 li. which he
recovers in damage, the Prothonotary shall bave a 100 li. and does nothing for
it, nor can justify the giving of any costs, for it was originally, as is
conceived, exacted by the Clergy as a personal Tithe, the Clergymen being the
Clerks that writ to all, or most of the Courts at Westminster.
They humbly conceive, that Damage Clear is both a great and unreasonable
burden to the Client, who after a long and tedious suit, must have his Debt, or
other duty Tythed; a duty anciently belonging to the Clergy, but is now
converted to an improper use (as they humbly conceive:) And therefore they
humbly propose, that the same may be taken away, and no more paid or demanded.

7. If the Client, because he can get no Process served upon the Defendant, be
forced to utlaw him, and then be forced to seize his Land to force him in, the
profit goes into the Exchequer, and the Client loses all, or else shall be put
to the charge of a Lease, which will lie him in above 20 Marks, and 4 pounds,
or thereabouts, yearly to continue it; and then if the party plead some seigned
Title, or reverse the Utlawry, all is lost, and it is desired, that if the
Parliament conceive it fit, that this Proposal be reduced to a Law, that care
may be taken in the penning it, that the Exchequer Clerks may not evade it, for
that lowable Laws will not hold them.
And whereas the Client is often enforced to utlaw the Defendant, by reason he
absents himself; and after a long, chargable and tedious Suit, is put also to
seize the Defendants Estate, and expects thereby to receive the benefit of his
Suit; when contrary to the poor Suitors expectation, the whole benefit is swept
into the Exchequer. They therefore for remedy thereof, humbly propose, that the
Plaintiff in such cases may have the benefit of all Seizures upon Utlawries til
his debt, or other damages with reasonable costs be satified and paid; and that
to that end Process may issue out of the Exchequer, by which the Sheriff may be
authorized, and commanded to deliver all such Goods, and Chattels, and satisfy
and pay all such moneys by him to be levied to the Plaintiff, until he be
satisfied of his debt or damages, with reasonable costs to be assessed by the
said Court; and that afterward the Sheriff be accomptable in the Exchequer,
for the profits, as before times has been used.

8. And also when as the Client having run over all the Process, and having
obtained judgment, and expecting his Execution thereupon, Writs of Error are
often brought for delay, which, though we humbly conceive our former Proposals
will make good provision against, yet the same being a Supersedeas, and
admitting long process, it is often more costly and dangerous to the Client,
than all that has preceded; and though they humbly conceive Appeals just and
useful, yet to prevent the inconveniences thereof, they humbly propose, That
no Supersedeas upon a Writ of Error be from henceforth made forth or allowed,
but that the Court where the original Judgment was entered, may make forth
Execution, as though no such Writ of Error had been brought, or Record
transcribed, unless the party prosecuting the same deposite in Court the Money,
or other Duty recovered, or give sufficient bail, to satisfy the Judgment
with the costs and damage awarded, in case the same Judgment be affirmed, or
the Writ of Error discontinued or abated, or the Plaintiff therein nonsuited;
and that the death of any party to the said suit shall not discharge such bail;
and that from henceforth no Writ of Error shall be received or allowed, unless
the same be returnable within eight days, if there shall be so many in Term;
and if there shall not happen to be eight days in Term, then at the first
return of the next ensuing Term; and that the Plaintiff in such Writ of Error
shall without any Scire facias, assign his Errors within four days after the
return of the said Writ, whereunto the Defendant in the said Error may if he
will appear gratis, and be at liberty to allege dimunution, or join in issue,
and proceed to the examination of the Errors; and that in case Judgment be
affirmed, and it appear any such Writ of Error shall be brought merely for
delay, or that the matter assigned shall not be difficult, or abide argument,
then the party Plaintiff in the said Writ of Error, to pay to the Defendant for
his or their delay therein treble costs and damage; and in case of Nonsuit or
discontinuance before argument, double costs; and in case of abatement, or in
such cases where the matter shall be difficult, single costs and damages; and
that the parties may have thereof like execution as for the principle debt or
damages.

9. They humbly conceive it fit, that some legal course were provided for the
recovery of Legacies, and that the Client should not be forced to an equitable
course in Chancery for every petit Legacy, There is (by reason the Civil Law
has no compulsary process) no remedy, but in Chancery for Legacies, where if
the Legacy be small, it is quickly spent with a great overplus.
the remedy whereby often proves worse than the disease. They therefore humbly
propose, that an Action of Debt, Trover, Detinue, or other Action, as the Case
requires, may lie at Common Law for the same, and that therein the thing
demanded upon due proof made upon the Trial, may be recovered with costs and
damages, and like defense and process may be had therein, as in such other
Actions are, or shall be used at Common Law.

10. As the Law now stands, the Heir may defeat all Creditors, for if he fear
the debts of the Ancestor, he may alient the same day his Ancestor dies, and
leave the Creditor no medium to bring his Action, and though it is true that
fraud may be averred, yet few frauds are hard to be proved.
They humbly conceive it very hard to the Creditor, that the bare alienation of
an Heir should defeat him of a just debt, the same being often done merely in
fraud, when perhaps the Creditors money purchased the land discending; and
therefore they humbly propose, that an Action of debt may lie against the Heir
in all cases, as well after as before alienation, and that his Person, Goods,
and Land, may be subject to the execution for the debt of his Ancestors upon
specialty, to the value of the land discending in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail: and
that such Action, and this proposal, may (if the Parliament shall conceive
meet) be extended to the heirs of Copyholders, as well as Freeholders.

11. They humbly propose, that for the avoiding of unnecessary and frivolous
suits at Law, that it may be enacted, that if any Attorney or Solicitor shall
deposite in the defense or prosecution of his Clients Cause, any other or
larger sum or sums, then so much as the charge thereof shall surmount unto in
Easter Term, Trinity Term, and the short Vacation, or in one other Term and
Vacation, that then such Attorney or Solicitor shall be without all remedy to
recover the same against the Client at Law.

12. In Replevin at Common Law tender of amends before impounding in all cases
was a good Bar, and by the Statute 21 Jac. in trespass for involuntary
Trespasses, tender of amends is made a good plea, being done before Action
brought: but because many times impoundings and actions are made and brought,
perhaps before the Defendant has any knowledge of the Trespass, this proposal
is presented: But for voluntary trespasses it is conceived fit to leave them at
the Common Law to prevent greater inconveniences.
And for the further avoiding of the frivolous suits at Law, they humbly
propose, that tender of sufficient amends, with costs for all involuntary
Trespasses, may be a good Bar in all Replevins and Actions of Trespass brought
for the same, so that the same be done before the Rules be out for pleading in
such Action.

FINIS.

