CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS OFFERED TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE Honorable Houses OF
PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1642.

PROPOSITIONS OFFERED TO THE CONSIDEration of the Honorable Houses of
PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honors,
BEing that your four notorious Victories over the Cavaliers (that at
Worcester, that at Keinton, that at Brainford, and that lately at Malborough)
have now as you promised, taught the present Age, and will hereafter teach the
succeeding, what it is to run into so heinous crimes; And whereas things
stand now so, that you need not any longer hire Mr Booker to calculate
Path-waies on your side; These your great Conquests (which will terrify
Historians from writing them) and these your glorious Felicities (which are
even burdensome to your selves) having given you leisure to hearken to the
sighs and groans of the people, to whom you promised a Through reformation:
That you may in some part satisfy their expectations, the time of good tidings
(which the Kings men commonly call Christmas) being now at hand, I have thought
fit to present unto you these few ensuing Considerations, which upon mature
advice I presume you will find to be of much weight with your selves, and of
much concernment to the Commonwealth.

1. That the time of gaming being now come in, you would be pleased to take
into your serious consideration that scandalous Pack of Cards, which has,
upon the Coats, names unfit for Regenerate ears; as Hercules, Alexander,
Julius Caesar, and Hector of Troy, and such like; and that you would change
them into Old Testament Names, as the Kings to be David, Josiah, Solomon,
Hezekiah: the Queens, Sarah, Rachel, Hester, Susanna: and the Knaves lastly,
Balaac, Achitophel, Tobit, and Bell. It is not without ground conceived, that
the Israel of God would be well pleased now and then to recreate themselves at
New-Cutt, and some such other games, if they had Kings and Queens of the
Circumcision, and Knaves of the Covenant. Or if some men out of an holy dislike
to Antiquity, should desire to have Modern Kings and Queens, and Knaves; that
upon the four Kings you would put the Names of any four of the five Members,
and upon the four Queens any four women belonging to them, and upon the
four Knaves, Calamy, Marshall, Downing, and Burges. For as your selves have
served us in making men take up Arms against the King, and these Ministers have
served you in absolving them that were Captives, of that Oath which the King
gave them, not to bear Arms against Him; so both of you deserve to have your
memories kept fresh in Statues: and how that may be done more conveniently then
this way, I see not.

2. That seeing you have a very useful gift, and a great Talent in Multiplying
things to the advantage of the Common cause, and that many eyes see more then
few, and so may do more good to the Commonwealth, you would be pleased to
consider, if it were not worth the labor to employ some skillful men in the
making of two sorts of Dice: Confiding Dice, and Malignant Dice; the Confiding
to be eyed with Caters, Cinques, and Sices: and the Malignant with nothing but
Aces, Deuxes, and Treys; the which Dice are to be so ordered, that the
Confiding may be sold to the Confiding, and the Malignant to the Malignant;
that so we may make a lawful and holy game for you. But provided, that for
fear we be suspected of false play, it be ordered that these Dice be thrown
out of Parliament Boxes.

3. That during all this good tide, there be no Hazard allowed, but with an eye
upon the Commonwealth: and that instead of the Night that is usually destined
to the profit of the Butler, there be a Night destined to the two Houses of
Parliament, and that the Burgesses of every town (who through the thinness of
affairs may conveniently now be dispensed with) go down into their several
Countries to look to the Boxes; who for ministering to the Commonwealth in
such a service, shall have a considerable allowance out of the gains. This I
conceive (next to the showing of the Monstrous Lord with the five Members, in
Faires and Markets) will most conduce to the swelling of the Public Burse:
and it is very fit that you, that have undergone the burden of affairs,
should have a share out of all the Losses of the Kingdom.

4. That there be no Masquing, Mumming, Blind-man-buffe, Leading Hoodwinked, or
such like Gambolls, during the Twelve days, Acted or performed in any place,
but in either, or both houses, or some of the Courts where the Committees sit,
or lastly (which is accounted the far fittest place) in some of the City
Halls, where there has been a conference between the Members, and the
Aldermen: It being a great usurpation upon the privileges of this Parliament,
that any one (without your leaves) should lie hid in any dress or disguise, so
as to see all the rest, and not be seen himself of them.

5. That being your sage Counsels have thought fit to vote down Stage Players
root and branch, but many even of the well-affected to that Reformation have
found, and hope hereafter to find, Play Houses most convenient, and parry
places of meeting: and that now in this Bag-pipe Minstralfie week (I mean,
this red pack of leisure days that is coming) there must be some Enterludes
whether you will or no: You would be pleased to declare your selves, that you
never meant to take away the calling of Stage Plays, but reform the abuse of
it; that is, that they bring no profane plots, but take them out of the
Scripture all (as that of Joseph and his brethren would make the Ladies weep:
that of David and his Troubles would do pretty well for this present: and
doubtless Susanna and the two Elders would be a Scene that would take above
any that was ever yet presented) It would not be amiss too, if instead of the
Music that plays between Acts, there were only a Psalm sung for
distinction sake. This might be easily brought to pass, if either the Court
Play-writers be commanded to read the Scripture, or the City-Scripture-Readers
be commanded to write Plays. This as it would much advantage our Part, so it
would much disadvantage the King's: for as by it we should gain a new place
of Edifying, so Captain Trig, and the rest of the Players which are now in
service, would doubtlessely return to their callings, and much lessen the
Kings Army.

6. That instead of Carols, which Farmers sons, and servants sing on Christ's
Birthday before they may eat or drink, you take order, that by some of your
best City-Poets (who will write certainly to their capacity) there be some
songs made of the great deeds that his Excellency did at Worcester, and
Edgehill, in which 'twould do admirably well, if there were inserted a mention
of that honorary sum of five thousand pounds which you presented him with
after his Triumph through Kingsstreet; that so, if Posterity should chance to
question (as all certainties, you know, may be more then questioned) whether he
got the victory or no, they may be compelled to this Dilemma; either to
acknowledge His Nobleness that would receive so little for conquering, or your
Liberality that would give him so much for being beaten.

7. Being Nativity-Pies must be eaten with Spoones, and at the good time the
good old people bring out Plate older then themselves, among which there are
most commonly the Twelve Apostles, that is, a dozen of Sainted spoones, so that
their very instruments of eating are so many Idols, it is more then wished you
would take away those Apostles, as being now scandalous superfluities: and that
your own heads (as you can best agree among your selves) were fixed upon them:
which next to that I mentioned of the Cards, would be a pretty kind of Statue
to keep up your glories.

8. Being your Papers (which a while very handsomely thrust out Epistles and
Gospels in many places) are not now read in Churches, and that they begin nor
to be prevalent, but with the ignorant of your own party, and some few of the
Kings servants, which are paid by you, as well as by Him, and therefore may be
called Double-Pentioners: That (it being now a time when much fruit and spice
is to be vented) you would send all your Declarations, Messages, Answers,
Replies, and such like weekly productions, to the Grocers, with a command, that
they make up their fruits, and spices in no other paper but them, which Art
will disperse them, not into every shire but into every house; so that no
necessary business, that requires paper, would be done without them.

9. And lastly, That as the Revenewes of Bishops, and Cathedrals, and many
Lay-Land-Lords are already set apart for public disposal, so you would
opportunely advise of a way to sequester all New-yeares-guifts (as Capons,
Turkies, Hens, Geese, and such things as will live) for the use of the King
and Parliament, and command them to be immediately after the Day brought up to
London; and withal, that for their better safety, your own High Sheriffs
(which we hear you are now pricking) may raise a posse Comitatus to conduct
them in Droves from Shire to Shire. This I conceive will relish well with the
ordinary sort of Citizens, who begin already to be nice Stomack'd, and shortly
will be able to get down nothing but what falls from Heaven.

These grand Considerations I thought fit to present to you, because you have
now carried up things to that height, that the people expect nothing little
from you. They are but few in number, but your wisdom is great, and it is
easy to add to another man's Invention.

And thus I have discharged my duty to you, without which I should not have
thought I had closed the Year as a Subject, and a true Member of the
Commonwealth.

FINIS.

