Angliae Notitia, OR THE PRESENT STATE OF England: Together with DIVERSE
REFLECTIONS UPON The Ancient State thereof.

In Magnis voluisse sat est --

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for John Martyn, and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Bell without Temple Bar, 1669.

To the Reader.
IN this small Treatise the Reader may not reasonably expect to have his Fancy
much delighted, (Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri^) but only to have his
Understanding informed; and therefore the Author has industriously avoided all
curious Flowers of Rhetoric, and made it his whole business to feed his Reader
with abundant variety of Excellent Fruits.

Here are interspersed some Observations, which though already known to many
English men, yet may be unknown to most Strangers and Foreigners, for the
information of whom this Book is secondarily intended; and for that end will
shortly be translated into the French Tongue; whereby may be extinguished in
some measure the Thirst which Foreigners generally have to know the Present
State of this Considerable Monarchy.

Although the main aim is to inform all men of the Present State of this
Kingdom, yet diverse Reflections are made upon the past State thereof, that so
by comparing that with the present, some men may thereby not only be moved to
endeavor the Restoration of what was heretofore better, and the abolition of
what is now worse; but also in some measure may foresee without consulting our
Astrologers and Apocalytick men, what will be the future state of this Nation:
according to that Excellent Saying, Qui respicit praeterita and inspicit
praesentia, prospicit etiam and futura. A good Historian by running back to
Ages past, and by standing still and viewing the present times, and comparing
the one with the other, may then run forward, and give a Verdict of the State
almost Prophetic.

In the many Reflections upon the Ancient State of England, frequent use is
made of diverse grave Authors, as of Horn in his Mirror of Justice, of Glanvile,
Bracton, Britton, Fortescue, Linwood, Stamford, Smith, Cosens, Camden, Cook,
Spelman, Seldom, etc. And for the present State, Consultation was had with
several eminently learned Personages yet living, to the end that the Reader
might receive at least some satisfaction in every particular, without the
trouble and charges of a great Library. And as the Author does sometimes use
both the Words of the Living and the Writings* of the Dead, without quoting
any, to avoid Ostentation; so he hopes that this ingenuous Confession being
made at first, no man will be offended though he give no notice when the
Observation is theirs, and when it is his own; having taken special care that
both in theirs and in his own, there should be nothing but the truth: so that
although the Reader not perceiving every where by what Authority diverse things
are averred, may be apt to suspect that some things are gratis dicta, yet if it
shall please him to make search, he will find that generally they are vere and
cum authoritate dicta.

However in a Subject so multiform as this, where so many Marks are aimed at,
no wonder if in some the Author has not hit the White; but wheresoever it was
missed, it is not perhaps much wide therefrom; and if in any thing by
misinformation or mis-observation there be any palpable mistake (as humanum
est errare) it shall in the next Impression be duly corrected, if any Reader
will be so cou^teous as to advertise either the Author, the Printer, or
Publisher, by Letter or otherwise.

Brevity and a Laconique Style is aimed at all along, that so there might be
Magnum in Parvo, that it might be mole minimus, though Re magnus; that the
whole State of England might be seen at once, (...), or as in a Map; that as it
will be a necessary Book for all Englishmen at all times: so every one might
without trouble always carry it about with him as a Companion to consult upon
all occasions.

Mistakes in printing to be corrected thus:
Page 4. line 23. read complexion. p. 9. l. 6. bl^^ out Nightingales, and l.
20. add Rye. p. 8. l. 3. blot out Snipes. p. 23. l. 17. add It wants not
(...) Bat^s, and abounds in M^dicinal Springs. p. 31. l* 6. r. had. p. 42. l*
22. r. Treaties. p* 47. l. 14. r. 25th* p. 73. l. 20. make a Cross within the
Circle. p. 81. l. 4. r. (...) for (...) p. 98. l. 6. r. Dominium. p. 114. l.
10. r. Lieu. p. 122. l. 6. r. Eslire. p. 132. l. 15. r. Dominium. p. 136. l. 5.
r. Vice* ii. p. 168 l. 16. r. Co^sili^^ ii. p. 189* l. 17. r. thirteenth. p.
192. l. 4* r. married to Prince William only Son to Henry, etc. (...) 20^* l.
4. r. 17* ^e^^n. b. 1619. p. 237. l. 8. for Esses* r. t^^ Garter. p. 247. l.
21. for Stool r. Stole. p. 251. l. ^3. for George Duke of Albemarle, r. George
Duke o^ Buckingham. p. 269. l. 10. r. Lord Chamberlain. p. 272. l. 14. for Crey
r. Crew. p. 335. l. 14. r. Saxon^ p. 445. l. 11. r. William Craven. p. 446. l.
13. r. Audley. p. 449. l. 9. blot out Richard Boil p. 454. l. 17. r* 170* p.
504. l. 23. r. may descend.

The Contents.
OF England in general, p. 1. to p. 80. and therein, Of its Name, Climat,
Dimensions, Air, Soil, Commodities, Inhabitants, their Language, Stature, Diet,
Attire, Buildings, Number, Dispositions, Virtues, Vices, and Re^reations. Of
the Weights, Measures, and Moneys. Of the English Computation, Manner of
Numbering, Names, and Surnames. Of the Government of England in general, p. 80.
Of the King of England p. 87. to p. 149. and therein of his Name, Title, Arms,
Patrimony, Dominions, Person, Office, Prerogative, Power, Supremacy,
Sovereignty, and Respeet. Of Succession to the Crown of England, p. 149. Of the
Kings Minority, Incapacity, and Absence. Of the Queen of England, p. 156. Of
the Sons and Daughters of England, p. 160. Of the present King of England, p.
171. to p. 183. and therein of his Name, Surname, Genealogy, Birth, Baptism,
Education, Restoration, Marriage, etc. Of the present Queen of England, p.
183. Of the Queen Mother, p. 189. Of the present Princes and Princesses of the
Blood, p. 194. to p. 213. Of the Great Officers of the Crown p. 213. to p. 233.
Of the Kings Court, the Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Government therein,
p. 233. to p. 300. Of the Queen Consorts Court, p. 300. Of the Q. Mothers
Court, p. 305. Of the Duke of York's Court, p. 312. Of the Three States of
England, and first of the Clergy, p. 326. to p. 405. and therein of their
Dignity, Name, and Degrees, etc. Of the Privileges belonging to the
Archbishops, p. 335. Of the Privileges belonging to Bishops, p. 352. A
Catalogue of all the Bishops, p. 363. Of the Privileges of the Inferior
Clergy, p. 376. A Catalogue of all the Deans of England, p. 402. Of the Second
State or Nobility of England, p. 405. to p. 457. and therein of their Degrees,
Privileges, Precedence, State, Revenues. etc. p. 417. A Catalogue of all the
Peers of England according to their Precedence, p. 439. Of the Third State or
Commons of England, p. 457. Of Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Citizens,
Handycrafts, etc. p. 472. Of the Liberties and Properties of the English
Subjects, p. 493. Of the Women in England, p. 497. Of the Children, p. 509. Of
the Servants, p. 513.
OF ENGLAND.
ENgland the better part of the best Island in the whole World anciently with
Scotland, Name.
called Britain, and sometimes Albion; was about 800 years after the
Incarnation of Christ (by special Edict of King Egbert descended from the
Angles a people of the Lower Saxony) named Angle or Englelond, thence by the
French called Angleterre, by the Germans Engeland, and by the Inhabitants
England.

It is situated between the Degrees 16 and 21 Longitude, Climat.
equal with Normandy and Britany in France, and between 50 and 57 Northern
Latitude, equal with Flanders, Zeland, Holland, Lower Saxony, and Denmark.

The longest day in the most Northern part is 16 hours 44 minutes, and the
shortest 7 hours 16 minutes.

It is in length 386 miles, Dimensions.
in breadth 279, in compass (by reason of the many Bays and Promontories)
about 1300 miles; in shape triangular, contains by computation about 30
Millions of Acres, about the thousandth part of the Globe, and 333d part of the
habitable earth, almost ten times as big as the United Neatherlands, five times
as big as the Spanish Neatherlands; less than all Italy by almost one half, and
in comparison of France is as 30 to 82.

The Air is far more mild and temperate (if not more healthy) than any part of
the Continent under the same Climat. Air.


By reason of the warm vapors of the Sea on every side, and the very often
Winds from the huge Western Sea, the Cold in Winter is less sharp than in some
parts of France and Italy, though more Southern.

By reason of the continual blasts from Sea, the Heat in Summer is less
scorching than in some parts of the Continent, that lies more Northern.

As in Summer the gentle Winds and frequent Showers qualify all violent Heats
and Droughts, so in Winter the Frosts do only meliorate the cultivated Soil,
and the Snow keep warm the tender Plants.

It is blessed with a very fertile wholesome Soil, Soil.
watered abundantly with Springs and Streams, and in diverse parts with great
Navigable Rivers; few barren Mountains or craggy Rocks, but generally gentle
pleasant Hills and fruitful Valleys apt for Grain, Corn, or Wood. The
excellency of the English Soil may be learnt (as Varro advised of old) from
the Complexion of the Inhabitants* who therein excel all other Nations: or
else from the high value put upon it by the Romans and the Saxons, who ^ookt
upon it as such a precious ^pot of ground, that they thought it worthy to be
fenced ^n like a Garden Plot with a mighty Wall of fourscore miles ^n length,
viz. from Tinmo^th on the German Sea* to Solwey Frith on the Irish Sea (whereby
the Caledonian Bores might be excluded) and with a monstrous Dike of fourscore
and ten miles, viz. from the Mouth of the River Wy to that of the River Dee
(whereby the Cambrobritan Foxes might be kept out; lastly,) the excellency of
her Soil may also be learnt from those transcendent Elogies bestowed on her by
Ancient and Modern Writers, calling England the Granary of the Western World,
the Seat of Ceres, etc. That her Valleys are like Eden, her Hills like Lebanon,
her Springs as Pisgah, and her Rivers as Jordan. That she is a Paradise of
Pleasure, and the Garden of God. O fortunata and omnibus terris beatior
Britannia, te omnibus coeli ac soli ditavit Natura, tibi nihil inest quod vitae
offendat, tibi nihil deest quod vita desiderat; ita ut alter orbis extra orbem
poni ad delicias humani generis videaris. O happy and blessed Britanie, above
all other Countries in the World, Nature has enricht thee with all the
blessings of Heaven and Earth. Nothing in thee is hurtful to Mankind, nothing
wanting in thee that is desirable, in so much that thou seem another World
placed besides, or without the great World, merely for the delight and pleasure
of Mankind.

As it is divided from the rest of the World, Com^odities.
so by reason of its great abundance of all things necessary for the life of
Man, it may without the contribution of any other part of the World, more
easily subsist than any of its Neighboring Countries.

Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis. First, for Food, what plenty
every where of Sheep, Oxen, Swine, Fallow Deer, and Coneys, what plenty of
Hens, Ducks, Geese, Turkeys, Swans, Peacocks, Phesants, Partridges, Woodcocks,
Snipes, Plovers, Quails, Herons, Bustards, Heath Cocks, or Grouse Thrushes, or
Throstles, Black-birds, Veldevers, Nightingales, Pigeons, and Larks. What
plenty of Salmon, Trouts, Carps, Tench, Lampreys, Pikes, Perches, Eeles,
Crevish, Flounders, Plaice, Shads, Mullets. What great abundance of Herrings,
Pilchards, Oysters, Lobsters, Crabs, Mackerel, Whitings, Soles, Smelts, Sprats,
Prawnes, Ruffes, etc. What great plenty of Apples, Pears, Plums, and Cherries.
How does England abound with Wheat, Barley, Pulse, Beans, and Oats, with
excellent Butter and Cheese, with most sorts of Edible Roots and Herbs. It
wants not Red Deer, Hare, Goats, etc. It wants not Wild-Ducks, Wild-Geese,
Puffins, Snipes, God-wits, and many other kind of Sea-fowl. It wants not
Apricocks, Peaches, Nectarins, Grapes, Figgs, Melons, Quinces, etc. Walnuts and
Haselnuts. Lastly, for Drinks, England abounds with Beer, Ale, Sider, Perry,
and in some places with Metheglin.

Now of all these things there is such a constant continuance, by reason of the
Clemency of the Climat, that scarce the least Famine which frequenteth other
Countries, has been felt in England these 300 years.

Then for Raiment, England produces generally not only very Fine Wool, which
makes our Cloth more lasting than other Country Cloth, and better conditioned
against Wind and Weather; but also such great abundance of Wool, that not
only all sorts from the highest to the lowest are clothed therewith* but so
much has been heretofore transported beyond the Seas, that in honor of the
English Wool, that brough^ heretofore such plenty of Gol^ into the Territories
of Charle^ the puissant and bold Duke of Burgundy (where the Staple for English
Wool was then kept^ he instituted that famous Military Order of the Golden
Fleece, a^ this day in highest esteem with the whole House of Austria* This
abundance and cheapness of Wool in England proceeds not only from the
goodness of the Soil, but also from the freedom from Wolves and temperateness
of Heat and Cold, which in other Countries creates a great charge of a constant
guarding their Sheep, and housing them by Night, and sometimes by Day. Also for
advancing the Manufacture of Cloth, that necessary Earth called Fullers Earth,
is no where else produced in that abundance and excellency as in England.
Beside, there is in England great plenty of excellent Leather for all sorts of
uses, nor wants it Hemp and Flax, at least not ground fit to produce them.

For Building it wants not Timber nor Iron, Stone nor Slate, Brick nor Tiles,
Marble nor Alablaster, Mortar nor Lime, etc. Lead nor Glass.

For Firing, either Wood, Sea-Coal, or Pit-Coal, almost every where to be had
at reasonable rates.

For Shipping, no where better Oak, no where such Knee Timber, as they call it
or Iron to make serviceable and durable Guns.

For War, for Coach, for Highway, and Hunting, no where such plenty of Horses;
also for Plow, Cart, and Carriages: insomuch as Mules and Asses so generally
made use of in France, Italy, and Spain, are utterly despised in England.

Moreover, England produces besides a mighty quantity of Tin, Lead, and
Iron, some Brass, Copperas, Allome, Salt, Saffron, and diverse other beneficial
Commodities; it wants not Mines of Silver, yielding more in their small
quantities of Ore, and so richer than those of Po^osi in the West Indies,
whence the King of Spain has most of his Silver; those yielding usually but
one Ounce and a half of Silver in one hundred Ounces of Ore: whereas these in
Wales, Cornwall, Lancashire, and the Bishopric of Durham, yield ordinarily 6
or 8 Ounces per Cent. ^ut these lying deep, are hard ^o come unto, and Workmen
^ear, which is otherwise in Po^osi.

Vineyards have been hereto^ore common in most of the ^outhern and Middle Parts
of England, and Silks might be ^ere produced, as it was once ^esigned by King
James; but a great part of the Natives prone to Navigation, supplying England
at a very cheap rate with all sorts of Wine, Silks, and all other Foreign
Commodities, it has been found far better Husbandry to employ English Ground
rather for producing Wool, Corn, and Cattle, for which it is most proper. In a
word, though some Countries excel England in some things, yet in general there
is no one Country under Heaven whose Air is better stored with Birds and
Fowls, Seas and Rivers with Fishes, Fields with all sorts of ^orn, the Pastures
with Cattle, the Forests, Parks, and Woods with Wild Beasts, only for
Recreation and Food; the Mines with Metals, Coals, and other Minerals; where
are fewer ravenous and hurtful Beasts, fewer venomous Serpents or noisome
Flies; fewer Droughts, Inundations, or Dearths; fewer Unwholsom Serenes,
Pestilential Aires, Tempestuous Hurricanes, or Destructive Earthquakes; lastly,
where there is a greater abundance of all things necessary for man's life, and
more especially for all kind of Food; insomuch that it has been judged that
there is yearly as much Flesh and Beer consumed in England by over plentiful
Tables, as would well serve three times the number of People. Add to all this,
that being encompassed with the Sea and well furnished with Ships and abundance
of Commodious and excellent Havens and Ports, it excels for safety and security
(which is no small praise) all the Neighboring Countries, if not all the
Countries in the World.

It has been possessed by five several Nations, Inhabitants.
and coveted by many more, and no wonder so fair and rich a Lady should have
many Lovers, it being a Country (as was said of the Tree in the midst of
Paradise) good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired; whereas
Scotland, Wales, Biscay, Switzerland, and other like Countries, continue still
in the possession of their Aborigines, of the first that laid claim unto them,
none since judging it worth their pains to dispossess them.

The first Inhabitants of England are believed to be the Britains, descended
from the ^auls, subdued afterward by ^he Romans; who by reason of ^^eir
troubles nearer home, ^ere constrained to abandon this Country about 400 years
after Christ: whereupon the Picts ^ahabitants of Scotland, inva^^ng the
Britains, they call to ^^eir aid the Saxons; who cha^ng away the Picts, soon
made themselves Masters of the Britains: but these not able to en^ure the heavy
yoke of the ^axons, after many Battles and Attempts to recover their lost
Liberties and Country, retired ^r were driven most of them unto the two utmost
Western ^arren, and mountainous parts of this Country, called afterward by
the Saxons Walishland, instead of Gaulishland, as the Germans still call Italy
Walishland, because inhabited by the Cisalpine Gauls; and the French call our
Country of Britains, Le Pais de Gales.

The Saxons solely possessed of all the best part of this Isle* were for a long
time infested, and for some time almost subdued by the Danes, and afterward
wholly by the Normans, who drove not out the Saxons, but mixed with them; so
that the English blood at this day is a mixture chiefly of Norma^ and Saxon,
not without (...) tincture of Danish, Romish, and Britain Blood.

The English Tongue being a^ present much refined, Their Language
exceedingly copious, expressive, and significant (by reason of a liberty taken
by the Natives of borrowing out of all other Languages, whatever might conduce
thereunto) is (as their blood) a mixture chiefly of the Old Saxon (a Dialect of
the Teutonick) and the Old Norman (a Dialect of the French) not without some
savor of the Britains, Romans, and Danes Languages.

The Romans possessing England, caused their Tongue the Latin once to be
generally used in this Country.

The Saxons succeeding, introduced their Language wheresoever they seated
themselves.

The Normans afterward getting possession of England, caused the Norman or
French Tongue to be learnt at School by the Saxons, and for a long time had all
Laws, Pleadings, Sermons, etc. in French.

The Latin Tongue at present is made use of in Court Rolls, Processes of
Courts, in Charters, Commissions, Patents, Writs, Bonds, etc.

The Names of all Shires, Cities, Towns, and Villages, Places and Men, in
England, are generally Saxon, and so are most Nouns Appellative, and a great
part of the Verbs.

In French, or rather Norman, are still written the Common Laws, and learnt by
young Students thereof. Also some Pleadings, and all Mootes and Law Exercises,
are wholly French. In Parliaments the King does in French signify his assent
or dissent to all Bills.

The Natives of England (by reason of the Temperate Climat, Stature.
Mild Air, not rendered unequal by high Mountains, nor unhealthy by many
Marshes, plenty of wholesome food, and the use of Beer rather than Wine) pour la
belle taille and le beau teinct au visage, as the French say, for a just
handsome large proportion of body, for clear complexions and pleasing features,
do surpass all the Nations of the World.

The English are generally great Flesh-eaters, Diet.
although by the nearness of the Sea and abundance of Rivers and Fish Ponds,
there is no want of Fish. In former times their Table was in many places
covered four times a day, they had Breakfasts, Dinners, Beverages, and Suppers,
and every where set Dinners and Suppers: until in the late troubles, wherein
many eminent families were much impoverisht, a Custom was taken up by some of
the Nobility and Gentry, of eating a more plentiful Dinner, but little or no
Supper; as on the contrary the Romans and Jews anciently, and the hotter
Climats, at this day have little or no Dinners, but set Suppers.

The English are not now so much addicted to Gluttony and Drunkenness as
heretofore, nor unto Tobacco, which perhaps within a few years may be expelled
by Coffee.

Feasting also is not now so ^ommon and profuse as anti^ntly, for although the
Feasts ^t Coronations, at the Installations of Knights of the Garter,
^onsecrations of Bishops, Entertainments of Ambassadors, ^he Feasts of the Lord
Mayor of London, the Sergeants at Law, and Readers Feasts in the Innes of
Court, are all very sumptuous and magnificent in these times; ^et compared to
the Feasts of ^ur Ancestors, seem to be but ^iggardly and sparing: for Richard
Earl of Cornwall, Brother ^o Henry 3, had at his Marri^ge Feast, as is
recorded, Thir^y thousand Dishes of Meat; and King Richard the 2d. at a
Christmas spent daily 26 Oxen, ^oo Sheep, besides Fowl and ^ll other Provision
proportionably; so anciently at a Call (...) Sergeants, each Sergeant (sait^
Fortescue) spent sixteen hundred Crowns, which in thos^ days was more than
1600^ now.

The English that feed not over liberally (whereto the gre^^ plenty and variety
of Vian^^ entice them) nor drink much Wine, but content themselv^^ with Small
Ale or Sider (b^ especially the later) are observed to be much more health and
far longer lived than any (...) our Neighbor Nations.

For Apparel or Clothing the French Mode has been gen^rally used in England of
la^^ years. Attire.
In the time of Queen Elizabeth sometimes the Hi^^ Dutch, sometimes the Spanis^
and sometimes the Turkish and Morisco Habits, were by the English worn in
England when the Women wore Doublets with Pendant Codpieces on the Breast full
of Tags and Cuts; moreover Gallygascons, Fardingales, and Stockings of diverse
Colors: but since the Restoration of the King now reigning, England never
saw, for matter of wearing Apparel, less prodigality and more modesty in
Clothes, more plainness and comeliness than amongst her Nobility, Gentry, and
Superior Clergy; only ^he Citizens, the Country People, and the Servants,
appear clothed for the most part above and beyond their Qualities, Estates, or
Conditions. Since our late breach with France, the English Men (though not the
Women) have quitted the French Mode, and taken a grave Wear, much according
with the Oriental Nations.

Churches thorowout all England and all Public Edifices, Buildings.
are generally of Solid Stone, covered with Lead, Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches every where ample and magnificent; and the Churches in Market Towns
and Opulent Villages spacious and solid enough* Houses in Cities that were
heretofore usually of Wood* are now built of good Stone o^ Brick, and covered
with Slat^ or Tile; the Rooms within formerly wainscotted, are now hung with
Tapistry or other convenient Stuff, and all cieled with Plaster, excellent
against the rage of Fire, against the Cold and Sluttishness.

The Modern Buildings have been far more slight and of less continuance than
the Ancient.

The Houses of the Nobles and Rich, are abundantly furnished with Pewter, Brass,
Fine Linen, and Plate. The mean Mechanics and ordinary Husbandmen, want not
Silver ^poons, or some Silver Plate, in their Houses.

The Windows every where ^lased, not made of Paper or Wood, as is usual in
Italy and ^pain.

Chimnies in most places, no ^toves, although the far more ^outhern parts of
Germany can ^ardly subsist in the Winter without them.

England contains 9725 Parishes, Number of Inhabitants.
now allowing to each Parish one with another 80 Families, there will be 778000
Families, and to each Family 7 persons, there will be found in all Five
Millions four hundred forty six thousand souls, and amongst them about one
Million of Fighting Men.

As some years before the late Troubles no people of any Kingdom in the World
enjoyed more freedom from Slavery and Taxes, Dispositions and humors of the
Inhabitants*
so generally none were freer from evil tempers and humors: none more devoutly
religious, willingly obedient to the Laws, truly loyal to the King, lovingly
hospitable to Neighbors, ambitiosly civil to Strangers, or more liberally
charitable to the Needy.

No Kingdom could show a more knowing prudent Nobility, a more valiant Gentry,
a more learned and pious Clergy, or a more contented loyal Commonalty.

The Men were general honest, the Wives and Women chaste and modest, Parents
loving, Children obedient, Husbands kind, Masters gentle, and Servants faithful.

In a word, the English were then according to their Native Temper, the best
Neighbors, best Friends, best Subjects, and the best Christians in the World.

Amongst these excellent Tempers, amongst this goodly Wheat, whilst men slept,
the Enemy came and sowed Tares, there sprang up of later years a sort of people
sour, reserved, narrow-hearted, close-fisted, self-conceited, ignorant,
stiff-necked, Children of Belial (according to the genuine signification of the
word) ever prone to despise Dominion, to speak evil of Dignities, to gainsay
Order, Rule, and Authority; who have accounted it their honor to contend with
Kings and Governors, and to disquiet the Peace of Kingdoms; whom no deserts
nor clemency could ever oblige, neither Oaths or Promises bind, breathing
nothing but sedition and calumnies against the Established Government, aspiring
without measure, railing without reason, and making their own wild fancies the
square and rule of their consciences; hating, despising, or disrespecting the
Nobility, Gentry, and Superior Clergy, etc.

These lurking in all quarters of England, have at length with their
pestilential breath infected some of the worse natured and worse nurtured
Gentry, diverse of the inferior Clergy, most of the Tradesmen and very many of
the Peasantry, and prevailed so far, as not only to spoil the best governed
State, and ruin the purest and most flourishing Church in Christendom, but
also to corrupt the minds, the humors, and very natures of so many English;
insomuch that notwithstanding the late happy restoration of the King and
Bishops, the incessant joint endeavors and studies of all our Governors to
reduce this people to their pristine happiness, yet no man now living can
reasonably hope to see in his time the like blessed days again; without a
transplantation of all those sons of Belial (as King James in his grave
Testament to his Son did intimate) without an utter extirpation of those Tares,
which yet the Clemency and Meekness of the Protestant Religion seems to forbid.

The Nobility and chief Gentry of England have been even by Strangers compared
to the finest Flower, but the lower sort of common People to the coursest bran;
the innate good nature, joined with the liberal education and converse with
Strangers in foreign Countries, render those exceeding civil; whereas ^he
wealth, insolence, and pride ^f these, and the rare converse ^ith strangers,
have rendered them so distastful, not only to ^he few strangers who frequent
England, but even to their own Gentry, that they could sometimes wish that
either the Country were less plentiful, or that the Impositions were hea^ier,
for by reason of the great abundance of Flesh and Fish, Corn, Leather, Wool,
etc. which the Soil of its own bounty, with little labor does produce. The
Yeomanry at their ease and almost forgetting labor, grow rich, and thereby so
proud, insolent, and careless, that they neither give that humble respect and
awful reverence which in other Kingdoms is usually given to Nobility, Gentry,
and Clergy, nor are they so industrious or so skillful in Manufactures as some
of our Neighbor Nations; so that in England it is no Paradox to affirm* that
as too much indigency in the inferior sort of people does depress the spirits
and dul^ the minds of them, so too plentiful and wanton a fortune, causes in
them a lazyness* and less industry, that state commonly enjoying most peace and
order and happiness, where either the moderate barrenness of the Country, or
want of ground, or multitude of Imposts (as in Holland) do necessitate the
common people to be industrious in their Callings, and so to mind their own, as
not to disturb the State and Church Affairs.

Moreover, of the English especially it has been observed, that then it is
happiest with them, when they are somewhat pressed, and in a complaining
condition, according to that old Riming Verse, Anglica gens est optima flens
and pessima gaudens.

The English Nation anciently were and at this day are very apt to hearken to
Prophesies, and to create Prodigies; and then interpret them according to their
own extravagant conceits; to invent and then maintain any the most prodigious
Opinions and Tenants in Philosopy of Divinity; some of the inferior sort of
late holding abominable opinions, unworthy even of men, and such as in no Age
were ever broacht before.

The English National Vices were anciently Gluttony and the effects thereof
Lasciviousness, (when they made four Meals in a day and most excessive
Feasting, with great plenty of French Wine) when Women of professed
Incontinency were permitted to proffer their Bodies to all Comers, in certain
places called Stews or Stoves, or Bathing places; because men were wont to bath
themselves there (as still in other Countries) before they addressed themselves
to venereous acts. Moreover Pride in Apparel, wherein they were anciently so
extravagant and foolish, that diverse Statutes and Homilies have been made
against that Excess, and an English Man was wont to be pictured naked with a
pair of Tailors Sheers in his hand, and a piece of Cloth under his arm, with
Verses annexed, intimating that he knew not what fashion of Clothes to have.

Excess of drinking was anciently more rare in England, as appears by an old
Poet, Ecce Britannorum mos est laudabilis iste,
Vt bibat arbitrio pocula quisque suo.


The Danes in the time of King Edgar first brought it in, but it was afterward
banished ^ence, so that we find no ancient Statute against it; for though the
Statutes heretofore ^^ade against Excess in Apparel and Diet are ancient, yet
those against Drunkenness are but of late date.

As the English returning from the Wars in the Holy Land, brought home the foul
disease of Leprosy, now almost extinct here, though not yet in our
neighboring Countries; so in our Fathers days the English returning from the
Service in the Netherlands, brought with them the foul Vice of Drunkenness, as
besides other Testimonies, the Term of Carous, from Gar ausz, All out, learnt
of the High Dutch there in the same Service; so Quaffe, etc. This Vice of late
was more, though at present too much; insomuch that some persons, and those of
quality, may not safety be visited in an Afternoon, without running the hazard
of Excessive drinking of Healths (whereby in a short time twice as much liquor
is consumed as by the Dutch, who sip and prate) and in some places it is
esteemed a piece of wit to make a man drunk, for which purpose some swilling
insipid Trencher Buffoon is always at hand.

However it may be truly affirmed that at present there is generally less
Excess in Drinking (especially about London since the use of Coffee) less
excess in Diet, but principally in Apparel than heretofore: insomuch that the
poor Tradesman is much pincht thereby; for as it is expedient for the benefit
of the whole Commonwealth, that diverse unnecessary and superfluous Commodities
should be allowed, as 'Tobacco, Coffee, Spices, Sugars, Raisins, Silks, etc. so
some less hurtful excesses (as in Apparel, Diet, Building, Coaches, Lackeys,
etc. must either be connived at, or much of all the money of the Nation must
lie dead and unemploied (as it now does in the private, sullen, niggardly
Non-Conformists hands) and Tradesmen must either starve, or be sustained by
Alms.

The Sin of Buggery brought into England by the Lombards, as appears not only
by the word Bugeria, but also by Rot. Parl. 50. Edw. 3. N. 58. is now rarely
practiced amongst English, although sometimes discovered amongst Aliens in
England, and then punished by Death without any remission.

Impoysonments, so ordinary (...) Italy, is so abominable amongst English, as
21 H. 8. (...) was made High Treason, though since repealed; after which the
punishment for it was (...) be put alive in a Caldron of Water and there boiled
to ^eath.

Stabbing in England is much ^^ore seldom than in Italy, ^^e English being
easy to be re^onciled to pardon and remit ^ffences, not apt to seek re^enge;
the true well-bred En^lish have more of inclination (...) goodness, which the
Greeks ^alled Philanthropia, than other Nations; the Nobility and well-^red
Gentry delighting to be ^racious and courteous to Strangers, compassionate to
the afflicted, and grateful to Benefactors, when their Purse or Esta^ not
diverted by other extravagant expenses, will give the^ leave to remember them.

The English according to the Climat, are of a middle temp^^ The Northern
Saturnine a^ the Southern Mercurial temp^^ meeting in their Constitution render
them ingenious and active, yet solid and perseve^ring, which nourisht under
suitable liberty, inspires a courage generous and lasting.

Their Ingenuity will not allow them to be excellent (...) the Cheat, but
subject in tha^ point rather to take tha^ give, and supposing others (...)
open-hearted as themselves are many times in Trespass overmatcht by them, whom
they overmatch in Arms and ^^ue Valor.

The English since the Reformation so much given to Literature, that all sorts
are generally the most knowing people (...) the world. They have been (...)
much addicted to writing, and ^specially in their own language, and with so
much license or connivence, that according to the observation of a ^earned Man,
there have ^een since the Reformation more good and more bad Books printed and
published in the English Tongue, than in all the Vulgar Languages of Europe.

For solidity of matter, for ^legancy of style in their Sermons, Comedies,
Romances, as also in their Books of Philosophy, Physic, History, and all other
solid Learning, no Nation has surpassed the English and few equalled them.

The English, especially the Gentry, are so much given (...) Prodigality and
Slothfulness that Estates are oftener spent an^ sold than in any other Country
They think it a piece of frug^lity beneath a Gentleman (...) bargain before
hand, or to cou^^ afterward, for what they eat (...) any place, though the rate
(...) most unreasonable; whereby (...) comes to pass that Cooks, Vintners,
Innkeepers, and such mean fellows, enrich themselves, and beggar and in (...)
over the Gentry. In a word* by their prodigality it comes to pass, that not
only those, but Tailors, Dancing-Masters, and such Trifling Fellows, arrive to
that riches and pride as to ride (...) their Coaches, keep their ^^mmer Houses,
to be served (...) Plate, etc. an insolence insuportable in other well governed
Nations.

For variety of Divertisements, Recreations.
Sports and Recreations, ^o Nation does excel the English.

The King has his Forests, ^hases, and Parks, full of variety of Game; hunting
Red and Fallow Deer, Foxes, Others, Hawking, his Paddock Courses, Horse Races,
etc. ^broad; and at home Tennis, Baloon, Biliards, Comedies, Masks, etc. The
Nobility and chief Gentry have their Parks, Warrens, Decoyes, Paddock-Courses,
Horse Races, Hunting, Coursing, Fishing, Fowling Hawking, Setting Dogs,
Tumblers Lurchers, Duck-hunting, Cock fighting, Tennis, Bowling, Biliards,
Tables, Chesse, Draughts Cards, Dice, Catches, Questions, Purposes, Comedies,
Dancing, Singing, all sorts of Musical Instruments, etc. The Citizens and
Peasants have Hand-Ball, Football, Skitles, (...) Nine Pins, Shovel-board,
Sto^-Ball, Goffe, Trol Madam, Cuagels, Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Bow and
Arrow, Throwing at Cocks, Shuttle-cock, Bowling, Quaits, Leaping, Wrestling*
Pitching the Bar, and Ringing of Bells, a Recreation used in no other
Country of the World.

Amongst these Cock-fighting may seem too childish and unsuitable for the
Gentry, and (...) the Common People Bull^^iting and Bear-baiting may ^^em too
cruel, and for the ^itizens Football very uncivil (...) rude.

For Weights and Measures at ^^esent used in England, Weights and Measures.
there ^^ve been very many excellent ^^atutes and Ordinances, and ^undance of
care taken by our ^ncestors to prevent all cheating and deceit therein.

By the 27th Chapter of ^agna Charta the Weights and ^easures ought to be the
same yet all England, and those to (...) according to the Kings ^^andards of
Weights and Mea^^res kept by a special Officer (...) his House, called the
Clerk (...) Comptroller of the Market.

Of Weights there are two sorts used at present thorowout all England, viz.
Troy Weight and Avoirdupois. In Troy weight 24 grains of Wheat make a Penny
weight Sterling, 20 Penny weight make an Ounce, 12 Ounces make a Pound; so
there are 480 Grains in the Ounce, and 5760 Grains in the Pound.

By this Weight are weighed Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Bread, and
all manner of Corn and Grain; and this Weight the Apothecaries do or ought to
use, though by other divisions and denominations: their least Measure is a
Grain.

20 Grains make a Scruple marked 3 Scruples make a Drach. marked 8 Drachmes make
an Ounce, marked 12 Ounces make a Pound, marked lb
Avoir du pois has 16 Ounces to the Pound, but then the Ounce Avoir du pois is
lighter than the Ounce Troy by 42 Grains in 480, that is near a 12th part; so
that the Avoir du pois Ounce contains but 438 Grains, and is as 73 to 80,
that is 73 Ounces Troy is as much as 80 Ounces Avoirdupois, and 60 Pound
Avoirdupois is equal to 73 Pounds Troy, and 14 Ounces Troy and a half, and the
10th part of a Troy Ounce make 16 Ounces Avoirdupois.

By this Weight are weighed in England all Grocery Wares, Flesh, Butter,
Cheese, Iron, Hemp, Flax, Tallow, Wax, Wool, Lead, Steel, also all things
whereof comes waste, and therefore 112 l. Avoirdupois is called a hundred
weight, and 56 l. half a hundred, and 28 l. a quarter of a hundred, o^ a Tod.
Eight Pounds Avoirdupois amongst the Butchers is called a Stone.

Note that when Wheat is at 5 s. the Bushel, then the Penny Wheaten Loaf is by
Statute to weight 11 Ounces Troy, and (...) Half penny White Loaves to weigh as
much, and the Household Penny Loaf to weigh 1^ Troy Ounces and two third part of
an Ounce, and so more (...) less proportionably.

All Measures in England are either Applicative or Receptive. Measures


The smallest Mensura applicationis or applicative measure ^s a Barley Corn,
whereof 3 in length make a fingers breadth or Inch, 4 Inches make a Handful, 3
Handful a Foot, 1 Foot and a half makes a Cubit, 2 Cubits a Yard, 1 Yard and a
quarter makes an Ell, 5 Foot make Geometrical Pace, 6 Foot a ^athom, 16 Foot
and a half make a Perch, Pole, or Rod, (...) Perch make a Furlong, 8 ^urlongs,
or 320 Perch make English Mile, which according to the Statute of 11 H. 7.
^ight to be 1760 Yards, or ^80 Foot, that is 280 Foot more than the Italian
Mile; 60 Miles, or more exactly 69 English Miles and a half, make a Degree, and
360 Degrees or 25020 Miles compass the whole Globe of the Earth.

For measuring of Land in England, 40 Perch in length and 4 in breadth make an
Acre of Land (so called from the German word Acker, and tha^ from the Latin
Ager) 3^ Acres ordinar^ly make a Yar^ Land, and one hundred Acre are accounted
a Hide of Land but in this and also in some Weights and other Measures^ the
Custom of the place is otherwise, yet must be regarded.

Mensurae Receptionis, or the Receptive Measures, are tw^ fold; first of Liquid
or Mo^^ things, secondly of Dry things* About a pound Avoir dupois makes the
ordinary smallest receptive measure called a Pint, 2 Pints make a Quart, 2
Quarts a Pottle, 2 Pottles a Gallon, 8 Gallons a Firkin of Ale, 9 Gallons a
Firkin of Beer, 2 such Firkins or 18 Gallons make a Kilderkin, 2 Kilderkins or
36 Gallons make a Barrel of Beer, 2 Barrels a Hogshead, 2 Hogsheads a Pipe or
Butt, 2 Pipes a Tun, consisting of 2300 Pints or Pounds.

A Barrel of Butter or Soap is the same with a Barrel of Ale.

The English Wine Measures are smaller than those of Ale and Beer, and hold
proportion as 4 to 5; so that 4 Gallons of Beer Measure are 5 Gallons of Wine
Measure, and each Gallon of Wine is 8 pounds Troy Weight. Of these Gallons, a
Rundlet of Wine holds 18, a Tierce of Wine holds 42 Gallons, a Hogshead 63
Gallons, a Pipe or Butt holds 126, and a Tun 252 Gallons or 2016 Pints.

To measure dry things as Corn or Grain, there is first the Gallon which is
bigger than the Wine Gallon and less then the Ale or Beer Gallon, and is in
proportion to them as 33 to 28 and 35, and is counted 8 pounds Troy weight. Two
of these Gallons make a Peck, 4 Pecks a Bushel, 4 Bushels the Comb or Curnock,
2 Curnocks make a Quarter; and 10 Quarters a Last or Weigh, which contains 5120
Pints, and about so many pounds; so that in a Garrison of 5000 men, allowing
each but a pound of bread per diem, they will consume near a Last or 80 Bushels
every day, and 250 Men in a Ship of War will drink a Tun of Beer in 2 days,
allowing each man but his Pottle per diem.

At first all Nations bartered and exchanged one commodity for another, Moneys.
but that being found troublesome, by a kind of Custom, good liking, or usage,
amongst all Civilized Nations, Silver and Gold as most portable, pliable,
beautiful, and less subject to rust, has been as early as the days of
Abraham, chosen to be the Instruments of Exchange and measure of all things,
and were at first paid only by Weight, till the Romans about 300 years before
the Birth of Christ invented Coining or Stamping Gold and Silver.

When Julius Caesar first entered this Island, here were current instead of
Money, certain Iron Rings, afterward the Romans brought in the use of Gold,
Silver, and Brass Coyns.

In the time of King Richard the First Moneys coined in the East parts of
Germany being for its purity highly esteemed, some of those Easterlings were
sent for over, and employed in our Mint, and thence our Money called Esterling
or Sterling Money, as some think; though others say of the Saxon word Ster,
Weighty.

King Edward the First since the Norman Conquest, established a certain
Standard for Coin in this manner: Twenty four Grains made one Penny Sterling,
20 Penny weight one Ounce, and 12 Ounces made a Pound Sterling, consisting of
20 Shillings. Of these 12 Ounces, 11 Ounces 2 Penny weight Sterling, was to be
of pure Silver, called Leaf Silver, and the weight of about 18 Penny Sterling
in allay the Minter might add: So that anciently a Pound Sterling was a Pound
of Troy weight, whereas now a Pound Sterling is but the third part of a Pound
Troy, and little more than a 4th part of Avoirdupois weight.

The Money of England was abased and falsified for a long time, till Queen
Elizabeth in the year 1560, to her great praise called in all such Money; since
which time no base Money has been coined in England, but only of pure Gold
and Silver, called Sterling Money; only of later times, in relation to the
necessity of the Poor, and Exchange of great Money, a small piece of Brass
called a Farthing, or fourth part of a Penny, has been permitted to be coined,
but no man enforced to receive them in pay for Rent or Debt; which cannot be
affirmed of any other State or Nation in the Christian World, in all which
there are several sorts of Copper Money as current with them for any payment as
the purest Gold or Silver.

No Moneys in any Mint are made of pure Silver, because Silver in its purity is
almost as flexible as Lead; and therefore not so useful, as when hardened with
Copper.

Gold minted pure would also be too flexible, and therefore is in all Mints
allaied with some Copper; and most Mints differ in more or less allay.

The Ordinary Silver Coyns at present in England, are according to weight,
either the Ounce Troy, the half Ounce, the 5th part, 10th part, 15th part, 20th
part, 30th part, or 60th part; thus denominated, The Crown, Half Crown,
Shilling, Six Pence, Four Pence, Three Pence, Two Pence, a Penny.

The Standard of Sterling Silver in England is Eleven Ounces and Two Penny
weight of Fine Silver, and 18 Penny weight of Allay of Copper out of the Fire,
and so proportionably; so that 12 Ounces of pure Silver, without any allay, is
worth 3 l. 4 s. 6 d. and an Ounce is worth 5 s. 4 d. 1 ob. but with allay is
worth but 3 l. and the Ounce 5 s.

The Ordinary English Gold Coyns are now only the old Carolus, or 20 s. Piece,
which by a late Proclamation is current at 21 s. 4 d. it weighs 5 Penny
weight 20 Grains. The New Guinea 20 s. weighs 5 Penny 10 Grains.

The Standard of the English Carolus piece, or Ordinary Gold, is in the Pound
weight Troy 22 Carrats of Fine Gold and 2 Carrats of Allay Silver or Copper;
that is, 11 Ounces of Fine Gold and one Ounce of Allay Silver or Copper.

The Spanish, French, and Flemish Gold is of equal fineness with the English.

The English Silver Money has less Allay than the French or Dutch.

The Moneyers divide the Pound weight into 12 Ounces Troy.

The Ounce Pen weight Grain Mite Droite Periot. into 20 Pen. w. 24 Grains. 20
Mites. 24 Droites 20 Periots. 24 Blanks.



The English Silver is coined at 3 l. 2 s. the Pound of Troy weight, the 2 s.
being allowed the Minters for Coinage.

The English Gold is coined at present at 44 l. 10 s. the Pound Troy weight,
whereof 15 s. is allowed the Minters for Coinage.

So that now the proportion of Gold to Silver in England, is as one to 14 and
about that is to say. one Ounce of Gold is worth in Silver 14 Ounces and about
or 3 l. 14 s. 2 d. of English Money.

That the English Coin may want neither the purity nor the weight required, it
is most wisely and carefully provided, that once every year the Chief Officers
of the Mint appear before the Lords of the Council in the Star Chamber at
Westminster, with some pieces of all sorts of Moneys-coined the foregoing
year, taken at adventure out of the Mint, and kept under several Locks by
several persons till that appearance, and then by a Jury of 24 able Goldsmiths
in the presence of the said Lords, every piece is most exactly assaied and
weighed.

Since the happy restoration of His Majesty now reigning, the coining or
stamping of Money by Hammers has been laid aside, and all stamped by an Engine
or Skrew; whereby it is come to pass that our Coins for neatness, gracefulness,
and security from counterfeiting, surpass all the most excellent Coins not only
of the Romans, but of all the Modern Nations in the World.

In England at the beginning of Christianity they counted as all other
Christians, English Co^^^tation.
according to the then Roman Account, by Olympiads or space of five years.
Afterward (in the Reign of Constantine the first Christian Emperor) by
Indictions or Fifteen years; at length in the Reign of the Emperor Justinian,
532 years after Christ's Incarnation (and not before) all Christians generally
began to count ab Anno Christi Incarnati; at which time one Dionysius Exiguus
or Abbas, a worthy Roman, had finished a Cycle for the Observation of Easter,
which was then generally received, and is still observed by the Church of
England; the ground whereof is this. The Vernal Equinox at that time was
accounted to be the 21 of March, and by consequence must be the earliest Full
Moon, and then March the 8 must be the earliest New Moon; and April the 5 the
latest New Moon, and April the 18 the latest Full Moon; which happening on a
Sunday (as it will when the Dominical Letter is C. and the Golden Number 8)
then Easter that year will be April 25. So when the New Moon shall be on March
8, and that happening on a Sunday (as it will when the Dominical Letter is D.
and the Golden Number 16) then Easter will be on the 22 March, as was this year
1668.

But the Romish Church following new Rules for finding of Easter, it happens
sometimes that their Easter is full 5 weeks before ours, and sometimes with
ours, but never after ours; for Pope Gregory the 13th in the year 1582, having
observed that upon exact account the year contained above 365 days, not full 6
hours (as had been from the time of Julius Caesar hitherto reckoned) but only 5
hours 49 minutes and 16 seconds, and that this difference of almost 11 minutes
in the space of about 134 years, makes one whole day, which not considered
since the Regulation of Easter, had brought back the year at least 10 days;
insomuch that the Vernal Equinox which was at first on the 21 of March, was now
on the 11th of March; by reason whereof sometimes 2 Full Moons past between the
Equinox and Easter, contrary to the Primitive Institution thereof; which was,
that Easter should always be observed on the Sunday following the first ^ull
Moon after the Vernal Equinox, Pope Gregory then having observed these
inconveniences, resolved at once to take away 10 days, and that out of the
Month of October, by calling the 5th day thereof the 15th, and that for that
year those Festivals which fell in those 10 days, which by reason of the
Vintage time were but few, should be celebrated upon the 15, 16, and 17th days
of that Month. And that the Equinox might never retrocede for the future, it
was then provided that every 400 years 3 Bissextile years should be left out;
that is, in the years 1700, 1800, and 1900, and so again in 2100, 2200, and
2300, leaving the year 2000 to have its Bissextile, and so every 400th year.

The English Nation, as all other States that withdrew* themselves from under
the Bishop of Rome's Usurped Authority, before the said year 1582, except
Holland and Zealand, observe still the Ancient Account made by Julius Caesar 43
years before the Birth of Christ; and is therefore called the Old Style or
Julian Account: the other observed by those still under the Romish Yoke, is
called the New Style or Gregorian Account; and is (by reason of the aforesaid
10 days taken away) 10 days before ours for the beginning of Months, and for
all Fixed Festivals; but various for all Moveable Festivals.

Easter and the other Moveable Feasts in England, are most certainly thus
found. Shrove-Tuesday is always the first Tuesday after the first New Moon
after January, except that New Moon happen on a Tuesday, then the next is
Shrove-Tuesday, and the Sunday following is Quadragesima, and the Sixth Sunday
after is Easter Day, and the Fifth Sunday after Easter is Rogation Sunday, and
the Thursday following, being 40 days after the Resurrection, is Ascension
day; 10 days after which, or 50 days after Easter is Pentecoste or Whit
sunday, and the Sunday following is Trinity Sunday: Which Computation of the
Church of England agrees with all the Eastern Christian Churches, for they and
we find Easter by the Rules which were generally received by all Christendom,
Anno 532, and ever since till 1582, it was altered by the Pope as aforesaid,
yet cannot it be denied but that this old Computation is become erroneous; for
by our Rules, two Easters will be observed within one year, as in the last year
1667, and not one Easter to be observed this year; as this Author observed the
last year in his Proposals to the Parliament.

Advent Sunday has a peculiar Rule, and is always the Fourth Sunday before
Christmas Day, or the nearest Sunday to St. Andrews, whether before or after.

The year in England according to the Cycles of the Sun and Moon, and according
to Almanacks begins on the First of January; but the English Church and State
begins the year from the day of Christ's Incarnation, viz. on the 25 of March,
which also is observed in Spain; yet the Portugues (as diverse Countries in
Africa) begin their year on the 29th of August, the Venetians on the first of
March according to the Epact, the Grecians on the longest day, as the old
Romans did on the shortest day; which two last seem to have most reason, as
beginning just at the Periodical day of the Suns return.

The Natural day consisting of 24 hours, is begun in England at Midnight, and
counted by 12 hours to Midday, and again by 12 hours to next Midnight; whereas
in Italy, Bohemia, Poland, and some other Countries, their Account (...) from
Sunsetting by 24 of the Clock to the next Sunsetting and at Noremberg and
Wirtenberg in Germany, according to the old babylonian Account they begin at
the first hour after Sunrising, to count one of the Clock, and so again at the
first hour after Sunset.

Probably there was a time when those Names of Number English Numbering.
now in use amongst all Civilized Nations were unknown, and Men applied their
Fingers of one or both hands to those things they desired to keep account of;
and thence it may be that the Numeral words are but Ten in any Nation, and in
some Nations but Five; and then they begin again, as after december, undecim,
duodecim, etc.

The Hebrews and the Greeks instead of Numeral Words used the Letters of their
Alphabets, beginning again after the Tenth Letter.

The Latins made use only of 7 of their Capital Alphabet, viz MDCLXVI, all
comprehended in this Figure O and all made use of in the same order, in the
late year 1666, which never did happen before, or ever will happen again.

The English (as all the Western Christian World till about 400 years ago) used
only Numeral Words in all Writings; but since use the Figures 1, 2, 3, etc.
which the Christians learnt first of the Maures or Arabs, and they of the
Indians.

Nomina quasi Notamina, English Names.
Names were first imposed upon Men for distinction sake by the Jews at their
Circumcision, by the Romans at the 9th day after Birth, and by the Christians
at the Baptism; of such signification for the most part that might denote the
future good hope or good wishes of Parents toward their Children.

The English Names of Baptism are generally either Saxon, as Robert, Richard,
Henry, William, Edward, Edmund, Edwin, Gilbert, Walter, Leonard, etc. Which are
all very significative; or else out of the Old and New Testament, as John,
Thomas, James, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc.

Names super-added to the Christian Names the French call Sur noms (i. e.)
supernomina. Surnames^


The Hebrews, Greeks, and most other Ancient Nations, had no Surnames fixed to
their Families as in these days, but counted thus, for example among the
Hebrews, Melchi Ben Addi, Addi Ben Casam, etc. So the Britains, Hughe ap Owen,
Owen ap Rhese, etc. so the Irish, Neal mac Con, Con mac Dermoti, etc.

As Christian Names were first given for distinction of Persons, so Surnames
for distinction of Families.

About Anno 1000 the French Nation began to take Surnames with de prefixed, as
at this day is their usual manner. The English also took to themselves
Surnames, but not generally by the Common People, till the Reign of Edw. 2.

At first, for Surnames the English Gentry took the Name of their Birthplace
or Habitation, as Thomas of Aston or East-Town, John of Sutton or South-Town;
and as they altered their Habitation, so they altered their Surname. After,
when they became Lords of places, they called themselves Thomas Aston of Aston,
John Sutton of Sutton.

The Common People for Surnames added their Fathers Name with Son at the end
thereof, as Thomas Johnson; Robert Richardson. They also often took their Fathers
Nick Name or abbreviation, with addition of s, as Gibs, the Nick Name or
abbreviation of Gilbert, Hobs of Robert, Nicks of Nicholas, Bates of
Bartholomew, Sams of Samuel; and thence also Gibson, Hobson, Nickson, Batson,
Samson, etc. Many also were surnamed from their Trade, as Smith, Joyner,
Weaver, etc. Or from their Office, as Porter, Steward, Shepherd, Carter, or
from their Place of Abode, as Atwood, Atwell, Athill; which since are shrunk
into Wood, Wells, Hill.

The Normans at their first coming into England brought Surnames for many of
their Gentry with de prefixed, as the French Gentry does generally at this day,
and their Christian Names were generally German; they being originally
descended from a part of North Germany. And some for about 200 years after the
Conquest, took for Surname their Fathers Christian Name, with Fitz or Fills
prefixed, as Robert Fitz-William, Henry Fitz-Gerard, etc.

The Britains or Welsh more lately civilized, did not take Surnames till of
late years, and that for the most part only, by leaving out a in ap, and
annexing the p to their Fathers Christian Name; as instead of Evan ap Rice, now
Evan Price; so instead of ap Howel, Powel; ap Hughe, Pughe; ap Rogers, Progers,
etc.

The most ancient Families and of best account for Surnames in England, are
either those that are taken from Places in Normandy and thereabouts in France,
and from some other Transmarine Countries, or else from Places in England and
Scotland; as Devereux, Seymour, Nevile, Montague, Mohun, Biron, Bruges,
Clifford, Berkley, Darcy, Stourton, etc. which anciently had all de prefixed,
but of later times generally neglected.

Of the Government of ENGLAND in general.
OF Governments there can be but three Kinds, for either One or More, or All,
must have the Soveragn Power of a Nation. If One, then it is a Monarchy; If
More (that is an Assembly of Choice Persons) then it is an Aristocracy; If All
(that is the General Assembly of the People) then it is a Democracy.

Of all Governments the Monarchical, as most resembling the Divinity, and
nearest approaching to perfection (unity being the perfection of all things)
has ever been esteemed the most excellent. (...)
(...)


For the Transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes or Rulers thereof,
Prove. 28. 2.

Of Monarchies some are Despotical, where the Subjects like Servants are at the
Arbitrary Power and Will of their Sovereign, as the Turks and Barbarians:
Others Political or Paternal, where the Subject like Children under a Father,
are governed by equal and just Laws, consented and sworn unto by the King; as
is done by all Christian Princes at their Coronations.

Of Paternal Monarchies, some are Hereditary, where the Crown descends either
only to Heirs Male, as in France; or next of Blood, as in Spain, England, etc.
Others Elective, where upon the death of every Prince, without respect had to
the Heirs or next of Blood, another by Solemn Election is appointed to succeed,
as in Poland and Hungary; and till of late in Denmark and Bohemia.

Of Hereditary Paternal Monarchies, some are dependent and holden of Earthly
Potentates, and are obliged to do Homage for the same; as the Kingdoms of
Scotland and Man, that held in Capite of the Crown of England, and the Kingdom
of Naples, holden of the Pope; others independent, holden only of God,
acknowledging no other Superior upon Earth.

England is an Hereditary Paternal Monarchy, governed by one Supreme,
Independent, and Undeposable Head, according to the known Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom.

It is a Free Monarchy, challenging above many other European Kingdoms, a
freedom from all Subjection to the Emperor or Laws of the Empire; for that the
Roman Emperors obtaining anciently the Dominion of this Land by force of Arms,
and afterward abandoning the same, the Right by the Law of Nations returned to
the former Owners pro derelicto, as Civilians speak.

It is a Monarchy free from all manner of Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, and
thereby from diverse inconveniences and burdens, under which the neighboring
Kingdoms groan; as Appeals to Rome in sundry Ecclesiastical Suits, Provisions,
and Dispensations, in several cases to be procured from thence; many Tributes
and Taxes paid to that Bishop, etc.

It is a Monarchy free from all Interregnum, and with it from many mischiefs
whereunto Elective Kingdoms are subject.

England is such a Monarchy, as that, by the necessary subordinate Concurrence
of the Lords and Commons in the making and repealing all Statutes or Acts of
Parliament, it has the main advantages of an Aristocracy and of a Democracy,
and yet free from the disadvantages and evils of either.

It is such a Monarchy, as by a most admirable temperament affords very much to
the Industry, Liberty, and Happiness of the Subject, and yet reserves enough
for the Majesty and Prerogative of any King that will own his people as
Subjects, not as Slaves.

It is a Kingdom that of all the Kingdoms of the World is most like the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ's; whose yoke is easy, whose burden is light.

It is a Monarchy that without interruption has been continued almost 1000
years, and (till of late) without any attempts of change of that Government: so
that to this sort of Government the English seem to be naturally inclined, and
therefore during the late Bouleversations or over-turnings, when all the art
that the Devil or Man could imagine, was industriously made use of to change
this Monarchy into a Democracy, this Kingdom into a Commonwealth, the most and
the best of English Men, the general Spirit and Genius of the Nation (not so
much the Presbiterian or Royalist) by mighty though invisible influence,
concurred at once to restore their exiled Sovereign, and re-establish that
ancient Government.

Of the KING of ENGLAND.
THe King is so called from the Saxon word Koning, Name.
intimating Power and Knowledge, wherewith every Sovereign should especially
be invested.

The Title anciently of the Saxon King Edgar was Anglorum Basileus and Dominus
quatuor Marium, Title.
viz. the British, German, Irish, and Deucalidonian Seas; and sometimes
Anglorum Basileus omniumque Regum, Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam
circumsacentis, cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eum includuntur Imperator and
Dominus.

The Modern Title more modest, is, Dei Gratia of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland King, Defender of the Faith.

The King only is Dei Gratia simply (i.e.) from the favor of none but God; and
the Archbishops and Bishops that pretend to that Title, must understand, Dei
gratia and Regis, or, Dei gratia and voluntate Regis.

Defender of the Faith, was anciently used by the Kings of England, as appears
by several Charters granted to the University of Oxford, but in the year 1521
more affixt by a Bull from Pope Leo the Tenth for a Book written by Henry the
Eighth against Luthers, in defense of some points of the Romish Religion; but
since continued for defense of the Ancient Catholck and Apostolic Faith.

Primogenitus Ecclesiae belongs to the Kings of England, because their
Predecessor Lucius was the first King that embraced Christianity.

Christianissimus was by the Lateran Council under Pope Julius the 2d conferred
on the Kings of England in the 5th year of Henry 8, though now used only by the
French King.

The Title of Grace was first given to the King about the time of H. 4. to H.
6. Excellent Grace, to Ed. 4. High and Mighty Prince, to Hen. 8. first Highness
then Majesty, and now Sacred Majesty; after the Custom of the Eastern
Emperors, that used (...).

The King of England in his Public Instruments and Letters styles himself Nos,
We, in the plural number; before King John's time the Kings used the singular
number, which Custom is still seen in the end of Writs, Test meipso apu^ Westminster.

In speaking to the King is used often (besides Your Majesty) Sir, from Cyr, in
the Greek (...) an Abbreviation o^ (...) and (...), Dominus much used to the
Greek Emperors; but Sir or Domine i^ now in England become the ordinary word
to all of better rank, even from the King to the Gentleman. It was anciently in
England given to Lords, afterward to Knights, and to Clergymen, prefixed before
their Christian Names; ^ow in that manner only to Ba^onets and Knights of the
Bath, and Knights Batchelours, yet in France Sir or Sire is reserved only for
their King.

About the time that our Savior lived on Earth, there was a Jewish Sect, whose
Ring-^eader was one Judas of Gaile, mentioned Acts 5. 37. that would not give
this Title of Sir or Dominus to any man; affirming that it was proper only to
God, and stood (not unlike our new Fanatics, called Quakers) so perversely for
such Nominal Liberty (being ^n other points mere Pharisees) that no penalties
could force them to give this honorary Title to any man, no not to the
Emperor; uti videre (...) apud Josephum and alios. Sed h^^ obiter.

The Saxon Kings before the Conquest bare. Arms.
Azure a Cross^ Formy between four Martlet Or.

Afterward the Danish King reigning in England bare o^ Semi de Hearts, Gules 3
Lion Passant Gardant Azure.

After the Conquest the Kings of England bare two Leopards, born first by the
Conqueror as Duke of Normandy, till the time of Hen. 2 who in right of his
Mother annexed her Paternal Coat the Lion of Aquitaine, which being of the same
Field, Metal* and Form with the Leopards, ^^om thence-forward they were ^intly
marshalled in one Shield, and Blazoned 3 Lions, as at ^resent.

King Edward the Third in ^^ght of his Mother claiming ^he Crown of France,
with the Arms of England quartered the Arms of France, which then were Azure,
Semy Flower ^eluces Or; afterward changed to 3 Flower deluces: whereupon Hen.
5. of England caused the English Arms to be changed likewise: King James upon
the Union of England and Scotland, caused the Arms of France and England to be
quartered with Scotland and Ireland, and are thus blazoned.

The King of England bears for his Sovereign Ensigns Armorial as follows:

In the first place, Azure 3 Flower deluces Or; for the Regal Arms of France
quartered with the Imperial Ensigns of England, which are Gules thre^ Lions
Passant Gardant in Pal^ Or. In the second place, with in a double Tressure
counter-flowered de lys Or, a Lion Rampant Gules for the Royal Arms of
Scotland. In the third place Azure an Irish Harp Or Stringed Argent, for the
Royal Ensigns of Ireland. In the fourth place as in the first, All within the
Garter, the chief Ensign of that most Honorable Order, above the same an
Helmet answerable to His Majesty's Sovereign Jurisdiction, upon the same a rich
Mantle of Cloth of Gold doubled Ermine, adorned with an Imperial Crown, and
surmounted for a Crest by a Lion Passant Gardant Crowned with the like;
supported by (...) Lion Rampant Gardant Or, Crowned as the former, and an
unicorn Argent Gorged, with a Crown, thereto a Chain affixt passing between his
fore^egs and reflext over his back Or, both standing upon a Compartment placed
underneath, and in the Table of the Compartment His Majesty's Royal Motto, Dieu
and mon Droit.

The Supporters used before the Union of England and Scotland were the Dragon
and Lion.

The Arms of France placed first, for that France is the greater Kingdom, and
because from the first bearing, those Flowers have been always Ensigns of a
Kingdom; whereas the Arms of England were originally of Dukedoms as beforesaid.

The Motto upon the Garter, Honi soit qui mal y pense; that is, Shame be to him
that evil thereof thinks, was first given by Edward 3 the Founder of that
Order, upon occasion as some have written of a Garter falling from the Countess
of Kent and Salisbury as she danced, and taken up by that King; whereat the
Queen being jealous, or the Courtiers observing it, the King first uttered
those words now upon the Garter, whereof the Order was soon after instituted.

The Motto Dieu and mon Droit, that is, God and my Right, was first given by
Richard the First, to intimate that the King of England holds his Empire not
in Vassallage of any mortal man, but of God only; and after taken up by Edward
3. when he first claimed the Kingdom of France.

King William the Conqueror getting by right of Conquest all the Lands of
England (except Lands belonging to the Church, Patrimony.
to Monastenies, and Religious Houses) into his own hands in Demesne, as
Lawyers speak, soon bestowed amongst his Subjects a^ great part thereof,
reserving some retribution of Rents and Services, or both to him and his Heirs
Kings of England; which reservation, is now, as it was before the Conquest,
called the Tenure of Lands; the rest he reserved to himself in Demesne, called
Coronae Regis Dominica, Domaines, and Sacra Patrimonia, Praedium Domini Regis,
Directum Dominum, cujus nullus est Author nisi Deus: all other Lands in England
being held now of some Superior, and depend mediately or immediately on the
Crown; but the Lands possessed by the Crown, being held of none, can escheat to
none; being sacred, cannot become profane: are or should be permanent and
inalienable. Which Royal Domaines are (by Time, the Gift and Bounty of our
Kings, and some Necessities for the preservation of the Weal Public) too much
alienated.

The Ancient Dominions of the Kings of England, Dominions.
were first, England and all the Seas round about Great Britain and Ireland,
and all the Isles adjacent, even too the Shores of all the Neighbor Nations;
and our Law says the Sea is of the Ligeance of the King, as well as the Land:
and as a mark thereof, all ships of Foreigners have anciently demanded leave to
fish and pass in these Seas, and do at this day Lower their Top-sailes to all
the Kings Ships of War.

To England Henry 1. annexed Normandy, and Henry 2. Ireland, being styled only
Lord of Ireland till 33 H. 8. although they had all Kingly Jurisdiction before.

Henry 2. also annexed the Dukedomes of Guien and Anjou, the Counties of
Poictou, Turein, and Mayn. Edward the First all Wales, and Edward the Third the
Right, though not the Possession of all France.

King James added Scotland, and since that time there have been super-added
sundry considerable Plantations in America.

The Dominions of the King of England are at this day in Possession (besides
his just Right and Title to the Kingdom of France) all England, Scotland, and
Ireland, Three Kingdoms of large extent, with all the Isles, above 40 in number
small and great; whereof some very considerable: and all the Seas adjacent.
Moreover the Islands of Jersey, Garnsey, and Alderny, Parcel of the Duchy of
Normandy; besides those profitable Plantations of New England, Virginia,
Barbados, Jamaica, Florida, Bermudos; besides several other Isles and Places in
those Quarters, and some in the East Indies and upon the Coast of Africa; also
upon the main land of America, by right of first discovery; to Estoit land,
Terra Corterialis, New found Land, Novum Belgium, Guiana, the King of England
has a Legal Right, though not Possession.

Rex Angliae est Persona mixta cum Sacerdote, Person.
say our Lawyers. He is a Priest as well as a King.

He is anointed with Oil, as the Priests were at first, and afterward the
Kings of Israel; to intimate that his Person is Sacred and Spiritual: and
therefore at the Coronation has put upon him a Sacerdotal Garment called the
Dalmatica, etc. and before the Reformation of England, when the Cup in the
Lords Supper was denied to the Laity, the King as a Spiritual Person received
in both kinds: He is capable of Spiritual Jurisdiction, of holding of Tithes,
all Extra-Parochial Tithes some Proxies, and other Spiritual Profits belong to
the King, of which Laymen both by Common and Canon Law are pronounced incapable.

He is an External Bishop of the Church, as Constantine the Emperor said of
himself, (...); But I am constituted Bishop for external things of the Church.

Rex idem hominum Phaebique Sacerdos. He is as the Roman Emperors Christian as
well as Heathen styled themselves, Pontifex Max. He is the Supreme Pastor of
England, and has not only Right of Ecclesiastical Government, but also of
Exercising some Ecclesiastical Function so far as Solomon did, 1 Kings 8. when
he blessed the People, consecrated the Temple, and pronounced that Prayer which
is the Pattern now for Consecration of all Churches and Chapels; but all the
Ministerial Offices are left to the Bishops and Priests, as the determinination
of Causes are to the Kings Judges, although the King may himself sit in
Judgment, if the Affairs of State did not always require his Presence at the
Helm; and the Administration of Sacraments, Preaching, and other Church
Offices and Duties to the Bishops and their Ordained Clergy.

Of this Sacred Person of the King, of the life and safety thereof, the Laws
and Customs of England are of tender, that they have made it High Treason,
only to imagine or intend the death of the King. And because by imagining or
conspiring the death of the Kings Counselors or Great Officers of his
Household, the destruction of the King has thereby sometimes ensued, and is
usually aimed at (says Stat. 3 H. 7.) that also was made felony, to be punished
with death, although in all other Cases Capital the Rule is Voluntas non
reputabitur pro facto; and an English Man may not in other Cases be punished
with death, unless the Act follow the Intent.

The Law of England has so high esteem of the Kings Person, that to offend
against those Persons and those things that represent his Sacred Person, as to
kill some of the Crown Officers or the Kings Judges executing their Office, or
to counterfeit the Kings Seals, or his Moneys, is made High Treason; because by
all these the Kings Person is represented: and High Treason is in the Eye of
the Law so horrid, that besides loss of Life and Honor, Real and Personal
Estate, to the Criminal, his Heirs also are to lose the same for ever, and to
be ranked amongst the Peasantry and Ignoble, till the King shall please to
restore them. Est enim tam grave crimen (says Bracton) ut vix permittitur
haeredibus qu^d vivant. High Treason is so grievous a Crime, that the Law not
content with the Life and Estate and Honor of the Criminal, can hardly endure
to see his heirs survive him,

And rather than Treason against the Kings Person shall go unpunisht, the
Innocent in some Cases shall be punished; for if an Idiot or Lunatic (who
cannot be said to have any will, and so cannot offend) during his Idiocy or
Lunacy, shall kill, or go about to kill the King, he shall be punished as a
Traitor; and yet being Non compos mentis, the Law holds that he cannot commit
Felony or Petit Treason, not other sorts of High Treason.

Moreover, for the precious regard of the Person of the King, by an Ancient
Record it is declared, that no Physic ought to be administered to him, without
good Warrant, this Warrant to be made by the Advice of his Council; no other
Physic but what is mentioned in the Warrant to be administered to him; the
Physicians to prepare all things with their own hands, and not by the hands of
any Apothecary; and to use the assistance only of such Chyrurgeons as are
prescribed in the Warrant.

And so precious is the Person and Life of the King, that every Subject is
obliged and bound by his Allegiance to defend his Person in his Natural as well
as Politic Capacity with his own Life and Limbs; wherefore the Law says that
the life and member of every Subject is at the service of the Sovereign. He is
Pater Patriae and Dulce erit pro Patre Patriae mori, to lose life or limb in
defending him from Conspiracies, Rebellions, or Invasions, or in the Execution
of his Laws, should seem a pleasant thing to every loyal hearted Subject.

The Office of the King of England, Office.
(according to the Learned Fortescue) is, Pugnare bella populi sui and eos
rectissime judicare. To fight the Battles of his People, and to see Right and
Justice done unto them.

Or (according to another) it is to protect and govern his People, so that they
may (if possible) lead quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and Honesty
under him.

Or more particular (as is promised at the Coronation) to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Church and Clergy, the Royal Prerogatives belonging to
the Crown, the Laws and Customs of the Realm, to do Justice, show Mercy, and
keep Peace and Unity, etc.

The King for the better performance of this great and weighty Office, Power
and Prerogative.
has certain Jura Majestatis, extraordinary Powers, Preeminencies, and
Privileges, inherent in the Crown, called anciently by Lawyers Sacra Sacrorum,
and Flowers of the Crown, but commonly Royal Prerogatives; whereof some the
King holds by the Law of Nations, others by Common Law (excellent above all
Laws in upholding a free Monarchy and exalting the Kings Prerogative) and some
by Statute Law.

The King only and the King alone, by his Royal Prerogative, has Power without
Act of Parliament to declare War, make Peace, send and receive Ambassadors,
make Leagues and Treaties with any Foreign States, give Commissions for levying
Men and Arms by Sea and Land, or for pressing Men if need require, dispose of
all Magazines, Ammunition, Castles, Fortresses, Ports, Havens, Ships of War,
and Public Moneys; has the sole Power to coin Money, appoint the Metal,
Weight, Purity, and Value thereof, and by his Proclamation make any Foreign
Coin to be lawful Money of England.

By his Royal Prerogative may of his mere Will and Pleasure Convoke, Adjourn,
Prorogue, Remove, and Dissolve Parliaments; may to any Bill passed by both
Houses of Parliament, refuse to give (without rendering any reason) his Royal
Assent, without which a Bill is as a Body without a Soul. May at pleasure
increase the number of the Members of both Houses, by creating more Barons and
bestowing Privileges upon any other Towns to send Burgesses to Parliament. May
call to Parliament by Writ whom he in his Princely Wisdom thinks fit, and
may refuse to send his Writ to others that have sat in former Parliaments.
Has alone the choice and nomination of all Commanders and other Officers at
Land and Sea, the choice and nomination of all Magistrates, Counselors, and
Officers of State, of all Bishops and other High Dignities in the Church, the
bestowing of all ^onours both of higher and of ^^wer Nobility of England, ^he
Power of determining Re^ards and Punishments.

By His Letters Patents may ^ect new Counties, Bishoprics, ^niversities,
Cities, Buroughs, ^^lledges, Hospitals, Schools, ^airs, Markets, Courts of
Ju^^ice, Forests, Chases, Free ^arrens, etc.

The King by his Prerogative ^^th power to enfranchise an ^lien and make him a
Denison, ^hereby he is enabled to pur^^ase Leases of Houses and ^ands, and to
bear some Offi^es. Has power to grant Let^rs of Mart or Reprisal.

The King by his Preroga^ive has had at all times the ^ight of Purveyance or
Preemption of all sorts of Victua^ near the Court, and to tal^ Horses, Carts,
Boats, Ships for his Carriages at reasonab^^ rates; also by Proclamation (...)
set reasonable rates and pric^ upon Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Oa^ Hay, etc. which his
Majes^^ now reigning was pleased to exchange, and in liew thereof (...) accept
of some other recompense.

Debts due to the King are the first place to be satisfied, (...) case of
Executorship and Admi^nistratorship; and until the Kings Debt be satisfied, he
ma^^ Protect the Debtor from the arrest of other Creditors.

May distrain for the who^ rent upon one Tenant that hold^eth not the whole
land; man require the Ancestors Debt (...) ^he Heir, though not especi^ly
bound, is not obliged to ^^mand his rent as others are. ^^ay sue in what Court
he ^^ease, and distrain where he (...).

No Proclamation can be ^ade but by the King.

No Protection for a Defen^ant to be kept off from a Suit, ^t by him, and that
because (...) is actually in his Service.

He only can give Patents, in ^se of losses by Fire, to re^ive the Charitable
Benevolen^s of the People; without which no man may ask it pub^^kly.

No Forest, Chase, or Park (...) be made, nor Castle to be ^uilt, without the
Kings Au^^ority.

The sale of his Goods in a open Market will not take awa^ his property therein.

His Servants in ordinary a^ privileged from serving in an Offices* that
require their attendance, as Sheriff, Constable, Churchwarden* etc.

All Receivers of Money for the King, or Accompta^^ to him for any of his
Revenue^ their Persons, Lands, Goods Heirs, Executors, Administrators, are
chargeable for the same at all times; for, Nullu^ tempus occurrit Regi.

His Debtor has a kind (...) Prerogative remedy by a Q^minus in the Exchequer
against all other Debtors, or any against whom they have an^ Cause of Personal
Action supposing that he is thereb^ ^isabled to pay the King: and (...) this
Suit the Kings Debtor ^eing Plaintiff, has some Pri^iledges above others.

In Doubtful Cases, Semper ^^aesumitur pro Rege.

No Statute restrains the King, except he be especially ^amed therein. The
quality of his Person alters the Descent of Gavelkind, the Rules of Joint
Tenaney; no Estopel can bind him nor Judgment final in a Writ of Right.

Judgments entered against the Kings Title, are entered with a Salvo Jure Domini
Regis, that if at any time the Kings Council at Law can make out his Title
better; that Judgment shall not prejudice him, which is not permitted to the
Subject.

The King by his Prerogativ^ may demand reasonable Aid Money of his* Subjects
to Knigh^ his Eldest Son at the Age of 15 and to marry his Eldest Daughter at
the Age of (...) years, which reasonable Aid is Twenty Shillings for every
Knights Fee, and as much for every Twenty Pound a year in Socage. Moreover, if
the King be taken Prisoner; Aid Money is to be paid by the Subjects to set him
at liberty.

The King upon reasonable causes him thereunto moving may protect any man
against Suits at Law, etc.

In all Cases where the King is party, his Officers with an arrest by force of
a Process at Law may enter (and if entrance be denied) may break open the ^ouse
of any man, although ^ery man's House is said to be (...) Castle, and has a
privi^^dge to protect him against all ^her Arrests.

A Benefice or Spiritual Li^ng is not full against the King (...) Institution
only, without In^^ction, although it be so against Subject.

None but the King can hold ^^ea of false judgments in the ^ourt of his Tenants.

The King of England by his ^rerogative is Summus Regni ^ustos, and has the
Custody ^f the Persons and Estates of ^uch as for want of understanding cannot
govern themselves (...) or ^erve the King; so the Persons and Estates of Idiots
and Lu^aticks are in the Custody of ^he King, that of Idiots to his own use,
and that of Lu^naticks to the use of the nex^ Heir. So the Custody or
Ward^^ships of all such Infants who^ Ancestors held their Lands b^ Tenure in
Capite or Knight service, were ever since the Conquest in the Kings of England,
to the great honor an^ benefit of the King and King^dom, though some abuse^
made some of the people out (...) love with their good, and the Right of that
part of his ju^^ Prerogative.

The King by his Prerogative is Ultimus Haeres Regni and is (as the Great Ocean
is (...) all Rivers) the receptacle of a^ Estates when no Heir appears for this
cause all Estates for want of Heirs or by forfeiture revert or escheat to the
King* All spiritual Benefices for want of Presentation by the Bishop, is lapsed
at last to the King; all Treasure Trove (that is, Money, Gold, Silver, Plate,
or Bullion, found, and the Owner unknown) belongs to the King; so all Wayfs,
Strays, Wrecks, not granted away by him or any former Kings; all Wast ground or
Land recovered from the Sea; all Lands of Aliens dying before Naturalization or
Denization, and all things whereof the property is not known. All Gold and
Silver Mines in whosoever ground they are found; Royal Fishes, ^s Whales,
Sturgeons, Dolphins, etc. Royal Fowl, as Swans, not marked and swimming at
liberty on the River, belong to the King.

In the Church the Kings Prerogative and Power is extraordinary great. He only
has the Patronage of all Bishoprics, none can be chosen but by his Conged'
Estier, whom he has first nominated; none can be consecrated Bishop or take
possession of the Revenues of the Bishopric without the Kings special Writ or
Assent. He is the Guardian or Nursing Father of the Church, which our Kings of
England did so reckon amongst their principal cares, as in the 23th year of
King Edward the First it was alleged in a pleading and allowed. The King has
power to call a National or Provincial Synod, and by Commissioners or by his
Metropolitanes in their several Jurisdictions to make Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, to introduce into the Church what Ceremonies he
shall think fit; reform and correct all Heresies, Schisms, and punish
Contempts, etc. and therein and thereby to declare what Doctrines in the Church
are fit to be published or professed, what Translation of the Bible to be
allowed, what Books of the Bible are Canonical and what Apocryphal, etc.

In 28 of Eliz. when the House of Commons would have passed Bills touching
Bishops granting Faculties, conferring Holy Orders, Ecclesiastical Censures,
the Oath Ex Officio, Non Residency, etc. the Queen much incensed, forbad them
to meddle in any Ecclesiastical Affairs, for that it belonged to her
Prerogative, etc.

The King has power to pardon the violation of Ecclesiastical Laws, or to
abrogate such as are unfitting or useless; to dispense with the Rigor of
Ecclesiastical Laws, and with any thing that is only prohibitum and malum per
accidens and non malum in se; as for a Bastard to be a Priest, for a Priest to
hold two Benefices, or to succeed his Father in a Benefice, or to be Non
Resident, etc.

Has power to dispense with some Acts of Parliament, Penal Statutes, by Non
Obstantes, where himself is only concerned; to moderate the rigor of the Laws
according to Equity and Conscience, to alter or suspend any particular Law,
that he judges hurtful to the Commonwealth; to grant special Privileges and
Charters to any Subject, to pardon a man by Law condemned; to interpret by his
Judges Statutes, and in Cases not defined by Law, to determine and pass
Sentence.

And this is that Royal Prerogative which in the hand of a King is a Scepter of
Gold, but in the hands of Subjects is a Rod of Iron.

This is that Jus Coronae, a Law that is parcel of the Law of the Land, part of
the Common Law, and contained in it, and has the precedence of all Laws and
Customs of England; and therefore void in Law is every Custom quae exaltat se
in Praerogativam Regis.

Some of these Prerogatives, especially those that relate to Justice and Peace*
are so essential to Royalty, that they are for ever inherent in the Crown, and
make the Crown: they are like the Sunbeams in the Sun, and as inseparable from
it; and therefore it is held by great Lawyers that a Prerogative in point of
Government cannot be restrained or bound by Act of Parliament, but is as
unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians: wherefore the Lords and
Commons (Rot. Parl. 42. Edw. 3. number. 7.) declared that they could not assent in
Parliament to any thing that tended to the disherison of the King and the
Crown, whereunto they were sworn; no though the King should desire it: and
every King of England as he is Debtor Justitiae to his people, so is he in
conscience obliged to defend and maintain all the Rights of the Crown in
possession, and to endeavor the recovery of those whereof the Crown has been
dispossessed, and when any King has not religiously observed his duty in this
point, it has proved of very dreadful consequence; as the first fatal blow to
the Church of England was given when Hen. 8. waving his own Royal Prerogative,
referred the redress of the Church to the House of Commons (as the Lord Herbert
observes Hist. Hen. 8.) So the greatest blow that ever was given to Church and
State, was when the late King parting with his absolute Power of dissolving
Parliaments gave it (though only pro ill^ vice) to the Two Houses of
Parliament. And indeed it greatly concerns all Subjects (though it seem a
Paradox) to be far more solicitous that the King should maintain and defend his
own Prerogative and Preeminence, than their Rights and Liberties; the truth
whereof will appear to any man that sadly considers the mischiefs and
inconveniences that necessarily follow the diminution of the Kings Prerogative
above all that can be occasioned by some particular infringements of the
Peoples Liberties. As on the other side it much concerns every King of England
to be very careful of the Subjects just Liberties, according to that Golden
Rule of the best of Kings Charles I, That the Kings Prerogative is to defend
the Peoples Liberties, and the Peoples Liberties strengthen the Kings
Prerogative.

Whatsoever things are proper to Supreme Magistrates, Supremacy and Sovereignty.
as Crowns, Scepters, Purple R^be, Golden Globe, and Holy Unction, have as long
appertained to the King of England as to any other Prince in Europe. He holds
not his Kingdom in Vassallage, nor receives his Investiture or Installment
from another. Acknowledges no Superiority to any but God only. Not to the
Emperor, for Omnem Potestatem habet Rex Angliae in Regno suo quam Imperator
vendicat in Imperio; and therefore the Crown of England has been declared in
Parliaments long ago to be an Imperial Crown, and the King to be an Emperor of
England and Ireland, and might wear an Imperial Crown, although he choseth
rather to wear a Triumphant Crown, such as was anciently worn by the Emperors
of Rome, and that because his Predecessors have triumphed, not only over Five
Kings of Ireland, but also over the Welsh, Scottish, and French Kings.

He acknowledges only Precedence to the Emperor, Eo quod Antiquitate
Imperium omnia Regna superare creditur.

As the King is (...) in the State, so he is (...) in the Church. He
acknowledges no Superiority to the Bishop of Rome, whose long arrogated
Authority in England was 1535 in a full Parliament of all the Lords Spiritual
as well as Temporal declared null, and the King of England declared to be by
Ancient Right in all Causes over all Persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,
Supreme Head and Governor.

The King is Summus totius Ecclesiae Anglicanae Ordinarius, Supreme Ordinary in
all the Dioceses of England (...), and for his Superintendency over the whole
Church, has the Tenths and First Fruits of all Ecclesiastical Benefices.

The King has the Supreme Right of Patronage over all England, called
Patronage Paramount over all the Ecclesiastical Benefices in England; so that
if the mean Patron as aforesaid present not in due time, nor the Ordinary, nor
Metropolitan, the Right of Presentation comes to the King, beyond whom it
cannot go. The King is Lord Paramount, Supreme Landlord of all the Lands of
England, and all landed men are mediately or immediately his Tenants by some
Tenure or other, for no man in England but the King has Allodium, Directum
Dominum, the sole and independent Property or Domain in any Land, He that has
the Fee the Jus perpetuum and Utile Dominium, is obliged to a duty to his
Sovereign for it; so it is not simply his own, he must swear fealty to some
Superior.

The King is Summus totius Regni Anglicani Justitiarius, Supreme Judge, or Lord
Chief Justice of all England. He is the Fountain from whence all Justice is
derived, no Subject having here as in France, Haute moyenne and basse Justice.
He only has the Sovereign power in the Administration of Justice, and in the
Execution of the Law, and whatsoever power is by him committed to others, the
dernier resort is still remaining in himself; so that he may sit in any Court,
and take Cognizance of any Cause (as anciently Kings sat in the Court now
called the Kings Bench, Henry the Third in his Court of Exchequer, and Hen. 7.
and King James sometimes in the Star Chamber) except in Felonies, Treasons,
etc. wherein the King being Plaintiff and so Party, he sits not personally in
Judgment, but does perform it by Delegates.

From the King of England there lies no Appeal in Ecclesiastical Affairs to the
Bishop of Rome, as it does in other principal Kingdoms of Europe, nor in Civil
Affairs to the Emperor, as in some of the Spanish and other Dominions of
Christendom; nor in either to the People of England (as some of late have
dreamt) who in themselves, or by their Representatives in the House of Commons
in Parliament, were ever Subordinate and never Superior, nor so much as
Coordinate to the King of England.

The King being the only Sovereign and Supreme Head, is furnished with plenary
Power Prerogative and Jurisdiction to render Justice to every Member within his
Dominions; whereas some Neighbor Kings do want a full power to do Justice in
all Causes to all their Subjects, or to punish all Crimes committed within
their own Dominions especially in Causes Ecclesiastical.

In a word, Rex Angliae neminem habet in suis Dominiis Superiorem nec Parem sed
omnes sub illo, ille sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, a quo secundus, post quem
primus, ante omnes and super omnes (in suis ditionibus) Deos and Homines.

The Title of Dii or Gods, Divinity.
plurally is often in Holy Writ by God himself attributed to Great Princes,
because as Gods Vicars or Vice-dei upon Earth, they represent the Majesty and
Power of the God of Heaven and Earth: and to the end that the people might have
so much the higher esteem and more reverend awfulness of them; for if that
fails, all Order fails; and thence all Impiety and Calamity follows.

The Substance of the Titles of God was also used by the Ancient Christian
Emperors, as Divinitas nostra and Aeternitas nostra, etc. as imperfectly and
analogically in them, though essentially and perfectly only in God; and the
good Christians of those times out of their excess of respect, were wont to
swear by the Majesty of the Emperor (as Joseph once by the life of Pharaoh)
and Vege^ius a learned Writer of that Age seems to justify it; Nam Imperatori
(says he) tanquam praesenti and corpoarli Deo fidelis est praestanda Divotio
and pervigil impendendus famulatus; De^ enim servimus cum fideliter diligimus
cum, qui Deoregnat Autore.

So the Laws of England looking upon the King as a God upon earth, do attribute
unto him diverse excellencies that belong properly to God alone, as Justice in
the Abstract; Rex Angliae non potest cuiquam injuriam facere. So also
Infallibility, Rex Angliae non potest errare. And as God is perfect, so the Law
will have no Imperfection found in the King.

No Negligence or Laches, no Folly, no Infamy, no stain or corruption of blood;
for by taking of the Crown all former though just Attainders, and that by Act
of Parliament i^ ipso facto pu^ged. No Nonage or Minority, for his Grant of
Lands, though held in his Natural not Politic Capacity, cannot be avoided by
Nonage* Higher than this the Law attributes a kind of immortality to the King,
Rex Angliae non moritur; his Death is in Law termed the Demise of the King,
because thereby the Kingdom is demised to another: He is said not subject to
Death, because he is a Corporation in himself that lives for ever, all
Interregna being in England unknown, the same moment that one King dies, the
next Heir is King fully and absolutely without any Coronation, Ceremony, or Act
to be done ex post facto.

Moreover, the Law seems to attribute to the King a certain Omnipresency,
that the King is in a manner every where, in all his Courts of Justice, and
therefore cannot be nonsuited (as Lawyers speak) in all his Palaces, and
therefore all Subjects stand bare in the Presence Chamber, wheresoever the
Chair of State is placed, though the King be many miles distant from thence. He
has a kind of universal influence over all his Dominions, every soul within
his Territories may be said to feel at all times his Power and his Goodness,
Omnium Domos Regis Vigilia defendit, Omnium Otium illius Labor, Omnium Delicias
illius Industria, Omnium vacationem illius Occupatio, etc.

So a kind of Omnipotency, that the King can as it were raise men from death to
life, by pardoning whom the Law has condemned; can create to the highest
Dignity and annihilate the same at pleasure.

Diverse other semblances of the Eternal Deity belong to the King. He in his own
Dominions (as God) says Vindicta est mihi, for all punishments do proceed from
him in some of his Courts of Justice, and it is not lawful for any Subject to
revenge himself.

So he only can be Judge in his own Cause, though he de^^ver his Judgment by
the Mouth of his Judges.

And yet there are some things that the King of England cannot do. Rex Angliae
^ihil injuste potest, and the King cannot divest himself or his Successors of
any part of his Regal Power, Prerogative, and Authority inherent and annexed to
the Crown: not that there ^s any defect in the Kings Power (as there is none in
Gods Power, though he cannot lie, nor do any thing that implies Contradiction:)
not but that the King of England has as absolute a power over all his Sub^ects
as any Christian Prince rightfully, and lawfully has o^ ever had: not but that
he still has a kind of Omnipotency no^ to be disputed, but adored by his
Subjects; Nemo quidem (...) factis ejus praesumat disputar^ (says Bracton)
multo minu^ contra factum ejus ire, nam d^^ Chartis and Fact is ejus non deben^
ne^ possunt Justiciarii mult^ minus privatae personae disputare. Not but that
the King may do what he please, without either opposition or resistance, and
without being questioned by his Subjects; for the King cannot be impleaded for
any Crime; no Action lies against his Person, because the Writ goes forth in
his own Name, and he cannot arrest himself. If the King should seize his
Subjects Lands (which God forbid) or should take away his Goods, having no
Title by Law so to do, there is no remedy. Only this, Locus erit (says the
same Bracton) supplicationi quod factum suum corrigat and emendet, quod quidem
si non fecerit, sufficit ei ^d paenam quod Dominum Deum expectet Vltorem. There
may be Petitions and Supplications made that His Majesty will be pleased to
rule according to Law, which if he shall refuse to do, it is sufficient that he
must expect that the King of Kings will be the Avenger of Oppressed Loyal
Subjects.

But there are also diverse things which the King cannot do, Salvo jure, Salvo
Juramento, and Salva Conscientia sua. Because by Oath at his Coronation, and
indeed without any Oath, by the Law of Nature, Nations, and of Christianity; he
holds himself bound (as do all other Christian Kings) to protect and defend his
people, to do justice and to show mercy, to preserve Peace and Quietness
amongst them, to allow them their just Rights and Liberties, to consent to the
Repealing of bad Laws, and to the Enacting of good Laws. Two things especially
the King of England does not usually do without the consent of his Subjects,
viz. make New Laws, and raise New Taxes, there being something of Odium in both
of them; the one seeming to diminish the Subjects Liberty, and the other his
Property; therefore that all occasion of disaffection toward the King (the
Breath of our Nosthrils and the Light of our Eyes, as he is styled) might be
avoided, it was most wisely contrived by our Ancestors that for both these
should Petitions and Supplications be first made by the Subject.

These and diverse other Prerogative rightfully belong and are enjoyed by the
King of England.

Nevertheless the Kings of England usually govern this Kingdom by the ordinary
known Laws and Customs of the Land (as the great God does the World by the Laws
of Nature) yet in some Cases for the benefit not damage of this Realm, they
make use of their Prerogatives, as the King of Kings does of his Extraordinary
Power of Working of Miracles.

Lastly, To the Kings of England quatenus Kings, does appertain one Prerogative
that may be styled super-excellent if not miraculous, which was first enjoyed
by that pious and good King Edward the Confessor, which is by the touch to
remove and to cure the Struma, that stubborn disease, commonly called the Kings
Evil.

In consideration of these and other transcendent Excellencies, Respect.
no King in Christendom nor other Potentate receives from his Subjects more
Reverence, Honor, and Respect, than the King of England. All his People at
their first Addresses kneel to him, he is at all times served upon the Knee,
all Persons (not the Prince or other Heir Apparent excepted) stand bare in the
presence of the King and in the Presence Chamber, though in the Kings absence.
Only it was once indulged by Queen Mary for some eminent services performed by
Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex that (by Patent) he might at any time be covered
in her presence; but perhaps in imitation of the like liberty allowed by King
Philip her Husband and other Kings of Spain to some of the principal Nobility
there called Grandees of Spain.

Any thing or Act done in the Kings Presence is presumed to be void of all
deceit and evil meaning; and therefore a Fine levied in the Kings Court, where
the King is presumed to be present, does bind a Feme Covert, a married Woman
and others whom ordinarily the Law does disable to transact.

The Kings only Testimony of any thing done in his presence is of as high a
nature and credit as any Record, and in all Writs sent forth for dispatch of
Justice, he uses no other Witness but himself, viz. Test me ipso.

Of the Kings Succession to the Crown of ENGLAND.
THe King of England has right to the Crown by Inheritance and the Laws and
Customs of England.

Upon the Death of the King, the next of Kindred, though born out of the
Dominions of England, or born of Parents not Subjects of England; as by the Law
and many Examples in the English Histories it does manifestly appear: is and is
immediately King before any Proclamation, Coronation, Publication, or Consent
of Peers or People.

The Crown of England descends from Father to Son and to his Heirs, for want of
Sons to the Eldest Daughter and her Heirs, for want of Daughters to the Brother
and his Heirs, and for want of Brother to the Sister and her Heirs. The Salique
Law or rather Custom of France, has here no more force than it had anciently
among the Jews, or now in Spain and other Christian Hereditary Kingdoms. Among
Turks and Barbarians that French Custom is still and ever was in use.

In Case of descent of the Crown (contrary to the Custom of the descent of
Estates among Subjects) the Half Blood shall inherit; so from King Edward the
Sixth the Crown and Crown Lands descended to Queen Mary of the half blood, and
again to Queen Elizabeth of the half blood to the last Possessor.

At the death of every King die not only the Offices of the Court, but all
Commissions granted to the Judges durante beneplacito; and of all Justices of
Peace.

If the King be likely to leave his Crown to an Infant, Minor.
he does usually by Testament appoint the person or persons that shall have the
tuition of him; and sometimes for want of such appointment, a fit person of the
Nobility or Bishops is made choice of by the Three States assembled in the name
of the Infant King, who by Nature or Alliance has most Interest in the
preservation of the Life and Authority of the Infant, and to whom least benefit
can accrue by his Death or Diminution; as the Uncle by the Mothers side, if the
Crown come by the Father, and so vice versa, is made Protector; so during the
minority of Edward 6. his Uncle by the Mothers side the Duke of Somerset had
the tuition of him, and was called Protector: and when this Rule has not been
observed (as in the minority of Edw. 5.) it has proved of ill consequence.

If the King of England be Non compos mentis, ^capa^ty.
or by reason of an incurable disease, weakness, or old age, become incapable
of governing, then is made a Regent, Protector, or Guardian, to govern.

King Edward 3. being at last aged, sick, and weak, and by grief for the death
of the Black Prince, sore broken in body and mind, did of his own will create
his fourth Son John Duke of Lancaster Guardian or Regent of England.

If the King be absent upon any Foreign Expedition or otherwise (which
anciently was very usual) the Custom was to constitute a Vicegerent by
Commission under the Great Seal, Absence.
giving him several Titles and Powers according as the necessity of affairs
have required; sometimes he has been called Lord Warden or Lord of the
Kingdom, and therewith has had the general power of a King, as was practiced
during the Absence of Edward the First, Second, and Third, and of Henry 5. but
Henry 6. to the Title of Warden or Guardian added the Style of Protector of the
Kingdom and of the Church of England; and gave him so great power in his
absence, that he was tantum non Rex swaying the Scepter, but not wearing the
Crown; executing Laws, summoning Parliaments under his own Test as King, and
giving his assent to Bills in Parliament, whereby they became as binding as any
other Acts.

Sometimes during the Kings Absence the Kingdom has been committed to the care
of several Noblemen and sometime of Bishops, as less dangerous for attempting
any usurpation of the Crown; sometimes to one Bishop, as Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury was Viceroy of England for many years, and when Edward 3. was in
Flanders (though his Son then but nine years old, had the Name of Protector)
John Stafford Archbishop of Canterbury was Governor both of the Kings Son and
of the Realm.

Lastly, Sometimes to the Queen, as two several times during the absence of
Henry 8. in France.

Of the QUEEN of ENGLAND.
THe Queen so called from the Saxon Konigin, ^^me.
whereof the last syllable is pronounced as gheen in English, it being not
unusual to cut off the first Syllables, as an Almes-House is sometimes called a
Spital from Hospital.

She has as high Prerogatives, Dignity, and State, during the life of the
King, as any Queen of Europe.

From the Saxon times the Queen Consort of England, ^eroga^es.
though she be an Alien born, and though during the life of the King she be
femme covert (as our Law speaks) yet without any Act of Parliament for
Naturalization or Letters Pa^ents for Denization, she may purchase Lands in
Feesimple, make Leases and Grants in her own Name without the King; has power
to give, to sue, to contract, as a femme sole may receive by gift from her
Husband, which no other femme ^overt may do.

Had anciently a Revenue of Queen Gold or Aurum Reginae, as the Records call
it, which was the tenth part of so much as by the Name of Oblata upon Pardons,
Gifts, and Grants, etc. came to the King.

Of later times has had as large a Dower as any Queen in Christendom, has
her Royal Court apart, her Courts and Officers, etc.

The Queen may not be impleaded till first petitioned, shall not be amerced, if
she be nonsuited as all other Subjects are; if she be Plaintiff, the Summons in
the Process need not have the solemnity of 15 days, etc.

Is reputed the Second Person in the Kingdom. Dignity.


The Law sets so high a value upon her as to make it High Treason to
conspire her death, or to violate her Chastity.

Her Officers, as Attorney and Solicitor, for the Queens sake have respect
above others, and place within the Bar with the Kings Council.

The like honor, the like reverence and respect that is due to the King, is
exhibited to the Queen both by Subjects and Foreigners, and also to the Queen
Dowager or Widow Queen, who also above other Subjects loses not her Dignity,
though she should marry a private Gentleman; so Queen Katharine, Widow to King
Henry the Fifth, being married to Owen ap Theodore Esquire, did maintain her
Action as Queen of England; much less does a Queen by inheritance, or a Queen
Sovereign of England, follow her Husbands condition, nor is subject as other
Queens; but Sovereign to her own Husband, as Queen Mary was to King Philip.

Of the SONS and DAUGHTERS of ENGLAND.
THe Children of the King of England are called the Sons and Daughters of
England, because all the subjects of England have a special interest in them,
though the whole power of Education, Marriage, and disposing of them is only in
the King.

The Eldest Son of the King is born Duke of Cornwall, Eldest Son.
and as to that Duchy, and all the Lands, Honors, Rents, and great Revenues
belonging thereunto, he is upon his Birthday persumed and by law taken to be of
full age, so that he may that day sue for the Livery of the said Dukedom, and
ought of right to obtain the same, as if he had been full 21 years of age.
Afterward he is created Prince of Wales, whose Investiture is performed by the
Imposition of a Cap of Estate and Coronet on his Head, as a Token of
Principality, and putting into his Hand a Verge of Gold, the Emblem of
Government, and a Ring of Gold on hs Finger, to intimate that he must be a
Husband to his Country and Father to her Children. Also to him is given and
granted Letters Patents to hold the said Principality to him and his Heirs
Kings of England, by which words the separation of this Principality is
prohibited.

From the day of his Birth he is commonly styled the Prince, Title.
a Title in England given to no other Subject. The Title of Prince of Wales is
ancient and was first given by King Edward 1. to his Eldest Son; for the Welsh
Nation till that time unwilling to submit to the yoke of strangers, that King
so ordered that his Queen was delivered of her first Child in Caernarvan Castle
in Wales, and then demanded of the Welsh, If they would be content to subject
themselves to one of their own Nation, that could not speak one word of
English, and against whose life they could take no just exception. Whereunto
they readily consenting, the King nominated this his new born Son, and
afterward created him Prince of Wales, and bestowed on him all the Lands,
Honors, and Revenues belonging to the said Principality.

The Prince has ever since been styled Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine and
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester and Flint, which Earldomes are always conferred
upon him by his Patent, since the Union of England and Scotland his Title has
been Magnae Britanniae Princeps, but more ordinarily the Prince of Wales. As
Eldest Son to the King of Scotland he is Duke of Rothsay and Seneschal of
Scotland from his Birth.

The King of Englands Eldest Son (so long as Normandy remained in their hands)
was always styled Duke of Normandy.

Anciently the Princes of Wales whilst they were Sovereigns bare quarterly
Gules and Or 4 Lions passant gardant counterchanged. Arms.


The Arms of the Prince of Wales differ from those of the King only by addition
of a Labell of three points, and the Device of the Prince is a Coronet
beautified with three Ostrich Feathers, inscribed with Ich dien, which in the
German or old Saxon Tongue is I serve, alluding perhaps to that in the Gospel,
The Heir whilst his Father lives differs not from a Servant. This Device
was born at the Battle of Cressy by John King of Bohcmia, as serving there
under the King of the French, and there slain by Edward the Black Prince, and
since worn by the Princes of Wales, and by the Vulgar called the Princes Arms.

The Prince by our Law is reputed as the same Person with the King, Dignity.
and so declared by a Statute of Henry 8. Corruscat enim Princeps (say our
Lawyers) radiis Regis Patris sui and censetur una persona cum ipso. And the
Civilians say the Kings Eldest Son may be styled a King.

He has certain Privileges above other Persons. Privileges.


To imagine the death of the Prince, to violate the Wife of the Prince is made
High Treason.

Has heretofore had privilege of having a Purveyor and taking Purveyance, as
the King.

To retain and qualify as many Chaplains as he shall please.

To the Prince at the Age of 15 is due a certain Aid of Moneys from all the
Kings Tenants and all that hold of him in Capite, by Knight Service, and Free
Socage, to make him a Knight.

Yet as the Prince in nature is a distinct person from the King, so in Law also
in some cases, He is a Subject, holds his Principalities and Seignories of
the King, gives the same respect to the King as other Subjects do.

The Revenues belonging to the Prince, Revenues
since much of the Lands and Demesnes of that Duchy have been aliened; are
especially out of the Tin Mines in Cornwall, which with all other profits of
that Duchy amount yearly to the sum of

The Revenues of the Principality of Wales surveyed 200 years ago was above
4680 l. yearly, a rich Estate according to the value of Money in those days.

At present his whole Revenues may amount to

Till the Prince come to be 14 years old, all things belonging to the
Principality o^ Wales were wont to be disposed of by Commissioners consisting
of some principal Persons of the Clergy and Nobility.

The Cadets or younger Son of England, Cadets.
are created no^ born Dukes or Earls of what Places or Titles the King pleases.

They have no certain Appanages as in France, but only what the good pleasure
of the King bestows upon them.

All the Kings Sons are Consilii nati, by Birthright Counselors of State,
that so they may grow up in the weighty affairs of the Kingdom.

The Daughters of England are styled Princess, the eldest of which have an Aid
or certain rate of Money paid by every Tenant in Capite, Knight Service, and
Soccage, toward her Dowry or Marriage Portion.

To all the Kings Children belong the Title of Royal Highness, All Subjects are
to be uncovered in their presence, to kneel when they are admitted to kiss
their hands, and at Table they are (out of the Kings Presence) served on the
Knee.

The Children, the Brothers and Sisters of the King, if Plaintiffs, the summons
in the Process need not have the solemnity of 15 days, as in Case of other
Subjects.

The Natural or Illegitimate Sons and Daughters of the King after they are
acknowledged by the King take precedence of all the Nobles under those of the
Blood Royal.

They bear what Surname the King pleases to give them, and for Arms the Arms
of England with a Bend Sinister border Gobionnee, or some other mark of
illegitimation. Some Kings of England have acknowledged many, and had more
illegitimate Sons and Daughters.

King Henry the First had no fewer than sixteeen illegitimate Children.

Henry the Eighth amongst others had one by Elizabeth Blount, named Henry
Fitzroy, created by him Duke of Somerset and Richmond Earl of Notingham, and
Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aquitain.

OF THE PRESENT KING OF ENGLAND.
THe King now reigning is CHARLES the Second of that Name. Name.
His Name of Baptism Charles in the German Tongue signifies one of a Masculine
strength or virtue.

The Royal and also the most princely and ancient Families of Europe at this
day have properly no Surnames, Surname.
for neither is Burbon the Surname, but the Title of the Royal Family of
France, nor Austria of Spain, nor Stuart of England, since the coming in of
King James; nor Theodore or Tudor for his 5 immediate Ancestors in England, nor
Plantagenet for 11 Generations before, as some vainly think; for although
Geffery Duke of Anjou was surnamed Plantagenet from a Broom Stalk commonly worn
in his Bonnet, yet his Son H. 2. King of England was surnamed Fitz-empresse,
and his Son Richard Coeur de Lion: So Owen Grandfather to King Henry 7. was ap
Meredith, and he ap Theodore, pronounced Tyder; Surnames being then but little
in use amongst the Cambrobritans. So Walter Father to Robert King of Scotland,
from whom our present King is descended, was only by Office Grand Seneschal. or
High Steward, or Stuart of Scotland, though of later times by a long vulgar
error it has so prevailed, that they are accounted Surnames of many Families
descended from him.

Steward is a Contraction from the Saxon word Stedeward, that is in Latin
Locumtenens, in French Lieu-tenant; because the Lord High Steward was Regis
Locum tenens, a Name not unfit for any King, who is Dei Locum tenens, Gods
Stuart or Lieutenant or Vicegerent upon Earth.

The King now reigning is Son to King Charles the Martyr and the Princess
Henretta Maria, Genealogy.
Daughter of King Henry the Great of France; from which two Royal Stocks he
has in his Veins all the Royal Blood of Europe concentred.

Is descended lineally and lawfully from the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman,
and Scottish Kings and Princes of this Island.

From the first British King the 139th Monarch, from the Scottish in a
continued Succession for almost 2000 years the 109th, from the Saxon the 46th,
and from the first of the Norman Line the 26th King. So that for Royal
Extraction and long Line of just Descent, his Majesty now reigning excells all
the Monarchs of all the Christian, if not of the whole, World.

Is the first Prince of Great Britain so born, and has in possession larger
Dominions than any of his Ancestors.

He was born the 29th of May 1630. Birth.
at the Royal Palace of St. James, over which House the same day at Noon was by
thousands seen a star, and soon after the Sun suffered an Eclipse, a sad
presage as some then divined that this Princes Power should for some time be
eclipsed; and some subject signified by a star, should have extraordinary
splendour.

Was christened the 27th June following by the then Bishop of London Doctor
Land. Baptism


Had for Godfathers his two Uncles Lewis the 13th King of France, and Frederick
Prince Palatine of the Rhine, then called King of Bohemia, represented by the
Duke of Richmond and Marquess Hamilton; his Godmother being his Grandmother,
then Queen Mother of France, represented by the Duchess of Richmond.

Had for Governess Mary Countess of Dorset, Wife to Edward Earl of Dorset. In
May 1638 he was first knighted, and immediately after he was made Knight of the
Garter, and installed at Windsor.

About this time by Order, Court.
not Creation, he was first called Prince of Wales, and had all the profits of
that Principality, and diverse other lands annexed, and Earldom of Chester
granted unto him, and held his Court apart from the King.

At the Age of Eight he had for Governor the Earl, Education.
afterward Marquess, and now Duke of Newcastle, and for Tutor or Preceptor
Doctor Duppa, then Dean of Christchurch, after Bishop of Salisbury, and lately
of Winchester.

At the Age of 12 was with the King his Father at the Battle of Edgehill, and
soon after at Oxford was committed to the care of the Marquess of Hertford.

About 14 years old was in the Head of an Army in the West of England.

At the Age of 15 a Marriage was proposed between him and the Eldest Daughter
of the King of Portugal, the Infanta Joanna, since deceased.

Two years after was from Cornwall transported to the Isle of Scilly, and after
to Jersey, and thence to his Royal Mother to St. Germains near Paris.

In 1648 was at Sea with some Naval Forces, endeavoring to rescue the King his
Father, then in the Isle of Wight, out of the wicked hands of his rebellious
Subjects. Not many months after, upon the sad News of the horrid Murder of
his Royal Father, he was in Holland first saluted King, and soon after
proclaimed in Scotland, being not yet 19 years of Age.

At the Age of 20 from Holland he landed in Scotland, June 1650, and in January
following was crowned at Scoon.

The 3d of September 1651 fought the Battle of Worcester, whence after the
unfortunate loss of his whole Army, wandering in disguise about England for six
weeks, he was at length transported from a Creek near Shoram in Sussex to Fecam
near Havre de Grace in France; in which Kingdom, with his Royal Brothers, and
diverse English Nobility, Clergy and Gentry, he was for some years received and
treated as King of England, and by his mediations and interest with the Prince
of Conde and Duke of Lorraine, then in the Head of two great and mighty Armies
against the French King, quenched the then newly kindled fires of a great and
universal rebellion against him, much resembling that of England; and was a
means of recalling the then fled and banished Cardinal Mazarine: After which in
Germany, Flanders, Spain, etc. he passed the residue of his time in the Studies
and Exercises most befitting a Prince, in soliciting the Aid of Christian
Princes, and in advising and vigorously promoting the several attempts of his
Friends in England; until the year 1660, at which time being at Brussells
within the Spanish Territories, and perceiving a general inclination and
disposition of all England to receive him, he providently removed himself to
Breda, within the Dominions of the United Netherlands, in the month of April,
and thence in May to the Hague; from whence, after a magnificent Entertainment
and an humble Invitation by English Commissioners sent from the then Convention
at Westminster, he embarkt at Schevling the 23th of May 1660, and with a
gallant English Fleet and a gentle gale of Wind, landed the 25th at Dover, and
on the 29th following, being his Birthday, and then just 30 years of Age, he
entered into London, and was there received with the greatest and most universal
Joy and Acclamations and Magnificence that could possibly be expressed on so
short a warning.

On the first of June following His Majesty fate in Parliament, and on the 22th
of April 1661 rode in triumph from the Tower to Westminster; on the next day,
being St. Georges, was crowned with great Ceremony.

On the 28th of May following declared to his Parliament his Resolution to
marry the Infanta of Portugal, Marriage.
who accordingly in May 1662, being landed at Portsmouth was there espoused to
the King by the then Bishop of London, now Archbishop of Canterbury.

Of the present Queen of England.
DONNA CATHERINA Infanta of Portugal being Queen Consort of England, and the
Second Person in the Kingdom, was Daughter of Don Juan the Fourth of that Name,
King of Portugal, descended from our English John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster
and King of Castile, and Jean Fourth Son of Edward the third King of England,
and of Donna Lucia Daughter of Don Guzman el bueno a Spaniard, Duke of Medina
Sidonia, who was lineally descended from Ferdinando de la Cerde and his Consort
Blanch, to whom St. Lewis King of France her Father relinquisht his Right and
Title to Spain, descended to him by his Mother Blanch, eldest Daughter and
Heir of Alphonso the Spanish King.

She was born the 14th of November 1638 at Villa Vicosa in Portugal, she was
baptized Catherina, signifying in Greek Pure, her Father being then Duke of
Braganza (though right Heir of the Crown of Portugal) the most potent Subject
in Europe, for a third part of Portugal was then holden of him in Vassallage;
and is only. Sister at present of Don Alphonso the Sixth of that Name, and 23th
King of Portugal, born 1643.

Has one Brother more called Don Pedro, born 1648.

Had another Brother called Don Theodosio, the eldest Son of that King, who was
the most gallant and hopeful Prince of all Europe, but died 1653, aged but 18
years, yet his life thought worthy to be written by diverse grave Authors of
Portugal.

Having been most carefully and piously educated by her Mother, and at the age
of 22 desired in Marriage by King CHARLES the Second, and the Marriage not long
after concluded (by the Negotiation of Don Francisce de Melo Conde de Ponte
Marquis de Sand and then Extraordinary Ambassador of the King of Portugal,
and solemnized at Lisbon. She embarkt for England upon the 23th of April 1662,
being the Festival of St. George, Patron as well of Portugal as England, and
was safely by the Earl of Sandwich conducted by a Squadron of Ships to
Portsmouth; where the King first met her, and was remarried.

On the 23th of August 1662 her Majesty coming by water from Hampton Court, was
with great Pomp and Magnificence first received by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of London at Chelsey, and thence conducted by water to Whitehall.

The Portion she brought with her was Eight hundred Millions of Reas or two
Millions of Crusado's, being about Three hundred thousand pounds Sterling;
together with that important place of Tangier upon the Coast of Africa, and the
Isle of Bombaim near Goa in the East Indies, with a Privilege that any
Subjects of the King of England may trade freely in the East and West Indie
Plantations belonging to the Portugueses.

Her Majesty's Jointure by the Articles of Marriage is Thirty thousand pounds
Sterling per Annum, and the King out of his great affection toward her, has as
an addition settled upon her 10000 l. per Annum more.

The Queens Arms as Daughter of Portugal, Arms.
is Argent 5 Scutcheons Azure cross wise, each Scutcheon charged with 5 Plates
or Besants Argent Saltierwise, with a Point Sable, the Border Gules, charged
with 7 Castles Or. This Coat was first worn by the Kings of Portugal, in memory
of a Signal Battle obtained by the first King of Portugal Don Alphonso against
5 Kings of the Moors, before which Battle appeared Christ crucified in the air,
and a Voice heard, as once to Constantine the Great, In hoc signo vinces:
before which time the Portugal Arms were Argent a Cross Azure.

Queen CATHERINE is a Personage of such rare perfections of Mind and Body, of
such eminent Piety, Modesty, and other Virtues, that the English Nation may yet
promise all the happiness they are capable of from a Succession of Princes to
govern them to the end of the World.

Of the Queen Mother.
THe Third Person in the Kingdom is the Queen Mother, or Dowager, Henretta
Maria de Bourbon, Daughter to the Great King Henry the Fourth, Sister to the
Just King Lewis the Eleventh, Wife to the Pious Martyr King Charles the First,
Mother to our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, and Aunt to the
present Puissant King Lewis the 14th.

She was born the 19th of November 1609, married first at Nostre Dame in Paris
by Proxy 1625, and shortly after in the month of June arriving at Dover, was
at Canterbury espoused to King Charles the First. In the year 1629. was
delivered of her First born, a Son that died shortly after in 1630 of her
Second, our present Sovereign, whom God long preserve; in 1631 of her Third,
Mary, the late Princess of Orange, a Lady of admirable Virtues, who had the
happiness to see the King her Brother restored 6 or 7 months before her death.
In 1633 of her Fourth, James, now Duke of York. In 1635 of her Fifth, named
Elizabeth, who being a Princess of incomparable Abilities and Virtues, died for
grief soon after the murder of her father. In 1636 of her Sixth, named Anna,
who died young. In the year 1640 of her Seventh Child Henry of Oatlands,
designed Duke of Gloucester, who living till above 20, being most excellently
accomplished in all Princely Endowments, died four months after the
Restoration of the King. In the year 1644 of her Eighth, the Lady Henretta,
now Duchess of Orleans.

In the year 1641 her Majesty foreseeing the ensuing storm of Rebellion, and
seeing the groundless Odium raised already against her self, timely withdrew
her self with her eldest Daughter (then newly married to Henry Prince of
Orange, into Holland, whence in 1643 after a most furious storm and barbarous
fierce pursuit of the English Rebels at Sea, she landed at Burlington Bay with
Men, Money, and Ammunition, and soon after with a considerable Army met the
King at Edgehill, and thence was conducted to Oxford.

In April 1644 marching with competent forces from Oxford toward Exeter, at
Abington took her last farewell of the King, whom she never saw again.

In July following embarkt at Pendennis Castle, she sailed into France, where
entertained at the Charges of her Nephew the persent King of France, she passed
a solitary retired life until the month of October 1660. when upon the
Restauraution of her Son to the Crown of England, she came to London, and
having settled her Revenues here, she went again with her youngest Daughter the
Lady Henretta into France, to see her espoused to the then Duke of Anjou, now
of Orleans; and in the month of July 1662 being returned into England, she
settled her Court at Somerset House, where she continued till May 1665, then
crossed the Seas again, and has ever since continued in France her Native
Country.

She needs no other Character then what is found in the Seventh Chapter of
that inimitable Book compiled by him that knew her best.

Of the present Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal of England.
THe First Prince of the Blood (in France called Monsieur sans queue) is the
Most Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, Second Son to King Charles the
Martyr, and only Brother to the present King our Sovereign.

He was born October. 14. 1633, and forthwith proclaimed at the Court Gates Duke
of York; the 24th of the same month was baptized, and afterward committed to
the Government of the then Countess of Dorset.

The 27th of July 1643 at Oxford was created by Letters Patents Duke of York
(though called so by special command from his Birth) without those Solemnities
(the iniquity of the times not admitting thereof) that were used to the King
his Father 1605, when being Second Son to King James, and so Duke of Albany in
Scotland, was created Duke of York with the preceding Solemn Creation of diverse
young Noblemen to be Knights of the Bath, and the Robes of State put upon him,
the Cap of State on his Head, and the Golden Rod into his Hand, the Prime
Nobility and Heralds assisting at that Ceremony.

After the Surrender of Oxford his Royal Highness was in 1646 conveyed to
London by the then prevailing disloyal part of the Two Houses of Parliament,
and committed with his Brother Gloucester and Sister Elizabeth to the care of
the Earl of Northumberland.

In 1648 aged about 15, was by Colonel Bampfield conveyed in a disguise or
habit of a Girl beyond Sea, first to his Sister the Princess Royal of Orange
in Holland, and afterward to the Queen his Mother then at Paris, where he was
carefully educated in the Religion of the Church of England, and in all
Exercises meet for such a Prince.

About the Age of 20 in France he went into the Campaign, and served with much
Gallantry under that great Commander the Protestant Marshall de Turenne for
the French King against the Spanish forces in Flanders.

Notwithstanding which, upon a Treaty between the French King and Cromwell in
1655, being obliged with all his retinue to leave the French Dominions, and
invited into Flanders by Don Juan of Austria, he there served under him against
the French King, then leagued with the English Rebels against Spain; where his
Magnanimity and Dexterity in Martial Affairs (though unsuccessful) were very
eminent.

In the year 1660 came over with the King into England, and being Lord High
Admiral in the year 1665, in the War against the United States of the
Netherlands, commanded in person the whole Royal Navy on the Seas between
England and Holland, where with incomparable valor and extraordinary hazard of
his own Royal Person, after a most sharp dispute he obtained a Signal Victory
over the whole Dutch Fleet commanded by Admiral Opdam, who perished with his own
and many more Ships in that Fight.

He married Anne the eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Clarendon, late Lord
High Chancellor of England, by whom he has had a numerous issue, whereof are
living, first the Lady Mary, born 30 April 1662, whose Godfather was Prince
Rupert, and Godmothers the Dutchesses of Buckingham and Ormond. Secondly, the
Lady Anne born in Febr. 1664, whose Godfather was Gilbert Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, her Godmothers were the young Lady Mary her Sister and the Duchess
of Monmouth. She is lately for her health transported into France. Thirdly, 15
Sept. 1667 was born Edgar, lately created Duke of Cambridge by Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, whose Godfathers were the Duke of Albemarle
and the Marquess of Worcester, his Godmother the Countess of Suffolk.

The Titles of his Royal Highness are Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ulster,
Lord High Admiral of England, Ireland, and all Foreign Plantations, Constable
of Dover Castle, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Governor of Portsmouth, etc.

Of the Prince of Orange.
NExt to the Duke of York and his Issue is William of Nassau Prince of Orange,
only Issue of the lately deceased Princess Royal Mary, eldest Daughter to King
Charles the First, and wedded 1641 to William of Nassau, Commander in Chief of
all the Forces of the States General both by Land and by Sea.

His Highness the present Prince was born 9 days after his Fathers death on
the 14th November. 1650, had for Godfathers the Lords States General of Holland
and Zealand, and the Cities of Delft, Leyden, and Amsterdam.

His Governess was the Lady Stanhop, then wife to the Here van Hemvliet.

At 8 years of age was sent to the University of Leyden.

His Revenue is about 60000 l. Sterling, besides Military Advantages enjoyed by
his Father and Ancestors, which amounted yearly to about 30000 l. Sterling more.

He is a Prince in whom the high and princely qualities of his Ancestors
already appear.

Of the Princess Henretta.
THe next Heir (after the forenamed) to the English Crown, is the Princess
Henretta, only Sister living to the present King of England.

She was born the 16th of June 1644 at Exeter during the heat of the late
Rebellion, after the surrender of Exeter conveyed to Oxford, and thence 1646 to
London, whence with her Governess the Lady Dalkieth, she escaped into France,
was there educated as became her high Birth and Quality, but being left wholly
to the care and maintenance of the Queen her Mother at Paris, embraced the
Romish Religion.

At the age of 16 years came with the Queen Mother into England, and 6 months
after returning into France, was married to the only Brother of the French King
the Illustrious Prince Philip then Duke of Anjou, till the death of his Uncle,
and now Duke of Orleans, whose Revenue is 1100000 Livres Tournois, besides his
Appanage, not yet settled.

Her Portion was 40000 l. Sterling, her Jointure to be the same with the
present Duchess Dowager of Orleans.

This Princess has issue one Daughter, if she has a Son, the French King
allows him 50000 Crowns yearly, and the Appanage after the death of the present
Duke reverts to the Crown.

Of the Prince Elector Palatine.
THere being left alive no more of the Offspring of King Charles the First,
the next Heirs of the Crown of England are the Issue and Descendants of
Elizabeth late Queen of Bohemia, only Sister to the said King, who was married
to Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, afterward styled King of Bohemia,
whose eldest Son living is Charles Lodowick Prince Elector Palatine of the
Rhine, commonly called the Palsgrave, from the High Dutch pfaltzgraff, Palatii
Comes, was born the the 22th December 1617 at Heydelberg, and afterward in
Holland at the Hague, and at the University of Leyden, was educated in a
Princely manner. At the age of 18 years came into England, was created Knight
of the Garter, about two years after fought a Battle in Westphalia. In the year
1637 passing incognito through France to take possession of Brisach upon the
Rhine, which the Duke Saxon Weymar intended to deliver up unto him, together
with the Command of his Army, he was by that quick-sighted Cardinal Richlieu
discovered at Moulins, and thence sent back Prisoner to the Bois de Vincennes,
whence after 23 weeks imprisonment he was by the mediation of the King of
England set at liberty.

In the year 1643 he came again into England, and with the Kings secret consent
(because the King could not continue unto him the wonted Pension, whilst the
Rebels possessed the greatest part of his Majesty's Revenues) made his Addresses
to, and abode with the disloyal part of the Lords and Commons at Westminster,
until the Murder of the said King and the Restoration of the Lower Palatinat,
according to the famous Treaty at Munster, for which he was constrained to quit
all his right to the Upper Palatinat, and accept of an Eighth Electorship, at a
juncture of time when the King of England (had he not been engaged at home by
an impious Rebellion) had been the most considerable of all other at that
Treaty, and this Prince his Nephew would have had the greatest advantages there.

In 1650 he espoused the Lady Charlotte, Daughter to the Landgrave of Hessen,
by which Lady he has one Son named Charles, aged about 16, and one Daughter
aged about 14.

Of Prince Rupert.
NExt to the Issue of the Prince Elector Palatin is Prince Rupert, born at
Prague 27 November. 1619, not long before that very unfortunate Battle there
fought, whereby not only all Bohemia was lost, but the Palatin Family was for
almost 30 years dispossessed of all their Possessions in Germany.

At 13 years of age he marched with the then Prince of Orange to the Siege of
Rhineberg; afterward in England was created Knight of the Garter.

At the age of 18 he commanded a Regiment of Horse in the German Wars, and in a
Battle being taken by the Imperialists under the Command of Count Hatzfield, he
continued a prisoner above three years.

In 1642 returning into England, and made General of the Horse to the King,
fights and defeats Colonel Sands near Worcester, routed the Rebels Horse at
Edgehill, took Cirencester, recovered Lichfield and Bristol, raised the long
Siege before Latham House, fought the great Battle at Marston Moor; was created
Earl of Holderness, and Duke of Cumberland, after the extinction of the Male
Line of the Cliffords. Finally, the Kings forces at land being totally
defeated, he transported himself into France, and was afterward made Admiral of
such Ships of War as submitted to King Charles the Second, to whom after diverse
disasters at Sea, and wonderful preservations, he returned to Paris 1652, where
and in Germany, sometimes at the Emperors Court, and sometimes at Heydelberg,
he passed his time in Princely Studies and Exercises till the Restoration of
his Majesty now reigning; after which returning into England, was made a Privy
Counselor in 1662, and in 1666 being joined Admiral with the Duke of
Albemarle, first attackt the whole Dutch Fleet with his Squadron, in such a
bold resolute way that he put the Enemy soon to flight. He enjoys a Pension
from his Majesty of 4000 l. per Annum.

After Prince Rupert the next Heirs to the Crown of England are 3 French
Ladies, Daughters of Prince Edward lately deceased, who was a younger Son of
the Queen of Rehemia, whose Widow the Princess Dowager Mother to the said
three Ladies is Sister to the late Queen of Poland, Daughter and Coheir to the
last Duke of Nevers in France, amongst which three Daughters there is a Revenue
of about 12000 l. Sterling a year.

After these is the Princess Elizabeth eldest Sister living to the Prince
Elector Palatin, born 26 December. 1618. unmarried and living in Germany.

The next is another Sister, called the Princess Louisa, bred up at the Hague
with the Queen her Mother in the Religion of the Church of England, at length
embracing the Romish Religion, is now Lady Abbess of Maubisson at Ponthoise,
not far from Paris.

Last of all is the Princess Sophia, youngest Daughter to the Queen of Bohemia,
born at the Hague 1630. and in 1659 wedded to John Duke of Lunenberg, and Free
Prince of Germany, Heir to the Duchy of Brunswick, by whom she has Sons and
Daughters.

Of these three Princesses it is said, that the first is the most learned, the
second the greatest Artist, and the last one of the most accomplished Ladies in
Europe.

Of the Great Officers of the Crown.
NExt to the King and Princes of the Blood are reckoned the Great Officers of
the Crown; whereof there are Eight, viz. the Lord High Chancellor, the Lord
High Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord High Admiral, the Lord Great
Chamberlain, the Lord High Constable, the Earl Marshal, and the Lord High
Steward for the time being.

First, Lord Chancellor.
the Lord High Chancellor, Summus Cancellarius, so called, because all
Patents, Commissions, Warrants, coming from the King, and perused by him, are
signed if well, or cancelled, if amiss.

He is after the King and Princes of the Blood in Civil Affairs, Dignity.
the highest Person in the Kingdom, as the Archbishop of Canterbury is in
Ecclesiastical Affairs.

His Office is to keep the Kings Great Seal, Office.
to judge not according to the Common Law, as other Civil Courts do, but to
moderate the rigor of the Law, and to judge according to Equity, Conscience,
or Reason.

His Oath is to do right to all manner of People poor and rich, Oath.
after the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and truly counsel the King, to keep
secret the Kings Counsel, nor suffer so far as he may that the Rights of the
Crown be diminisht, etc.

From the time of Henry 2. the Chancellours of England have been ordinarily
made of Bishops or other Clergymen learned in the Civil Laws, till Henry 8.
made Chancellor one Richard Rich a Common Lawyer, from whom is descended the
present Earl of Warwick and the Earl of Holland; since which time there have
been some Bishops, but most Common Lawyers.

This High Office is in France durante vita, but here is durante beneplacito
Regis.

The Salary from the King is 848 l. per Annum, Salary.
and when the Star Chamber was up, 200 l. per Annum more for his Attendance
there.

The Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper (who differ only in Name) is created per
traditionem magni Sigilli sibi per dominum Regem, and by taking his Oath.

The Great Seal being lately taken from Edward Earl of Clarendon Lord
Chancellor, was by his Majesty's great favor bestowed upon Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, with the Title of Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.

The next Great Officer of the Crown is the Lord High Treasurer of England,
Lord Treasurer*
who receives this high Office by delivery of a White Staff to him by the
King, and holds it durante beneplacito Regis.

Anciently he received this Dignity by the delivery of the Golden Keys of the
Treasury.

His Oath is little different from that of the Lord Chancellor. Oath.


He is Praefectus Aerarii, Office.
a Lord by his Office, under whose Charge and Government is all the Kings
Revenue kept in the Exchequer. He has also the check of all the Officers any
way employed in collecting Imposts, Customs, Tributes, or other Revenues
belonging to the Crown. He has the gift of all Customers, Controllers, and
Searchers in all the Ports of England.

He has the nomination of the Escheators in every County, and in some Cases by
Statute is to appoint a Measurer for the length and breadth of Clothes.

He with others joined in Commission with him or without, lets Leases of all
the Lands belonging to the Crown. He gives Warrants to certain Persons of
Quality to have their Wine Custom free.

The Annual Salary of the Lord High Treasurer is in all 383 li. 7s. 8d. per
Annum. Since the decease of Thomas Wriothesly last Earl of Southhampton, and
last Lord High Treasurer of England, this Office has been executed by a
Commission granted to five eminent Persons, viz. the Duke of Albemarle, Lord
Ashley, Sir Thomas Clifford, Sir Will. Coventry, and Sir John Duncomb.

The Third Great Officer of the Crown is the Lord Privy Seal, Lord Privy Seal.
who is a Lord by his Office, under whose hands pass all Charters and Grants of
the King, and Pardons signed by the King, before they come to the Great Seal of
England; also diverse other matters of less Concernment, as for payments of
money, etc. which do not pass the Great Seal.

He is by his Place of the Kings Privy Council, and Chief Judge of the Court of
Requests, when it shall be re-continued; and besides his Oath of Privy
Counselor, takes a particular Oath as Lord Privy Seal.

His Salary is

His Place according to Statute is next to the Lord President of the Kings
Council. Dignity.


It is an Office of great Trust and Skill, that he put not this Seal to any
Grant without good Warrant under the Kings Privy Signet; nor with Warrant, if
it be against Law or Custom, until that the King be first acquainted.

This great Officer is mentioned in the Statutes of 2 Rich. 2. and then ^anked
amongst the Chief Persons of the Realm.

And is at present enjoyed by John Lord Robarts, Baron Robarts of Truro.

The Fourth Great Officer of the Crown is the Lord High Admiral of England,
Admiral.
whose Trust and Honor is so great, that this Office has usually been given
either to some of the Kings younger Sons, near Kinsmen, or to some one of the
highest and chiefest of all the Nobility.

He is called Admiral from Amir in Arabic and (...) in the Greek, that is
Praefectus Marinus, a word borrowed from the Eastern Empire, where such kind of
compounds were much in rerequest and introduced into England after the Wars in
the Holy Land by King Richard or King Edward 1.

The Patent of the Lord Admiral did anciently run thus, Angliae, Hiberniae, and
Aquitaniae, Magnus Admirallus, but at present thus, Angliae and Hiberniae ac
Dominiorum and Insularum earundem, Villae Callesiae, and Marchiarum ejusdem,
Normandiae, Gasconiae, and Aquitaniae, Magnus Admirallus and Praefectus
Generalis Classis and Marium dictorum Regnorum.

To the Lord High Admiral of England is by the King entrusted the management of
all Marine Affairs, Office.
as well in respect of Jurisdiction as Protection. He is that High Officer or
Magistrate to whom is committed the Government of the Kings Navy, with Power of
decision in all Causes Maritime, as well Civil as Criminal; of all things done
upon or beyond the Sea in any part of the World, all things done upon the Sea
Coasts in all Ports and Havens, and upon all Rivers below the first Bridge next
toward the Sea.

The Lord Admiral has the power to commissionate a Vice Admiral, a Rear
Admiral, and all Sea Captains, also Deputies for particular Coasts, Coroners to
view dead bodies found on the Sea Coasts or at Sea, Commissioners or Judges for
exercising Justice in the Court of Admiralty, to imprison, release, etc.

He has sometimes a power to bestow Knighthood to such as shall deserve it at
Sea.

To the Lord Admiral belongs by Law and Custom all penalties and amercements of
all Transgressors at Sea, on the Sea Shore, in Ports, and from the first Bridge
on Rivers toward the Sea; also the Goods of Pirates, Felons, or Capital
Faulters, condemned, outlawed, or horned. Moreover all Waifs, Stray Goods,
Wrecks of Sea, Deodands, a share of all lawful Prizes, Lagon, Jetson, and
Flotson, as the Mariners term them; that is, Goods lying in the Sea on Ground,
Goods floting on the Sea, and Goods cast by the Sea on the Shore, not granted
to Lords of Manors adjoining to the Sea: All great Fishes, as Sea Hogs, and
other Fishes of extraordinary bigness, called Royal Fishes, except only Whales
and Sturgeons.

This High Dignity is at present enjoyed by the Kings only Brother the
Illustrious Prince James Duke of York.

The Fifth Great Officer of the Crown is the Lord Great Chamberlain of England,
Chamberlain.
an Officer of great Antiquity, to whom belongs Livery and Lodging in the Kings
Court, and certain Fees due from each Archbishop and Bishop when they do their
Homage or Fealty to the King, and from all Peers of the Realm at their
Creation, or doing the Homage or Fealty, and at the Coronation of any King to
have 40 Else of Crimson Velvet for his own Robes, and on the Coronation day
before the King rises to bring him his Shirt, Coyfe, Wearing Clothes, and
after the King is by him apparelled and gone forth, to have his Bed and all
Furniture of his Bedchamber for his Fees, all the Kings Night Apparel, and to
carry at the Coronation the Coyfe, Gloves, and Linen to be used by the King
upon that occasion; also the Sword and Scabberd, and the Gold to be offered by
the King, and the Robe Royal and Crown, and to undress and attire the King with
his Robes Royal, and to serve the King that day before and after Dinner with
water to wash his hands, and to have the Basin and Towells for his Fees, etc.

This Honor was long enjoyed by the Earls of Oxford, from the time of Hen. 1.
by an Estate Tail or Inheritance, but in the two last Coronations by the Earls
of Lindsey, and that by an Estate of Inheritance from a Daughter or Heir
General claimed and controverted.

The Sixth Great Officer is the Lord High Constable of England. Constable.
so called some think from the Saxon Cuning, by contraction King and Stable,
quasi-Regis columen, for it was anciently written Cuningstable, but rather from
Comes Stabuli, whose Power and Jurisdiction was anciently so great, that after
the death of Edward Bohun Duke of Buckingham 1521 the last High Constable of
England, it was thought too great for any Subject.

But since upon occasion of Coronations (as at that of King Charles 2. was made
the present Earl of Northumberland) and at Solemn Trials by Combat (as at that
which was intended between Rey and Ramsey 1631, was made Robert Earl of
Lindsey) there is created pro hac vice a Lord High Constable. His Power and
Jurisdiction is the same with the Earl Marshal, with whom he sits Judge in the
Marshals Court, and takes place of the Earl Marshal.

The Seventh Great Officer of the Crown is the Earl Marshal of England, Earl
Marshal.
so called from Mare in the old Saxon (i.e.) Horses, and Schal Praefectus. He
is an Earl some say by his Office, whereby he takes as the Constable does,
Cognizance of all matters of War and Arms, determines Contracts touching Deeds
of Arms out of the Realm upon Land, and matters concerning Wars within the
Realm, which cannot be determined by Common Law.

This Office is of great Antiquity in England, and anciently of great Power.

The last Earl Marshal was Henry Howard Earl of Arundel, who died in 1652, his
Father Thomas Earl of Arundel and he enjoying that Office only for the Term of
their lives by the Kings Letters Patents.

At the Coronation of His Majesty now reigning, the present Earl of Suffolk for
that Solemnity only was made Earl Marshal.

The Eighth and last Great Officer of the Crown is the Lord High Steward of
England, High Steward.
quasi Stedeward Locum tenens the Kings Lieftenant, in Lawyers Latin
Seneschallus of Sen, in Saxon, Justice, and Schals Governor or Officer.

His Power anciently in Civil Matters was next to the King, and was so
transcendent, that it was thought fit not longer to trust it in the hands of
any Subject, for his Office was Supervidere and regulare sub Rege and immediate
post Regem (as an ancient Record speaks) totum Regnum Angliae and omnes
ministros Legum infra idem regnum temporibus pacis and guerrarum.

The last that had a State of Inheritance in this High Office was Henry of
Bullinbrook (Son and Heir to the great Duke of Lancaster John of Gaunt,
afterward King of England:) since which time they have been made only hac
vice, to officiate at a Coronation, by virtue of which Office he sits
judicially and keeps his Court in the Kings Palace at Westminster, and there
receives the Bills and Petitions of all such Noblemen and others, who by
reason of their Tenure or otherwise, claim to do Services at the New Kings
Coronation, and to receive the Fees and Allowances due and accustomed; as
lately at the Coronation of King Charles the Second, the Duke of Ormond was
made for that occafion Lord High Steward of England, and (marching immediately
before the King) bore in his hands St. Edwards Crown: Or else for the
Arraignment of some Peer of the Realm, their Wives or Widows, for Treason or
Felony, or some other great Crime, to judge and give Sentence, as the ancient
High Stewards were wont to do; which ended, his Commission expireth: During
such Trial he sits under a Cloth of Estate, and they that speak to him say,
May it please your Grace my Lord High Steward of England. His Commission is to
proceed Secundum Legem and consuetudinem Angliae. He is sole Judge, yet does
call all the Twelve Judges of the Land to assist him. Is not sworn, nor the
Lords who are the Tryers of the Peer arraigned.

During his Stewardship he bears a White Staff in his Hand, and the Trial
being over, openly breaks it, and so his Office takes an end.

Of the Kings Court.
THe Court of the King of England is a Monarchy within a Monarchy, consisting
of Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Persons and Government.

For the Ecclesiastical Government of the Kings Court there is first a Dean of
the Kings Chapel, who is usually some grave Learned Prelate, chosen by the
King, and who as Dean acknowledges no Superior but the King; for as the Kings
Palace is exempt from all inferior Temporal Jurisdiction, so is his Chapel
from all Spiritual; it is called Capella Domenica, the Demean Chapel, is not
within the Jurisdiction or Diocese of any Bishop, but as a Regal Peculiar
exempt and reserved to the Visitation and Immediate Government of the King, who
is Supreme Ordinary, and as it were Prime Bishop over all the Churches and
Bishops of England.

By the Dean are chosen all other Officers of the Chapel, viz. a Subdean or
Praecentor Capellae, 32 Gentlemen of the Chapel, whereof 12 are Priests, and
one of them is Confessor to the Kings Household, whose Office is to read Prayers
every Morning to the Family, to visit the Sick, to examine and prepare
Communicants, to inform such as desire advice in any Case of Conscience or
Point of Religion, etc.

The other 20 Gentlemen, commonly called Clerks of the Chapel, are with the
aforesaid Priests to perform in the Chapel the Office of Divine Service in
Praying, Singing, etc. One of these being well skilled in Music, is chosen
Master of the Children, whereof there are 12 in Ordinary, to instruct them in
the Rules and Art of Music for the Service of the Chapel. Three other of the
said Clerks are chosen to be Organists, to whom are joined upon Sundays,
Collar days, and other Holy Days, the Saickbuts and Cornets belonging to the
Kings Private Music, to make the Chapel Music more full and complete.

There are moreover 4 Officers called Vergers, from the Silver Rods carried in
their hands, also a Sergeant, 2 Yeomen; and a Groom of the Chapel.

In the Kings Chapel thrice every day Prayers are read, and Gods Service and
Worship performed with great Decency, Order, and Devotion, and should be a
Pattern to all other Churches and Chapels of England.

Twelve days in the year, being high and principal Festivals, His Majesty
after Divine Service, attended with his principal Nobility, adorned with their
Collars of Esses, in a grave solemn manner at the Altar offers a sum of Gold to
God, in signum specialis dominii, that by his Grace he is King, and holds all
of him.

All Offerings made at the Holy Altar by the King and the Queen, did anciently
belong to the disposal of the Archbishop of Canterbury, if his Grace were
present, wheresoever the Court was, but now to the Dean of the Chapel.

Those 12 days are first Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, and All Saints,
called Houshold-dayes, upon which the Besant or Gold to be offered, is
delivered to the King by the Lord Steward or some other of the Principal
Officers: then New-years-day and Twelf-day, upon the later of which Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh, in several Purses are offered by the King: Lastly,
Candlemas, Anuntiation, Ascension, Trinity Sunday, St. John Baptist, and
Michaelmass day, when only Gold is offered. Upon Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsunday, His Majesty usually receives the Holy Sacrament, none but two or
three of the Principal Bishops communicating with Him.

The King has also (besides many Extraordinary) 48 Chaplains in Ordinary, who
are usually eminent Doctors in Divinity; whereof 4 every Month wait at Court
to preach in the Chapel on Sundays and other Festivals before the King, and
in the Morning early on Sundays before the Household, to read Divine Service
before the King out of Chapel daily twice in the Kings Private Oratory, to
give Thanks at Table, in the Clerk of the Closets absence.

In time of Lent, according to ancient laudable Custom, the Divine Service and
Preaching is performed in a more solemn manner.

Anciently at Court there were Sermons in Lent only, and that in the Afternoon,
in the Open Court, and then only by Bishops, Deans, and principal Prebends: Our
Ancestors judging that time enough and those persons only fit to teach such an
Auditory their duty to God and Man. Anciently also the Lent Preachers were all
appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Now on the first Wednesday, called
Ashwednesday, in the Morning, begins the Dean of the Chapel to preach, and on
each Wednesday after one of his Majesty's more eloquent Chaplains, and every
Friday the Dean of some Cathedral or Collegiat Church, and on the last Friday,
called Good Friday, is always to preach the Dean of Westminster; and on every
Sunday in Lent some, Right Reverend Bishop preaches, and on the last Sunday of
Lent, called Palm Sunday, is to preach an Archbishop, and upon Easter day the
Lord High Almoner, who is usually some principal Bishop, that disposes of the
Kings Alms, and for that use receives (besides other moneys allowed by the
King) all Deodands and Bona Felonum de se, to be that way disposed.

In France the Grand Aumosnier is principal of all the Ecclesiastiques of the
Court, and all Officers of the Kings Chapel, he receives their Oaths of
Allegiance, and himself swears only to the King for that Office; he has the
disposition of all Hospitals, the Charge for delivering Prisoners pardoned by
the King at his coming to the Crown, or at his Coronation or first entrance
into any of his Cities.

Under the Lord High Almoner there is a Subalmoner, two Yeomen, and two Grooms
of the Almonry.

Besides all these, the King has a Clerk of the Closet or Confessor to His
Majesty, who is commonly some reverend discreet Divine, extraordinarily
esteemed by His Majesty, whose Office is to attend at the Kings right hand
during Divine Service, to resolve all doubts concerning spiritual matters, etc.

The present Dean of the Chapel is Doctor Herbert Crofts Bishop of Hereford,
whose Fee is 200 l. yearly and a Table, his Subdean is Doctor Jones, whose Fee
is 100 l. yearly.

The Fee of each Priest and Clerk of the Chapel is 70 l. yearly.

The Clerk of the Closet is Doctor Blandford Bishop of Oxford, has no Fee.

The Lord High Almoner is Doctor Henchman Bishop of London, has no Fee: his
Sub-Almoner is Doctor Perinchef, whose Fee is 6 l. 6 s. 10 d.

Of the Civil Government of His Majesty's Household.
FOr the Civil Government of the Kings Court, the Chief Officer is the Lord
Steward, quasi Stead ward Locum tenens, called also in the time of Henry 8. the
Great Master of the Kings Household after the French Mode, but Primo Mariae, and
ever since called the Lord Steward of the Kings Household.

He has Authority over all Officers and Servants of the Kings House, except
those of His Majesty's Chapel, Chamber, and Stable etc.

He judges of all disorders committed in the Court, or within the Verge, which
is every way within 12 miles of the chief Tunnel of the Court (only London by
Charter is exempted) for the Law having an high esteem of the dignity of the
Kings settled Mansion House, laid out such a Plot of ground about his House (as
a half-pace or Foot-Carpet spread about the Kings Chair of Estate that ought to
be more cleared and void than other places) to be subject to a special exempted
jurisdiction depending on the Kings Person and Great Officers, that so, where
the King comes, there should come with him Peace and Order, and an Awfulness
and Reverence in men's hearts, besides it would have been a kind of eclipsing of
the Kings Honor, that where the King was, any Justice should be sought, but
immediately from the Kings own Officers, and therefore from very ancient times
the Jurisdiction of the Verge has been executed by the Lord Steward with great
Ceremony in the nature of a peculiar Kings Bench, and that not only within but
without the Kings Dominions; for so it is recorded that one Engleam of Nogent
in France for stealing Silver dishes out of the House of Edward 1. King of
England, then at Paris (after the matter had been debated in the Council of the
King of France touching the Jurisdiction, and ordered that the King of England
should enjoy this Kingly Prerogative of his Household) was condemned by Sir
Robert Fitz-John then Steward to the King of England, and hanged in St. Germans
Fields.

The Lord Steward is a White Staff Officer, for he in the Kings Presence
carries a White Staff, and at other times going abroad, it is carried by a
Footman bare-headed. At the death of the King, over the Hearse made for the
Kings Body, he breaks this Staff, and thereby discharges all the Officers,
whom the succeeding King, out of his mere grace does re-establish each one in
his former Office.

This eminent Emploiment is now enjoyed by James Duke of Ormond, Lord
Lieftenant of Ireland, whose Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes daily each
Meal, with Wine, Beer, etc.

The next Officer is the Lord Chamberlain, who has the oversight of all
Officers belonging to the Kings Chamber, except the Precincts of the Kings
Bedchamber, which is wholly under the Groom of the Stool; and all above Stairs;
who are all sworn by him (or his Warrant to the Gentlemen Ushers) to the King.
He has also the oversight of the Officers of the Wardrobes at all his
Majesty's Houses, and of the removing Wardr. or of Beds, of the Tents, Revels,
Music, Comedians, Hunting, and of the Messengers, of the Trumpetters,
Drummers, of all Handy-Crafts and Artisans retained in the Kings Service.
Moreover he has the oversight of the Heralds and Pursivants, and Sergeants
at Arms, of all Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Barbers, etc. To him also
belongs the oversight of the Chaplains, though himself be a Layman;
contrary in this particular to the Ancient Custom of England, and Modern Custom
of all other Kingdoms, where Ecclesiastiques are never under the ordering of
Laymen.

The Fee of the Lord Chamberlain of the Kings House is 100 l. yearly, and 16
Dishes each Meal, with all the Appurtenances.

This Office is now in the hands of Edward Montague, Lord Montague, and Earl of
Manchester.

Most of the abovenamed Offices and Places are in the Gift and Disposal of the
Lord Chamberlain.

The Third Great Officer of the Kings Court is the Master of the Horse,
anciently called Comes Stabuli, or Constable, to whom a highe^ Employment and
Power was then given, and this taken from him.

This great Officer has now the ordering and disposal of all the Kings Stables
and Races of Horses, and had heretofore of all the Posts of England. He has
also the power over Escuiries and Pages, over the Footmen, Grooms, Riders of
the Great Horses, Farriers, Smiths, Coach-men, Sadlers, and all other Trades
working to the Kings Stables, to all whom he (or by his Warrant the Avener)
gives an Oath to be true and faithful.

He has the Charge of all Lands and Revenues appointed for the Kings breed of
Horses, and for Charges of the Stable, and for Litters, Coaches, Sumpter
Horses, etc.

Also for the Charges of Coronations, Marriages, Entries, Cavalcades, Funerals,
etc.

He only has the Privilege to make use of any Horses, Pages, Footmen
belonging to the Kings Stable.

At any Solemn Cavalcade he rides next behind the King, and leads a Lear Horse
of State.

This great honor is now enjoyed by George Monk Duke of Albemarle, in
consideration of his unparalleld Services to the King, to his Crown and Dignity
at a juncture of time when his Affairs and Friends were in a very desperate
condition.

His yearly Fee is 666 l. 16 s. 4 d.

Under these Three Principal Officers of His Majesty's Household are almost all
the other Officers and Servants.

First under the Lord Steward in the Compting-House is the Treasurer of the
Household.

Comptroller.

Cofferer.

Master of the Household.

Two Clerks of the Green-Cloth.

Two Clerks Comptrollers.

One Sergeant.

Two Yeomen.

The Cofferers Clerk.

The Groom.

Two Messengers.

It is called the Compting-House, because the Accounts for all Expenses of the
Kings Household are there taken daily by the Lord Steward, the Treasurer, the
Comptroller, the Cofferer, the Master of the Household, the two Clerks of the
Green Cloth, and the two Clerks Comptrollers, who also there make Provisions
for the Household, according to the Law of the Land, and make Payments and
Orders for the well governing of the Servants of the Household.

In the Compting-House is the Green-Cloth, which is a Court of Justice
continually sitting in the Kings House, composed of the Persons last mentioned;
whereof the three first are usually of the Kings Privy Council. To this Court,
being the first and most ancient Court of England, is committed the charge and
oversight of the Kings Court Royal for matters of Justice and Government, with
Authority for maintaining the Peace within 12 miles distance, wheresoever the
Court shall be; and within the Kings House the power of correcting all the
Servants therein that shall any way offend.

It is called the Green Cloth, of a Green Cloth whereat they sit, over whom are
the Arms of the Compting House, bearing Vert a Key and a Rod Or, a Staff
Argent Saultier, signifying their Power to reward and correct, as Persons for
their great wisdom and experience thought fit by His Majesty to exercise both
these Functions in his Royal House.

The Treasurer of the Kings House is always of the Privy Council, and in
absence of the Lord Steward has power with the Comptroller and Steward of the
Marshalsea to hear and determine Treasons, Felonies, and other inferior Crimes
committed within the Kings Palace, and that by Verdict of the Kings Household.

Household Servants within the Check Roll, if any be found guilty of Felony, no
benefit of Glergy is to be allowed him. Anciently this Court might have held
Pleas of Freehold also.

His yearly Fee 124 l. 14 s. 8 d. and a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. He bears
a white Staff, and is at present Sir Thomas Clifford.

The Comptrollers Office is to control the Accounts and Reckonings of the
Green Cloth.

His yearly Fee is 107 l. 12 s. 4 d. a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. He bears a
white Staff, and is at present the Lord Newport.

The Cofferer is also a Principal Officer, has a special charge and oversight
of other Officers of the House, for their good Demeanor and Carriage in their
Offices, and is to pay the Wages to the Kings Servants below Stairs.

His yearly Fee is 100 l. a Table of 7 Dishes daily, and is now Colonel Will.
Ashburnbam.

The next is the Master of the Household, whose Office is to survey the Accounts
of the House.

His Fee 100 Marks and 7 Dishes daily, enjoyed by Sir Herbert Price.

The Two Clerks of the Green Cloth are Sir Henry Wood and Sir Stephen Fox, and
the two Clerks Comptrollers Sir William Boreman and Sir Winston Churchill.

The yearly Fee to each of these four, is 48 l. 13 s. 4 d. and between them 2
Tables of 7 Dishes to each Table.

The rest of the Compting-House being less considerable, shall for brevity be
past over, and for other Officers below stairs, only their Names and Number
shall be noted, their Fees being not considerable, except the Sergeants Fee of
each Office.

In the Bake-House, A Sergeant, a Clerk, diverse Yeomen, a Garnitor, diverse
Purveyors, Grooms and Conducts, in all 17 Persons.

In the Pantry, A Sergeant, Yeomen, Grooms, Pages, etc. in all 11.

In the Cellar, A Sergeant, a Gentleman, Yeomen, Grooms, Purveyors, Pages, in
all 12.

In the Buttry, A Gentleman, Yeoman, Grooms, Pages, Purveyors, in all 11.

In the Pitcher-House, A Yeoman, Grooms, Page, and Clerk, in all 5 persons.

In the Spicery, Three Clerks and a Grocer.

In the Chandlery, A Sergeant, 2 Yeomen, 2 Grooms, and a Page, in all 6 persons.

In the Wafery, A Yeoman and a Groom.

In the Confectionary, A Sergeant, 2 Yeomen, a Groom, and a Page.

In the Ewry, A Sergeant, a Gentleman, 2 Yeomen, a Groom, and 2 Pages.

In the Landry, A Yeoman, a Groom, 3 Pages, and a Draper.

In the Kitchen, Six Clerks, a Master Cook to the King, a Master Cook to the
Household, 6 Yeomen, 7 Grooms, 5 Children, in all 26 persons.

In the Larder, A Sergeant, a Clerk, 3 Yeomen, 3 Grooms, 2 Pages.

In the (...) or the Caterers Office, a Sergeant, a Clerk, Purveyors for Flesh
and Fish, Yeomen, in all 12 persons.

In the Boyling-House, a Yeoman, 2 Grooms.

In the Poultry, A Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, Purveyors, in all 10
persons.

In the Scalding-House, Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all 6.

In the Pastry, A Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Children, in all 11
persons.

In the Scullery, A Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all 12
persons.

In the Wood-Yard, A Sergeant, a Clerk, Yeomen, Groom, and Pages, in all 8
persons.

Harbingers, 2 Gentlemen, 6 Yeomen.

In the Almonry, Sub-Almoner, 2 Yeomen, Grooms.

Porters at Gate, A Sergeant Sir Edward Bret, 2 Yeomen, 4 Grooms.

Cart-Takers, 6 in number.

Surveyors of the Dresser, 2 persons.

Marshals of the Hall, 4.

Sewers of the Hall, 5.

Wayters of the Hall, 12.

Messenger of the Compting-House, 1.

Bell-Ringer, 1.

Long-Cart-Takers, 4.

Wine-Porters, 8.

Wood-Bearer, 1.

The Cock, 1.

Supernumerary Servants to the last King, viz. In the Poultry 2, in the Almonry
1, and in the Pastry 1.

Besides the forenamed Officers below Stairs, there are also under the said
Lord Steward all the Officers belonging to the Queens Kitchen, Cellar, Pantry,
etc. and to the Kings Privy Kitchen, and to the Lords Kitchen, together with
Children, Scowrers, Turn-broaches, etc. in all 68.

A List of His Majesty's Servants in Ordinary above Stairs.
GEntlemen of the Bed Chamber, whereof the first is called Groom of the Stole,
that is (according to the signification of the word in Greek, from whence first
the Latins, and thence the Italian and French derive it) Groom or Servant of
the Robe or Vestment: He having the Office and Honor to present and put on His
Majesty's first Garment or Shirt every morning, and to order the things of the
Bedchamber.

The Gentlemen of the Bedchamber consist usually of the Prime Nobility of
England. Their Office in general is each one in his turn to wait a Week in
every Quarter in the Kings Bedchamber, there to lie by the King on a
Pallet-Bed all Night, and in the absence of the Groom of the Stole to supply
his place.

The yearly Fee to each is 1000 l.

Their Names follow according to their Order.

John Earl of Bath, Groom of the Stole and first Gentleman of the Bedchamber.
George Duke of Buckingham. Charles Duke of Richmond. William Duke of Newcastle.
George Duke of Albemarle. James Duke of Ormond. Earl of Suffolk. The Earl of
Newport. Earl of Ossory. Earl of Ogle. Lord Gerrard. Lord Crofts. Lord
Lauderdale. Lord Mandevil. Mr. May Privy Purse. Sir George Carteret
Vice-Chamberlain. George Lord Viscount Grandison Captain of the Guard. Sir
Edward Griffin Knight, Treasurer of the Chamber. Sir John Denham Knight of the
Bath, Surveyor to His Majesty.
Grooms of the Bedchamber.
Henry Seymour, Esquire. John Ashburnham, Esquire. Thomas Elliot, Esquire.
David Walter, Esquire. William Leg, Esquire. Sylvius Tytus, Esquire. Thomas
Killegrew, Esquire. Robert Philips, Esquire. Edward Progers, Esquire. Richard
Lane, Esquire. Henry Coventry. Esquire.
These are not to be above the degree of Gentlemen, Their Office is to attend
in the Kings Bedchamber to dress and undress the King in private, etc.

The yearly Fee to each is 500 l.

Pages of the Bedchamber 6 in number, whereof one is Keeper of his Majesty's
Closet.

Gentlemen Vshers of the Privy-Chamber.
Sir William Flemming. Marmaduke Darcy. Sir Paul Neale. Sir Robert Stapleton.


These wait one at a time in the Privy Lodgings.

Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber in Ordinary.
Sir Edward Griffin. Sir Francis Cobb. Sir John Boys. Sir John Talbot. Sir
Robert Bindlos. Sir Thomas Sandys, etc.
in number forty eight, all Knights or Esquires of note.

Their Office is 12 every Quarter, to wait on the Kings Person within doors and
without, so long as His majesty is on foot, and when the King eats in the Privy
Chamber, they wait at the Table and bring in his Meat. They wait also at the
reception of Ambassadors, and every Night two of them lie in the Kings
Privy-Chamber.

A Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber by the Kings Commandment only, without any
written Commission is sufficient to arrest any Peer of England.

Grooms of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, in number 6, all Gentlemen of
Quality; these (as all Grooms) wait without Sword, Cloak, or Hat: whereas the
Gentlemen wear always Cloak and Sword.

In the Presence Chamber, Gentlemen-Ushers, daily Waiters in Ordinary are 4,
whereof the first has the Office of Black Rod, and in time of Parliament is to
attend every day the Lords House, and is also Usher of the Honorable Order of
the Garter. They are now Sir John Ayton, Sir Edward Carteret, Richard March,
Sir James Mercer. Tho. Duppa, Assistant Daily Waiter.


Their Office is to wait in the Presence Chamber, and to attend next the Kings
Person, and after the Lord Chancellor and the Vice-Chamberlain to order all
affairs, and to obey these are all Underofficers above Stairs.

Gentlemen Ushers Quarter Waiters in Ordinary, in number 8; these wait also in
the Presence Chamber, and are to give directions to the Grooms and Pages and
other under Officers; who are to attend in all servile Offices next to the
Grooms.

The Grooms of the Great Chamber are 12, the Pages of the Presence Chamber 4.

Cup-Bearers in Ordinary.
James Halsal, Charles Littleton, Sir William Fleetwood, Sir Philip Palmer, Mr.
Ayrskyn. Carvers in Ordinary, 4. Sewers in Ordinary, 4.
Esquires of the Body in Ordinary, 4.

Their Office to guard the Kings Person by Night, to set the Watch and give the
Word, and keep good Order in the whole House by Night, as the Lord Chamberlain
and his other Officers are to do by Day.

Groom Porter, Col. Offley.

His Office to see the Kings Lodgings furnished with Tables, Chairs, Stools,
Firing, to furnish Cards, Dice, etc. to decide disputes arising at Cards, Dice,
Bowlings, etc.

Sergeants at Arms, 16, all Gentlemen.

Chaplains in Ordinary, 4 for every Month, as follows:
January. Dr. Sandcroft, Dr. Brideock. Dr. Jos. Beaumont, Dr. Colebrand.
February. Dr. Pierce, Dr. Shute, Dr. Duport. Dr. Cradock.
March. Dr. Crofts, Dr. Reeves, Dr. Brough, Dr. Bell.
April. Dr. Maine. Dr. Gullston, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Creighton.
May. Dr. Fell, Dr. Sudbury, Dr. Crey, Dr. Bathurst.
June. Dr. Wood, Dr. Carlton, Dr. Basire, Dr. Neale.
July. Dr. Cartwright, Dr. Castillian, Dr. Smith, Dr. John Loyd.
August. Dr. Fleetwood, Dr. Gunning, Dr. Thorn, Dr. Offly.
September. Dr. Pearson, Dr. Bolton, Dr. Perinchief, Dr. Tillotson.
October. Dr. Ovtram, Dr. Meuse, Dr. Tho. Tulley, Dr. Smallwood.
November. Dr. Allestree, Dr. Benson, Dr. Geo. Beaumont, Dr. Will. Loyd.
December. Dr. Hodges, Dr. Hardye. Dr. Ball, Dr. Lamplagh.

These 48 Chaplains in Ordinary are usually Doctors in Divinity, and for the
most part Deans or Prebends, and all principal Predicators.

Messengers of the Chamber in Ordinary, first 2 Clerks of the Check, then 40
more, in all 42.

Musicians in Ordinary, 62.

Trumpeters in Ordinary and Kettle Drummers are in all 15.

Drummers and Fifes, 7.

Of Wardrobes the King has (besides the Great Wardrobe now in the Savoy,
whereof Edward Earl of Sandwich is Master) diverse standing Wardrobes at
Whitehall, Windsor, Hampton Court, the Tower of London, Greenwich, etc. whereof
there are diverse Officers. Lastly, removing Wardrobes, whereof there is one
Yeoman, 2 Grooms, and 2 Pages.

Jewel House, Sir Gilbert Talbot Master, and three Under Officers called Yeoman
and Grooms.

Whose Office is to take Charge of all Vessels of Gold or Silver gilt for the
King and Queens Table, of all Plate in the Tower, of Chains and loose Jewels,
not fixed to any Garment.

Physicians in Ordinary to His Majesty's Person are*
Sir Alexander Fraser, Sir John Baber. Doctor Clark, Doctor Hinton.
Physicians in Ordinary to the Household.
Doctor Waldron. Doctor Scarborough for the Tower of London.
Apothecaries, 2, one for the Kings Person and one for the Household.
Surgeons, 6. Barbers, 2. Printers, 2. Bookbinder, 1. Taylers, 2.
Hydrographer, 1. Stationer, 1.
In the Office of the Tents, Toils, Hales, and Pavilions, 2 Masters, 4 Yeomen,
1 Groom, 1 Clerk, Comptroller, 1 Clerk of the Tents. A Master of the Revels,
Office to order all things concerning Comedies, etc. Engraver, Sculptor, 1 in
each Office. In the Office of the Robes, 1 Master, 4 Grooms, a Purveyor, Clerk,
Tailor, and Page, and a Dyer. In the Matter of Ceremonies, A Master Sir Charles
Cotterel, and one Marshal. A Master of the Game of Cock-fighting. Two Sergeant
Skinners. Three Embroiderers. Two Keepers of the Privy Lodgings. Two Gentlemen
and one Yeomen of the Bows. One Crossbow-Maker, one Fletcher. One Mrs
Sempstress, and one Laundress. One Perspective Maker. One Master Fencer. One
Haberdasher of Hatts. One Comb-Maker. One Coffee-Maker. Shoo-maker, Joyner,
Copier of Pictures, Watch-maker, Cabinet-maker, Lock-Smith, Library Keeper,
Rat-Killer, of each one. Game of the Bears and Bulls, 1 Master, 1 Sergeant, 1
Yeoman. Operators for the Teeth, 2. Coffer-Bearers to the Back-Stairs, 2.
Falconers, Sir Allen Aspley Master of the Hawks, and other Officers under him
about London and other places, belonging to the King, in all 33. Huntsmen for
the Buckhounds in Ordinary, John Carey Esquire, Master of the Buckhounds, and
under him a Sergeant and 34 other persons. Otter-hounds, Smith Esquire, Master
of the Otter-hounds, and 4 more under him. Huntsmen for the Harriers, Master of
the Harriers, Mr. Elliot and 5 under him. One Yeoman of the Leash. Watermen 55.
Silkmen 2. Perfumer, Feather-maker, Milliner, Mercer, Hosier, Draper,
Upholster, Letter-carrier, Foreign Post, of each one. Officers belonging to
Gardens, Bowling-Greens, Tennis-Courts, Pall Mall, 10 persons. Culter,
Spurrier, Girdler, Corn-Cutter, Button-maker, one of each. Embosser, Enameler,
of each one. Armory at the Tower, Master of the Ordinance now in several
Commissioners, William Leg Lieutenant of the Ordnance and Master Armorer, and
17 under Officers. Heralds, 3 Kings at Arms. Sir Edward Walker, Garter. Sir
Edward Bish, Clarenceux. William Dugdale, Norroy. Also 4 Heralds and 4
Pursuivants. Comedians, 17 Men and 8 Women Actors. Gunner, Gilder, Cleanser of
Pictures, Scene-Keeper, Coffer-Maker, Wax-Chandler, Mole-Taker, Public Notary,
one of each. Keeper of Birds and Foul in St. James's Park, 1. Keeper of the
Volery, Goffe-Club-maker, Sergeant Painter, one for each.


A List of His Majesty's Servants under the Master of the Horse.
There are,

FIrst 14 Queryes, so called from the French word Escuyers, derived from
Escuyrie a Stable; their Office is to attend the King on Hunting, on Progress,
or on any occasion of riding abroad, to help His Majesty up and down from his
Horse, etc.

The yearly Fee to each is 20 l.

2. The Chief Avener (which place with all the following, are in the Gift of
the Master of the Horse) so called from Avena, Oats; whose Office is to
provide Provender, and yearly Fee is 40 l.

There are 2 Clerks of the Avery or Avenry.

One Clerk of the Stable.

Three Surveyors, 2 Gentlemen Riders, 4 Yeomen Riders, 4 Coachmen, 8 Littermen,
a Sergeant of the Carriage, 2 Sadlers, a Squire Sadler and a Yeoman Sadler, a
Yeoman of the Stirrup, 4 Yeomen Purveyors, 4 Yeomen Granators, a Sergeant
Farrier, 4 Yeomen Farriers, a Yeoman of the Male, a Yeoman Peckman, a Yeoman
Bilmaker, a Yeoman of the Close Cart, Sixty four Grooms of the Stable, 26
Footmen in Liveries to run by the Kings Horse.

There is (besides some other Officers not here named) an Ancient Officer in
the Kings Household, called Clerk of the Market, who within the Verge of the
Kings Household is to keep a Standard of all Weights and Measures, and to burn
all false Weights and Measures; and from the Pattern of this Standard are to be
taken all the Weights and Measures of the Kingdom.

There are diverse other Offices belonging to the King of great importance,
which are not subordinate to any of the 3 forementioned Great Officers, as
Master of the Great Wardrobe, Master of the Ordnance, Warden of the Mint, etc.
and above all for profit is the Office of Postmaster settled by Act of
Parliament on the Duke of York, and worth about 20000 l. yearly, but managed by
the order and oversight of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State; who
also are Principal Domestiques of the King: of whom a farther account shall be
given in the Chapter of the Kings Privy Council.

Master of the Robes is Laurence Hyde Esquire, second Son to the late Lord
Chancellor; whose Office is to have in Custody all His Majesty's Robes, as
those of Coronation, of St. Georges Feast, and of Parliament; also the Custody
of all His Majesty's Wearing Apparel, and of his Collar of Esses, Georges, and
Garters, beset with Diamonds, Pearls, etc. Of this Office there is one Master,
2 Yeomen, 4 Grooms, 3 Pages, etc.

In the Court of King James there were many more Offices, and to many Offices
there belonged many more persons, which King Charles the first much lessened,
and the present King now reigning has yet lessened much more.

Of the Military Government in the Kings Court.
AS in a Kingdom, because Civil Governors proposing Temporal and
Ecclesiastical Governors Eternal Rewards and Punishments are not sufficient to
secure Peace; therefore a Military force is always in readiness: so in the
Kings Court, besides Civil and Ecclesiastical Officers, it is thought necessary
always to have in readiness Military Officers and Soldiers, to preserve the
Kings Person; whereupon depends the Peace and Safety of all his Subjects.

Belonging peculiarly to the Kings Court (besides above 4000 Foot, and above
500 Horse, who are always in Pay and readiness to assist upon any occasion)
there are Guards of Horse and Foot.

The Horse Guard, which the French call Guard du Corpse, the Germans Lieb
Guardy, we corruptly. Life Guard, that is, the Guard of the Kings Body, has
consisted of 500 Horsemen, all or most Gentlemen and old Officers, commanded by
the Captain of the Guard, now James Duke of Monmouth, whose Pay is 30 s. a day,
and each Horseman 4 s. a day. These Horse have been divided into Three Parts,
whereof 200 under the immediate Command of the Captain of the Guard, 150 under
Monsieur le Marquis de Blancfort, and 150 under Sir Philip Howard, whose Pay to
each is 20 s. a day.

Under the Captain of the Guard are four Lieutenants, Sir Thomas Sandis, Sir
Gilbert Gerard, Major General Egerton, and Sir George Hambleton, the Cornet is
Mr. Stanly, Brother to the Earl of Derby; also four Brigadeers.

The Office of the Captain of the Life Guard is at all times of War or Peace to
wait upon the Kings Person (as often as he rides abroad) with a considerable
number of Horsemen well armed and prepared against all dangers whatsoever.

At home within the Kings House it is thought fit that the Kings Person should
have a Guard both above and below Stairs.

In the Presence Chamber therefore wait the Gentlemen Pensioners carrying
Pole-axes, there are 50 who are usually Knights or Gentlemen of good Quality
and Families; their Office is to attend the Kings Person to and from his
Chapel only as far as the Privy Chamber; also in all other Solemnities: their
yearly Fee is 100 l. to each. Over these there is a Captain, usually some
Nobleman, at present the Lord Bellassis, whose Fee is 200 l. yearly; a
Lieutenant Sir John Bennet, his Fee 66 l. 13 s. 4 d. a Standard Bearer, Fee 100
l. a Pay-masters Fee 50 l. and a Clerk of the Check.

Again in the first Room above Stairs, called the Guard-Chamber, attend the
Yeomen of the Guard, whereof there are 250 men of the best quality under
Gentry, and of larger Stature, wearing Red Coats, after an Ancient Mode,
bearing Halberds at home and Half-Pikes in Progress, and always wearing a
large Sword.

Their Pay is daily 2 s. 6 d.

Their Captain the Lord, Grandison.

The Kings Palace Royal (ratione Regiae Dignitatis) is exempted from all
Jurisdiction of any Court Civil or Ecclesiastical, but only to the Lord
Steward, and in his absence to the Treasurer and Comptroller of the Kings
Household, with the Steward of the Marshalsey, who may by virtue of their
Office, without Commission hear and determine all Treasons, Felonies, Breaches
of the Peace, committed within the Kings Court or Palace.

The Kings Court or House where the King resideth, is accounted a place so
sacred, that if any man presume to strike another within the Palace where the
Kings Royal Person resideth, and by such stroke only draw blood, his right hand
shall be stricken off, and he committed to perpetual prison and fined. By the
Ancient Laws of England only striking in the Kings Court was punished with death
and loss of goods.

To make the deeper impression and terror into men's minds for striking in the
Kings Court, it has been ordered that the Punishment for striking should be
executed with great Solemnity and Ceremony, in brief thus:

The Sergeant of the Kings Woodyard brings to the place of execution a square
Block, a Beetle, Staple, and Cords to fasten the hand thereto, the Yeoman of
the Scullery provides a great fire of Coals by the Block, wherein the Searing
Irons brought by the Chief Farrier, are to be ready for the Chief Surgeon to
use. Vinegar and Cold Water brought by the Groom of the Saucery; the Chief
Officers also of the Cellar and Pantry are to be ready, one with a Cup of Red
Wine, and the other with a Manchet, to offer the Criminal after the Hand cut
off and the Stump seared. The Sergeant of the Ewry is to bring linen to wind
about and wrap the Arm. The Yeoman of the Poultry a Cock to lay to it, the
Yeoman of the Chandry seared Clothes, the Master Cook a sharp Dresser Knife,
which at the place of Execution is to be held upright by the Sergeant of the
Larder, till Execution be performed by an Officer appointed thereto, etc.

In the Kings Court not only striking is forbidden but also all occasions of
Striking, and therefore the Law says, Nullas Citationes aut summonitiones
licet facere infra Palatium Regis apud Westminster, vel alibi ubi Rex residet.

The Court of the King of England for Magnificence, for Order, for Number and
Quality of Officers, for rich Furniture, for Entertainment and Civility to
Strangers, for plentiful Tables, might compare with the best Court of
Christendom, and far excel the most Courts abroad; of one whereof, see the
Description made by an ingenious Person beyond Sea, writing to a Friend of his
at Court there, Annon in Inferno es Amice, qui es in Aula ubi Daemonum
habitatio est, qui illic suis artibus (humana licet effigy) regnant, atque ubi
Scelerum Schola est, and Animarum jactura ingens, ac quicquid uspiam est
perfidiae ac doli, quicquid crudelitatis ac inclementiae, quicquid effraenatae
superbiae and rapacis avaritiae, quicquid obscaenae libidinis ac faedissimae
impudicitiae, quicquid nefandae impietatis and morum pessimorum, totum illic
acervatur cumulatissime, ubi stupra, raptus, incestus adulteria ubi inebriari
jurare pejerare Atheismum profiteri palam principum and nobilium ludi sunt, ubi
fastus and tumor, ira Liver faedaque cupido cum sociis suis imperare videtur,
ubi criminum omnium procellae, virtutumque omnium inerrabile naufragium, etc.

But the Court of England on the contrary has been (and is hoped ever will be)
accounted (as King James advises in his Basilicon Doron) a Pattern of
Godliness and all Honesty and Virtue, and the properest School of Prowess and
Heroic Demeanor, and the fittest Place of Education for the Nobility and
Centry.

The Court of England has for a long time been a Pattern of Hospitality to the
Nobility and Gentry of England. All Noblemen or Gentlemen, Subjects or
Strangers that came accidently to Court, were freely entertained at the
plentiful Tables of His Majesty's Officers. Diverse Services or Messes of Meat
were every day provided Extraordinary for the Kings honor. Two hundred and
forty Gallons a day were at the Buttry Bar allowed for the Poor, besides all
the broken Meat, Bread, etc. gathered into Baskets and given to the Poor at the
Court Gates by 2 Grooms and 2 Yeomen of the Almonry, who have Salaries of His
Majesty for that Service.

Moreover the Court is an eminent Pattern of Charity and Humility to all that
shall see the performance of that Ancient Custom by the King and the Queen on
the Thursday before Easter, called Maundy Thursday, wherein the King in a
solemn manner does wash the Feet, cloth and feed as many poor Old Men as His
Majesty is years old, bestowing on every one Cloth for a Gown, Linen for a
Shirt, Shoes, and Stockings, a Joul of Salmon, a Pol of Ling, 30 Red and 30
White Herrings, all in clean Wooden Dishes, 4 Six Penny Loaves of Bread, and a
Purse with a 20 s. Piece of Gold.

The Magnificence and abundant plenty of the Kings Tables has caused amazement
in all Foreigners, when they have been informed that yearly was spent of gross
Meat 1500 Oxen, 7000 Sheep, 1200 Veals, 300 Porkers, 400 Sturks or young
Biefes, 6800 Lambs 300 Flitches of Bacon, and 26 Boares. Also 140 Dozen of
Geese, 250 Dozen of Capons, 470 Dozen of Hens, 750 Dozen of Pullets, 1470 Dozen
of Chicken. For Bread 36400 Bushels of Wheat, and for Drink 600 Tun of Wine and
1700 Tun of Beer. Moreover of Butter 46640 Pounds, together with Fish and Fowl,
Venison, Fruit, Spice, proportionable. This prodigious plenty caused
Foreigners to put a higher value upon the King, and caused the Natives who
were there freely welcome, to increase their affection to the King, it being
found as necessary for the King of England this way to endear the English, who
ever delighted in Feasting; as for the Italian Princes by Sights and Shows to
endear their subjects, who as much delight therein.

The Court of the Queen Consort of England.
THe Queens Court, suitable to the Consort of so great a King, is Splendid and
Magnificent.

Her Majesty has all Officers and a Household apart from the King; for the
maintenance whereof there is settled 40000 l. per annum.

For the Ecclesiastique Government of her Court, there is first the Grand
Almoner Father Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk.

He has the superintendency over all the Ecclesiastiques belonging to the
Queen.

The next is the Dean of the Chapel Doctor Goodwin.

The Third is the Treasurer of the Chapel.

Besides there are 4 Almoners and 4 Preachers, 11 Franciscan Monks, all
Portuguez; 6 Benedictins all English; diverse Persons belonging to the Music of
the Chapel, to serve at the Altars, Porters, etc.

For the Civil Government of Her Majesty's Court she has a Council consisting
of Persons of High Worth and Dignity, whereof there are 12.

1. The Lord Vicount Cornbury, her Lord Chamberlain. 2. The Earl of Manchester.
3. Earl of Sandwich. 4. Lord Brunkard, her Chancellor. 5. Sir Richard Beclin,
her Secretary. 6. Mr. Harvey, Treasurer of her Household. 7. Sir William
Killigrew, her Vice-Chamberlain. 8. Mr. Montague, her Atturney-General. 9. Mr.
Montague Brother to the Earl of Manchester, her Solicitor General. 10. Mr.
Montague, Son to Lord Montague of Boughton. 11. Sir Charles Harbord. 12. Sir
Henry Wood.
Of Her Majesty's Bedchamber are six Ladies of high rank, first the Countess
of Suffolk is her Groom of the Stole, next are the Duchess of Buckingham, the
Countesses of Castlemaine, Bath, Mairshal, and Falmouth. Her Majesty has six
Maids of Honor to wait at other times, these must be all Gentlewomen
unmarried; over whom there is placed a Governess, called, The Mother of the
Maids of Honor, who is at present the Lady Sanderson. The Maids are Mrs Carry,
Mrs Boynton, Mrs Wells, Mrs Price, etc.

There are also 4 Dressers, viz. the Ladies Scroop, Freyser, Killegrew, and Mrs
Le Guard: moreover one Laundress Mrs Nun, one Seamstress Mrs Chivens.

There are five Gentlemen Ushers of the Privy Chamber, Sir William Courtney,
etc.

Five Gentlemen Ushers Daily Waiters.

Six Pages of the Back Stairs.

Eight Grooms of the Privy Chamber.

Two Carvers, two Sewers, two Cupbearers, all Persons of quality.

Seven Gentlemen Ushers Quarter Waiters.

Four Pages of the Presence.

Master of Her Majesty's Horse is Mr. Montague, Son to the Lord Montague of
Boughton.

To her Stable belong 4 Queries, Persons of worth, and 13 Grooms and 3
Messengers, etc.

Of the Court of the Queen Mother.
THe highest Office in Her Majesty's Court is that of Lord Chamberlain and
Steward of Her Majesty's Revenue, enjoyed at present by Henry Lord Germin Earl
of St. Albans, whose Salary is and a Table of Dishes.

Monsieur Vantelet Vice-Chamberlain, whose Salary is 200 l. per annum.

The third place is Her Majesty's Chancellor, enjoyed at present by Sir J.
Winter, Sir Henry Wood, and Sir Robert Long, whose Salary is and a Table of
Dishes.

The next is the Lord Arundel of Warder and Count of the Empire, Master of the
Horse, whose Salary is

Then Her Majesty's Secretary Sir John Winter.

The Treasurer, Receiver General of Her Majesty's Revenues, Sir Henry Wood.

Sir Thomas Bond Comptroller of the Household, whose Salary is

Sir Thomas Ork and diverse other Officers of the Robes.

Four Gentlemen ushers of the Privy Chamber, to each of which is 130 l. Salary
per annum, and diet.

Two Cupbearers, two Carvers, two Sewers, two Gentlemen Ushers of the Presence
Chamber, Salary to each 120 l. and diet all these at a Table together.

Four Grooms of the Privy Chamber, Salary 60 l. and diet.

Four Gentlemen ushers Quarter Waiters, Salary 60 l. and diet.

Four Pages of the Presence.

Eight Grooms of the Great Chamber.

For guarding Her Majesty's Person, She has first a Captain of her Guard, the
Earl of St. Albans.

A Lieutenant, Monsieur de la Chapelle.

An Exempt of the Guards, Monsieur Fremon.

24 Gentlemen Soldiers in Black Velvet Cassocks and Golden embroidered Badges,
marching or waiting about the Person of Her Majesty (when in Sedan, or at
Chapel or Table, or Coach with two Horses) on foot with Halberts; and when in
Coach and 6 Horses, on Horseback with Carabins; in all places within doors as
without, covered.

For to take care of Her Majesty's Health, There is one Physician and one
Apothecary.

For to wait on Her Majesty in her Bedchamber, There are first the Ladies of
the Bedchamber; the chief whereof is,

The Duchess Dowager of Richmond, Sister to the present Duke of Buckingham,
who is Groom of the Stole.

And the Countess of Newport Lady of the Chamber.

Of the Privy Chamber there are 4 Ladies all English, Fee 150 l. each one; they
are at present the Lady Price, the Lady Bond, etc.

Women of the Bedchamber 8 or 9, partly French and partly English.

In the Laundry, The Lady Sanderson is the Chief Laundress.

1 Seamstress.

1 Starcher.

In the Stable, the Chief Query or Escuyer is Sir Edward Wingfield.

The many Officers in the Buttry, Cellar, Pantry, Ew^y, etc. shall be for
brevity passed over.

Her Majesty has also 4 Coaches with 6 Horses each, also 12 Footmen, a Barge
with 12 men in Liveries: Moreover Pages of the Back Stairs 4, etc.

In the Chapel.
There is first the Lord Almoner Abbot Montague, 800 l. per annum.

Father Lambart Confessor to Her Majesty, a Frenchman, 300 l. per annum.

Father Gough, Priest of the Oratory, Clerk of Her Majesty's Private Chapel,
and Assistant to the Confessor an Englishman, 200 l. per annum.

A Lay Brother of the Oratory, 40 l.

Besides these there is adjoining to the Chapel a Convent of Capuchins,
wherein is a Father Guardian, 7 other Priests and two Lay Brothers, all French;
whose Office is to perform the Office of the Chapel daily, also to preach on
Sundays and Holidays, and in Lent three days every Week, for the maintenance
of these Her Majesty allows 500 l. per annum.

Her Majesty's Revenue is for her Jointure 30000 l. yearly, and of His Majesty
a Pension of 30000 l. more out of the Exchequer.

Diverse other Offices belonging to Her Majesty's Court, as Master of Buck
Hounds, and Bows and Music.

Master of the Queens Games.

The present State of the Court of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, His
Majesty's only Brother, according to the last Establishment.
STeward of the Household, John Lord Berkley, 800 l. Treasurer of the Household
and Receiver of the Revenue, Sir Alan Apsley, his Fee 400 Marks or 266 l. 13 s.
4 d.

Comptroller, Sir Henry de Vic, 266 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Secretary, Matthew Wren Esquire, 200 l.

Keeper of the Privy Purse, Marquess de Bland, 100 l.

Master of the Robes and Groom of the Bedchamber, Edward Villiers Esquire, 266
l. 13 s. 4 d.

Seven other Grooms of the Bedchamber,
Richard Nicols Robert Worden, Henry Killegrew, Roger Vaughan, Anthony Air,
Henry Howard; Mr. Thynn, now Resident in Swethland. each 200 l.

Belonging to his Royal Highness Cappel.
Almoner Doctor Henry Killegrew, 100 l.

Five Chaplains,
Dr. William Clark, Dr. William Thomas, Dr. Richard Watson, Mr. Turner, Mr.
Doughty, each 50 l.

Sacristan, 40 l.

Keeper of the Closet, 40 l.

Gentleman Usher, 80 l.

Nine Gentlemen Waiters, each 40 l.

Yeoman of the Robes, Mr. Lawrence du Puy, 60 l.

Brusher, 40 l.

Yeoman of the Wardrobe, Philip Kinnersly, 100 l.

Two Barbers, each 80 l.

Four Pages of the Back Stairs, each 80 l.

A Governor of the Pages,

Two Grooms of the Privy-Chamber,

Two Grooms of the Presence,

A Fire-maker in the Presence,

Two Physicians,

Three Surgeons,

Two Apothecaries,

A Secretary of the Languages, 100 l.

A Gentleman Harbinger, 50 l. besides Riding Charges, 8 s. 4 d. per diem.

Semstress and Laundress to the Body, Mrs du Puy, 250 l.

Laundress to the Table, Mrs Katherine Atkinson, 200 l.

Yeoman of the Wine Cellar, Mr. Tuke, 70 l.

Yeoman of the Beer Cellar, Mr. Pierce, 60 l.

Yeoman of the Poultry and Larder, 60 l.

Yeoman of the Woodyard and Skullery, 50 l.

Of the Pantry and Ewry, 50 l.

Porter, 50 l.

Keeper of the Armory, 50 l.

Trumpeter 30 l.

Necessary Woman, 40 l.

Chamber-Keeper to the Maids,

Bottleman,

Two Clerks to the Commissioners,

Messenger to the Commissioners, 71 l. 18 s. 4 d.

Doorkeeper to the Commissioners.

Clerk of the Kitchen, 50 l.

Master Cook, 40 l.

Second Cook, 30 l.

Three Turn-broaches each, 18 l. 5 s.

Two Scowrers each, 18 l. 5 s.

Pan-keeper,

Porter of the Kitchen,

Porter of the Back-Stairs,

Cole-Carrier,

Porter at Whitehall,

Gardener,

Officers of his Highnesses Revenue.
Attorney General, Sir Edward Turner, 40 l. Solliciter General, Sir Edward
Thurland, 40 l. Solliciter, Charles Porten Esquire, 40 l. Auditor General,
Thomas Holder Esquire, 180 l. Assistant to the Auditor, Henry Thwaits,
Messenger to the Revenue, Mr. Dutton, 71 l. 18 s. 4 d.
Officers of the Admiralty.
Sir William Turner, Mr. David Bud.
Seven Huntsmen of the Buck-hounds,

Six Huntsmen of the Fox-hounds,

Teacher of the Setting Dogs, Dancing Master, Fencing Master, Master of the
Barges, Twenty four Watermen, Pensioners,


Officers and Servants in his Highnesses Stable.
Henry Jermin Esquire, Master of the Horse, 266 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Three Escuyries, each 100 l.

Clerk of the Stables, 60 l.

Surveyor of the Stable, 40 l.

Yeoman Rider, 80 l.

Governor of the Pages, 78 l.

Six Pages, each 52 l.

Fourteen Footmen, each 39 l.

Fifteen Grooms, each 32 l. 10 s.

Three Coachmen, each 78 l. For themselves, 3 Postillions, and 3 Helpers,

Besides Linen, Stockings, and Liveries twice a year.

Two Sumpter men, each 26 l.

Three Muleters, each 26 l.

Porter of the Stables, 32 l. 10 s.

Officers and Servants belonging to Her Royal Highness the Duchess.
GRroom of the Stole, Countess of Rochester, 400 l.

Lady of the Bedchamber, Countess of Peterborough, 200 l.

Four Maids of Honor, Mrs. Arabella Churchil 20 l. Mrs. Dorothy Howard 20 l.
Mrs. Anne Ogle, 20 l. Mrs Mary Blague, 20 l.


Mother of the Maids, Mrs. Lucy Wise.

Four Dressers, Mrs. Katherine Eliot, 200 l. Mrs. Margaret Dawson, 150 l. Mrs.
Lelis Cranmer, 150 l. Lady Apsley, 150 l.


Starcher Mrs. Mary Roche, 120 l.

Semstress, Mrs. Ellen Green, 80 l.

Laundress, Mrs. Mary Cowerd, 250 l.

Lace Mender,

Secretary to her Highness Sir Phil. Froud, 100 l.

Two Gentlemen Ushers each, 80 l.

Six Gentlemen Waiters, whereof one has 100 l.

The other five each 40 l.

Four Pages of the Back-Stairs, each 80 l.

Yeoman of the Mouth, 50 l.

Tailor, 90 l.

Shoemaker, 36 l. 10 s.

Master Cook, 40 l.

Necessary Woman, 40 l.

Eighteen Watermen, each 2 l.

Master of the Horse to the Duchess, is Sir Richard Powle, 266 l. 13 s. 4 d.

Two Escuyries, each 100 l.

Four Pages, each 52 l.

Eight Footmen, each 39 l.

Four Coachmen, each 78 l. for themselves, Postillions, and helpers.

Five Grooms, each 32 l. 10 s.

Two Chairmen, each 39 l.

Officers and Servants to the Duke of Cambridge.
GOverness, Lady Francis Villiers, 400 l.

Under-Governess, Mrs. Mary Kilbert, 150 l.

Wet Nurse, 80 l.

Dry Nurse, 80 l.

Tutor of the French Tongue, Monsieur Lesne, 100 l.

Three Rockers, each 70 l.

Laundress to the Body, 60 l.

Semstress,

Laundress to the Table,

Page of the Back-Stairs, 60 l.

Necessary Woman, 50 l.

Cook, 38 l. 5. s.

Musician, 31 l. 4 s.

Two Pages to the Duke of Cambridge, each 52 l.

Four Footmen,

One Groom,

One Coachman, Postillion, and Helper.

Officers and Servants belonging to the Lady Mary.
TWo Dressers,

Mrs. Anne Walsingham, 80 l.

Mrs. Mary Langford, 80 l.

Ro^ker, Mrs. Jane Leigh, 70 l.

Semstress,

Laundress, Mrs. Elizabeth Brooks, 90 l.

Page of the Back-Stairs, 60 l.

Dancing Master, 200 l.

Singing-Master, 100 l.

Servants to the Lady Anne.
DResser, Three Rockers, Semstress, Page of the Back-Stairs, Necessary Woman,
His Royal Highness upon all occasions when he goes abroad without the King,
has for his particular Guard a Gallant Troop of Horse, commanded by Monsieur
de Blancfort.

Of the Three States of England.
ALl the Subjects of England are divided into Clergy and Laity; The Laity
sub-divided into Nobility and Commonalty. These are called Ordines Regni, or
the Three States, and first of the Clergy.

As Heaven is more honorable than Earth, Clergy their Dignity.
the Soul than the Body; so is the Spiritual Function more excellent than the
Civil, and the Sacerdotal Dignity higher than the Secular: and therefore in
England the Clergy caeteris paribus, has ever had (according to the practice
of all other Civilized Nations since the World began) the preference and
precedence of the Laity, and has in all times been reputed the First of the
Three States.

The Clergy so called, Name.
because they are Gods (...) or Portion: For although all Christians may be
styled Gods Portion as well as Gods Servants; yet amongst Christians those
Persons whom God has set apart and separated from common use to his Service,
to be as it were his Domestic Servants; are more peculiarly the Lords Portion:
and therefore from the first Age of Christianity, the Persons so set apart,
have been called Clerici, Clerks.

As in the State, Degrees.
so in the Church, the Laws and Constitutions of England would not that there
should be a parity and equality of all persons. Quippe in Ecclesia nihil magis
inaequale quam aequalitas. And therefore in conformity to the first Times and
Places of Established Christianity, so soon as the Christian Faith was by
Authority received in England, one of the Clergy was in every City ordained a
Bishop; Bishop.
who has (to avoid Confusion, which usually springs from equality) a
pre-eminence over the rest of the Clergy within certain Precincts.

Afterward the Bishops being necessitated to meet about Public Affairs of the
Church, as Consecrations, Consultations for remedy of general disorders, for
Audiences Judicial, when the actions of any Bishop should be called in
question; or Appeals from Bishops, etc. It seemed requisite to our Ancestors
(according to other Christian Churches (ever since the first Nicene Council) to
have amongst a certain number of Bishops, one to be chiefest in Authority over
the rest; from thence named Archiepiscopus, Archbishop.
Arch or Chief Bishop.

For easing the Bishop of some part of his burden, as the number of Christians
waxed great, or the Diocese was large, there were ordained in the Primitive
Times Chorepiscopi, Suffragan, or Subsidiary Bishops. Accordingly in the
English Church of a long time there have been such ordained by the name of
Bishops Suffragans or Titular Bishops; Suffragan Bishop.
who have the Name, Title, Style, and Dignity of Bishops, and (as other
Bishops) are consecrated by the Archbishop of the Province; each one to execute
such Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority, and receive such Profits as is limited
in his Commission by the Bishop or Diocesan, whose Suffragan he is.

For a Supply of able and fit Persons to assist Bishops, or to be made Bishops,
it seemed good to Reverend Antiquity, that in every Diocese a certain number of
the more prudent and pious Pastors should be placed in a Collegiate manner at
every Cathedral or Episcopal See; where they might not only be ready to assist
the Bishop in certain weighty Cases; but also fit themselves (by gaining
experience and loosing by little and little their former familiarity with the
inferior Country Clergy) for Government and Authority in the Church.

Accordingly in every Cathedral Church in England, there are a certain number
of Prebendaries or Canons, and over them a Dean, in Latin Decanus, Dean.
from (...); because anciently set over ten Canons at the least: who is
sometime styled Alter Episcopi Oculus, the other being the Archdeacon,
Archdeacon.
who (though a Presbyter himself) is so named for his Charge over the Deacons;
who are to be guided and directed by him under the Bishop.

Next is the Rural Dean, who was anciently called Arcbipresbyter, and had the
guidance and direction of the Presbyters.

In the last place are the Pastors of every Parish, who are called Rectors,
unless the Predial Tithes be impropriated, and then they are called Vicars,
quasi vice fungentes Rectorum.

In England are 2 Archbishops, 24 Bishops, no Suffragan Bishops at present; 26
Deans of Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches, 60 Archdeacons, 544 Prebendaries,
many Rural Deans, and about 9700 Rectors and Vicars, besides Curates, who for
certain Stipends assist such Rectors and Vicars that have the care of more
Churches than one.

These (if it be considered of what great Learning and Abilities they are; what
great Authority and Sway they usually bear over the Laity, to incline, ^ead,
and draw them; what great Privileges and Immunities they do or ought to enjoy,
and how much means they possess) may well be reputed, as in all times they have
been in all other States, the first Member of the Three Estates of England.

It has been provided, Privileges of the Clergy.
not without singular wisdom, that as the ordinary course of common affairs is
disposed of by general Laws; so likewise men's rarer incident Necessities and
Utilities should be with special equity considered. Hence is it that so many
Privileges, Immunities, Exemptions, and Dispensations have been to the Clergy
of England granted in all times: Our Ancestors thinking it very reasonable that
as Soldiers were wont by the Roman Emperors to be endowed with certain
Privileges for their warding and fighting to preserve the State from external
Enemies, so the Clergy ought to have certain Immunities and Privileges for
their watching and spiritual Warfare to preserve the State from internal
Enemies the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; Ut serventur immunes Clerici, quo
Castris suis sedulo commorantes, and vigiles excubias ducentes summo caell
^mperatori illaesos populos reprae^entent, Legibus effectum est, ^t quam
plurima iis Privile^ia concessa sint tum ad eorum personas tum bona ac res
spectan^ia.

Of Privileges some belong to Archbishops, some to Bishops, as they are so,
and some belong to them, and to the inferior Clergy, as they are
Ecclesiastiques or Churchmen.

Before the coming of the Savons into England, Archbishop.
the Christian Britains had 3 Archbishops, viz. of London, York, and Caerleon,
an ancient great City of South Wales upon the River Uske. Afterward the
Archiepiscopal See of London was by the Saxons placed at Canterbury, for the
sake of St. Austin the Monk, who first preached the Gospel there to the Heathen
Saxons, and was there buried. The other of Caerleon was translated to St.
David's in Pembroke-Shire, and afterward subjected wholly to the Sea of
Canterbury; since which all England and Wales reckon but 2 Archbishops,
Canterbury and York.

The Archbishop of Canterbury anciently had Primacy as well over all Ireland as
England, Canterbury.
and the Irish Bishops received their Consecrations from him; for Ireland had
no other Archbishop until the year 1152, and therefore in the time of the 2
first Norman Kings, it was declared that Canterbury was the Metropolitan Church
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Isles adjacent. He was therefore
sometimes styled a Patriarch (and Patriarcha was a Chief Bishop over several
Kingdoms or Provinces (as an Archbishop is over several Dioceses) and had
several Archbishops under him; was sometimes called, Alterius Orbis Papa and
Orbis Britannici Pontifex; and matters done and recorded in Ecclesiastical
affairs, ran thus, Anno Pontificatus Nostri primo secundo, etc. He was Legatus
Natus, that is, a perpetual Legantine Power was annexed to that Archbishopric
near 1000 years ago; whereby no other Legate, Nuncio, or Ambassador from the
Bishop of Rome, could here exercise any Legantine Power, without special
License from the King. He was so highly respected abroad, that in General
Councils he was placed before all other Archbishops at the Popes right Foot. He
was at home so highly honored by the Kings of England, that (according to the
Practice of Gods own People the Jews, where Aaron was next in Dignity to Moses,
and according to the practice of most other Christian States; where the next in
Dignity and Authority to the Sovereign, is usually the chiefest Person of the
Clergy) he was accounted the Second Person in the Kingdom, and named and
ranked even before the Princes of the Blood. He enjoyed some special marks of
Royalty, as to be Patron of a Bishopric (as he was of Rochester:) to Coin
Moneys, and to have the Wardships of all those who held Lands of him Jure
Hominii (as it is called) although they held in Capite other Lands of the King;
a Princely Prerogative, even against the Kings written Prerogative.

In an ancient Charter granted by William the Conqueror to Lanfranc Archbishop
of Canterbury, he is to hold his Lands with the same freedom in Dominico suo
(as the words are) as the King holds his in Dominico suo, except only in 2 or
3 Cases, and those of no great importance.

It is an Ancient Privilege of the Sea of Canterbury, that wheresoever any
Manors or Advowsons do belong unto that See, that place forthwith becomes
exempt from the Ordinary, and is reputed a Peculiar, and of the Diocese of
Canterbury.

The Archbishop of Canterbury by the favor of our Kings is judged fit to enjoy
still diverse considerable Pre-eminencies. He is Primat and Metropolitan over
all England, and has a super-eminency and some Power even over the Archbishop
of York; has power to summon him to a National Synod, and Archiepis.
Eboracensis venire debet cum Episcopis suis ad nutum ejus, ut ejus Canonicis
dispositionibus obediens existat.

The Archbishop of Canterbury is at this day Primus par Regni, the first Peer
of England, and next to the Royal Family to precede not only all Dukes, but all
the Great Officers of the Crown.

He is styled by the King in his Writs directed to him, Dei Gratia Archiepisc.
Cant. and writes himself Divina Providentia, whereas other Bishops write Divina
Permissione; and he is said to be inthroned, when he is invested in the
Archbishopric.

To Crown the King belongs to him, and it has been resolved that wheresoever
the Court shall happen to be, the King and Queen are Speciales Domestici
Parochiani Domini Ar. Cant. and had anciently the Holy Offerings made at the
Altar by the King and Queen, wheresoever the Court should happen to be, if his
Grace was there present. Also the Power of appointing the Lent Preachers, as
thought by our Ancestors much more fit for a Prelate or Spiritual Person to do,
(as in all other Christian Courts) then for any Lay Lord, as has been used in
England since one Cromwell was by Hen. 8. made Vicar General, and placed above
the Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Bishop of London is accounted his Provincial Dean, the Bishop of
Winchester his Chancellor, and the Bishop of Rochester his Chaplain.

In writing and speaking to him is given the Title of Grace, (as it is to all
Dukes) and Most Reverend Father in God.

He has the Power of all Probate of Testaments, and granting Letters of
Administration, where the Party dying had Bona Notabilia, that is five pounds
worth or above, out of the Diocese wherein he died; or ten pounds worth within
the Diocese of London; or if the party dying be a Bishop, though he has no
Goods out of the Diocese where he died. Also to make Wills for all such as die
intestate within his Province, and to administer their Goods to the Kindred or
to Pious Uses, according to his discretion; which most transcendent Trust and
Power is so anciently in England belonging to Bishops, that the best Antiquary
cannot find the first Original thereof.

By Stat. 25 H. 8. he has the Honor and Power to grant Licenses and
Dispensations in all Cases heretofore sued for in the Court of Rome, not
repugnant to the Law of God or the Kings Prerogative. As to allow a Clerk to
hold a Benefice in Commendam or Trust; To allow a Son (contrary to the Canons)
to succeed his Father immediately in a Benefice; To allow a Clerk rightly
qualified to hold two Benefices with Cure of Souls; To abolish irregularity
gotten without a man's own default, as by defect of body or birth, or by
accidental killing of a man, etc. To abolish the guilt of Simony; To allow a
Beneficed Clerk for some certain Causes to be Non-Resident for some time; To
allow a Layman to hold a Prebend, etc. whilst by study he is preparing himself
for the Service of the Church; To grant Dispensations to sick, to Old People,
to Women with Child, to eat flesh on days whereon it was forbidden; To
constitute Public Notaries, whose single Testimony is as good as the
Testimonies of any two other Persons. He has the Power to grant Literns
Tuitorias, whereby any one that brings his Appeal, may prosecute the same
without any molestation; To bestow one Dignity or Prebend in any Cathedral
Church within his Province upon every Creation there of a new Bishop; who is
also to provide a sufficient Benefice for one of the Chaplains of the
Archbishop, or to maintain him till it be effected.

By the Stat. Primo Eliz. it is provided that the Queen by the Advice of the
Archbishop might ordain and publish such Rites and Ceremonies as may be for
Gods glory, for edifying the Church, and due reverence of the Sacraments.

He has the Prerogative to Consecrate a Bishop (though it must be done in the
presence and with the assistance of two other Bishops (as every Bishop gives
Ordination but with the assistance of Presbyters) to assign Co-adjutors to
infirm Bishops; to confirm the Elections of Bishops within his Province; to
call Provincial Synods according to the Kings Writ always directed to him; to
be Moderator in the Synods or Convocations; to give his Suffrage there last of
all; to visit the whole Province; to appoint a Guardian of the Spiritualties,
during the Vacancy of any Bishopric within his Province; whereby all the
Episcopal Rights of that Diocese belong to him, all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as Visitation, Institutions, etc.

The Archbishop may retain and qualify 8 Chaplains, which is 2 more than any
Duke by Statute is allowed to do.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has moreover the Power to hold diverse Courts of
Judicature for deciding of Differences in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as his Court
of Arches, his Court of Audience, his Prerogative Court, and his Court of
Peculiars; of all which shall be handled particularly, and apart in the Second
Part of the Present State of England.

These and other Prerogatives and Privileges, the Wisdom of our first
Reformers thought fit to be retained and added to the Chief Person (under the
King) of the Church of England.

The next Person in the Church of England is the Archbishop of York; York.
who was anciently also of very high repute in this Nation, and had under his
Province not only diverse Bishoprics in the North of England, but all the
Bishoprics of Scotland for a long time; until the year 1470, when Pope Sixtus
the 4th created the Bishop of St. Andrews Archbishop and Metropolitan of all
Scotland.

He was also Legatus Natus and had the Legantine Office and Authority annexed to
that Archbishopric.

He has still the place and precedence of all Dukes not of the Royal Blood,
and of all Great Officers of State, except only the Lord Chancellor; has the
Title of Grace and Most Reverend Father; has the Honor to Crown the Queen,
and to be her perpetual Chaplain.

He is styled Metropolitan of England, and has under his Province the
Bishoprics of York, Durham, Carlisle, Chester, and that of the Isle of Man.

Has the Rights of a Count Palatine over a certain Territory near York erected
by King Rich. 2. into a County Palatine. May qualify also 8 Chaplains, and
has within his Province diverse other Prerogatives and Privileges which the
Archbishop of Canterbury has within his own Province.

The next in place amongst the Clergy of England are the Bishops, so called
from the Saxon word Biscop, and that from the Greek (...), Speculator,
Explorator vel Superintendens, an Officer amongst the Heathen so called, quia
praeerat pani and victui quotidiano: Episcopus enim apud Christionos praeest
pani and victui spirituali.

All the Bishops of England are Barons and Peers of the Realm. They are Barons
by a threefold manner (which cannot be said of the Lay Lords) they are Feodal
in regard of their Lands and Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics. They are
Barons by Writ, being summoned by the Kings Writ to Parliament, and they are
created Barons by Patent, which at their Consecration is always exhibited to
the Archbishop. They have the Precedence of all Temporal Barons under Vicounts.
In the Parliament have place in the Upper House in a double capacity, not only
as Barons, but as Bishops; for before they were Barons, they had in all times
place in the Great Council of the Kingdom: and there ever placed on the Kings
right hand, not only to give their Advice as the Judges do, but ad tractandum,
ordinandum, statuendum, definiendum, etc. They have the Title of Lords and
Right Reverend Fathers.

All Bishops in England have one or two transcendent Privileges, which seem
almost Regal; as, In their own Courts to judge and pass Sentence alone by
themselves, without any Colleague or Assessor; which is not done in other of the
Kings Courts: for the Bishops Courts (though held by the Kings Authority
Virtute Magistratus sui) are not accounted to be properly the Kings Courts, and
therefore the Bishops send forth Writs in their own Names, Test the Bishop,
and not in the Kings Name; as all the Kings Courts properly so called do.

Moreover Bishops have this other transcendent Privilege, To depute their
Authority to another (as the King does) either to their Bishops Suffragans, to
their Chancellours, to their Commissaries or other Officers; which none of the
Kings Judges may do.

All Bishops have one Privilege above and beyond all Lay Lords, viz. That in
whatsoever Christian Princes Dominions they come, their Episcopal Dignity and
Degree is acknowledged; and they may, quatenus Bishops, confer Orders, etc.
whereas no Lay Baron, Vicount, Marquess, nor Duke, is in Law acknowledgeed such
out of the Dominions of the Prince who conferred those Honors.

The Laws and Customs of England are so tender of the Honor, Credit,
Reputation, and Person of Bishops our Spiritual Fathers, that none might
(without special License from the King first obtained) be endited of any Crime
before any Temporal Judge.

Upon severe Penalty by our Laws no man may raise reports, whereby Scandal may
arise to the Person of any Bishop, or Debate and Discord between them and the
Commons of England.

In Civil Trials, where a Bishop is Plaintiff or Defendant, the Bishop may as
well as any Lay Lord, challenge the Array, (...) one Knight at least be not
^eturned of the Jury, and it shall be allowed unto him as (...) Privilege due
to his Peerage.

In Criminal Trials for life, all ^ishops by Magna Charta and ^tat. 25 Edw. 3.
are to be try^d by their Peers, who are Ba^ns, and none under; not^ithstanding
the late conceit of ^ome Lawyers, that because Bishops may not be on the
Criminal Trial of a Peer, therefor are not to be tried by ^eers; for so
neither may Bishops be tried by a Common ^ury, Because they may not ^e on the
Trial of such men. Moreover, Noble-women may ^ot be on the Trial of Peers, and
yet they are to be tried by Peers of the Realm. And there is no Legal Precedent
(...) England of a Bishop remaining a Bishop, that ever was tried for his life,
but by Peers of the Realm. Anciently indeed Bishops were so ecempted, as no^ at
all to be tried by Tempor^^ Judges, till after deprivatio^ and degradation, and
then being thereby rendered no Peers but common Persons, the^ might be tried by
Common Juries.

Since the Reformation, the English Protestant Bishop^ have been so constantly
loya^ and true to the Crown ((...) which they are so much m^ligned by
Non-Conformists and so free from all Capita^ Crimes, that there is yet (...)
Precedent in England for their manner of Trial for Life. A^ (...) that Common
Assertion, that no Lords of Parliament (...) to be tried by their Peers, (...)
such as sit there Ratione ^obilitatis, and that all Lay ^ords have place in
Parliament (...) that reason; it is not on^^ false but frivolous in the
^^dgement of very many judi^^ous men. And indeed how ^^urd and unreasonable
must it ^^eds be (let all men judge) ^^at an Archbishop of Canter^^ry, who is
by all acknow^^dged to be Primus Par Reg^^, should be tried by a Com^on Jury of
Freeholders, ^^en as the meanest Lay Ba^^, though created but ye^^^rday, may
not be tried by a^^ under Barons?

In Parliament Bishops as Ba^^as may be present and vote at the Trial and
Arraignment (...) a Peer of the Realm, only before Sentence of Death or lo^^ of
Member be pronounced that they may have no hand (...) blood, no hand in
destroying but only in saving; they have by Canon Law the Priviled^^ and
Injunction to absent themselves, and by Common La^ to make Proxies to vote for
them.

Primo Eliz. cap. 2. It is expressly declared that all Lords (...) Parliament
(without any exception of Lords Spiritual (...) should be tried in that
particular by their Peers.

The Bishops of England enjoy at this day many other Privileges as freedom
from Arrests, Outlawries, Distress p^^ Equitaturam or in a Journey Liberty to
hunt in any of the Kings Forests or Parks, to kill one or two Deer going from
or coming to the King upon his Order.

The Persons of Bishops may not be seized upon Contempt (as the Persons of Lay
Lords) but their Temporalities only may be seized.

Every Bishop may by Statute Law qualify as many Chaplains as a Duke, viz. six.

The Laws of England attributes so very much to the Word of a Bishop, that not
only in the Trial of Bastardy the Bishops Certificate shall suffice, but also
in Trial of Heresy, which touches a man's Life, upon the Bishops bare
Certificate that any has been convicted before him of Heresy, the Secular
Power puts him to death without any trial by his Peers.

The Persons the Spiritual Governors of the Church of England, are of such
high and tender respect in the eye of the Law, that it is thought fit to exact
the same respect from a Clergyman to his Bishop or Ordinary, as from a Child to
his Father; and therefore made the Offenses of Parricide and Episcopicide
equal, viz. both Petty Treason.

Next to the two Archbishops of England, don.
the Bishop of London amongst all the Bishops has the pre-eminence. Episcopus
Londinensis (says an ancient Record) speciali quadam Dignitate caeteris
anteponendus quia Ecclesiae Cantuariensis Decanus est Provincialis. Being
Bishop over the Imperial and Capital City of England, it is by a Statute of
later times expressly provided that he should have the preference and precedence
of all the Bishops of England; whereby he is become (as heretofore the Lord
Prior of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem) Primus Baro Regni, as the Lord
Abergavenny is Primus Baronum Laicorum.

Next amongst those of the Episcopal College is the Bishop of Durham, within
the Province of York, who has been a Count Palatine 6 or 700 years; wherefore
the Common Seal of the Bishopric has been of a long time an Armed Knight,
holding in one hand a naked Sword, and in the other a Church.

In the fifth place by virtue of the forementioned Statute, is the Bishop of
Winchester, reputed anciently Earl of Southampton, and so styled in the
Statutes of the Honorable Order of the Garter by Hen. 8. though soon after
that Earldome was otherwise disposed of.

After these aforementioned all the other Bishops take place according to the
Seniority of their Consecration, unless any Bishop happen to be made Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, or Secretary of State; which anciently was
very usual, as reputed for their Piety, Learning, Single Life, Diligence, etc.
far more fit for the Advantage and Service of the King and Kingdom, than any
Laymen; and in such case a Bishop being Lord Chancellor, had place next to the
Archbishop of Canterbury and above the Archbishop of York; and being Secretary
of State, had place next to the Bishop of Winchester.

All the Bishops of England now living take place as they are ranked in this
following Catalogue:

Dr. Gilbert Sheldon Lord Archbishop of Canterbury consecrated Bishop of London
1660, and translated to Canterbury 1663.

Dr. Richard Stern Lord Archbishop of York, consecrated Bishop of Carlisle 1660,
and translated to York 1664.

Dr. Humphrey Henchman Lord Bishop of London, consecrated Bishop of Salisbury
1660, and translated to London 1663.

Dr. John Cosens consecrated Bishop of Durham 1660.

Dr. George Morley consecrated Bishop of Worcester 1660, and translated to
Winchester 1662.

Dr. William Piers Bishop of Bath and Wells, consecrated 1632.

Dr. Robert Skinner consecrated Bishop of Bristol 1636, then translated to
Oxford 1640, and lastly to Worcester 1663.

Dr. Henry King Lord Bishop of Chichester, consecrated 1641.

Dr. William Lucy Lord Bishop of St. David's, consecrated 1660.

Dr. Benjamin Laney Lord Bishop of Ely, consecrated 1660 Bishop of
Peterborough, thence translated to Lincoln 1663, lastly to Ely 1667.

Dr. Gilbert Ironside Bishop of Bristol, consecrated 1660.

Dr. Edward Reynolds consecrated 1660 Bishop of Norwich, he is also Abbot of
St. Bennet de Hulmo, the sole Abbot now remaing in England.

Dr. William Nicolson consecrated Bishop of Gloucester 1660.

Dr. John Hacket consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield 1661.

Dr. Seth Ward consecrated Bishop of Exeter 1661, translated to Salisbury 1667.

Dr. Herbert Crofts consecrated Bishop of Hereford 1661.

Dr. Henshaw consecrated Bishop of Peterborough 1663.

Dr. Rainbow consecrated Bishop of Carlisle 1664.

Dr. Blandford consecrated Bishop of Oxford 1665.

Dr. Dolben Bishop of Rochester, consecrated 1666.

Dr. Davis Bishop of Landaff, consecrated 1667.

Dr. Fuller consecrated Bishop of Lincoln 1667.

Dr. Glemham consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph 1667.

Dr. Price consecrated Bishop of Bangor 1667.

Dr. Sparrow consecrated Bishop of Exeter 1667.

Dr. Wilkins consecrated Bishop of Chester 1668.

These are all Barons and Peers of the Realm, these have place in the Upper
House of Parliament, and in the Upper House of Convocation, and these are the
Lords Spiritual; next follow the Commons Spiritual, consisting of Suffragan
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Rectors, and Vicars, to whom also belong
diverse considerable Privileges.

All Suffragan Bishops, all Deans, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Rectors, and
Vicars, have Privileges, some by themselves, others by proxy or by
representative, to sit and vote in the Lower House of Convocation.

No Subsidies or other Tax to the King may legally be laid upon them, without
their own consent first had in Convocation.

The Clergy (as appears by the words of the Writ, as also by Modus Tenendi
Parliam* and by 21 Rich. 2. cap. 12.) has per Procuratores Cleri, Place and
Suffrage in the Lower House of Parliament, as was anciently practiced in
England, and of later years in Ireland (though now not used in either) and as
the Bishops still have and use in the Higher House of Parliament.

No Clergyman may be compelled to undergo any Personal Functions or Services of
the Commonwealth, or to serve in War. If any man by reason of his Land, be
subject to be elected to any Temporal Office, if he take Orders he is free, and
there is a Writ purposely to free him.

All Clergymen are free from the Kings Purveyors, the Kings Carriages, the
Kings Posts, etc. for which they may demand a Protection from the King cum
clausula nolumus.

If a Clergyman acknowledge a Statute, his Body shall not be taken by virtue of
any Process thereupon; for the Writ runs, Si Laicus sit, etc.

Clergymen are not obliged to appear at Sherives Tourns, or Views of Frank
Pledge, there to take their Oath of Allegiance, the Ancient Laws presuming that
those whose principal care and Office should be to teach the People Loyalty and
Allegiance to their King, could not themselves want Loyalty.

By Magna Charta no Clergyman is to be fined or amerced according to his
spiritual means, but according to his temporal estate, and according to the
Crime committed.

The Goods of Clergymen are discharged by the Common Law of England from Tolls
and Customs (si non exerceant Marchandizas de eisdem) of Avirage, Pontage,
Muriage, Paviage; for which they have the Kings Writ to discharge them.

The Glebe Lands and Spiritual Revenues of Clergymen being held in pura and
perpetua Eleemosyna (i. e.) in Frankalmoine, are exempted from arraying and
mustering of Men or Horses for the War, as appears in a Statute still in force,
viz. 8 Hen. 4. Number. 12. in the unprinted Rolls of that Parliament.

The Clergy being by their Function prohibited to wear a Sword or any Arms
(their Coat alone being their defense) cannot serve in Person in War. They
serve their Country otherwise, and for that Service have always been thought
worthy of their Spiritual Profits and Revenues, and of the Kings Protection.

The Clergy paying to the King the First years profits of all Spiritual
Benefices, called First Fruits, and yearly the Tenth of all the said Benefices,
are with great reason thought fit to be exempted from all other Taxes; though
to give the Laity good example, they often lay Subsidies or other Great Taxes
upon themselves.

It was an Ancient Maxim in England, Nullus pro decimis debet onerari de
aliqua reparatione Pontis seu aliquibus oneribus temporalibus.

These and other Immunities of the Clergy the Great Aquinas thought agreeable
to Natural Equity or the Law of Nature, thence it was that King Pharaoh 47 Genesis
when all the Lands of his Subjects were mortgaged to him for Bread, yet spared
the Lands of the Priests. So Ezra 7. 24. and so in our Ancient Laws we find, De
Danigeldo libera and quieta erat omnis Ecclesia in Anglia and etiam omnis Terra
quae in proprio Dominio Ecclesiae erat ubicunque jacebat nihil prorsus in tali
redditione persolvens; and the reason thereof is added, Quia magis in Ecclesiae
confidebant Orationibus quam in Armorum defensionibus.

Many more Privileges, Immunities, Liberties, and Franchises there are rightly
belonging to the Clergy of England, so many, that to set down all, says Sir
Edward Coke upon Magna Charta, would take up a whole Book.

The Privileges of the Clergy and Franchises of the Church, were (with the
Lities of the People) granted, confirmed, and sealed by the King in full
Parliament, Anno 1253. in such a solemn manner, as no Story can parallel it:
The King stood up with his Hand upon his Breast, all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal stood with burning Tapers in their hands; the Archbishop pronounced as
follows, By the Authority of God Omnipotent, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, etc. We excommunicate, anathematize, and sequester from Our Holy Mother
the Church, all those which henceforth knowingly and maliciously deprive and
spoil Churches of their right, and all those that shall by any art or wit
rashly violate, diminish, or alter secretly or openly, in Deed, Word, or
Counsel, those Ecclesiastical Liberties, etc. granted by Our Lord the King to
the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, etc. For everlasting memory whereof We have
hereunto put Our Seals. After which all throwing down their Tapers extinguished
and smoking, they all said, So let all that shall go against this Curse be
extinct and stink in Hell.

Since which all Kings of England at their Coronations have by Solemn Oaths
promised to preserve the same, and they have been confiremed by above 30
Successive Parliaments, commanded to be read once a year in Churches; and if
any Act should be made to the contrary, it is to be held for null and void, by
the Statute of 42 Edw. 3.

Anciently men were very tender and fearful to do any thing that might make
them incur the said dreadful censure; but of later times, especially since our
Reformation, many men pretending to more Christianity, and to more knowledge,
have made little conscience of infringing and violating any Rights,
Privileges, or Franchises of the Church or Churchmen; whilst the Liberties of
the People (though very little violated) have been exacted, even to Sedition
and Rebellion.

To the end that men of the best rank and abilities should in all times be
encouraged to embrace the most painful and severe Profession of a Clergyman,
Revenues of the Clergy.
and that the People should the more willingly be ^uided and conducted by them.
Our most Christian Ancestors, according to the Pattern of Gods ancient People
the Jews, and of all other Christian Commonwealths, judged it expe^ient to
allot large Revenues, and a most plentiful mainte^ance to the English Clergy;
^aving observed with Solomon that a Wiseman for his pover^y is too often
contemned and ^espised, and that there is nothing more contemptible and
^diculous than a poor Clergyman.

The first Kings of England ^ad all the Lands of England (...) Demesne. The
second sole Monarch amongst the Saxon Kings Ethelwolphus, by the advice of his
Nobles, gave for ever to God and the Church both the Tithe of all Good and the
Tenth part of all the Lands of England, free from all Secular Service,
Taxations or Impositions whatsoever; the Charter of which Donation (...) to be
seen in Ingulphus and other Authors; which Chart^ thus ends, Qui augere voluer^
nostram donationem (as many Pious Kings and Nobles sin^ have done) augeat
Omnipoten^ Deus dies ejus prosperos, si qu^^ vero mutare vel minuere praesump^
serit noscat se ad tribunal Christ rationem redditurum.

Beside the Tenth of Land* and the Husbandmans profits Merchants also and
Shopkeepers paid to their Spiritua^ Pastors the Tenth of their Gain, Servants
in diverse Pla^es the Tenth of their Wages, (...) as Soldiers in the Kings
Armies do now a part of their Pay) and in some places Ale^ellers the Tenth
Flagon. Al^o Handicrafts-men and Day-^abourers paid the Tenth of their Wages
upon their Oaths, (...) required.

Per Assisas Forestae and other ^ecords, it does appear that ^ythes have been
paid even ^f Venison in diverse parts of England, men making consci^nce in those
days, as amongst ^he ancient Jews, to pay Tithes ^f all they poss^ssed.

Besides all those, in some pla^es were paid to the Pastor, Ob^entions,
Oblations, Pensions, Mortuaries, etc. so that the En^lish Clergy were the best
provided for of any Clergy in the whole World, except only the Nation of the
Jews, amongst whom the Tribe of Levi being not the 40th part of the 12 Tribes,
as appears in the Book of Numbers; yet had as Mr. Seldom confesses, and that
by Gods own appointment three times the Annual Revenue of the greatest of the
12 Tribes: insomuch that the poorest Priest in the 24 Courses might be reputed
a wealthy person.

And as amongst the Jews the 24 Chief Priests, for the better maintenance of
their Authority and Dignity, had means far exceeding those of the Inferior
Clergy, and the High Priest had a Maintenance as far exceeding any of the said
24 Priests. So in England the Bishops by the great Piety and Bounty of several
English Kings, had in Lands and Revenues Temporal and Spiritual, a Maintenance
far more ^mple than those of the Inferior Clergy, and the 2 Archbishops more
ample than ^he Bishops.

William the Conqueror at his coming into England, found ^he Bishoprics then
in being (...) richly endowed with Lands, that he erected them all into
Baronies, and every Barony ^hen consisted of 13 Knights Fees at the least.

Besides the^e belonged to Bishops several Perquisits and Duties for the
Visitations of their Diocesses, for Ordinasions, Institutions, Census
Cathedraticus subsidium Charitativum, which upon reasonable Causes they might
require^ of the Clergy under them; also other Duties, called, Decimarum quarta,
Mortuariorum and Oblationum pensitatio Ju^ Hospitii, Processio, Litania,
Viatici vel Commeatus collatio* which upon a Journey to Rom^ they might demand.
Tenth^ and First Fruits was anciently paid (as is believed) to the several
Diocesans, and was continued to the Bishop of Norwich till Henry 8. deprived
him thereof, and deprived the Pope of all the rest. Moreover all Cathedral
Churches were by diverse Kings and Nobles richly furnished with Lands for the
plentiful maintenance of a Dean and a certain number of Prebends; insomuch that
together with the Lands given to Monasteries, a third part of the Lands of
England belonged to the Church and Churchmen; whereby did accrue much benefit
to this Nation, great Hospitality was kept, many Hospitals, Colleges,
Churches, Bridges built, and other Public, Pious, and Charitable Works. All
Leases held of them by the Laity, were not ^aly much more easy than other
Tenures, but so unquestionable, that there was little work for the Lawyers; so
much peaceableness, that 140 sworn Attourneys was thought sufficient to serve
the whole Kingdom.

At present the Revenues of the English Clergy is generally very small and
insufficient above a third part of the best Benefices of England being
anciently by the Popes Grant appropriated to Monasteries, toward their
maintenance, were upon the dissolution of Monasteries made Lay Fees; besides
what has been taken by secret and indirect means, through corrupt Compositions
an^ Compacts and Customs in many other Parishes; also man^ large Estates wholly
exemp^^ from paying Tithes, as Land belonging to the Cistertia^ Monks, to the
Knights Templars and Hospitallers. Tho^ Benefices that are free from these
things, yet (besides Fi^^ Fruits and Tenths to the King and Procurations to the
Bishop are taxed toward the Charg^ of their respective Parishes, and toward
the public charges of the Nation above and beyond the proportion of the Laity.

The Bishoprics of England have been also since the later end of Hen. 8. to
the coming in of King James, most miserably robbed and spoiled of the greatest
part of their Lands and Revenues; so that at this day a mean Gentleman of 200
l. land yearly, will not change his worldly estate and condition with diverse
Bishops: an Attorney, a Shopkeeper, a common Artisan; will hardly change
theirs with ordinary Pastors of the Church.

Some few Bishoprics do yet retain a competency, amongst which the Bishopric
of Durham is accounted one of the Chief, the yearly Revenues whereof before the
late troubles was above 6000 l. of which by the late Act for abolishing Tenures
in Capite, was lost above 2000 l. yearly. Out of it an yearly Pension of 880 l
is paid to the Crown ever since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who promised in
lieu thereof so much in Impropriations; which was never performed. Above 340 l.
yearly paid to several Officers of the County Palatine of Durham, The Assizes
and Sessions duly kept in the Bishops House, at the sole Charges of the Bishop.
The several expenses for keeping in repair certain Banks of Rivers in that
Bishopric, and of several Houses belonging to the Bishopric. Moreover the
yearly Tenths, the Public Taxes, the Charges of going to, and waiting at
Parliament, being deducted, there will remain communibus annis to the Bishop to
keep Hospitality* (which must be great) and to provide for those of his Family
but about 1500 l. yearly. The like might be said of some other Principal
Bishoprics.

The great diminution of the Revenues of the Clergy and the little care of
augmenting or defending the Patrimony of the Church, is the great reproach and
shame of the English Reformation, and will one day prove the ruin of Church and
State.

Judicious Mr. Hooker (who in the Preface of his Works foretold our late
troubles 40 years before they came to pass) observing in his time how the
Church was every day robbed of her Dues, and that it was then an opinion rife
[That to give to the Church smelt of Judaisme and Popery, and to take from the
Church what our Ancestors had given, was Reformation.] declared that what Moses
says in the 90th Psalm, was likely to be verified of Religion and Gods
Service amongst us. The time thereof may be Threescore years and ten, if it
continue till Fourscore it will be but small joy to those that shall then
behold the Condition of the English Church; and the best read Historian cannot
produce one example of a happy State, where the Clergy has been exposed to the
peoples Contempt; which must needs happen where their Benefices their
Maintenance is scandalous and their Persons despicable.

It is the last Trick says St. Gregory, that the Devil has in this World,
when he cannot bring the Word and Sacraments in disgrace by Errors and
Heresies, he invented this Project, to bring the Clergy into contempt and low
esteem, as it is now in England; where they are accounted by many as the dross
and refuse of the Nation: Men think it a stain to their blood, to place their
Sons in that Function, and Women ashamed to marry with any of them; whereas
anciently in England (as among the Jews, the Tribe of Levi was counted Noble,
above all other Tribes except that of the Royal Tribe of Judah) the Function of
the Clergy was of so high account and esteem, that not only the best Gentry and
Nobility, but diverse of the Sons and Brothers of diverse of our English Kings
since the Conquest and before, disdained not to enter into Holy Orders, and to
be Clergymen, as at this day is practiced in most other Monarchies of
Christendom. Ethelwolph Son and Successor to Egbert, first sole King of
England, was in Holy Orders and Bishop of Winchester at his Fathers death. Odo
Bishop of Bayeux in Normandy, was Brother to William the Conqueror. Henry de
Blois Brother to King Stephen was Bishop of Winchester. Geofry Plantagenet Son
to Henry 2 was Bishop of Lincoln. Henry de Beaufort Brother to Henry the 4th,
was Bishop also of Winchester. And of later Times that most prudent Henry 7 had
designed his second Son to be a Clergyman, to omit many others of Noble Blood.
Which Policy is still observed even amongst the few Families of the Romish
Religion in England, wherein are to be found at this day some Brothers or Sons
of Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and Barons in Holy Orders, and all the rest of the
Stock of Baronets, Knights, or Gentry; and for this cause find respect not only
amongst those of their own Opinions; but even of the more sober, moderate, and
best civilized Protestants. Whilst this Policy lasted in England, the Clergy
were judged the fittest Persons to execute most of the Chief Offices and Places
of the Kingdom (according to the Divine Policy amongst Gods peculiar People,
where the Priests and Levites were the Principal Officers and Judges in every
Court; to whom the People were to be obedient on pain of death) and the Laity
did with much reverence and respect submit to them. And as then Os Sacerdotis,
Oraculum erat plebis (according to that of Malachi 2. 7.) So Os Episcopi
Oraculum erat Regis and Regni and Rex amplectabatur universum Clerum lata
front and ex eo semper sibi eligebat primos a Consiliis, primos ad officia
Regni obeunda. Primi igitur sedebant in omni Regni Comitiis and Tribunalibus
Episcopi, in Regali quidem Palatio cum Regni Magnatibus, in Comitatu una cum
Comite, in Turno cum Vicecomite, and in Hundredo cum Domino Hundredi, sic ut in
promovenda Justitia usquequaque gladius gladium adjuvaret and nihil inconsulto
Sacerdote vel Episcopo ageretur. And because the Weal of the Kingdom and the
Service of the King depended so much upon them, and their presence for that end
so often required at London, it was judged expedient that every Bishopric should
have a Palace or House belonging to it in or about London; and it is known at
this day where stood the Houses of every one, except that of St. Asaph, which
also might probably have had one, but more obscure than some other; that
Bishopric having been, as still, very mean.

Great was the Authority of the Clergy in those days, and their Memory should
be precious in these days, if we consider that they were the Authors of so
great benefits and advantages to this Kingdom, that there are few things of any
importance for promoting of the welfare of this Church and State, wherein the
Bishops and Prelates; under God, have not been the Principal Instruments. The
Excellent Laws made by King Ina, King Athelstan, King Edmund, and St. Edward
from whom we have our Common Laws, and our Privileges mentioned in Magna
Charta, were all made by the persuasions and advice of Bishops and Archbishops
named in our Histories. The Union of the 2 Houses of York and Lancaster;
(whereby a long and bloody War was ended) was by the most wise Advice and
Counsel of Bishop Morton, then a Privy Counselor. The Union of England and
Scotland, that inexpressible advantage to both Nations, was brought to pass by
the long foresight of Reverend. Bishop Fox a Privy Counselor, in advising
Henry the 7th, to match his Eldest Daughter to Scotland, and his Younger to
France. Most of the Great Public Works now remaining in England, acknowledge
their ancient and present being either to the sole Cost and Charges, or to the
liberal Contributions, or at least to the powerful Persuasions of Bishops; as
most of the best endowed Colleges in both our Universities, very many
Hospitals, Churches, Palaces, Castles, have been founded and built by Bishops;
even that famous chargeable and difficult Structure of London Bridge stands
obliged to the liberal Contributions of an Archbishop; and it was a Bishop of
London, at whose earnest request William the Conqueror granted to the City of
London so large Privileges, that in a grateful remembrance thereof, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen to this day, upon some solemn days of their resort to St.
Paul's Church, do go in Procession to the Grave Stone where that Bishop lies
interred.

But above all, The Converting England to the Christian Religion, the Reforming
that Religion when corrupted, and since that, the maintenance of the Doctrine
thereof against all Romish Writers, and of the Discipline thereof (none of the
least good Offices) against all the Practices and Power of the Puritan and
Presbyterian Factions, and all those other Sectaries lineally descended from
them; all this and more is owing (if not solely, yet principally) to Bishops
and Prelates: by the late want of whom to sit at the Stern, how soon was this
goodly Vessel split upon the Rocks of Anarchy and Confusion.

Even since the late Restoration of Bishops, to set down the many considerable
Public Benefits flowing from them and other Dignified Clergy, would tire the
Reader.

What Sums of Money have been by them expended in repairing Cathedral Churches,
Episcopal Houses, in founding and building Hospitals, in Charity to poor
Widows of Clergymen utterly ruined by the late Rebels, for redeeming of poor
Christian Slaves at Algier, what public and private Sums for supplying the
Kings Necessities at his Restoration, what Expenses in Hospitality, etc. above
and beyond the Charity and Bounty of others, who have ten times their Wealth
and Riches.

As they have then been beneficial to this Kingdom above and beyond other
ranks of men, so they have had the highest respect, reverence, and esteem.

In all Ages amongst all Nations, amongst Turks, as well as Jews and
Christians, it was judged fit that the Principal Domestique Servants of the
King of Heaven and Earth either should be of the Chiefest and Noblest upon
Earth, or at least should be so esteemed.

Such Reverence our Ancestors bare to that Function, that (as Seldom observes)
to fall down and kiss the Feet, was a Ceremony usual toward other Bishops and
Principal Prelates besides the Bishop of Rome. Diverse of our Saxon and Norman
Kings and Nobles so respected them, that they constrained them in Public
Grants, yet to be seen to sign before the highest of the Lay Nobles, and
sometimes before the Kings own Sons and Brothers, and to rank them before, etc.

In the year 1200. three Kings, viz. of England, Scotland, and of South Wales,
to express their pious and courteous respect to Hugh Bishop of Lincoln,
disdained not with their own Royal Shoulders to bear his dead Corpse to the
Grave.

And yet it has been observed even by Strangers, that the Iniquity of the
present times in England is such, that the English Orthodox Clergy are not only
hated by the Romanists on the one side, and maligned by the Presbyterian on the
other side (as the English Liturgy has also been for a long time by both of
them (a sure evidence of the excellency thereof) and as our Savior was
crucified between two Thieves) but also that of all the Christian Clergy of
Europe (whether Romish, Lutheran, or Calvinian) none are so little respected,
beloved, obeyed, or rewarded, as the present Pious Learned Loyal Orthodox
Clergy of England, even by those who have always professed themselves of that
Communion.

O Deus in quae tempora reservasti nos! Here follows a Catalogue of the
present Deans in the Provinces both of Canterbury and York.
In the Province of Canterbury
Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury. Dr. Sancrost Dean of Paul's. Dr. Dolben Bishop
of Rochester and Dean of Westminster. Dr. Clark Dean of Winchester. Dr. Wilford
Dean of Ely. Dr. Creyton Dean of Bath and Wells. Dr. Williams Bishop of Ossory
and Dean Commendatory of Bangor. Dr. Fell Dean of Christ-Church. Dr. Hardy Dean
of Rochester. Dr. Gueson Dean of Chichester. Dr. Thomas Dean of Worcester. Dr.
^redyok Dean of Salisbury. Dr. Honywood Dean of Lincoln. Dr. Lloyd Dean of St.
Asaph. Dr. Carry Dean of Exeter. Dr. Duport Dean of Peterborough. Dr. Crofts
Dean of Norwich. Dr. Toogood Dean of Bristol. Dr. Hodges Dean of Hereford. Dr.
Brough Dean of Gloucester. Dr. Wood Dean of Litchfield.
In the Province of York.
Dr. Hitch Dean of York. Dr. Sudbury Dean of Durham. Dr. Carlton Dean of
Carlisle. Dr. Bridgeman Dean of Chester.
Note, That in the Cathedral Churches of St. David's and of Landaff there never
has been any Dean, but the Bishop in either is Head of the Chapter, and in the
Bishops absence the Chanter at St. David's and at Landaff the Archdeacon.

Note also, That there are some Deans in England without any Jurisdiction, only
for honor so styled; as the Dean of the Chapel Royal, and Dean of the Chapel
of St. George at Windsor.

Moreover, Some Deans there are without any Chapter, yet enjoying certain
Jurisdictions, as the Dean of Croyden, the Dean of Battle, the Dean of Bocking,
etc.

Of the Nobility or Second Estate of England.
NObiles quasi viri Noscibiles or Notabiles. Name.
In all Christian Monarchies men that have been Notable for Courage, Wisdom,
Wealth, etc. have been judged fit and worthy to enjoy certain Privileges,
Titles, Dignities, Honors, etc. above the Common People, to be placed in an
higher Orb, and to be as a Skreen between the King and the Inferior Subjects,
Use.
to defend the one from Insolences and the other from Tyranny; to interpose by
their Counsel, Courage, and Grandeur, where common persons dare not, ought not
to be so hardy; to support the King and defend the Kingdom with their lives and
fortunes.

The Nobility of England is called the Peerage of England, because they are all
Pares Regni; that is, Nobilitate Pares, though gradu impares.

The Degrees of the English Nobility are only five, Degrees.
viz. Duke, Marquess, Earl, Vicount, and Baron. These are all Barons, but the
four first are for State, Privilege, and Precedence above and before other
Barons.

A Duke in Latin Dux, Duke.
a ducendo, Noblemen being anciently either Generals and Leaders of Armies in
time of War, or Wardens of Marches and Governors of Provinces in times of
Peace; afterward made so for term of life, then held by Lands and Fees, at
length made Hereditary and Titular.

The first Duke since the Conqueror was Edward the Black Prince, created so by
Edward 3 in the 11th year of his Reign. A Duke is at this day created by
Patent, Cincture of a Sword, Imposition of a Cap and Coronet of Gold on his
Head, and a Verge of Gold put into his hand.

Marchio a Marquess, Marquis^
was first so called from the Government of Marches and Frontier Countries. The
first that was so created was Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, made Marquess of
Dublin in Octavo of Richard 2.

A Marquess is created by a Cincture of a Sword, Imposition of a Cap of Honor,
with a Coronet and delivery of a Charter or Patent.

Earls anciently called Comites, Earl.
because they were wont Comitari Regem, to wait upon the King for Counsel and
Advice. The Saxons called them Ealdormen, the Danes Eorlas, and the English
Earls. They had anciently for the support of their state the third penny out of
the Sherives Court issuing out of all Pleas of that Shire whereof they had
their Title, but now it is otherwise.

An Earl is created by the Cincture of a Sword, a Mantle of State put upon him
by the King himself, a Cap and a Coronet put upon his head, and a Charter in
his hand.

All Earls are styled by the King Consanguinei nostri, Our Cosins, and they
anciently did and still may use the style of Nos.

All the Earls of England are local, or denominated from some Shire Town or
Place, except 2, whereof one is personal, as the Earl Marshal of England, who
is not only honorary as all the rest, but also officiary. The other is nominal,
viz. Earl Rivers, who takes his denomination from an Illustrious Family, as the
rest do from some noted place.

Vicecomes quasi vice Comitis gubernaturus Comitatum. Vicount.
This Title was first given say some by Hen. 6. in the 18th year of his Reign
to John Beaumont, though it may be found that 5 H. 5. Sir Robert Brent was by
that King created a Vicount.

A Vicount is so made by Patent.

In the Laws of the Longobards and of the Normans this Word Baron was used for
Vir, Baron.
as at this day Baron or Varon in the Spanish Tongue is used for the same; so
that a Baron is Vir (...), Vir Notabilis and Principalis; so the Chief
Burgesses of London anciently and still those of the Cinque Ports are called
Barons.

Anciently those Barons only were accounted Peers of the Realm that held of the
King per integram Baroniam, which consisted of 13 Knights Fees, and one third
part (each Knights Fee being 20 l.) which make in all 400 Marks, and whoever
had so much, was wont to be summoned to Parliament. Now to hold per Baroniam,
is to hold per haereditatem Baronis whether greater or less.

Barons in the beginning of the Reign of H. 3. were not of so much repute as
afterward, when that King (after that great Rebellion against him was
suppressed) called by Writ unto Parliament only such great men as had continued
loyal; which the succeeding Kings observing, they only were accounted Peers of
the Realm, that were called by the Kings special Writ; and the others lost
their Peerage.

The Earls Palatines and Earls Marchers of England had anciently also their
Barons under them; as in Cheshire there are yet such Barons: but as no Bishops
but those that hold immediately of the King, are Peers of the Realm (for the
Bishop of Man, holding immediately of the Earl of Derby is no Peer) so no
Barons, but those that hold immediately of the King, are Peers of the Realm.

Caput Baroniae is some Castle or Chief Seat of a Nobleman, which is not to be
divided amongst Daughters (if there be no Son) but must descend to the Eldest
Daughter, caeteris filiabus aliunde satisfactis.

Lands holden by Barony, does not make the purchaser that is ignoble to be
noble, although the charge of such Tenure does lie upon him in respect of the
Service of the Realm; no more than Lands by Villain Service, does make the
Purchaser that is a Freeman a Villain, though he shall thereby be bound to his
Villain Service due for those Lands.

Barons are sometimes made by Writ, being thereby called to sit in the Higher
House of Parliament, but most usually by Patent.

All the forementioned Degrees have the Title of Lord from the Saxon word
Laford, Dominus.

All the Lords of England both Spiritual and Temporal, are Feudataries to the
King, and in their Creation and also in their Succession, do swear an Oath of
Fealty, and do Homage to the King their Sovereign, and pay certain Duties, as
Signs and Symbols of their Subjection to their Prince.

All Honors in England are given by the King, who is the sole Fountain of
Honor.

The Law of England prohibiteth all Subjects of the Realm to receive any Title
of Honor or Dignity of the Gift of any Foreign Prince, King or Emperor. Est
enim jus Majestatis and inter Insignia summae potestatis.

None of these Honors bestowed by the King on a Family can be lost, but by
want of Issue, or else by some heinous Crime; and then that Family cannot be
restored to their Blood but by Parliament.

All Noblemen at their Creation have two Ensigns, to signify two Duties. Their
Heads are adorned ad consulendum Regem and Patriam tempore pacis, and they are
girt with a Sword ad defendendum Regem and Patriam tempore belli.

The several Degrees of the English Nobility are differenced and distinguished
one from another by their Titles and Ensigns of Honor.

A Duke has the Title of Grace, and being written unto, may be styled, Most
High, Potent, and Noble Prince. A Marquess, Most Noble and Potent Prince. An
Earl, Most Noble and Potent Lord. A Vicount, Right Noble and Potent Lord. And,
A Baron, Right Noble Lord.

Their Coronets are all different. A Baron has a Coronet of 6 Pearls upon the
Circle, given to that honor by the present King. A Vicount has a Coronet with
8 Pearls without the Circle. ^n ^^arls Coronet has the Pearls raised. The
Marquess a Pearl and Strawbe^ry Leaf round. And a Dukes Coronet only Leaves
without Pearls. They are more especially distinguished by their Robes of
Parliament, by their several Guards on their Mantles or Short Cloaks about
their Shoulders. A Baron has but 2 Guards, a Vicount two and and a half, an
Earl 3, a Marquess 3 and a half, and a Duke 4.

The Nobility of England have in all times enjoyed many considerable
Privileges. Privileges.


All Peers of the Realm being looked on as the Kings Hereditary constant
Counselors, their Persons out of Parliament time are privileged (as others
in Parliament time) from all arrest, unless for Treason, Felony, or breach of
Peace, Condemnation in Parliament, or Contempt to the King. No Supplicavit can
be granted against them, No Capias or Exigent sued out against them for Actions
of Debt or Trespass. No Essoin lies against any Peer of the Realm. In Criminal
Causes, Treason, or Felony, they cannot be tried by any other Jury but by a
Jury of Peers of the Realm; who are not as other Juries to be put to their
Oath, but their Ve^dict given in upon their Honor suffices. In Civil Causes
they are not to be empanelled upon any Jury, nor upon any Enquests de facto,
though in a matter between two Peers. In case any Peer be returned upon any
such Jury, there is a special Writ for his discharge. Upon no case to be bound
to the good behavior, nor put to swear they will not break the Peace, but only
to promise it upon their Honor; which was ever counted so sacred, as upon no
terms to be violated. A Peer of the Realm may not be put to the Rack or
Torture, to discover the truth, though accused of High Treason. Every Peer of
the Realm called to Parliament, has the Privilege in his lawful absence to
constitute a Proxy to vote for him, which none of the Commons may do. Also in
places of trust committed to them, they are allowed to make Deputies, by reason
of the necessity supposed in the Law of their attendance on the Person of the
King. Though neither Civil Law nor Common Law allow any others Testimony to be
valid, but what is given upon Oath, yet the Testimony of a Peer of England
given in upon his Honor, without any Oath, is esteemed valid; and they were
wont to be examined upon their Allegiance and the Loyalty of their Chivalry,
and to put in their Answer to a Bill super honorem, without taking an Oath;
though of later times that Privilege, by the neglect of some Lords has been
infringed sometimes. A day of Grace by the favor of the Court is not to be
granted to the Plaintiff in any Suit or Action wherein a Peer of the Realm is
Defendant; and this by Statute Law, because the Law presumes that a Peer of the
Realm must always be ready to attend the Person of the King and the Service of
the Commonwealth, and therefore it is not to be delayed longer than the
ordinary use of the Court, but to have expedition of Justice. At the beginning
of Parliament when the Oath of Supremacy is exacted of all those of the House
of Commons, yet is it not reqnired of any of the Lords, because the King is
otherwise assured of their Loyalty and Fidelity as is presumed. In all Cases
wherein the Privilege of Clergy is allowed to other men, and also in diverse
Cases where that Privilege is taken away from other men, every Peer of the
Realm having Place and Voice in Parliament, shall upon his Request by Stat. 1.
Ed. 6. without burning in the hand, loss of Inheritance, or corruption of
Blood, be adjudged for the first time as a Clerk convict, though he cannot read.

All Barons of England are exempted from all attendance at Sherives Turns or
any Leets, as others are, to take the Oath of Allegiance.

A Peer cannot be outlawed in any Civil Action, because he cannot be arrested
by any Capias, and by the same reason lies no Attachment against him.

By the Custom of England, (as is by the Law of the Empire) Nobiles non
torquentur in quibus plebeii torquerentur and Nobiles non suspenduntur sed
decapitantur: yet this by the mere favor of the King, and in some cases,
especially of Felony, has been otherwise sometimes.

For the suppressing of Riots and Routs, the Sheriff may raise the Posse
Comitatus, that is, ^all able men are to assist him; yet may not the Sheriff
command the Person of any Peer of the Realm to attend that Service.

A Baron of Parliament being sent for by the Kings Writ or Letter, or by his
Messenger to come to Court, or to Parliament, or to appear before the
Council Board, or in his Court of Chancery, may both coming and returning by
the Kings Forest or Park kill one or two Deer.

In any Civil Trial, where a Peer of the Realm is Plaintiff or Defendant, there
must be returned of the Jury at least one Knight, otherwise the Array may be
quasht by Challenge.

The Laws of England are so tender of the Honor, Credit, Reputation and
Persons of Noblemen, that there is a Statute on purpose to prohibit all offense
by false reports, whereby any scandal to their persons may arise, or debate and
discord between them and the Commons; and because it is to defend not only Lay
Lords but Bishops and all great Officers of the Realm, it is called Scandalum
Magnatum.

If a Peer of the Realm appear not upon a Subpena, yet may not an Attachment be
awarded against him, as it may against a common person; though of later times
the practice has been otherwise.

The House of a Peer cannot in some Cases (as in search for Prohibited Books,
for Conventicles, etc.) be en^^red by Officers of Justice, without a Warrant
under the Kings own hand, and the hands of 6 of his Privy Council, whereof 4 to
be Peers of the Realm.

No Peer can be assessed toward the standing Militia, but by 6 or more of
themselves.

The Law allowing any one of the Commonalty to be ar^aigned for Felony or
Treason in favorem vitae to challenge 35 of his Jury without showing cause, and
others by showing cause; yet allows not a Peer of the Realm to challenge any of
his Jury, or to put any of them to their Oath, the Law presuming that they
being all Peers of the Realm, and judging upon their Honor, cannot be guilty
of Falsehood o^ Favor or Malice.

All Peers of the Realm have a Privilege of qualifying a certain number of
Chaplains, who (after a Dispensation from the Archbishop (if to him i^ seem
good) and the same ratified under the Great Seal of England) may hold Plurality
of Benefices with Cure of Souls: In this manner every Duke may qualify 6
Chaplains, every Marquess and Earl 5 apiece, every Vicount 4, and every Baron 3.

A Peer of the Realm may retain 6 Aliens born, whereas another may not retain
above 4.

In Case of Amercements of the Peers of the Realm upon Non-suits or other
Judgments, a Duke is to be amer^ed only 10 pounds, and all under only 5 l. and
this to be done by their Peers, according to Magna Charta; al^hough it is often
done by the Kings Justices instead of their Peers.

All Peers of the Realm being constant hereditary Councillors of the King in
his Great Council of Parliament, and being obliged upon the Kings Summons to
appear and attend in all Parliaments upon their own Charges, are privileged
from contributing to the Expenses of any Member of the House of Commons; for
which no levy may be made upon any of their Lands, parcel of their Earldoms or
Baronies, any of their ancient Demesnes, Copyhold, or Villain Tenants.

The Estates of all Peers of the Realm being judged in the Eye of the Law
sufficient at all times to satisfy all Debts and Damages, satisfaction is to
be sought by Execution taken forth upon their Lands and Goods, and not by
Attachments, Imprisonments of their Persons (those are to be always free for
the Service of the King and Kingdom) no^ by Exigents or Capias Utlegatum, etc.

Other Privileges belong to the Peers of England, as 8^ Tun of Wine Custom
free to every Earl, and to the rest proportionably, etc.

Notwithstanding these great Privileges belonging to the Nobility of England,
yet the greatest of them (no not the Brother or Son of the King) ever had the
Privilege of the Grandees of Spain, to be covered in the Kings Presence,
except only Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Surrey, as before Page 147. nor had ever
that higher Privilege of the Nobility of France, whose Domain Lands and their
Dependants holding them, are exempted from all Contributions and Tailles,
whereby they are tied to their King, and so enabled to serve him, that although
Rebellions are frequent, yet seldom of long continuance, and never prosperous;
whereas the highest born Subject of England has herein no more Privilege than
the meanest Plowman, but utterly want that kind of reward for ancient Virtue,
and encouragement for future Industry.

Touching the Places or Precedences amongst the Peers of England, Precedence.
it is to be observed that (after the King and Princes of the Blood, viz. the
Sons, Grandsons, Brothers, Uncles, or Nephews of the King and no^ farther)
Dukes amongst the Nobility have the first place, then Marquisses, Dukes eldest
Sons, Earls, Marquisses eldest Sons, Dukes younger Sons, Vicounts, Earls eldest
Sons, Marquisses younger Sons, Barons, Vicounts eldest Sons, Earls younger
Sons, Barons eldest Sons, Vicounts younger Sons, Barons younger Sons.

Here note, That it was decreed by King James, that the younger Sons of Barons
and Vicounts should yield Place and Precedence to all Knights of the Garter,
quate^us tales, and to all Privy Councillors, Master of the Wards,
Chancellor, and Under Treasurer of the Exchequer, Chancellor of the Duchy,
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Master of the Rolls, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and all other Judges and Barons of
the Degree of the Coise of the said Courts, and that by reason of their
Honorable Order and Employment; and also to all Bannerets made under the Kings
Banner or Standard displayed in an Army Royal in open War, and the King
personally present.

Note also, That if any of the Degrees of Nobility abovementioned are
descended of the Blood Royal, they are to have place of all those of the same
Degree with them.

Moreover, Observe that all the Nobles of the same Degree take place according
to the Seniority of their Creation.

There are certain Marks of State that belong to each Degree amongst the
Nobility, State.
which they may practice or not practice at pleasure.

A Duke may have in all places out of the Kings presence a Cloth of Estate
hanging down within half a yard of the ground, so may his Duchess, and her
Train born up by a Baron; and no Earl to wash with a Duke without the Dukes
pleasure.

A Marquess may have a Cloth of Estate reaching within a yard of the ground,
Marquess
and that in all places out of the presence of the King or a Duke, and his
Marchioness to have her Train born by a Knights Wife; and no Vicount to wash
with a Marquess, but at his pleasure.

An Earl also may have a Cloth of Estate without Pendants Earl.
but only Fringe, and a Countess may have her Train born by a Gentlewoman out
of the presence of her Superiors, and in their presence by a Gentleman.

A Vicount may have a Cover of Assay holden under his Cup while he drinks,
Vicount.
but no Assay taken, as Dukes, Marquisses and Earls may have. And a Vicountess
may have her Gown born up by a Woman out of the presence of her Superiors, and
in their presence by a Man.

A Baron may also have the Cover of his Cup holden underneath whilst he
drinks, Baron.
and a Baroness may have her Gown born up by a man in the presence of a
Vicountess.

All Dukes eldest Sons be as Earls, and the younger as Lords, with the addition
of their Christian Names, as Lord Thomas, Lord John, etc.

A Dukes eldest Son of the Blood Royal shall take place of a Marquess that is
not, and of an Earl that is of the Blood Royal.

A Marquisses eldest Son is called Lord of a place, and the younger Sons Lord
Thomas, Lord John, etc.

A Marquisses eldest Son of the Blood Royal shall go before an Earl that is
not, and of a Vicount that is of the Blood Royal.

An Earls eldest Son is called Lord of a place, and all his Daughters Ladies,
but his younger Sons not Lords.

An Earls eldest Son of the Blood Royal takes place of a Vicount that is not,
and of a Lord that is of the Blood Royal.

A Vicounts eldest Son is no Lord, nor his Daughters Ladies, and therefore the
eldest Son and the eldest Daughter of the first Vicount of England, is said to
be the first Gentleman and Gentlewoman without Title in England.

A Vicounts eldest Son of the Blood Royal takes place of all Barons.

The Princes of the Blood, the Great Officers of the Realm, and the Bishops are
to precede, according to an Act of Parliament, 31 H. 8.

The Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council,
Lord Privy Seal: These being Barons or above, shall in Parliament sit above all
Dukes, except the Son, Brother, Grandchild, or Nephew of the King.

The Lord High Steward of England is not here named, because it was intended
that he should not continue beyond the occasion for which he should be made.

Next has place the Lord Great Chamberlain of England, then the Lord High
Constable, the Earl Marshal, the Lord High Admiral, Lord Steward of the Kings
Household, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household. These shall sit after the
Lord Privy Seal, above all of their Degree only. And if the Kings Principal
Secretary be a Baron, he takes place of all Barons that are not of the Offices
before mentioned; but if he be a Vicount or higher Degree, he shall take place
only according to his Degree. Also if the Kings Secretary be a Bishop, as
anciently was usual, he takes place next to the Bishop of Winchester of all
other Bishops that have none of the Offices aforesaid.

All Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Vicounts, and Barons, not having any of the said
Offices, shall take place according to the anciently of their Creation.

All Dukes eldest Sons have the Title of Earls, and the eldest Son of an Earl,
has the Title of the Earls Barony, and sometimes of the Vicountry, according
to the Patent.

A Catalogue of the Peers of England according to their Precedence.
Dukes of the Royal Blood.
JAMES Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ulster, Lord High Admiral of England,
the Kings only Brother.

Rupert Duke of Cumberland and Earl of Holderness.

Edgar Duke of Cambridge.

The Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Treasurer, and
the Lord Privy Seal, take place before all Dukes not of the Blood Royal.

Dukes.
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. William Seymour Duke of Somerset. George
Villars Duke of Buckingham. Charles Stuart Duke of Richmond. George Monk Duke
of Albemarle. James Scot Duke of Monmouth. William Cavendish Duke of Newcastle.
Marquisses.
John Pawlet Marquess of Winchester. Edward Somerset Marquess of Worcester.
Henry Pierrepont Marquess of Dorchester.
Earls.
These three take place in respect of their Offices. Bertue Earl of Lindsay,
Lord High Chamberlain of England. James Butler Earl of Brecknock, Lord Steward
of the Kings Household. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of
the Kings Household.
Earls.
Awbrey de Vere Earl of Oxford. Algernon Percy Earl of Northumberland. Francis
Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Anthony Gray Earl of Kent. Charles Stanley Earl of
Derby. John Mannours Earl of Rutland. Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntingdon.
William Russel Earl of Bedford. Philip Herbert Earl of Pembroke* Theophilus
Clinton Earl of Lincoln. Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham. James Howard Earl
of Suffolk. Richard Sacvile Earl of Dorset. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury.
John Cecil Earl of Exeter. John Edgerton Earl of Bridgewater. Robert Sydney
Earl of Leicester. James Compton Earl of Northampton. Charles Rich Earl of
Warwick. William Cavendish Earl of Devonshire. Basil Fielding Earl of Denbigh.
George Digby Earl of Bristol. Lionel Cranfield Earl of Middlesex. Henry Rich
Earl of Holland. John Hollis Earl of Clare. Oliver St. John Earl of
Bullingbroke. Mildmay Fane Earl of Westmorland. Montague Earl of Manchester.
Thomas Howard Earl of Berkshire. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland. Edward
Sheffield Earl of Mulgrave. Thomas Savage Earl Rivers. Bertue Earl of Lindsay.
Nicolas Knowles Earl of Banbury Henry Carry Earl of Dover. Henry Mordant Earl of
Peterborough. Henry Gray Earl of Stamford. Henage Finch Earl of Winchelsey.
Charles Dormer Earl of Caernarvon. Montjoy Blunt Earl of Newport. Philip
Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield. John Tufton Earl of Thanet. William Wentworth
Earl of Strafford. Robert Spenser Earl of Sunderland. James Savil Earl of
Sussex. George Goring Earl of Norwich. Nicholas Leak Earl of Scarsdale. John
Willmot Earl of Rochester. Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans. Edward Montague
Earl of Sandwich. James Butler Earl of Brecknock. Edward Hyde Earl of
Clarendon. Arthur Capel Earl of Essex. Thomas Brudnel Earl of Cardigan. Anthony
Annesly Earl of Anglesey. John Greenvile Earl of Bath. Charles Howard Earl of
Carlisle. John Craven Earl of Craven. Thomas Bruce Earl of Alisbury. Richard
Boil Earl of Burlington.
Vicounts.
Leicester Devereux Vicount Hereford. Francis Brown Vicount Montague. James
Fiennes Vicount Say and Seal. Edward Conway Vicount Conway. Baptist Noel
Vicount Camden. William Howard Vicount Stafford. Thomas Bellasis Vicount
Falconbridge. John Mordant Vicount Mordant. George Savil Vicount Halifax*
Barons.
John Nevil Lord Abergavenny. James Touchet Lord Andley. Charles West Lord de
la War. George Berkly Lord Berkly. Thomas Parker Lord Morly and Monteagle.
Francis Lennard Lord Dacres. Conyers Darcy Lord Darcy and Menil. William
Stourton Lord Stourton. William Lord Sandys de la Vine. Edward Vaux Lord Vaux.
Thomas Windsor Lord Windsor. Thomas Wentworth Lord Wentworth. Wingfield Cromwell
Lord Cromwell. George Evre Lord Evre. Philip Wharton Lord Wharton. Francis
Willoughby Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Paget Lord Paget. Dudly North
Lord North. William Bruges Lord Chandos. William Petre Lord Petre. Dutton
Gerard Lord Gerard. Charles Stanhop Lord Stanhop. Henry Arundel Lord Arundel of
Warder. Christopher Rooper Lord Tenham* Fulk Grevil Lord Brook. Edward
Montague Lord Montague of Boughton. Charles Lord Howard of Charlton. William
Gray Lord Gray of Wark. John Robarts Lord Robarts. John Lovelace Lord Lovelace.
John Pawlet Lord Pawlet. William Mainard Lord Mainard. Thomas Coventry Lord
Coventry* Edward Lord Howard of Escrick. Warwick Mohun Lord Mohun. William
Butler Lord Butler. Percy Herbert Lord Powis. Edward Herbert Lord Herbert of
Cherbury. Francis Seymour Lord Seymour. Francis Newport Lord Newport. Thomas
Leigh Lord Leigh of Stonelty. Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton. Henry Hastings L.
Loughborough. Richard Byron Lord Byron. Richard Vaughan Lord Vaughan Charles
Smith Lord Carington. William Widrington Lord Widrington. Humble Ward Lord
Ward. Thomas Lord Culpeper. Isaac Astley Lord Astley. Richard Boil Lord
Clifford. John Lucas Lord Lucas. John Bellasis Lord Bellasis. Lewis Watson Lord
Rockingham. Charles Gerard Lord Gerard of Brandon. Robert Sutton Lord Sutton of
Lexinton. Charles Kirkhoven Lord Wotton. Marmaduke Langdale, Lord Langdale.
William Crofts Lord Crofts. John Berkley Lord Berkley. Denzil Hollis Lord
Hollis. Frederick Cornwallis Lord Cornwallis. George Booth Lord de la Mere.
Horatio Townsend Lord Townsend. Anthony Ashley Cooper Lord Ashley. John Crew
Lord Crew, etc. Henry Bennet Lord Arlington. John Freschevile Lord
Fresschevile. Richard Arundel Lord Arunde^ of Trerice.
Of Temporal Lords or Peer of England, Number.
there are at present about 170, whereof there ar^ 10 Dukes, 3 Marquisses, 6^
Earls, 8 Vicounts, and 78 Barons; whereas within 60 year^ last past there was
not on^ Duke, but one Marquess, about 20 Earls, 3 or 4 Vicounts, an^ 40 Lords.

The Laws and Customs of England always willing that Decorum and Convenience
should be every where observed, Revenue.
and considering the Charges and Expenses appertaining to the several Degrees
of Honor, as they belong to Men of Principal Service to the King and Realm,
both in time of War and Peace, expected that each of them should have a
convenient Estate and Value of Lands of Inheritance, for the support of their
Honors and the Kings Service. Therefore anciently when the intrinsique value
of a Pound Sterling was worth 30 l. of our Money now, every Knight was to have
about 800 Acres, reckoned at 20 l. yearly in Land, that is, about 600 l. of our
Money at this day: A Baron to have 13 Knights Fees and one third part, which
amounted to 400 l. which multiplied by 30, was as much as 8000 l. a year at
this day. An Earl 20 Knights Fees, and a Duke 40. And in case of decay of
Nobility, or that they had so far wasted their Revenues, that their Honors
could not decently be maintained (as the Roman Senators were in such case
removed from the Senate) so sometimes some English Barons have not been
admitted to sit in the Higher House of Parliament, though they kept the Name
and Title of Dignity still.

For the better support o^ these Degrees of Honor, the King does usually upon
the Creation of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, or Vicount, grant an Annuity or yearly
Rent to them and their heirs, which is so annexed to the Dignity that by no
Grant, Assurance, or any manner of Alienation can be given from the same, but
is still ^ncident to, and a support of the same Creation; contrary to that
Principle in Law, That every Land of Feesimple may be charged with a Rent in
Feesimple by one way or other.

To a Duke the King grants 40 l. heretofore a considerable Pension, to a
Marquess 40 Marks, to an Earl 20 l. and to a Vicount 20 Marks. To Barons no
such Pensions is ordinarily granted, only the late King creating Mountjoy
Blount (the late Earl of Newport) Lord Mountjoy of Thurlston, granted him a Fee
of 20 Marks per annum to him and his heirs for ever.

As the King of England has ever had the repute of the richest in Domaines of
any King in Europe, so the Nobility of England have been accounted the richest
in Lands of any Neighboring Nation; some having above 20000 l. yearly, others
15000, and so many of them above ten, that if one with another they have 10000
l. yearly, it will amount to in all amongst the 160 Lords Sixteen hundred
thousand pounds a year, about the ninth part of the yearly Revenue of all
England, which upon Computation is found to be about Fourteen Millions yearly.

The English Nobility for Valor, Wisdom, Integrity, and Honor, has in all
former Ages been equal to any in Christendom.

Every Lords House was a kind of a well disciplined Court, insomuch that the
Gentry, Males, and Females, were wont to be sent thither for virtuous breeding
and returned excellently accomplished.

At home their Table Attendance, Officers, Exercises, Recreations, Garb, was an
Honor to the Nation.

Abroad they were attended with as brave, numerous, and uniform Train of
Servants and Followers as any ^u^ope; not thinking it consistent with their
Honors to be seen walk the Streets almost in Cuerpo with one Lackey, or not
that, much less to be found drinking in a Tavern, etc.

If the English Nobility by ^ long continued Peace, excessive Luxury in Diet,
want o^ Action, etc. were before the late Wars born more feeble in body than
their Ancestors, an^ by too fine and too full Die^ afterward were rendered
weaker in mind, and then during the late troubles by much licentiousness and
want of fit Education, were so debauched, tha^ it was lately difficult to fin^
(as some are bold to affirm) the Courage, Wisdom, Integrity, Honor, Sobriety,
and Courtesy of the Ancient Nobility; yet is it not to be doubted, but that
under a Warlike Enterprising Prince all those Virtues of their Forefathers may
spring afresh: especially if we consider the vicissitude of all sublunary
things, and remember that there was once a time when the Juvenes Nobiles, in
Old English the Edel Knaben, were so lewd, that those words came at length to
signify, as now, Idle Knaves.

Of the Commonalty or Third State of England.
THe Law of England, contrary to the Laws and Customs of other Countries,
^alleth none Noble under a Baron; so that not only all Baronets, all sorts of
Knights, all Esquires and Gentlemen, but also all the Sons of the Nobility, are
by our Law reckoned amongst the Commons of England: and therefore the eldest
Son of a Duke, though by the Courtesy of England styled an Earl, yet shall be
arraigned by the Style of Esquire only, and may be tried by a Jury of Common
Freeholders; and in Parliament can sit only in the House of Commons, if
elected, till called by the Kings Writ to the Lords House. Yet does it seem
very absurd that all Noblemens Sons, with all Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen,
should be esteemed Plebeans, but rather as in Rome they were, in a middle Rank,
inter Senatores and Plebem; or else as ^n other Christian Kingdoms, they
should be considered as ^he Minor Nobilitas Regni: so that as Barons and all
above, may be styled Nobiles Majores; ^o from a Baron downward to ^he Yeoman,
all may be not ^^fitly, styled Nobiles Minores.

The Lower Nobility then of England consists of Baro^ets, Knights, Esquires,
and Gentlemen.

The next Degree to Barons ^re Baronets, Baronets.
which is the low^st Degree of Honor that is ^ereditary. An Honor first
^nstituted by King James Anno ^611, given by Patent to a Man and his Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten; for which each one is obliged to ^ay into
the Exchequer so much money as will for 3 years at 8^ d. per diem, pay 30 Foot
Soldiers to serve in the Province o^ Vlster in Ireland, which sum amounts to
1095 l. which with Fees does commonly arise to 1200 l.

Baronets have precedenc^ before all Knights excep^ Knights of the Garter and
Knights Bannerets, made under the Kings Banner or Standard, displaied in an
Army Roya^ in open War, and the Kin^ personally present.

Baronets have the Priviledgi to bear in a Canton of their Coat of Arms, or in
a whol^ Scutcheon the Arms of Vlster viz. In a Field Argent a Han^ Gules: also
in the Kings Armies to have place in the gros near the Kings Standard, wit^
some other particulars for their Funerals.

The whole number of Baronets in England are not to exceed 200 at one and the
same time; after which number completed, as any for want of heirs come to be
extinct, the number shall not be made up by new Creations, but be suffered to
diminish; as appears by their Patent.

No Honor is ever to be created between Baronets and Barons.

The first Baronet that was created, was Sir Nicholas Bacon of Suffolk; whose
Successor is therefore styled Primus Baronettorum Angliae.

This Word Knight is derived from the German Word Knights.
Knecht signifying originally (...) Lusty Servitor.

The Germans (as the ancient Romans gave their young men Togam Virilem) by
Public Authority bestowed on their young men able to manage Arms) a Shield and
a Javelin, as fit for Martial Service, and to be a Member of the Common wealth,
accounted before but a part of a Family; and such a young man publicly
allowed, they called Knecht: whence we had our Institution of Knighthood.

The thing Knight is at this day signified in Latin, French, Spanish, Italian,
and also in the High and Low Dutch Tongues, by a Word that properly signifies a
Horseman, because they were wont to serve in War on Horsback; and were
sometimes in England called Radenyhts, id est, Riding Servitors; yet our Common
Law styles them Milites, because they commonly held Lands in Knights Service to
serve the King in his Wars as Soldiers.

The Honor of Knighthood is commonly given for some personal desert, and
therefore dies with the person deserving, and descends not to his Son.

In England there are several sorts of Knights, whereof the chiefest are those
of the Order of St. George, Knights of the Garter.
commonly called Knights of the Garter.

This Order is esteemed the most Honorable and most Ancient of any now in use
in Christendom. It began as appears in the Statutes of this Order in the 23th
year of the Warlike and Puissant King Edward 3, who was Founder thereof, and at
first made choice of the most Illustrious Persons of Europe, to be of that
Royal Society (no doubt) upon a Martial, and not upon any such Amorous Account,
as is intimated Page 96 of this Treatise, which ridiculous Story, to the
dishonor of the Order, was first fancied by Polydore Virgil; and since upon
his credit taken up by many late Authors.

It appears by Ancient Writings that this Honorable Company is a College or
Corporation, having a Great Seal belonging to it, and consisting of a Sovereign
Guardian (which is always the King of England) and of 25 Companions called
Knights of the Garter, of 14 Secular Canons, that are Priests, of 13 Vicars who
are also Priests; of 26 poor Knights, who have no other Maintenance but the
allowance of this College, which is given them in respect of their Prayers, to
the Honor of God and of St. George, who is the Patron of England and of this
Order in particular; and is none of those Fabulous St. Georges as some have
vainly fancied; but that famous Saint and Soldier of Christ St. George of
Cappadocia, a Saint so universally received in all Parts of Christendom, so
generally attested by the Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages from the time of
his Martyrdom till this day, that no one Saint in all the Calendar (except
those attested by Scripture) can be better evidenced.

There be also certain Officers belonging to this Order, as the Prelate of the
Garter, which Office is settled on the Bishopric of Winchester. A Chancellor
of the Garter, A Register, who of later times has been constantly the Dean of
Windsor, though anciently it was otherwise. The Principal King at Arms called
Garter, whose chief function is to manage and marshal their Solemnities at
their Installations and Feasts. Lastly, The Usher of the Garter.

There are also certain Orders and Constitutions belonging to this Society
touching the Solemnities in making these Knights, their Duties after Creation,
and their high Privileges, too long for this place.

The College is seated in the Castle of Windsor, with the Chapel of St.
George, there erected by King Edward 3. and the Chapter House.

The Order of the Garter is wont to be bestowed upon the most excellent and
renowned Persons for Honor and Virtue; and with it a Blew Garter decked with
Gold, Pearl, and Precious Stones, and a Buckle of Gold, to be worn daily on the
Left Leg; also at High Feasts they are to wear a Surcoat, a Mantle, a Black
Velvet Cap, a Collar of Garters, and other stately and magnificent Apparel.

They are not to be seen abroad without their Garter upon the Left Leg, upon
pain of paying 2 Crowns to any Officer of the Order who shall first claim it;
only in taking a Journey a Blew Ribon under the Boot does suffice.

Upon the Left Shoulder, upon Cloak, Coat, or Riding Cassack in all places of
Assembly, when they wear not their Robes, they are to wear an Escutcheon of the
Arms of St. George, that is, a Cross with a Garter, and this by an Order made
April 1626. That Ornament and Embellishment about the said Escutcheon now worn,
and called the Star or rather the Sun in its glory; was at the same time
enjoined. The

The greatest Monarchs of Christendom have been enrolled, and have taken it
for an Honor to be of this Order.

There have been of this Order since the Institution 8 Emperors, 25 or 26
Foreign Kings, besides many Sovereign Princes, etc.

The Fellows and Companions of the Most Noble Order of St. George, are at
present these that follow, ranked according as they are seated in their several
Stalls at Windsor.
IN the first Stall on the right hand is the Sovereign of the Order King
Charles the Second, who is Patron and Sole Disposer of the Order.

The Stall opposite to His Majesty is now void.

In the other Stalls on the Sovereign Side are thus placed these that follow: 2
The Duke of York, 3 Prince Rupert, 4 Marquess of Brandenbourgh, 5 Earl of
Salisbury, 6 Earl of Northumberland, 7 Duke of Buckingham, 8 Earl of Bristol, 9
Count Marsin, 10 Earl of Sandwich, 11 Duke of Richmond, 12 Earl of Strafford,
13th Stall is void. On the other side, opposite to these aforementioned, are
placed in this Order these that follow: 2 Prince Elector Palatine, 3 Prince of
Orange, 4 Prince of Denmark, 5 Earl of Berkshire, 6 Duke of Ormond, 7 Duke of
Newcastle, 8 Prince of Tarent, 9 Duke of Albemarle, 10 Earl of Oxford, 11 Earl
of Manchester, 12 Duke of Monmouth, 13th Stall on this Side also is void.

The whole number of Fellows of this Order is not to exceed 26.

In the next place are Knights Bannerets, Knights Bannerets.
Equites Vexilliferi, anciently a high Honor, now obsolete; there being at
this time none of this Order in England.

These may bear Supporters of their Arms, and none under this Degree.

Knights of the Bath, Knights of the Bath.
so called of their Bathing used before they are created. The first of this
sort were made by Henry 4th. Anno 1399. They are now commonly made at the
Coronation of a King or Queen, or Installation of (...) Prince of Wales. They
wea^ a Scarlet Ribon Belt-wise They are still made with much Ceremony, too long
here to be described.

Other Knights called Equites Aurati, Knights Bachelors.
from the Gilt Spurs usually put upon them, and Knights Batchelors, quasi
Baschevaliers, Knights of lower Degree: So Bachelors in Arts or Divinity, quasi
Low Knights or Servitors in Arts. These were anciently made by girding with a
Sword and Gilt Spurs, and was bestowed only upon Sword men for their Military
Service, and was re^uted an excellent and glorious Degree, and a Noble Reward
^or Courageous Persons; but ^f late being made more common, and bestowed upon
^own Men, contrary to the nature of the thing (as Degrees ^n the University are
sometimes ^estowed upon Sword men) it ^s become of much less reputa^ion. Yet
amongst Gown men (...) is given only to Lawyers and ^hysitians, and not to
Divines, ^ho may as well become that Dignity, and be Spiritual Knights as well
as Spiritual Lords.

These are now made with no other Ceremony but kneeling down, the King with a
drawn Sword lightly touches them on the Shoulder, after which heretofore the
King said in French Sois Chevalier au nom de Dieu and then Avances Chevalier.

When a Knight is to suffe^ death for any foul Crime, hi^ Military Girdle is
first to be ungirt, his Sword taken away, hi^ Spurs cut off with an Hatchet^
his Gantlet plucked off, and hi^ Coat of Arms reversed.

Next amongst the Lowe^ Nobility are Esquires, so called from the French word
Escuyers, Scutigeri, because they were wont to bear before the Prince in War,
or before the better sort of Nobility (...) Shield, or else perhaps because
they bear a Coat of Arms as Ensigns of their descent; and by our Lawyers are
called Armigeri.

Of this Title are first all Vicounts eldest Sons, and all Vicounts and Barons
younger Sons; and by the Common Law of England all the Sons of Earls,
Marquisses, and Dukes, are Esquires and no more. Next are the Esquires of the
Kings Body, mentioned among the Officers of the Kings Court; after these are
reckoned Knights eldest Sons, and their eldest Sons for ever; then younger Sons
of the elder Sons of Barons; next Esquires created by the King by putting about
their Necks a Collar of Esses, and bestowing on them a pair of Silver Spurs.
Lastly, any that are in superior Public Office for King or State, are reputed
Esquires, or equal to Esquires, as Justices of the Peace, Mayors of Towns, so
Councillors at Law, Batchelors of Divinity, Law, or Physic, although none of
them really are so.

In the last place, Gentleman.
among the lower Nobility are accounted the Gentry of England, that have no
other Title, but are descended of ancient Families that have always born a
Coa^ of Arms.

This Kind of Honor is derived from the Germans to the rest of Christendom,
and was never known in any Country where the German Customs were unknown, as
in Asia, Africa, and America. The Germans anciently warring often amongst
themselves, painted their Scutcheons with the Picture of some Beast, Bird, or
other thing for distinction, and put some eminent and visible Mark upon the
Crest of their Helmets, and this Ornament both of Arms and Crest descended by
inheritance to their Children, to the eldest pure, and to the rest with some
note of distinction, such as the Old Master of Ceremonies, in High Dutch
Here-alt, now Herald thought fit.

Gentlemen well descended and well qualified, have always been of such repute
in England, that none of the higher Nobility, no nor the King himself, have
thought it unfitting to make them sometimes their Companions.

The Title of Gentleman in England (as of Cavalier in France, Italy, and Spain)
is not disdained by any Nobleman. All Noblemen are Gentlemen, though all
Gentlemen are not Noblemen.

The State of Gentry was anciently such, that it was accounted an abasing of
Gentry to put their Sons to get their Living by Shop-keeping, and our Law did
account it a disparagement of a Ward in Chivalry to be married to a Shopkeepers
Daughter, or to any mere Citizen; for Tradesmen in all Ages and Nations have
been reputed ignoble, in regard of the doubleness of their Tongue, without
which they cannot grow rich (for Nihil proficiunt nisi admodum mentiuntur, as
Tully observed) and therefore amongst the Thebans no man was admitted to places
of Honor or Trust, unless he had left off trading ten years before: So by the
Imperial Laws a Tradesman is not capable of any Honorable Estate, nor to be a
Commander over Soldiers; and therefore the English Nobility and Gentry till
within late years, judged it a stain and diminution to the honor and dignity
of their Families, to seek their Childrens support by Shop-keeping, but only
(as in all great Monarchies) by Military, Court, State, or Church Emploiments,
much less to subject their Children to an Apprentisage, a perfect Servitude;
for during that time, whatever they gain by their Masters Trade or their own
wit, belongs all to their Master, neither can they lie our of their Masters
House, no^ take a Wife, nor trade of their own, but subject to all Household
Work, all Commands o^ their Master, undergo what punishment, and eat and wear
what their Master pleases; which Marks of Slavery considered, Heralds are of
opinion that a Gentleman thereby loses his Gentility for ever, till he can
otherwise recover it; and yet to the shame of our Nation we have seen of fare
not only the Sons of Baroners, Knights, and Gentlemen, sitting in Shops, and
sometimes of Pedling Trades, far more fit for Women and their Daughters, but
also an Earl of this Kingdom subjecting his Son to an Apprentisage and Trade;
but the folly of the English in swerving from their Ancestors steps herein (as
in other things) is now apparent, for those young Gentlemen possessing more
noble and active Spirits, could not brook such dull slavish lives, and being
thereby unfitted for other emploiments, have generally taken ill debauched
courses.

Privileges.
The lower Nobility of England have fewer and less Privileges than those in
other Monarchies.

Some few Privileges belong to Knights, quatenus Knights. (...) a Knight be a
Minor, yet shall he be out of Wardship both for Lands, Body, and Marriage; for
though the Law does judge him not able to do Knights Service till the Age of 21
years, yet the King being Sovereign and Supreme Judge of Chivalry, by dubbing
him Knight, does thereby allow him to be able to do him Knights Service.

Knights are excused from attendance at Court-Leets.

They and their eldest Sons not compellable to find Pledges at the Visus Franci
Plegii.

Knights by Magna Charta cap. 21. are so freed, that no Demesne Cart of theirs
may be taken.

The Son and Brother of a Knight, by Statute law, are capacitated to hold more
than one Beenfice with cure of Souls.

By the Stat. Primo Jacobi It seems that Knights and their Sons (though they
cannot spend 10 l. per annum, nor are worth 200 l. may keep Greyhounds, Setting
Dogs, or Nets to take Pheasants or Partridges.

Some Privileges also be^ong to Gentlemen. Antient^y if an ignoble person did
^trike a Gentleman in England, he was to lose his hand.

A Gentleman by Stat. Quint. Eliz. may not be com^elled to serve in Husbandry.

The Child of a Gentleman ^rought up to singing, cannot ^e taken without the
Parents and Friends consent, to serve ^n the Kings Chapel, as others may.

The Horse of a Gentleman, may not be taken to ride post.

Note, That as there are some Great Officers of the Crown^ who for their
Dignity an^ Worth of their Places; although they are not Noble men, yet take
place among^ the highest of the Higher Nobility; so there are some Persons who
for their Dignities in the Church-degrees i^ the University Offices, in the
State or Army, although the are neither Knights nor Gentlemen born, yet take
place amongst them. So all Dean^ Archdeacons, Chancellours Prebends, Doctors of
Divinity, Law, and Physic Heads of Houses in the University, usually take
place nex^ to Knights, and before all Esquires and Gentlemen.

Likewise all Judges of Courts, Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace.

All Commissionated Officers in the Army, as Colonels, Master of Artillery,
Quartermaster General, etc.

All higher Officers in the Kings Court or State.

All Sergeants at Law, etc. These are wont to precede Esquires.

All Batchelors of Divinity, Law, and Physic, all Doctors in the Arts,
commonly called Masters of Art, all Barresters in the Innes of Court, all
Captains, Officers in the Kings Household, etc. may equal, if not precede,
Gentlemen, that have none of those qualifications.

In England Gentry (as in Germany all Nobility) and Arms are held in Gavelkind,
descending to all the Sons alike, only the eldest Son bears Arms without
difference, which the younger may not.

Of the low Nobility in England the number is so great, that there are reckoned
at present above 500 Baronets more than the first intended number; that is in
all above 700, who are possessed one with another of about 1200 l. a year in
Lands. Of Knights above 1400, who one with another may have about 800 l. Lands
a year. Of Esquires and Gentlemen above 6000, each one possessed one with another
of about 400 l. a year in Lands, besides younger Brothers, whose number may
amount to about 16000 in all England, who have small Estates in Lands, but are
commonly bred up to Divinity, Law, Physic, to Court, and Military Emploiments,
but of late too many of them to Shop-keeping.

The Lands in the possession of the lower Nobility will amount to about four
Millions and sixty thousand pounds yearly.

Next to the lower Nobility and the first Degree of the Commons or Plebeans are
the Freeholders in England, commonly called Yeomen from the High Dutch Gemen or
Gemain, in English Common, so in the Kings Court it signifies an Officer,
which is in a middle place between a Sergeant and a Groom, or else from the Low
Dutch Yeman, Somebody, as the Spaniard calls a Gentleman Hidalgo, Hijo d'
algo, that is, the Son of Somebody.

The Yeomanry of England having Lands of their own to a good value, and living
upon Husbandry, are looked upon as not apt to commit or omit any thing that may
endanger their Estates and Credits, nor apt to be corrupted or suborned, etc.
wherefore they are judged fit to bear some Offices, as of Constable,
Churchwarden, to serve upon Juries, to be Train-Souldiers, to vote in the
Election of Knights of the Shire for Parliament, etc.

In Cases and Causes the Law of England has conceived a better opinion of the
Yeomanry that occupy Lands, then of Tradesmen, Artificers, or Laborers.

Husbandry has in no age rendered a Gentleman ignoble nor incapable of places
of Honor.

Amongst the Romans some of the greatest Dictators and Consuls had been once
Husbandmen, and some of them taken from Plowing their Ground, to bear those
Highest Offices and Dignities; so diverse Princes, Kings, and Emperors, have
exercised Agriculture, and the Grand Scip^o and the Emperor Dioclesian left
their Commands to enjoy Husbandry.

By the Statutes of England certain Immunities are given to Freeholders and
landed men, though they are not Gentlemen: Vide Stat. 1 Jacobi, cap. 27. and
alibi.

Of the Freeholders in England there are more in number and richer than in any
Country of the like extent in Europe, 40 or 50 l. a year a piece is very
ordinary, 100 and 200 l. a year in some Counties is not rare.

Besides these Freeholders (which are so called, because they hold Lands or
Tenements inheritable by a perpetual Right to them and their heirs for ever)
there are in England a very great number of Copyholders, who hold Lands within
some Manors only by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manor, etc. and have Jus
perpetuum and utile Dominium, though not Allodium and directum Dominium, which
none in England but the King has.

Amongst the Commons of England in the next place are reckoned Tradesmen,
amongst whom Merchants of Foreign Trafick have for their great benefit to the
public, and for their great Endowments and generous living been of best repute
in England, and although the Law of England look upon Tradesmen and Chapmen
that live by buying and selling as a baser sort of people, and that a Ward
within age may bring his Action of Disparagement against his Guardian for
offering any such in Marriage; yet in England as well as Italy to become a
Merchant of Foreign Commerce, without serving any Apprentisage, has been
allowed as no disparagement to a Gentleman born, especially to a younger
Brother.

Amongst Tradesmen in the next place are Whole-salemen; then Retailers, lastly
Mechanics or Handy-craftsmen. These are all capable of bearing some Sway or
Office in Cities and Towns Corporate.

The lowest Member, the Feet of the Body Politic, are the Day-Labourers; who
by their large Wages given them, and the cheapness of all Necessaries, enjoy
better Dwellings, Diet, and Apparel in England, than the Husbandmen do in many
other Countries.

Liberties and Properties.
As the Clergy and Nobility have certain Privileges peculiar to themselves, so
they have Liberties and Properties common to the Commonalty of England.

The Commons of England for hereditary fundamental Liberties and Properties are
blessed above and beyond the Subjects of any Monarch in the World.

First, No Freemen of England ought to be imprisoned or otherwise restrained,
without cause shown for which by Law he ought to be so imprisoned.

Secondly, To him that is imprisoned, may not be denied a Writ of Habeas
Corpus, if it be desired.

Thirdly, If no cause of Imprisonment be alleged, and the same be returned
upon an Habeas Corpus, then the Prisoner ought to be set at Liberty.

Fourthly, No Soldiers can be quartered in the House of any Freeman in time of
Peace, without his will; though they pay for their quarters.

Fifthly, Every Freeman has such a full and absolute propriety in Goods, that
no Taxes, Loans, or Benevolences can be imposed upon them, without their own
consent by their Representative in Parliament. Moreover, They have such an
absolute Power, that they can dispose of all they have how they please, even
from their own Children, and to them in what inequality they will; without
showing any cause: which other Nations governed by the Civil Law, cannot do.

Sixthly, No Englishman may be pressed or compelled, (unless bound by his Tenure)
to march forth of his County, to serve as a Soldier in the wars, except in
case of a Foreign. Enemy invading, or a Rebellion at home. Nor may he be sent
out of the Realm against his will upon any foreign Employment, by way of an
honorable Banishment.

Seventhly, No Freeman can be tried but by his Peers, nor condemned but by the
Laws of the Land, or by an Act of Parliament.

Eighthly, No Freeman may be fined for any Crime, but according to the merit of
the Offense, always, salvo sib^ contenemente suo, in such manner that he may
continue and go on in his Calling.

Briefly, If it be considered only that they are subject to no Laws but what
they make themselves, nor no Taxes but what they impose themselves, and pray
the King and Lords to consent unto, their Liberties and Properties must be
acknowledged to be transcendent, and their worldly condition most happy and
blessed; and so far above that of the subjects of any of our Neighbor Nations,
that as all the Women of Europe would run into England (the Paradise of Women)
if there were a Bridge made over the Sea: so all the Men too, if there were but
an Act for a general Naturalizati-of all Aliens.

Of the Women, Children, and Servants of England.
TOuching the Women of England there are diverse things considerable in the
English Laws and Customs, Women in England with all their Moveable Goods, so
soon as they are married, are wholly in potestate viri, at the will and
disposition of the Husband.

If any Goods or Chattels be given to Feme Covert to a Married Woman, they all
immediately become her Husbands. She cannot let, set, sell, give away, or
alienate any thing, without her Husbands consent.

Her very Necessary Apparel by the Law is not hers in property. If she has any
Tenure at all, it is in Capite, that is, she holds it of and by her Husband,
who is Caput mulieris; and therefore the Law says Uxor fulget radiis mariti.

All the Chattels personal the Wife had at the Marriage, is so much her
Husbands, that after his death they shall not return to the Wife, but go to the
Executor or Administrator of the Husband, as his other Goods and Chattels,
except only her Parapherna, which are her Necessary Apparel, which with the
consent of her Husband she may devise by Will; not otherwise by our Law;
because the property and possession even of the Parapherna are in him.

The Wife can make no Contract without her Husbands consent, and in Law matters
sine viro respondere non potest.

The Law of England supposes a Wife to be in so much Subjection and Obedience
to her Husband, as to have no will at all of her own: Wherefore if a Man and
his Wife commit a felony together, the Wife by the Law can be neither Principal
nor Accessory, the Law supposing that in regard of the subjection and obedience
she owes to her Husband, she was necessitated thereunto.

The Law of England supposes in the Husband a power over his Wife, as over his
Child or Servant, to correct her when she offends; and therefore he must answer
for his Wives faults, if she wrong another by her Tongue or by Trespass, he
must make satisfaction.

So the Law makes it as high a Crime, and allots the same punishment to a Woman
that shall kill her Husband, as to a Woman that shall kill her Father or
Master, and that is Petty Treason, and to be burnt alive.

So that a Wife in England is de jure but the best of Servants, having nothing
her own in a more proper sense than a Child has, whom his Father suffers to
call many things his own, yet can dispose of nothing.

The Woman upon Marriage loses not only the power over her person and her
will, and the property of her Goods, but her very Name; for ever after she
uses her Husbands Surname, and her own is wholly laid aside; which is not
observed in France and other Countries, where the Wife subscribes her self by
her Paternal Name; as if Susanna the Daughter of R. Clifford be married to E.
Chamberlayn, she writes her self Susanna Clifford Chamberlayn.

Notwithstanding all which, their condition de facto is the best in the World;
for such is the good nature of Englishmen toward their Wives, such is their
tenderness and respect, giving them the uppermost place at Table and elsewhere,
the right hand every where, and putting them upon no drudgery and hardship;
that if there were a Bridge over into England as aforesaid, it is thought all
the Women in Europe would run thither.

Besides in some things the Laws of England are above other Nations so
favorable to that Sex, as if the Women had voted at the making of them.

If a Wife bring forth a Child during her Husbands absence, though it be for
some years within England, and not beyond the Seas, that Husband must father
that Child.

If a Wife bring forth a Child begotten by any other before Marriage, yet the
present Husband must own the Child, and that Child shall be his Heir at Law.

The Wife after her Husbands death may challenge the third part of his yearly
Rents of Lands during her life, and within the City of London a third part of
all her Husbands movables for ever.

As the Wife does participate of her Husband Name, so likewise of his
Condition. If he be a Duke, she is a Duchess; if he be a night, she is a Lady;
if he be an Alien made a Denison, she is ipso facto so too. If a Freeman marry
a Bondwoman, she is also free during the Coverture; wherefore it is said as
before, Uocor fulget radiis Mariti.

All Women in England are comprised under Noble or Ignoble.

Noble Women are so three manner of ways, viz. by Creation, by Descent, and by
Marriage.

The King the Fountain of Honor, may, and often has created Women to be
Baronesses, Countesses, Dutchesses, etc.

By Descent such Women are Noble, to whom Lands holden by such Dignity do
descend a^ Heir; for Dignities and Titles of Honor for want of Males descend
to Females; but to one of them only, because they are things in their own
nature entire, and not to be divided amongst many (as the Lands and Tenements
are which descend to all the Daughters equally) besides by dividing Dignities,
the Reputation of Honor would be lost, and the Strength of the Realm impaired;
for the Honor and Chevalry of the Realm does chiefly consist in the Nobility
thereof.

By Marriage all Women are Noble, who take to their Husbands any Baron or Peer
of the Realm; but if afterward they (...) to Men not Noble, they (...) their
former Dignity, and follow the condition of their la^^ Husband; for eodem modo
distolvitur earum Nobilitas, quo constituitur. But Women Noble by Creation, or
Descent, or Birthright, remain Noble, though they marry Husbands under their
Degree; for such Nobility is accounted Character indelebilis. Here note, that
by the Courtesy of England a Woman Noble only by Marriage always retains
her Nobility; but if the Kings Daughter marry a Duke or an Earl, illa semper
dicitur Regalis, as well by Law as Courtesy.

Noble women in the Eye of the Law are as Peers of the Realm, and are to be
tried by their Peers, and to enjoy most other Privileges, Honor, and Respect
as their Husbands* Only they cannot by the opinion of some great Lawyers
maintain an Action upon the Statute De Scandalo Magnatum, the Makers of that
Statute meaning only to provide in that Case for the Great Men, and not for the
Women, as the words of that Statute seem to import. Likewise if any of the
Kings Servants within his Check Roll should conspice the death of any
Noblewoman, this were not Felony, as it is, if like Conspiracy be against a
Nobleman.

None of the Wives Dignities can come by Marriage to their Husbands, although
all their Goods and Chattels do; only the Wives Lands are to descend to her
next Heir: yet is the Courtesy of England such, that as the Wife for her Dower
has the third part of her Husbands Lands during her life; so the Husband (for
the Dignity of his Sex, and for playing the Man in begetting his Wife with
Child, which must appear by being born alive) shall have all his Wives Lands
(for his Dower, if it may be so called) during his life.

By the Constitutions of England married persons are so fast joined, that they
may not be wholly separated by any agreement between themselves, but only by
Sentence of the Judge, and such separation is either a Vinculo Matrimonii, and
that is ob praecontractum, vel ob contractum per metum effectum, vel ob
frigiditatem, vel ob affinitatem sive Censanguinitatem, vel ob Saevitiam; or
else such separation is a Mensa and Thoro, and that is ob Adulterium.

The Wife in England is accounted so much one with her Husband, that she caunot
be produced as a witness for or against her Husband.

Concerning Children in England.
The Condition of Children in England, is different from those in our Neighbor
Countries.

As Husbands have a more absolute Authority over their Wives and their Estates,
so Fathers have a more absolute Authority over their Children. Fathers may give
all their Estates from their own Children, and all to any one Child, and none
to the rest; the consideration whereof keeps the Children in great awe.

Children by the Common Law of England are at certain ages enabled to perform
certain Acts.

A Son at the age of 14 may choose his Guardian, may claim his Lands holden in
Socage, may consent to Marriage, may by Will dispose of Goods and Chattels.

At the age of 15 he ought to be sworn to his Allegiance to the King.

At 21 he is said to be of full age, may then make any Contracts, may pass not
only Goods but Lands by Will, which in other Countries may not be done till the
Annus consistentiae, the age of 25, when the heat of youth is somewhat abated,
and they begin to be stayed in mind as well as in growth.

A Daughter at 7 years is to have aid of her Fathers Tenants to marry her, for
at those years she may consent to Marriage, though she may afterward dissent.

At 9 she is dowable, as if then or soon after she could virum sustinere, and
thereby Dotem promereri.

At 12 she is enabled to ratify and confirm her former consent given to
Matrimony, and if at that age she dissent not, she is bound for ever; she may
then make a Will of Goods and Chattels.

At 14 she may receive her Lands into her own hands, and is then out of
Wardship, if she be 14 at the death of her Ancestor.

At 16 (though at the death of her Ancestor she was under 14) she shall be out
of Wardship; because then she may take a Husband who may be able to perform
Knights-service as well as hers.

At 21 she is enabled to contract or alienate her Lands by Will or otherwise.

The Eldest Son inherits all Lands, and to the younger Children are disposed
Goods and Chattels, and commonly the Eldest Sons Wives Portion; and besides
they are carefully educated in some Profession or Trade*

If there be no Son, the Lands as well as Goods are equally divided amongst the
Daughters.

Concerning Servants in England.
The Condition of Servants in England is much more favorable than it was in
our Ancestors days, when it was so bad, that England was called the Purgatory
of Servants, as it was and is still the Paradise of Wives, and the Hell for
Horses.

Ordinary Servants are hired commonly for one year, at the end whereof they may
be free (giving warning 3 Months before) and may place themselves with other
Masters; only it is accounted discourteous and unfriendly to take another Man's
Servant, before leave given by his former Master; and indiscreet to take a
Servant without a Certificate of his diligence and of his faithfulness in his
Service to his former Master.

All Servants are subject to be corrected by their Masters and Mistresses, and
resistance in a Servant is punished with severe penalty; but for a Servant to
take away the life of his or her Master or Mistress, is accounted a Crime next
to High Treason, and called Petty Treason, and has a peculiar Punishment
Capital.

Slaves in England are none since Christianity prevailed. A Slave brought into
England, is upon landing ipso facto free from Slavery, but not from ordinary
service.

Some Lands in England are holden in Villanage, to do some particular Services
to the Lord of the Manor, and such Tenants may be called the Lords Servants.

There is a Twofold Tenure called Villanage, one where the Tenure only is
servile, as to plow the Lords ground, sow, reap, and bring home his Corn, dung
his Land, etc. the other whereby both Person and Tenure is servile, and bound
in all respects at the disposition of the Lord; such persons are called in Law
pure Villans, and are to do all Villainous Services to improve the Land he holds
to the Lords use, themselves to be wholly at the Lords Service, and whatever
they get is for their Lord; of such there are now but few left in England. The
nearest to this condition are Apprentices (that signifies Learuers) a sort of
Servants that carry the Marks of pure Villans or Bondslaves (as before in the
Chapter of Gentry is intimated) differing however in this, that Apprentices are
Slaves only for a time and by Covenant; the other are so at the Will of their
Masters.

FINIS.

