The Certain Way TO SAVE ENGLAND; Not only NOW, but in Future AGES, BY A
Prudent Choice OF MEMBERS To Serve in the next Ensuing PARLIAMENT. In a
Seasonable Address to its Freeholders, and other Electors.

7. H. 4. Multorum Consilia requiruntur in magnis. Prove. 11.14. Vbi non sunt
prudentia Consilia, corruit Populus; salus autem est in amplitudine
Consiliarii. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in Ball-Court, in the
Old Bailey. MDCLXXXI.

THE CERTAIN WAY TO SAVE ENGLAND; Not only NOW, but in Future AGES, BY A
PRUDENT CHOICE OF MEMBERS To Serve in PARLIAMENT.
SInce it has been openly declared by His Sacred Majesty in several
Proclamations, acknowledged by him in his Speeches to his Parliaments,
publicly owned in their Votes by three Parliaments; and sufficiently made out,
to a full Conviction of all Mankind, but only interessed Obstinates, seered
cunning Jesuits, and resolute Bigoted Papists; That there has been for these
many Years last past, contrived and carried on by the Roman Catholics, a
Traitorous and execrable Conspiracy and Plot within this Kingdom of England,
and other places; to alter, change and subvert the Ancient Government and Laws
of this Kingdom and Nation, and to suppress the true Religion therein
established, and to extirpate and destroy the Professors thereof, and for the
accomplishing the said wicked, pernicious and most damnable Designs, that a
great number of Persons of several Qualities and Degrees, Actors therein; did
most Hellishly and Traitorously agree, conspire and resolve to Imprison, Depose
and Murder His Sacred Majesty, and to deprive him of his Royal State, Crown and
Dignity: and by malicious and unadvised Speaking, Writing, and otherwise,
declared such their Purposes and Intentions. And also, to subject this Kingdom
to the Pope, and to his Tyrannicul Government; and to seize and share among
themselves the Estates and Inheritances of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects:
and to remove and deprive all Protestant Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
Persons (and God knows what a number there are of these in this Nation) from
their Offices, Benefices and Preferments, and so to overthrow all our Rights,
Liberties and Properties. And the better to compass their Traitorous Designs,
that these Conspirators have consulted to raise, and have procured and raised
Men, Money, Horses, Arms and Ammunition: and also have made Application to, and
Treated and Corresponded with the Pope, his Cardinals, Nuncios and Agents, and
with other Foreign Ministers and Persons, to raise and obtain Supplies of Men,
Money, Arms and Ammunition, therewith to make, levy and raise War, Rebellion
and Tumults within this Kingdom, and to Invade the same with Foreign Forces,
and to surprise, seize and destroy His Majesty's Navy, Forts, Magazines and
Places of Strength within this Kingdom: whereupon the Calamities of War,
Murders of Innocent Subjects, Men, Women and Children, Burnings, Rapines,
Devastations, and other dreadful Miseries and Mischiefs would inevitably ensue
to the Ruin and Destruction of this Nation. And to encourage themselves in
prosecuting their said wicked Plots, Conspiracies and Treasons, and to hide and
hinder the Discovery of the same, and to secure themselves from Justice and
Punishment, that these Conspirators, their Accomplices and Confederates have
used many wicked and Diabolical Practices; viz. caused their Priests to
administer to them an Oath of Secrecy, together with their Sacrament; and also
caused their Priests upon Confessions to give their Absolutions, upon condition
that they should conceal the said Conspiracy. And of their further Malice, that
they have wickedly contrived by many false Suggestions, to lay the Imputation
and Guilt of these horrid and detestable Crimes upon the Protestants, that so
thereby they might escape the Punishments they have justly deserved, and expose
the Protestants to great Scandal, and subject them to Persecution and
Oppression in all Kingdoms and Countries, where the Romish Religion is received
and prrfessed. I say, since all this is so fully known, and has been so
evidently made to appear by the King's Witnesses, before the Judges of this
Realm, and by the said Judges so often acknowledged, (as may be seen in their
several Speeches they have made upon the Trials of some of these wicked
conspiring Traitors that have been executed;) What Care and Diligence, what
Prudent Circumspection ought we to take in these so sad and dangerous times,
not to suffer any Idle, Loose, Debauched, Atheistical, or Mercenary Persons to
be elected into any Places of Office or Trust within this Kingdom; but to make
it our chief study and endeavors to choose such as we shall really in our
Hearts believe, will faithfully (according to the utmost of their Knowledge and
Power) perform their Duty to God, to the King, and to the People, in all their
respective Relations. I need not tell you the necessity for doing this:
SELF-PRESERVATION, Common Interest of King and People. page 2.
the first great Principle of Nature (or an inseparable desire of keeping our
selves in Being, by the obtaining and enjoyment of all those things which
contribute toward the Continuance of it; or which gives us a Power and
Capacity, either to escape and avoid, or to overcome and remove what we know,
or but suspect to be dangerous or destructive to us: Which is the Foundation of
all our Natural and Rational Desires and Aversions.) I say; SELF-PRESERVATION
exacts it from us; for now is not our All in imminent Hazard? Are we not
struggling with our Romish Adversaries pro Aris and Focis? And if ever we think
to save and defend our selves from the Merciless Cruelties of these (in the
plain Literal Sense) Men of Blood, is not this the time? His Majesty's Capital
City, I make no Question, have done their parts like honest and dutiful
Subjects, in choosing Men into their public Offices of Trust, that make
Integrity their Principle, Conscience their Guide, and the known Laws of the
Land their Rule: from which nothing shall have the force to divert them. I wish
to God all the Countries as resolute and industrious to have done the like: I
know not to the contrary, but that they may have been so. But if they should
have been negligent and careless in this matter, there remains now no other way
to retrieve themselves, but by mending all in their Elections of such Members
as are to serve in this New Parliament, that will be most likely to stand Firm
and Unshaken in their Pious Resolutions to maintain all the King's just Honors
and Prerogatives, and to establish the perpetual happiness of these his
Kingdoms, by securing to us, his Natural Subjects, the true Protestant
Religion, and all our Civil Rights and Privileges; and by taking away our great
and many (I cannot say how well or ill grounded) Fears and Jealousies of
Arbitrary Government, which nothing but the industrious Malice of wicked
Counselors can dare in secret to advise His Majesty to seek to oppress the
People with, and which they full well know they can never persuade him to,
unless they do disguise (and so deceive him by) such their Traitorous
Intendments, under the most plausible Flourishes of Acting according to his
Monarchical Prerogative.

The most probable way (in short) to effect all this, will be, by following the
Advice which Jethro gave to Moses; and to choose for your Representatives, Men
Fearing God, Loving Truth, and Hating Covetousness.

1. Rushworth's First Collection, fol. 219.
Men Fearing God; i. e. who halt not betwixt two Opinions, or incline to false
Worship, in respect of a Mother, Wife or Father.

2. Loving Truth; i. e. For Courtship, Flattery and Pretense become not King's
(nor the People's) Counselors: but they must be such as the King and Kingdom
may trust.

3. Hating Covetousness; i. e. No Bribers or Sellers of Places in Church or
Commonwealth: much less Honors and Places about the King; and least of all,
such as live upon other Men's Ruins.

Such will the King most certainly honor, and rely upon, in their grave and
deliberate Counsels: Such shall we all have in highest Estimation and
Reverence: And none can fear and dread them, (much less stand up against their
fair and just Elections) but those whom we ought to have in the last
Abhorrency, as the worst of our Enemies.

But because I would lay down Truths and Counsels as plain as possible I could
before you, give me leave to enlarge with further Directions; and may the
Spirit of Infinite Wisdom be your Conduct, to lead you to the Choice of such
Persons, as may be willing to lay out themselves and Interests to their largest
extents for the King and Kingdom's lasting Peace and Safety: that so We and our
Posterities may evermore have blessed Remembrances of their Religious and
Memorable Proceedings.

And I pray consider, this is a Critical time: Upon your well or ill Choosing,
depends your well or ill Being; and you had need do that well, which you do not
know whether ever you may do again. Your Fate may not suffer you to offend
twice in this one Particular.

Such is the happy Constitution and Frame of your Government, so prudently, so
strong have your Ancestors secured Property and Liberty (rescued by Inches out
of the hands of incroaching Violence) that you can never be ruined, unless you
become the Authors of your own Ruin: you cannot be enslaved, but with Chains of
your own making. As you are never undone, till you are undone by a Law, so you
can never be undone by a Law, till you choose the undoing Legislators. And will
it not be an Aggravation of your Misery; that your selves have made your selves
miserable? Will not your Enemies add Scorn to their Cruelty, and pretend
Justice for both, when they can plead, that they had never trampled on your
Heads, had you not laid them on the Ground? and will not your Friends and
Enemies abroad; the one with Pity, the other with Scorn, object it to you; O
England, thou have destroyed thy self, whom all the World could not otherwise
have destroyed!

Therefore, that I may at once present to your view whom you may, and ought to
choose, and whom to reject; be pleased to let me rank them under these two
Denominations, of your FRIENDS and ENEMIES. And after I have given you one
general Consideration by way of Premise, I will fall upon the two Points, and
give you the best Sense I can upon them.

The Consideration, in short, is this; and it is worthy your particular Note:
That they whom you choose will represent your Qualities, as well as your
Persons: and if you send us up a false Glass, it will represent you with an
ugly Face. You have hitherto had the Repute of an Ancient and Grave People; but
if you choose raw Saplings, green Heads, unexperienced Children, the World will
judge of you as they once did of the Grecians; that you were either always
Children, or are grown twice Children. You have formerly had the Character of a
Sober, Temperate Nation: but if you choose Drunkards to represent you, they will
conclude that you are all drunk. And it has sometimes been your Glory, that you
were a Generous People: but if you send up a company of Sordid, Saleable,
Mercenary Souls to represent (or rather to betray) you, you will forfeit that
Glory, and the World will judge that you your selves were Mercenary. Consider
you trust the Parliament with your Estates, Liberties, Religion and Lives; and
should you be undone in any of these, when it is too late, you may lament, that
you are undone by making such a Choice as have undone you by Law.

And now, Whom you may with safety choose.
if you would know whom you ought to choose, I think they may be such as follow.

Those that have already served you well.
First, Those that have already acquitted themselves well of their Duty and have
faithfully served you; never boggle at these again: they are known tried
Persons by you, and worthily deserve the honor to be continued to them; and we
all know it is a very burdensome honor indeed. Their Names may be famous in
after Ages for doing their King and their Country Loyal and Good Services, but
their present Cares are great and thoughtful: they have the Interests and
Charge of us all upon them: And since they will be further ready to serve you
and the Kingdom with their Persons and Estates, show you your sense of
Gratitude to them, and your high and honorable Esteems of them, and Acceptance
of their former Kindnesses, by an unanimous choosing of them again, forasmuch as
they are best acquainted with the deplorable State and Condition of these
Kingdoms. Review the Members of the last Parliament, and their Votes and
Inclinations, as near as you can learn them, and the Conversation of your own
Country, that were not Members; and take your Measures of both, by that which
is your true and just Interest at this Critical time of the day, and you need
not be divided or distracted in your Choice.

What gallant Essays the late House of Commons have made to secure both our
Civil and Religious Liberties, you ought thankfully to own: How your
Expectations have been frustrated, your Hopes blasted, you feelingly bewail: by
what Counsels you have been defeated in the Dissolution of Parliaments, you
cannot be ignorant: and that the Remedy of all these Evils is in and from your
selves (under God) there needs no proof: What an excellent Spirit was poured
out upon you in your last Elections, we all admire. That you may keep up the
same Spirit is the hope of those that love you, the terror of those that hate
you, and the only design of this humble Address.

I say then (my dear Countrymen) keep a tender Eye in your present Choice upon
those worthy Persons who answered the Trust reposed in them the last
Parliament; and where you find your selves mistaken (and in some you were sadly
mistaken) rectify your Error; and let your second thoughts compensate
whatsoever Failing you were guilty of in your last Choice.

2. Men of sound Religion.
Secondly, In the next place, it is the duty of you all to take care that you
choose such as are well known to be Men of good Conscience, thoroughly principled
in the Protestant Religion, and of high Resolution to maintain it with their
Lives and Fortunes. And, among these, be sure to find out, and cast your Favor
upon Men of large Principles, And such as are of large Principles.
such as will not sacrifice his Neighbor's Property to the frowardness of his
own Party in Religion. Pick out such Men as will inviolably maintain Civil
Rights for all that will live soberly and civilly under the established
Government. I say, set your Eyes, and fix your Hearts upon Persons of as large
Principles as the Gospel will warrant you. Narrow Souls, that will own none but
those that bear their own Image and Superscription, will sooner raise
Persecution at home, than secure us from Popery and Invasion from abroad. The
great Interest of England at this day is, to tolerate the Tolerable, to bear
with the Weak, to encourage the Conscientious, and to restrain none but such as
would restrain all besides themselves.

3. Men of Courage.
Thirdly, Endeavor to choose Men of Courage, who will not be hectored out of
their Duties by the Frowns and Scowles of Men: never had you more need to pitch
upon the old English Spirit that durst be faithful and just against all
Temptations. It is God's own Counsel, that you elect Men after his own Heart;
such as fear God, and not the Faces of Great Ones. Remember who they were that
could never yet resist Smile or Frown, but tamely sunk below their own
Convictions, and knew the Evil they did, yet durst not but commit it.

4. Men that will stand up for the Power and Privileges of Parliament.
Again Fourthly, Make it your business to choose those that are most resolved to
stand by, and maintain the Power and Privileges of Parliament, (for they are
the Heart Strings of the Commonwealth) together with the Power and just Rights
of the King according to the Laws of the Kingdom, so as the one may not
entrench upon the other. This is to make Choice of such for Parliament Men,
that will not sell, but save us, to the happy Settlement of our present
Protestant King and Government.

5. Men that will vigorously search into the bottom of the Plot.
Fifthly, Let me add, since we are to have (as the King is pleased to assure us)
frequent Parliaments, it greatly concerns us, as to our present Interest, and
therein the future Happiness of our Posterity, to act at this time with all the
Wisdom, Caution and Integrity we can. For (I think I may truly say) there has
never happened, not only in the Memory of the Living, but in the Records of the
Dead, so odd and so strange a Condition as this we are under, by this most
Hellish and accursed Plot of the Papists. Therefore let us do all we can to
make choice of such Persons for our Representatives, in whom we may pretty
assuredly confide, that they will vigorously and undauntedly pursue the
Discovery and Punishment of this damnable Plot; for that has been the old Snake
in the Grass, the Trojan Horse, Milite plenus, with an Army in the Belly of it.

6. Men who will endeavor to remove evil Counselors.
Sixthly, As also, to see that they be such, who with a true becoming English
Resolution, will endeavor to get removed, and brought to Justice all those
Evil Counselors, and Corrupt and Arbitrary Minsters of State, that have been
so industrious to give the King wrong Measures, to turn things out of their
Ancient and Legal Channel of Administration, and alienate his Affections from
his People.

7. Men of Industry and Improvement.
And Lastly, Be sure to take particular notice of those who are Men of Industry
and Improvement. For such as are ingenious and laborious to propagate the
Growth of their Country will be very tender of yielding to any thing that may
weaken or impoverish it.

And now I think I may, with a great deal of truth and boldness, affirm, that
such as are here under-named, are Persons in no wise fit to be your
REPRESENTATIVES, whom your own Safety and Interest obliges you to reject.

1. Those that endeavor to vilify the House of Commons either in their
Writings or Speeches.
First, Those that with as much Defiance, as Positiveness and Error, assert,
that the Honorable House of Commons first began by Rebellion in 49. of H. 3.
and that they were not till then an Essential or Constituent Part of the
Legillative Power of the Kingdom: And make use of all their Art, Industry and
Learning to vilify and reproach the Commons of England. For I have generally
observed it to be a certain Rule, and worthy of a particular Observation, that
such Men that decry and debase the Commons, and magnify the Power of the
Lords, only aim at the Destruction and Ruin of both; and through the Sides of
the Commons, design to wound and stab the Peerage of England; and so murder
both, to set up an Arbitrary and Despotical Power, and overturn and root up the
famous Constitution of our English Parliaments.

Are such Men worthy to come and sit within those Walls, that have such base
and pitiful Conceptions of the Members of them?

Though I will not with the like Effrontery conclude, yet I cannot but justly
(methinks) make it a Quaere, whether such Persons would not put all their
Endeavors to make Will and Pleasure triumph over Right and Law?

Are not these the Men who cry up an Absolutely Absolute Power in the Prince?
That we are all Slaves and Vassals, and ever have been so, since the Conquest?
That the Prince may impose Taxes upon the Subjects, which they in Conscience
are bound to obey; and that Voluntas Regis is Lex Populi?

I am sure this has been the Speech of some of late, and some have ventured to
publish little less, if not full out as much in their Writings: What may be
their Fate, and what are their Demerits, I will not pretend to know; but sure
such Members will never long be pleasing to those that may, without reflection,
be called the Honester Party in that House. For those that do so fiercely cry
up Prerogative against the true and just Liberty of the Subject, are Enemies
both to Prerogative and Liberty, and would swell up the one to the Consumption
of the whole. For when all the Spirits are drawn to one part, the rest must
sensibly waste, for want of their due and proper Nourishment.

I will conclude this first Point with a remarkable Saying of His Late Majesty
of blessed Memory, which I find in Mr. Sanderson's History of him, and who was
an Ear-Witness of it:
It is fol. 115. He that will preach other than he can prove, let him suffer: I
will give them no thanks to give, me my due. This was spoken upon the
Questioning of Doctor Manwaring in Parliament, for his bold Assertions in the
Pulpit.

But Secondly, Those that would Purchase by their Briberies the Peoples Voices.
Be not overfond to receive Bribes and Gratifications from Persons that would
fain make a Prey of you, and by their wanton Purses, lavish Feasts and
Entertainments, would allure you to Prostitute your Voices for their Elections,
say with the Poet in this Case, timeo Danaos and Dona ferentes, Virg. For you
may be assured they would never bid so high for your Suffrages, but that they
know where to make their Markets. Choose the Worthy unwilling Person, before the
Complemental unworthy Man, whose extraordinary Forwardness Prognosticates he
seeks not your good, but his own, separate from the Public: Let us not play
the Fools or Knaves, to neglect or betray the Common Interest of our Country by
a Base Election: Let neither Fear, Flattery, nor Gain bias us. Nor,

Thirdly, Those that would lay private Favors to oblige the Peoto choose them.
Make not your public Choice the Recompense of Private Favors. It Is not
pleasing a Neighbor, because Rich and Powerful, but saving England that you
are to Eye: Neither pay nor return private Obligations at the cost of the
Nation: Let not such Engagements put you upon dangerous Elections, as you love
your Country. But tell them they must excuse you for that the weight of the
Matter will well bear it. This is your Inheritance; all may depend unto it. Men
don't use to lend their Wives, or give their Children to satisfy personal
kindnesses; nor ought you to make a swop of your Birthright, (and that of your
Posterities too) for a Mess of Pottage, a Feast, or a good lusty Drinkingbout:
There can be no proportion here, and therefore none must take it ill, that you
use your freedom about that which in its Constitution is the great Bull-wark of
all your Ancient Liberties. Truly, your not considering what it is to choose a
Parliament, and how much all is upon the hazard in it, may at last loose as
fatally by your own Choice. For I must tell you, if you Miscarry it will be
your own fault, you will have no body else to blame: For such is the happiness
of this Constitution, that you cannot well be destroyed, but by your selves;
and what Man in his Wits would Sacrifice his Throat to his own hands?

Fourthly, Furthermore, Those that are Pensioners.
Let me advise you to be very cautious that you choose no Pensioners: There is
none more implacably your Enemy, than that Person whose interest it is to
destroy you: They therefore that must neither eat nor drink except you starve,
that must go in Rags, except you go naked, are taught to Fleece you, that they
may keep themselves warm: Pensioners sold you once to get bread, and would
gladly sell you once again that they may get drink: they have betrayed us once,
and thereby proved themselves K -- if they be trusted, and betray us again, we
shall prove our selves errant Fools. Oh! it should be the great Care of all
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, to consider who they are that have been
formerly Pensioners or Favorers of Popery; and never more to entrust them with
their Religion, Lives, and Liberties. If any such should endeavor to buy their
Seats in Parliament, do you think they do not intend again to make Merchandise
of all that is dear to us? and will not you be deservedly accounted infamous,
and the betrayers of your Country, who shall resolvedly, after such
Discoveries of your Dangers, and such opportunities of being, by Gods blessing,
delivered from them by getting honest English Parliaments, bring them in again
to the utter undoing of your selves, your Country, and your Posterity? Choose
not one that has been a reputed Pensioner. The Representative of a Nation
ought to consist of the most Wise, Sober, and Valiant of the People, not Men of
mean Spirits, or sordid Passions, that would sell the Interest of the People
that chose them, to advance their own, or be at the Beck of some Great Man, in
hope of a Lift to a good Employ. Beware of these. You need not be straightened,
the Country is wide, and the Gentry Numerous. Set a Black Brand upon the
Notorious Pensioners, who would sell their God, their King, and their Country
for a Maintenance for their own private Family. What Protection do you expect
from them who cannot show their faces with confidence, without a Protection
either in, or out of Parliament? will you secure them within the Walls of the
House of Commons, who were better secured within the Walls of a common Goal?
who can never pay their debts contracted by their Prodigality, but out of your
Purses; and must run you in, to get themselves out of their Mortgages?

Consider likewise, Those that depend upon Foreign Princes or States.
That whosoever have their dependence upon foreign Princes or States, are
under a strong Obligation to see you ruined: for your own Reason will tell you,
that no foreign Power will prodigally throw away his Pistols, where he expects
not an Harvest auswerable to his Seed. These are those degenerated Englishmen,
who having forsaken the Interest of their Native Country, have sold themselves
to an Ontlandish Interest, that they may the better gratify their own
Ambition, and those Potent Lusts which their own Meaner Fortunes could not
otherwise seed and satiate.

Fifthly, Those that are Officers at Court, and whose piaces are durante been
placito.
And by no Means choose a Man that is an Officer at Court, or whose Employment
is durante Been placito, that is, at Will and Pleasure: Nor is this any
Reflection upon the King, who being one part of the Government, should leave
the other free, and without any the least awe or influence to bar or hinder its
proceedings. Besides, an Officer is under a Temptation to be biased; and, to
say true, an Office in a Parliament Man, is but a softer and safer Word for a
Pension: the pretense it has above the other, is the danger of it. Therefore do
not think of opening your Mouths for such as these, for they are not their own
Men; but they are pre-engaged to their Great Masters, and must follow their
whistle: their Offices, Preserments; Salaries, Court-Imployments lie so near
their Hearts, that they have no Room for any sober thoughts tending to the good
of their poor Country. The Ambitious, and those that leave their own Countries
to live about the Court gaping after Preferment. Those that are of broken
Fortunes.


You ought to have the same care of Ambitious Men, and Non-Residents, such as
live about the Town, and not with their Estates; These seek Honors and
Preferments above, and little or never embetter the Country with their expenses
or Hospitality, for they intend themselves, and not the advantage of their
Country.

Sixthly, Choose no Indigent Persons; for those may be under a Temptation of
abusing their trust to gain their own Ends: for such do not prefer you, which
should be the end of their Choice, but raise themselves by you. If Beggars ever
come to be your Representatives, they will cut large thongs out of your Hides,
to spare their own: It Is a Pleasure to them to become Levellers, and to make
you as poor as themselves: How can they judge what is expedient for the Nation
to spare, whose only care it is to get a piece of Money to spend?

Seventhly, Minors.
Be resolved (against all Temptations) to choose no Minors: Can you judge them
fit to dispose of your Liberties, Lives, Estates, and Religion, who cannot
legally dispose of their own Estates, or themselves? what security can they
give you, that they will not give away yours, and you, whose Bond in the Eye of
Law will not be taken for Forty Shillings? I think I need say no more upon this
head, your own Experience of what such Young green Persons have been in former
Parliaments, have, I hope, learned you sufficient Wisdoms, not to choose the
like again.

Eighthly, Prodigal and Voluptuous Persons.
Elect no Prodigal or Voluptuous Persons, for besides that they are not Regular
enough to be Lawmakers, they are commonly Idle; and though possibly they may
wish well to your Interest, yet they will loose it rather than their Pleasures:
they will scarce leave one of their Nightly Revellings, to give you their
Attendance and Service the next day, and therefore they are not to be relied
upon. So that such Persons are only to be preferred before those that are sober
to do Mischief; whose Debauchery is that of the Mind; Men of unjust, mercinary,
and sinister Principles, who, the soberer they be to themselves, the worse they
are to you. And therefore

Ninthly, Mighty Zealots for a Popish Successor.
Observe those well that are mighty Zealots for a Popish Successor, and at lest
be afraid of them: Certainly such cannot but be in a Conspiracy against the
Interest of the Kingdom, if I may pretend to know any thing of it, and however
possibly they may Traduce all other Worthy Men; for Fanatics and the like,
that would be bold in serving their God, their King, and their Country, with
true Loyalty and Faithfulness now in this Critical Juncture of Affairs and
Circumstances, when it is most necessary; may not they themselves properly be
said to be Persons most dangerous and isaffected to the Government? Have we or
can we ever forget the Dreadful Effects of Queen Mary's Reign, whose large and
Golden Promises were sealed with Fire and Faggot? or need I bid you call to
Remembrance the Spanish Invasion in 1588. and the Gunpowder Treason, 1605. How
many Hundred Thousand Protestants of all Ages and Sects were Barbarously
Massacred in the Netherlands, Ireland and Piedmont, and amongst the Albigenses?
then let us humbly and Importunately beseech Almighty God, and use all our
Honest and Lawful Endeavors that no Papist of such destructive Principles may
ever Rule in our Land.

Be sure choose not those that play the Protestants in Design, and are indeed
Disguised Papists, Protestants in design.
ready to pull off their Mask when time serves. You will know such by their
Laughing at the Plot, Disgracing the King's Evidence, and Discountenancing of
them, Admiring the Traitors Constancy, that were forced to it, or their
Religion and Party were gone beyond an Excuse or Equivocation. The contrary are
men that thank God for this Discovery, and in their Conversation zealously
direct themselves in an Opposition to the Papal Interest; which indeed is a
combination against good Sense, Reason, and Conscience, and to introduce a
blind Obedience without (if not against) Conviction: And that Principle which
introduces implicit Faith and blind Obedience in Religion, will also
introduce implicit Faith and blind Obedience in Government. So that it is no
more the Law in the one than in the other, but the Will and Power of the
Superior that shall be the Rule and Bond of our subjection. This is that fatal
mischief Popery brings with it to civil Society, and for which such Societies
ought to beware of it, and all those that are Friends; and none certainly can
be such, but who are in this sense Tories, and of an Irish Understanding.

Whoever have been Neutrals in this last grand Contest between the Protestant
Religion and Popery, Neutrals in this great contest between the Protestant
Religion and Popery.
ought to be more than suspected for the Nations Enemies: He that is not with
us in Extremity, is certainly against us; These only wait the good hour when
they may safely show their Teeth and bite, which now in policy they hide.

And may we not place those in this Rank who by subtle Artifices, and finer
Sleights, The Obstructors of Parliamentary-proceedings.
have formerly obstructed Parliamentary Proceedings; who by unseasonable and
unreasonable insisting upon Vnparliamentary Vnpresidented Privileges, did
hinder those excellent Bills from Passing into Acts, which had been the
Bulwarks of the Nation against Popery; who by various and secret Methods damm'd
up the Current of Justice, that it could not reach the Capital Offenders, who
triumph in their present Immunity, and the Hopes of future Indemnity.

And now, having carefully and strictly observed these several things, and made
right distinctions between the King and Kingdom's real FRIENDS and ENEMIES,
what is there remaining for you more to do? but earnestly to pray to God for a
happy success to your Elections, and a blessed Issue upon the unanimous
Councels of your Representatives. That the King would be pleased to hearken to,
and rely upon all the wholesome Advice of his Parliament, and avoid all such
who seek to make themselves Rich, by making the King and Kingdom poor.
Forasmuch as the Parliament are the great Council of the King and Kingdom, and
by them the King is supplied out of the Purse of the Kingdom.

FINIS.
A Postscript, SHOWING, The Honor and Courage of the English Parliaments in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in defense of Her, and the Protestant Religion.
THe true sense of both Houses of the goodness of God and Prudence of the Queen
for the Safety of the Nation. Rast. Stat. 5. Eliz. c. 27.


The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, give Thanks for restoring the
true Service of God.

By delivering our Consciences from Tyranny.

And Invasions of Strangers and preservation of Scotland.

For reducing of the base and loathsome Coin to Gold and Silver.

For undertaking the Defense of the French King fortibly governed by Favorites
of the Faction of the Guises and holy Leagures.

For the blessed fruit of Justice both for Lives, Lands, Goods, and Behavior,
without exception of persons.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, Anne. 8. Eliz. c. 18. Bastal.
declare their great Satisfaction and Thanks that the Queen would settle the
Succession of the Crown, with Assent of the Realm in Parliament.

The Parliament cannot but enter into Consultation of the great Affairs of the
Nation. Anno 23. Eliz. c. 15. Rastal.


The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare the Bishop of Rome enemy
to God, the Queen, and all the Realm.

They touch upon the Rebellion in Ireland, and a Foreign Invasion. And the
practices abroad to unite the Queen and her Allies.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare the Pope capital Enemy to
God; Rastal 's Stat. 29. Eliz. c. 8.
his restless practice to suppress the Christian Religion.

Their care for God's honor, her Majesty's Safety, and their own Surety and
Liberty.

The service of their Bodies naturally due for the defense of the common Mother
and Country.

Continual Practices, Conspiracies, 31 Eliz. c. 15. Rastal.
and Plots by Enemies at home and abroad for the subversion and ruin of the
happy Peace of the Nation, who intended to have made a full bloody Conquest.

The natural care of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons for their own
particular Preservation.

The Enemies of the Realm intended to have made a bloody conquest of this
Nation, 35 Eliz. c. 13. Rastal.
and to have reduced it under a perpetual and miserable Yoke of foreign
Potentates, which Capital and dangerous Enemies obstinately pursue.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare the Queen the principal
Support of all Just and Religious Causes against Usurpers. And the Island a
Stay and Sanctuary to distressed States and Kingdoms, and as a Bulwark against
the Tyrannies of Mighty and Usurping Potentates.

Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons adjudge the Aid the Queen had given
to the Hugonots in France and to the Low Countries, to be honorable.

The Lords and Commons effectual feeling of the spiritual benefit of God's true
Religion planted and possessed among them. 39 Eliz. c. 27. Rastal.


The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare the Land in her time a
Part and a Haven of Refuge for distressed States and Kingdoms.

The Judgment of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons touching the
preservation of the Realm.

They approve the assisting of the French King against the holy Leaguers, and
the Hollanders against the King of Spain.

Circumspection and foresight can only secure the Nation. Nota. 43 Eliz. c.
18. Rastal.


The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons tell the Queen, that all that
were either well-affected in Religion toward God, Loyalty toward her Majesty,
or Care of their own Safety and their Posterities, ought to consult truly and
provide effectually to preserve Her and them from apparent dangers.

The prudential foresight of the Parliament for the safety of the Kingdom.

The King and Parliament one Body Politic, their Cause the same.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare they were fully resolved
to leave all, even Life it self, rather than suffer the Nation to be ruined.

The King declares he could not permit the growth of Popery without betraying,
K. Jam. Speech to his first Parl. Mar. 19. 1603.
1. Himself and Conscience. 2. England and Scotland. 3. Betraying their
Liberties, and reducing them to a former slavish Yoke.


FINIS.

