CERTAIN QUERIES Propounded, to the standing ENGLISH ARMY; By an unfeigned
Friend (...) Piety and Public LIBERTY.
OH you standing Army of England! were you not raised and maintained for
Defense of the Peoples privileges in a free Representative, which ought to be
as free from apprehension of force, as impulsion of Faction? But are you not
now made use of for carrying on the contrary, to the very Abolition of
Parliaments by unheard of Violations and unpresidented breaches, whereby is not
Liberty (the Honor and Purchase of our Ancestors) the price of your own and
Brethrens Blood, Time, Treasure, Prayers, Tears and Appeals, become an Eutopia
to us and ours? Nay, are we not a Prey to those alone, who have taken to
themselves the determining Power of the danger and necessity of three Nations,
and under pretense of Cementing, have unsettled our security; over which have
they not usurped a most unparrallel'd arbitrary Power? Hereupon is not the hand
of God gone out against you abroad, and a sentence of Death (as some of your
own Party have confessed). past upon you at home? Are not our Estates wasted,
Trade by Land and Sea decayed? And after some thousands of lives lost; for your
Hypocrisies, Apostacies, Perjuries, and Oppressions, are you not all the world
over become a Callumny or Parrable of reproach? Yet can you enjoy your places
and profits, (whilst others true unto their Trust are persecuted and oppressed
by imprisonment, banishment, etc.) stand still and see the Free Representatives
of the People (the very Bulwarks of our Liberties) laid aside or cut assunder
with the same Sword, whzich were first drawn for their Defense?

II.
Yet would (...) of the Army be so honest after all your Interposings as to
permit a true decision of the Question, whether the judging Power of the
Nations necessity and safety more properly depends upon a Parliament or a
Protector? Would it not soon be decided, whether it were more porper for the
People to have good laws executed by a Religious Representative of their own
without a Protector, set up of and by himself; or to be under a Protectors Will
and Power, without a Representative, or any law, but what hoe's pleased to put
upon us, without or against the consent of Representatives or People? Hereby is
not your Protector (as is apparent by too many Presidents) sole judge and
Advocate in his own and all other cases, courts and causes? But if the Peoples
Representatives be the undoubted supreme Authority of the Nation, is it not
easy to determine, who in this case should be the Judge of all Necessities
etc. Or, is it not easy also by this means to understand what danger we are
already in, of forfeiting the security of all our Estates, Laws, Liberties,
Privileges and Proprieties, by an unparrallel'd Arbitrary Power? Or, once more
to be made a most miserable sacrifice to an unlimitted Royal Malignity, under
the unequalled Power of a most perfidious and presumptuous single Person?

III.
When Justice was executed upon the late King, when Parliaments were purged,
and dissolved, did not your General in yours and his own name, Promise and
protest, to remove all oppressions and oppressors, to (...) on the work of
Reformation in that much commended way of a Commonwealth, (in opposition to
Monarchy) the very next step (as some understand it,) to that expected and
approaching kingdom of Christ, so speciously by your entitled Protector
pretended to at Pinckland-hils in Scotland? Oh have you forgotten how often
with hands and eyes heaved up to Heaven, he has Protested, that if God would
be pleased to enable him there unto, he would endeavor to promote the Cause
and Kingdom of Christ Jesus, if not in Power, yet in Justice and
Righteousness? Might he not yet do it if he would? Or, if he will not, may,
nay ought you not to endeavor to see it done (in ^u^rsuance of your Oaths,
Protestations and Declarations (especally that in Scotland 1650.) without him?
Will not otherways all the Nations of the Earth in the present and after Ages
say, that either you wanted Grace and (...) to endeavor it, or skill and
courage to effect it?

IV.
But if you pretend ignorance of your cutie herein, will it not behove you to
look back to what you have sworn to maintain, appealed, Covenanted, Protested
and Engaged to make good? Are there not hands and hearts enough in England
ready to promote and pursue the purchase of public Liberty (the price of so
many bypast bloody victories) and in order thereunto, to set up a Free
Representative consisting of men fearing God, and hating Coveteousnesse, men of
choice of light and life, who can content themselves to make the Scriptures the
rule of all their actions and Ordinances? Will not such avid former Fractions
and Divisions in the House, siding (...) etc. with the scruples of any other
ways, meddling (...) matters of conscientious concernment? Would they not be
(...) herein to be bound up or limited by their Electors, for (...) making
(upon any other grounds of humane invention) (...) which are either tyrannical
or Arbitrary? May not upon this (...) grond Public Liberty, Fifth Monarchy,
(so called) and all (...) honest intersts be united? The Cavaleerish and all
(...) destructive Parties prevented and disappointed?

V
The Members of a Free (...) thus appointed and chosen by such as have from
(...) encement of the War hither to continued faithful (...) God and their
Country (all Neuters, Apostates, (...) or open Opprestors, and under myners
being there (...) might not the Lord our God (by enabling you (...) to make
good your Engagements) roll away the (...) Under and withal restore (together
with the (...) and Privilege of the Peoples Representatives) the (...)
interest of these Nations? Nay hereby may you not (...) mercinaries to an
arbitrary Power, become once (...)) the Saviors of your Country, the
prosperous (...) those, who have set themselves over us? Who are (...) plotting
to pack a juncto of Parrasites (under than (...) of a Parliament) to undergo
the the odium they (...) polling and oppressing the People, by taking up (...)
the most ungainfull and ungrateful promotion of the (...), or otherwise the
most ignominious conclusion of (...)?

VI
But will not you of the Arm (...) be honest? If but men you must: If Monsters,
still (...) to your Conutry and kindred, and having fought us (...) to slavery,
dare to be so degenerate as either to (...) to the Royal party, or to the
Invasive power of (...) Enemy, or otherwise ^o seal our miseries with the for
(...) but Honor, Faith and Conscience. But may we not (...) have some
remaining (...) of that ancient English (...) shined so eminent(...) you
(seemingly) (...) hereof prompt (...)? Can you set Ho(...) so (...), as not
(...) your du(...) to any ^eherous (...) not a direful execra(...) curse your
dust (...) to God and your (...) to so noble an (...) deserved(...) Repairers


