AN ANSWER TO THE Scotch Papers.

Delivered In the House of Commons in Reply to the Votes of both Houses of the
PARLIAMENT of England, Concerning the disposal of the Kings Person, As it was
spoken when the said Papers were read in the House.

By Thomas Chaloner Esquire, A Member of the House of Commons.

London, Printed by Francis Leach, 1646.

A Speech made in the House of Commons the 26th day of October 1646. (upon the
Reading of the Scottish Papers the same day, In Reply to the Votes of both
Houses of Parliament of the 24th. of Sept. concerning the disposal of the
Kings Person,) spoken by Thomas Chaloner, Esquier, a Member of the said House.
Mr. SPEAKER,
YOu have just now heard two Papers Read before you from the Commissioners of
Scotland, the first concerning the disposal of the Kings Person, the other
touching the distractions of the North, by reason (as they say) of the
nonpayment of their Army: I shall speak nothing to the latter, because it has
been so sufficiently answered by diverse knowing Members of this House. To the
first I shall wholly apply my self, because little or nothing has been said
to that point.

The question then before you is, about the disposeall of the Kings person, you
say that, he is to be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament shall think
fitting, but your Brethren of Scotland say he is to be disposed of as both
Kingdoms shall think fitting, And they Fortify their affirmation with these
reasons.

They say that he is not only King of England, but also King of Scotland, and
as you have an interest in him, he being King of England, so have they no
less interest in him he being KING of Scotland. And as they have not the sole
interest in him, he being KING of Scotland, because they acknowledge with all,
that he is King of England, so have not you the sole interest in him, he being
King of England, because they desire you to remember, that he is also King of
Scotland: so as neither Nation having a sole, but a joint Interest in his
person, they ought jointly to dispose of it for the weal and benefit of both
Kingdoms:

This I take to be the whole scope of their Argument which they have
represented unto you under so many disguises, and as it were by multiplying
glasses, Insomuch as the bare relating of it takes up three large sheets of
paper.

But while they debate this great question with you, touching the disposal of
the Kings Person, and while they possitively affirm, that he is to be disposed
of by the joint consent of both Nations. Give me leave to remember you that in
the mean time, they dispose wholly of him themselves, and so have done for
these six months, and may for six months longer, for any thing I can gather out
of these Papers.

Their Argument runs thus. Wheresoever the Kingdom of Scotland has an
Interest in there King, there they may dispose of him.

But the Kingdom of Scotland has an Interest in their King, he being in
England.

Therefore in England they may dispose of him.



Sir, This may seem at the first to some to be a fair and specious Argument,
but let it be well considered, it will prove erroneous and Fallacious. For in
the Major Proposition they understand one thing by the word King, and in the
minor Proposition they understand another thing by the word King, and so here
is a conclusion inferred, which the premises will not warrant.

For the clearing whereof, I pray Sir, remember that this word King is of a
various signification, sometimes it is taken in abstracto, that is for the
Royal power, Function, and office of a King, sometimes it is taken in
Concreto, that is for the man or person whom we call King.

If their Major Proposition be taken in the first sense, we shall never deny it
them, nay we shall acknowledge that the King of Scotland being taken in
abstracto, we have nothing to do with him at all, he is solely and totally
theirs; God forbid that a King of Scotland going out of his Kingdom, should
either make Scotland cease to be a Kingdom, or give any participation of
interest to that Country where he does reside, Let his person reside in the
furthest parts of the earth; yet the Royal Office and Capacity of the King
resideth still in Scotland, They have his sword to do Justice by, they have his
Scepter to show mercy by, they have his Seal to confirm what they please by:
And they have his Laws to Govern by; And in this sense it is only meant that
the King is never under years, never dies, cannot be deceived, can neither do
wrong, nor take wrong, of any body; And in this sense we fight for King and
Parliament, though the person of the King be in opposition to both, and in
this sense the returns and tests of the Kings Writs are, Coram me ipso apud
VVestmonasterium, and test meipso apud VVestmonasterium, let the Person of the
King at the same time be in France, or the remotest Country of the world; but a
King of Scotland taken in this sense is never out of Scotland, and therefore
whereas they say in the minor Proposition. That the Kingdom of Scotland, has
an interest in their King, he being in England, this must needs be meant of a
King in Conereto, that is only of the person of their King, and not of his
Royal Capacity, And in this sense we must deny that they have any thing at all
to do with him. For though the Royal Office of the King of Scotland is solely
to be disposed of by the State of Scotland: Yet it is not so with his Person.
For Persona sequitur locum; and his person must be disposed of by the supreme
power of that Country wheresoever he shall happen to abide. Suppose a King of
Scotland should be in Spain, will they say, they have as great an interest to
dispose of his Person there as in Scotland, I think they will not say so* and
yet they did affirm last day at the Conference, that they had as good right to
dispose of his person at Westminster, as they had at Edinburgh. But under their
favor England is as distinct a Kingdom from Scotland as Spain: It is as
distinct in Laws, distinct in Privileges, distinct in interest, it is neither
subordinate, nor dependent of Scotland, and they can no more dispose of a King
of Scotlands person, he being in England, then if he were in Spain.

I shall take this as granted for good Law, that let the person of any Nation
under the sun, which is in amity with England, happen to come into England,
that person is forthwith a subject of ENGLAND

For he being protected by the Laws of England, he becomes thereby subject
to those Laws, it being most certain that Protectio trahit subjectionem, and
subjectio protectionem, they being relatives, the one cannot stand without the
other, and as no man can be said to be a father that has no son, nor no man a
husband, that has no wife, so no man can be said to be protected, that is
not withal thereby subjected. And since without such protection every man may
kill him, and destroy him. It seems to stand with no proportion of Justice,
that a man should be protected in Life, Limb, or estate by any law that will
not subject himself to that Law.

It cannot be denied, but that there is a twofold subjection legal, and
local, the legal subjection is due from every subject to his natural Prince,
the local from any Forreigner to that Prince or State where his person does
reside. And this, though it be only pro tempore, and the other, during life:
Yet it does for the time totally obstruct the operation of the other
subjection: So that no King can command any subject of his, living out of his
Kingdom, but such subject of his, is to be disposed of, by the sole Authority
of that supreme power, where he makes his Residence: And since the question
is only about the person of a King of Scotland, for I conceive they will not
take upon them any Authority to dispose of the Person of a King of England, I
do affirm that if a King of Scotland should have come into ENGLAND, before
the Union of both these Kingdoms, he had been instantly a subject of England
and his person to be disposed of by the sole Authority of the Laws of England.

For either we must take him as a King or a Subject, since betwixt them two
there is no medium, as a King we cannot take him, unless we should commit
Treason against our natural Prince, and subject our selves to any but to him,
it being most certain, that there is the same relation betwixt the King and
his Subjects, as betwixt the husband and his wife, and as no man can be said to
be a husband but to his own Wife; So no man can be said to be a King but to his
own subjects, and therefore we cannot admit of any Regality in the person of a
King of Scotland coming into England, unless at the same time, to the same
person we should confess subjection. For that it is most true, that as none
can be said to be Rex sine Regno, so no man can be said to be Rex but in
Regno: Therefore if a King of Scotland coming as before said into England, if
against the Laws of England he do offend, by those Laws of England he must
be tried, and by none other, For ubi quis delinquit, ibi punietur, And it is
most sure, that we have disposed of the persons of Kings of Scotland coming
into England both living and dead. And if we may dispose of the person of a
King of Scotland without the consent of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, much more may
we dispose of the person of a King of ENGLAND, he being now in England
without their privity or advice. But if they have any power to dispose of him,
it is because they are either our Masters or our Fellows: if they be our
Masters, let them show the time when they conquered us, or the price for which
we were sold unto them: If they be our Fellows, why come they not to our
Parliaments, why contribute they not to our necessities? But as it is apparent
that they being two distinct Kingdoms, governed by two distinct Laws: so they
ought not to intermeddle one with another interest; but to content themselves
with what does naturally appertain to each of them severally.

There is no doubt to be made, but that every Husband has as great an interest
in the person of his wife, as any Subject has in the person of his Sovereign;
and yet a man may lose that interest by some act of his Wives, as if she commit
Felony, Murder, or Treason, the Law disposes of her person, and her husband
cannot claim any right, so much as to her dead body: so fares it with a King,
who by going out of his Kingdom, or by being taken prisoner by his enemies,
his Subjects lose the interest they had in him, and he is at the disposal of
his enemies Iure belli. John King of England was cited to appear at Paris to
answer for the death of Arthur Plantagenet Duke of Britain whom he had
murdered; the State of England would not let him go, as holding it a great
indignity and incongruity that a King of England should answer for any thing at
Paris right or wrong; The French answered that they cited him not as King of
England, but as Duke of Normandy; as King of England they acknowledged to have
nothing to do with him, he was in that respect without them and beyond them;
but as Duke of Normandy which he held in fee of the Crown of France, he owed
fealty and allegiance for the same to the Crown of France, and therefore ought
to answer. The English replied, that if the Duke of Normandy did go, the King
of England must go; and if the Duke of Normandy were beheaded, they knew well
enough what would become of the King of England; Upon large debate hereof by
all the Lawyers in France it was resolved that if John had been in Normandy at
the time of his summons, he ought to have appeared; but he being Extra
jurisdictionem Regni Franciae at the time of his summons, and insra
jurisdictionem Regni Angliae, though legally he were a subject of France, yet
loeally he being in England, his summons was void, and he forfeied nothing by
his nonappearance.

I will only urge one argument more deduced from a known maxim of the Law,
not of England but of Scotland also, which the Commissioners of Scotland the
other day at the Conference did cite themselves, in my opinion much against
themselves, and that is this, Quando Duo I^^a, in^o Duo Begna (says a great
Lawyer) concurrant in unae persona, aequum est ac si essent in diversis, which
is no more then this, when two kingdoms held by two distinct Titles do concur
in one and the same person, it is all one as if they were in two distinct
persons. I suppose here is our very case, here are two kingdoms, England and
Scotland, held by two distinct Titles, which do both concur in one Person, in
the person of King CHARLES; it is all one says this rule and maxim of the
Law, as if they were under two several persons; why then put the case, that
there were one King of England and another of Scotland, should the State of
Scotland have any thing to do to dispose of the person of a King of England,
he being in England? I think you will say they could not.

Sir, I am sorry that our brethren have moved this question at this time; for
all questions make debates, and debates differences; and this were a time for
brothers to reconcile differences rather then to make them; we have now lived
44 years, both under two Princes, and in all this time this question was never
stirred in, till now; had it been stirred in, no question but it had been
rejected. The people of England would have held it very strange that they could
not have disposed of the person of their own King, or that a King of England
could not have gone from Whitehall to Richmond or Hampton Court without the
will and appointment of the Council of Scotland: they would have thought they
had made an evil bargain by such a union. For before the union they might
have disposed of the person of their Prince; but after, not. And since they
conceived that by the addition of Scotland there was an addition of charge,
they would have been very sorry withal to have had an addition of servility.

Since the beginning of the World there was never before such a contention
about the person of a King. The Greeks and Trojans did contend for a long time
in fight about the dead body of Partroclus which of them should have it. But
here is not a contention about the dead body of a private man, but about the
living body of a King; neither do we contend as they did, who should have his
person, but here you do contend (as far as I conceive) who should not have
it. Your brethren of Scotland say positively they will not have the Kings
person upon any conditions whatsoever. It is now above six months past that
you voted in this House the demanding of the Kings person, but the Lords
refused to join with ye; ever since until this present you your self did
Acquiesce as if you had repented of your former vote; Now he must be put upon
you, and with such terms as his present Gardians please to allow of.

Truly it seems strange to me, that an Army of Scots in pay of the kingdom of
England, which by the Treaty ought to be governed by the joint consent of the
Committees of both kingdoms upon the place, should in England take a King of
England without the privity of the English Committee, and convey him to
Newcastle a Town likewise of England, and should there keep him for six whole
months without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. And when they find
it not convenient for them to keep him any longer, then they will capitulate
with you upon what conditions you must receive his person.

I never thought to have found a King of England his person being in England,
under any other protection but that of the Laws of England; but now I find
him under the protection of a Scottish Army, whether they say he is fled for
shelter, and that they cannot render him up in Honor.

Sir, if that Army of theirs be come into this kingdom as brethren, friends,
and confederates (as we hope they are) then is every person of that Army during
the time of his stay here locally a subject of England, and such children as
are borne to them here are not Aliens but Denisons, and not only local but
legal Subjects of this kingdom. And therefore they having gotten the King
into their hands, they ought no more to capitulate upon what terms he should be
delivered into yours, then if the Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax were in possession
thereof, who if they should deny the surrendering of the King unto you, but upon
condition, no question but it were capital.

They say, that by virtue of the Covenant they are obliged to defend his Person
and Authority. What his Authority is in Scotland themselves best know; but you
only are to judge of it in England, since being not subordinate to any power
on Earth, there is no power under Heaven can judge you. The Covenant ties you
to maintain in the first place the Rights of Parliament, and the liberties of
the Kingdom; and in the second place the Kings Person and Authority; and that
only in defense of the former, and not otherwise. And whereas they expect the
King should be received by you with Honor, safety, and freedom, I beseech
you, Sir, consider whether (as the case now stands) his Reception with Honor
can stand with the Honor of the Kingdom, whether his safety be not
incompatible with the safety of the Commonwealth, and whether his freedom be
not inconsistent with the freedom of the people.

I pray (Sir) take heed least that bringing him in with Honor you do not
dishonor your self, and question the very justice of all your Actions; be
wary that in receiving him with safety you do not thereby endanger and hazard
the Commonwealth; be advised least in bringing him home with freedom, you do
not thereby lead the people of England in thraldom.

I pray (Sir) first settle the honor, safety and freedom of the
Commonwealth, and then the honor, safety, and freedom of the King, so far as
the latter may stand with the former, and not otherwise

Wherefore I shall conclude with my humble desire that you would adhere to your
former vote that is, that the King be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament
shall think fitting; and that you enter into no Treaty either with the King or
your brethren of Scotland, least otherwise thereby you retard the going home of
their Army out of England.

FINIS.

