THE CHALLENGE, Sent by a Young Lady TO Sir THOMAS -- etc. OR, THE Female War.

Wherein the Present Dresses and Humors, etc. Of the FAIR SEX Are Vigorously
attackt by MEN of QUALITY, and as Bravely defended by Madam GODFREY, and other
Ingenious Ladies, who set their Names to every Challenge.

The Whole Encounter consists of Six Hundred LETTERS, Pro and Con, on all the
Disputable Points relating to Women.

AND IS The First Battle of this Nature that was ever fought in England.

London, Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
'TWas a considerable while since, that Advertisements were given in the
Atheninian Mercury concerning this Book and the design of it: There happened it
seems a QUARREL sometime since between Sir Thomas, -- etc. And Madam Godfrey --
he reflected on the whole Sex, and she as vigorously defended 'em, till at
length the Gentleman undertook more at large to prove 'em guilty of innumerable
Faults and Follys, ( that the whole Sex was made up of Vexation and Vanity, not
a Patch or Mask, or Ribbon about 'em; nothing from Top-knot to Shoe-tie, but
what needed reformation) and she to Answer whatever he could urge against 'em:
But the CHALLENGER began so roughly that the Defendant fled to Athens for
succor, which at her desire answered the First Paper, that against LOVE, but
would not engage any further in the Controversy; only Printed an Advertisement
for any other Ladys to come in and assist their Sex: Accordingly, as the
Defendant received the Letters, she sent 'em to me, with Permission to Print
'em, having Answered several of 'em her self. And the rest were done by others
of her Acquaintance, and many of 'em shown to the Gentleman before they were
sent me. This first Volume beating up for Volunteers, it is supposed such an
Army of Ladies will come in from all parts of Europe, as will humble Sir Thomas
and all his Adherents. The War was no sooner proclaimed, but the Learned
Anonyma, the Ingenious Daphne, Madam H -- and other Ladies, appeared in behalf
of their Sex; and it is hoped the News of this First Battle will soon reach the
Ears of Madam D'acier of France, Madam Daunoy ( Author of the Travels into
Spain), the Lady Manley, Madam Pix, and the Ingenious Pindarick Lady, ( who
lately published a Book of Poems under the Name of Philomela). It Is not doubted
but these Ladies, and many others will take up Arms in this Litteral War; in
which all the Dresses, Customs and Humors of the Fair Sex will be boldly
attackt -- The Ingenious Bernice has already promised the Defense of Commodes,
Madam Wells a farther Defense of Topknots, Climene the Defense of Lap-Dogs,
Madam Gibbs the Defense of Kissing, Ephelia the Defense of Red Hair, Madam
Diggs the Defense of Patches, Madam Sherburn the Defense of Women's taking
Tobacco; And Ariadne will prove there is no Sex in Souls, against Leander, who
affirms there is. Neither is Clarinda or Sapho Cowardly, but have promised to
fight for their Rights and Privileges as long as they can weild Tongue or Pen
-- And sure I am if these Heroines come thus in a Body, Sir Thomas and his Army
will soon be Routed. But suppose these Ladies (like Cowardly Soldiers) will
neither scratch nor bite, but turn their Backs when they see the Enemy, yet the
Valiant Godfrey ( as Oldham expresses it)

Wears her Pen as others do their Sword;

And resolves (with the Females already Listed) to Charge the Enemy through and
through; But the greater Force comes in, the more hopes of Victory --

All Young Ladies therefore that are willing to serve under Madam Godfrey,
(their She-Champion) are desired to send in their Names. and place of Abode,
and they shall be furnished wirh Pen, Ink and Paper, and entered into present
Service. The Place of Rendevouz is Mr. Darker's House in Bull-head-Court near
Cripplegate, to whom all Letters must be directed --

That every Lady may take or propose what Point they can best defend, (for each
Female has the Liberty of naming as well as taking her Subject), at the End of
this FIRST Battle is added some of the Challenges designed for the Second --
The whole Encounter will consist of 600 Letters, Pro and Con, on all the
dissputable Points relating to Women. And as soon as the Peace is concluded,
there will be printed an Alphabetical Table of all the Ladies engaged in the
Fight, and if permitted, their Quality, and Place of Residence, with a
Pind^rick Poem to Anonyma, Madam H -- and the Ingenious Ariadne, on their
timely assistance in this Female War.

If any be so wise and incredulous still, as to ask whether this War be real or
not? I answer, it is designed by the Challenger as a piece of Diversion for
Ladies these Winter Evenings. So that it is not a Pin matter whether it is real
or feigned. I suppose no man is so very silly, as to have the worse Opinion of
the Turkish Spy, because generally thought a Fiction -- But (for once) to
humor these Nice Palates, I do assure 'em that this Quarrel is matter of Fact;
and might I have leave to tell who the Ladies are that fight under the Names of
Anonyma, Sapho, Cleonta, Arsinda, and Daphne, etc. -- 'twould give such
Reputation to the Undertaking, that this First Volume would soon swell to the
size of the Turkish Spy. I had like to have forgot to tell the Reader that
several of the Subjects being near akin, and many of the Ladys not knowing
what the rest had writ, 'twas impossible but their Notions must interfere in
several places, and be very like, if not the same with each other. An accurate
Reader may also take notice that the Style is the same in several of the
Answers, and will rightly conclude that they are by the same Hand; A great part
of the work, I think near half, being Written by the Lady who first undertook
the Quarrel, because there were not enough of her own Sex came in to help her.
I am not to Answer for the Freedom, the Combatants use with one another, for I
declare it on the Honor of the Black Bird, I neither know the Knight nor Lady.

But if this be worth the while, I Am promised the rest of the Letters: This is
all, Mr. Reader that I had to Acquaint you, since you know of old that I am,

Your Humble Servant, PHILARET.

The CONTENTS of the First Battle.
THat none but a Fool can be in love, by Sir Thomas p. 1 Denied by the
Athenians -- 7 Against the Female sexes Pride and Vanity, by Sir Thomas 13.
Answered by Madam Willet -- 21 An Essay in Defense of Top-knots, and the
present Fashions by Anonyma 27. Answered by Sir Thomas 41. That Blushing's no
Sign of Modesty by Mr. Sandford 61. Denied by Madam Prestwood 64. Against
Vizard Masks by Sir Henry 66. Answered by Daphne 70. That Women are more cruel
then Men by Sir Thomas 73. Answered by Madam Godfrey 80. That in a
Dishonorable Amor the Woman's most to blame by Mr. Palmer 85. Denied by Madam
Crockford 88. Against reading Romances by Sir Thomas 92. For them by Madam
Godfrey 97. That a Black-a-moor Woman is the greatest Beauty by Mr. Bexford
101. Denied by Sapho 106. Against naked Breasts by Sir Thomas 111. Answered by
Madam Wood 114. Against Painting and other Artificial Beauty by Sir Will. 116
The Defense of Artificial Beauty by Madam Godfrey 121. A second Answer to
Letter XI. further proving that Women ought to Paint by another hand 126.
Against VVomens managing business by Sir Thomas 119. Answer by Arsinda 134.
Against Old Maids by Sir Thomas 139. Their Defense by Madam Snell 144. Against
Fondness and Forwardness in Women 148. Answered by Madam Godfrey 154. Against
Dancing by Mr. Woolhouse 157. For it by Madam Field 161. Against Platonic Love
and Friendship in different Sexes by Mr. Rich 164. Its Defense by Madam Godfrey
170. That Women are not more Religious then Men by Mr. Randal 177. The
contraryprov'd, that Women are more Religious then Men by Madam Carter 185.
That ugliness is most desirable in a Wife by Sir Henry 193. Answer in Defense
of Beauty by Madam Dent 198. Against Shee-VVits by Sir Thomas 206. For them by
Madam Godfrey 212. Against Women's Jealousy by Mr. Trenchfield 219. Answered by
Madam Brigginshaw 224. That a true Wife's incorrigible by Mr. Axtel 229.
Answered by Madam Barnes 236. Against women's prodigality by Sir Thomas p. 1. in
the 2d Alphabet. Answered by Madam Hastings 8. Against marrying a Widow by Sir
Thomas 13. The Defense of Widows by a Young Widow 18. Against Plays by Mr.
Kingham 242. For them by Madam Chase 248. 1st Alphabet. That there is no such
thing as Love after marriage, by Mr. Stratford 23. That it is possible to love
as well after marriage as before, and the way to do it by M. H -- 31. That no
woman can be faithful in absence by Sir Thomas 38. Answered by Madam Godfrey
44. Against Nunneries by Mr. Preston 48. For them by Madam Lake 55. Against the
Unquietness, Impertinence and Garulity of women by Sir Charles 59. Answered by
Madam Haithorn 64. Against women's longing by Mr. Hollis 68. The Defense of
women's longing by Madam Radford 73. Against Learning in Women by Mr. Harcourt
101. Answered by Madam H -- 106. To an old woman about to Marry a Young Man by
Sir Thomas 254. The old woman's Answer 206. Another Answer by a Young Lady 257.
These 3 in the 1st Alphabet. The Cure of Love by Sir Thomas 78. Answered by
Madam Godfrey in a Letter showing the ways to be Loved 82. That Women are the
oddest things in Nature by Mr. -- 87. Answered by a Club of Wits 89. Against
women's Inconstancy by Mr. Harcourt 91. Answered by Madam H -- 95. A second
Answer to Mr. Harcourt, wherein is proved that Women are more constant then Men
by Ephelia 97.

THE CHALLENGE, Sent by a Young Lady TO Sir Thomas -- OR, THE Female War, etc.
LETTER I. Against LOVE.
By Sir THOMAS --
I Was in earnest, and am so still, and have too much reason to be so, and
desire nothing but a clear Stage, and no Quarter. I shall begin my Attack on
that which is the very Foundation of all your Sexes Pride, and the Dotage and
Folly of our own, and that is LOVE, which I undertake to prove, none but a Fool
can ever be guilty of. I know you will ask me presently, whether I never knew a
wise Man in that Condition? I grant, many that are esteemed wise, may have had
a shaking or two on it, or have at least thought fit to pretend something like
it, to hold their Necks of one side, and look like Fools, that they might not
be out of the Fashion, as our Grandsirs wore Ruffs, our Grannys Farthingales,
and your selves now, such Aerial Monumental Topknots; which though you all
acknowledge little less ridiculous than a Cap with a Bell at the Top of it, yet
it the Seven-Wise-Mistresses should rise again, they would rather never be kissed,
than be one Barly-Corn short of the Fashion. But you will say, they don't all
dissemble; for if wise Men han't bin really in Love, why do they marry? A
shroud Argument. And who ever did so that was well in his Wits? It Is true, that
Men of the greatest Sense may sometimes overstrain their Heads with thinking,
and get a little delirious, and in that Fit, Nature falls upon them like a
Coward, when they are down, and pops 'em into Matrimony; and when once their
Horns are fast in the Brake, let 'em get out again how they can. That this is
true, you your selves must grant, or your great Admirers, the Athenians, if
you would either of ye be so ingenious as to resolve me one Question, and that is
-- Whether you ever knew any of those celebrated Wisdoms, who did not play the
Fool egregiously in some one great Instance of their Lise, and in this I Am sure
as much as any other. You have heard, I suppose, of one of their Sagacities,
who when he had married his Maid, frankly owned that there was no reason below
the Girdle, and he never gave a more righteous Judgment. And perhaps it is
necessary that those great Men should have some such remarkable Blemish that
others may know them, and they know themselves to be but Men, as the Spots in
the Sun and Moon, are enough to keep any but Sots from worshipping 'em; and as
the old Romans, notwithstanding their long Beards, convinced the Gauls at last,
that they were not Gods, because they were capable of passion as well as
themselves. Suppose then, at worst, that a wise Man should have bin in Love,
it is as a Fool, not a wise Man: He for the time parts with his Wisdom, puts off
his Politic, and appears in his Personal Capacity, unless you will rather say,
that as the Gods are fabled to have done, he disguises himself to descend among
Mortals. This I still affirm, it is no part of his wisdom; he is dr^wn into it by
a mere Trick and Fallacy of Nature; it is what he would, if he could, avoid,
like sleeping, or other less handsome Actions. It Is certain, no wise Man would
ever be in Love, if he knew how to help it, because it makes him look so like a
Fool, that the two Sosia's are hardly less distinguishable. For must not any
Man in his right Senses, (which besure is no Lover) must he not own that upon a
fair and equal Balance, the Inconveniences of that Passion infinitely outweigh
that scratching sort of a Pleasure, which some say is to be found in it. Would
any wise Man, I Would fain know, bring a thousand Mischiefs upon himself, which he
might keep clear of, or make another Misfortunes his own, as if he had not
already sufficient to torment him? But he that is not in Love is half an Angel
to the Wretch, who is condemned to row in that Ship of Fools, chained to some
other Fellow-Slave, to have and to hold with a Vengeance, like those poor
Creatures, whom the Tyrant fastened to Dead Carcasses, that they might stink and
rot together. The Story of Pandor's Box is doubtless mistold by the Poets:
'Twas the Dressing Box, which Nature presented to all your Sex, containing, as
I hope to prove, I know not how many hundred Kinds of Poisons, Mischiefs and
Miseries, entrusted all in your Hands, to punish and plague Mankind. I Would fain
know to what piece of Midwifry a Man must have recourse, to find all the
Diseases of your Bodies only, (since these of your Minds are granted
innumerable) with which, if a Man has the hard Fate not to be choakt or
poisoned the first Night, as a certain King they talk of used to serve his
Wives, yet how many a tedious Moon and Year, and Age, must he languish with
some frightful Hag rustling by his side, unless he takes a Dose of Opium to
break the Charm, and give him his Habeas Corpus to an easier, and more
comfortable Bed in the Dust? It Is one of the least and most tolerable
Inconveniences of that whimfical Passion, that it turns the Brains of all it
seizes, and makes 'em so ridiculous, that it is impossible to pity 'em, without
laughing at 'em.

And the worst of it is, that this Madness is infectious too, and better come
near any other Venomous Creature than a Lover: -- For not only his Bite, or his
Sight, is mortal, but it is almost equally dangerous to hear him. His Sighs kill
as certainly as the Breath of a Serpent, and infuse the same Poison into
others, which he himself was so full of, that it runs over. To speak truth,
he is not only a public Nuisance, but a common Enemy, and deserves as well to be
expelled a regular Commonwealth, as the Poets from Plato's, or as that
Tragedian, who put a whole City into a Fever, by reciting a Famous Tragedy. All
wise Lawgivers have taken a peculiar Care to punish those very severely, who
have bin Corrupters of Manners, and by their bad Examples, debauched the
Commonwealth, and infected it with Riot and Lewdness. But nothing effeminates a
Man more than this sickly Passion; nay, it makes him despise or hate all who
are healthier and wiser, and will have it a mark of Dullness and Nonsense, not
to play the Fool, and is as angry with those who do not, as the Sybarite with
the poor honest Fellow, who was hard at work; which so highly displeased him,
that he was like to have beaten him, because it made him sweat to look upon
him. The subject is so copious, that I find it is easier to say too much than
enough upon it; I shall therefore add no more, but one just Remark, that it is
easy to observe what an useful and innocent Passion we ought to esteem it,
when we find nothing more common than for the Ravisher, the Incestuous, the
Adulterer, and sometimes the Murderer, to plead Love, to excuse them, which
therefore should seem not only a Pretense for the blachest Villainies, but even
the Cause of them.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter I.
By the Athenians.
ALL Men must Love, and this Sir you grant, and that Nature it self obliges 'em
to do so, which if true, it must be Good and Rational, and the contrary
unnatural, then which nothing more can be desired to the prejudice of your
opinion; nor can any thing be pleaded more to the Advantage of Love then that
it is necessary in our present State of Life. When we come to be Angels it is
another matter, but what is that to those that make the objection? Would not a
Man desire to Eat and Sleep when he has occasion, and if he should quarrel with
Nature for obliging him to it, would he not thereby highly bring in Question
both his Piety and Wisdom, it being no less then taking it ill, that he is made
a Man, not a Stone, or a Tree (tho even they Love too, in their way) or a
senceless Lump of Earth, when she was at Liberty into what mould she would cast his
yet undetermined matter? What is there stronger, more certain, or more
unaccountable and wonderful then Sympathy and Instinct? But had the Loadstone
that Reason we boast of, 'twou'd surely make better use on it then to find fault
with Nature for making it so dearly Love the Iron. But there is more then this
in it, there is something highly rational in the very Essence of virtuous Love,
abstracted from that muddy sense we have been so long talking of, tho the
objection makes it all nothing else, as if Sir Thomas had no Notion of any
purer Love, and yet it concludes against Love in General, which is by no means
a fair way of arguing. If there be no reason below the Girdle, sure there is
some above it, or else we are in a worse condition then those which some esteem
their Fellow-Reasoners, and Fellow-Lovers too, if they Love promiscuously and
make it all a matter of sense only. But that there is something more refined in
Love, is evident to any, who will but be at the pains to reflect on the cause
and manner of it, and nothing is more certain then that the mind of Man
perceives it is not, nor can be in it self completely happy. It therefore looks
abroad, coasts about, and surveys the whole Creation, as the first Man did in
Innocence, to seek for something like it and suitable to it, till it meets at
last with some imbody'd Soul, and that it Loves, for were it the body only,
'twou'd Love a Carcass as well as an Animal, at least one Person as well as
another, the contrary whereof is evident to all the World, and that only
Brutes, or those who are very near 'em, have no choice in these matters: It
finds, it is true, no perfect satisfaction in what it Loves, even when it
possesses it; and what is the reason, but because the Body lags behind, comes
between, and obstructs its happiness; no other weakness then is to be found in
all sensible pleasures. But the reasonableness of Love reaches further: The
sympathy of Souls is rational, and we are conscious of it, and can reflect upon
it; there is not only, as has been said, something of choice, but even of
delicacy in it, whereas there is none in any Magnet either Dead or Living, a
subject indeed fit to be wrote upon by none but a Transported Lover.

However, nothing can be weaker then the remaining objections, which this angry
Gentleman produces against that best of passions, the direct contrary to most
of what he asserts being evidently true. He calls it a ^azy distemper, when
it is the most Active Principle in the World; would persuade us that no Wise man
is, or would be in Love, whence it follows by the Rule of contrarys, that
either hatred, or at least a stoical Apathy would better become him, which
needs no confutation. So far is Love from being an Argument of Folly, that we
defy him to instance in a Fool that ever was in Love. Tho of the other side, he
knows the story of the Ass in the Turkish-Spy, and we leave him to apply it.
And as this Aversion to Love is no great sign of wit, so it is no better of
Civility and Humanity. For which reason, when we find a person who really has
all those qualifications, fall foul on that well-natur'd passion, we may well
believe one of these two things, either that it is only a Copy of his
Countenance, only as a Trial of Skill and ostentation of his Wit, to show how
much he can say for an ill cause, or else that his mind is sowr'd by having
been himself unfortunate in his amors, in which case he is a prejudiced Person,
and an unproper Judge, and as little regard is to be given to his Ravings as he
has for Truth or Justice. But let such as these say what they will, the World
will be still apt to believe their senses, and when they have so often seen
such as have been neither Liberal or Courtly, nor Industrious, nor it may be so
much as neat or cleanly before they have fallen in Love, immediately after
reformed as it were by Miracle, and become quite other Men, and when their
difference from themselves has been and often is so Remarkable, and the Change
so much for the better, and they become both Generous and Liberal, and Courtly
and Diligent, who can hinder himself from concluding that it must be a Noble
Principle, and very Beneficial to Mankind, which causes such an Advantageous
alteration? But above all, the slanders he casts upon Love, none appears more
unjust or improbable then his charging it with effeminating Men's minds; when
it is Notorious that it does the contrary, and that sometimes to a Fault; and
that even a Timorous Heart will not refuse to fight when his Mistresi is near
him.

As for the Gentleman's Civil Farewell, wherein he throws all those mischiefs
upon Love, whereof it is either the innocent, or but pretended occasion, he
cannot but be satisfied himself it is a very unfair way of Arguing, since if that
would hold good, we'd fain know how he could Answer an objection much of the
same nature brought against Religion it self, the pretense of which all must
own has been the occasion of much mischief in the World. But the same Answer
will serve to both; It Is not Religion, nor is it Love that really occasion
these fatal disorders, but the pretense, the abuse, the Vizard of 'em both, nor
will it ever be otherwise, but that Villains will Profane and Scandalize one of
these as well as the other.

But after all, what would the objector gain should we grant that Love were
really such a Bugbear as he has represented it, or how come Women more then Men
to be concerned in it? O -- he tells us in the Beginning, it is "this which is
the Foundation of all the Female Sexes Pride, as well as of the Dotage and
Folly of Man's. But was there never a Beau of his Acquaintance who grew Proud
and Vain with being Beloved, nay, with the very Fancy and Dream on it, having so
good an opinion of the Beauty and Good humor of his own Wig and Cravat, that
he thinks it is im possible any Lady in the World should resist him? Such
Monsters as these he knows have been found, out of Africa, and it is not at all
fair to lay the weight of a Folly that ought to be divided between both Sexes,
on one only, and that the weaker too, especially when so great a part of Men
have so much their own good word, that if the Ladies should not take pity on
'em, and let 'em now and then make Love to them, or at least to their Fan, or
Picture, they would infallibly fall in Love with their own dear selves, and
like Narcissus, stare so long on their own shadows, till they pined themselves
to Death.

Athens.

Letter II. Against the Sexes Pride and Vanity.
By Sir THOMAS --
A Vast Sea to Launch into, and not more wide then it is unfathomable: They are
indeed but one, tho distinguished by different Names, or at least have a mutual
Intercourse and flow into each other. But for more exactness I Will discourse of
them distinctly, and describe the dangerous Rocks and Sands and Shelves, that
are every where scattered round 'em, that tho you are resolved to sink your
selves, others at least may beware of 'em.

And first, your Pride, which you know was your Fall, as well as that of your
dear confident, who persuaded you to it. It Is hard to say, where you show it
most, in your Conversation with us, or with your selves, or with one another.

While you have Eyes, you will have Pride, you have sufficient in your selves
to feed that, and your vanity, tho no other living Eye should ever see you. Is
it for your Husbands, or so much as your Lovers, or for the sake of the rest of
the World, that is all this Patching and Painting, and Curling and Dressing, and
Fooling? No, I must clear you from all these; It Is as much for your own dear
selves you do it, as for all the rest together. We fancy the Peaco^k spreads
his fine Train to oblige the Spectators, but it is a great mistake, for he does
it often enough, and stares on himself, and admires his glaring Train, when he
knows not he has any Witnesses to admire him.

Thus would you do, if in a room by your selves, and you were sure neither to
receive or make any visits; you would yet rustle, and ftrut, and look back on your
Train, and mend your Curles, and make Court to your own amiable selves, for a
whole day together.

However, as to your outside you have oftentimes somewhat that may at least
give a pretense to your Vanity, but what have you to say, for your minds? What
show or shadow of Reason, for being Proud of what is so perfectly Contemptible,
and there is so little hopes, or it may be possibility, of their ever amending?
You are even Proud of your own Pride, when you can find nothing else, and you
thus make a sort of an infinite Process in Vice and Folly. Your Sex reconciles
a thousand Contradictions, which is it self the greatest, your minds are weak
and yet stubborn, loose and dissolved, and open to such pleasing sophistry as
you are sure will ruin you, and yet at the same time impregnable against the
utmost efforts of sober reason, mighty full of your selves, and yet as
notoriously empty as those shapes of Men, who so much admire you. I shall find
you a Glass, ever I Have left ye, better then Mrs. Behn's, and much truer; and
which, if you would look upon it half as often as on your own, there would be some
hopes you might a little rectify these mental Deformities; but I Am persuaded
you are much more inclined to break it, for you never yet endured one that told
you your Faults, any more then a Gown that shows your Ill shapes, you dearly
Love to be bolster'd, and he or none must have your Heart that flatters and
abuses ye.

But I Am slipped from your Pride to your Vanity, which seems to respect others,
while the former is often terminated on your selves; Tho 'twill be as difficult
to separate one from the other, as you from either, and therefore I must now
consider 'em promiscuously, and take that which comes uppermost.

And if ever either of 'em showed themselves, it is in your pretenses to
equality with your Lord and Sovereign; that Nobler Creature, whom you were made
to serve and obey, a sort of an Appendix you are to Mankind, a Crutch to his
Mortal Nature, made (one would be tempted to think) on Pravision of the Fall
(had not you your selves been the Principal Actors in it,) without which one
can scarce imagine there had been any need of you. However, made you were, for
another, and yet have the Vanity to flatter your selves, that he was rather
formed for you, and that all Mankind are to bow down and Worship ye. O! How
hard it goes to pay a little pretended bodily obedience, but if it once comes
to the mind, you will no more yield any Superiority then a begging Spaniard; to a
Nobleman of any other Nation. There you are perfect Levellers, as fit to rule
as any, and as much right to it, tho you may as well say your Bodies are as
strong, and can undergo as much Fatigue as ours.

How many poor Husbands d' you make weary of their Lives by the Pride, the
Uneasiness, and the Vanity of your Tempers, and what Bunches of 'em have strung
themselves on this occasion?

And no wonder, if you seldom miss trying your skill with them, after you have
closed them, at the safe Lock of Matrimony, when you are generally so well
practiced in Domineering before you are Married. Your Lovers are your Slaves,
from the very first sight, and you rule 'em more absolutely when once Chained
to your Bed, then the Algereens theirs, when fastened to their Gally-Benches.
Your concern is not so much, what subjects you have, as how many; nor how they
live, as how they serve, nor how you come by 'em, as how you may preserve 'em.
You have the Vanity to believe all that these say of you, all the gross
Flatteries wherewith they load you, with which Tyrants are generally pleased,
because they think greater things of themselves, then they can hear from
others. How many perjuries are you Guilty of? Both all your own, and theirs
too, who are so unfortunate, to be enslaved by your fatal artifices. They must
be deeply forsworn to please you, and protest you have ten thousand charms they
never dreamt of, tho your Faces be as mean as your minds. And if these happen
to be Blasphemed, if any whom you are grown weary of, and have cast 'em off for
the sake of beloved variety, happens to take the ungenteel Freedom to slander
you with the greatest Truth, what atonement presently but his Blood, and what
Sacrifice less then humane, to appease your Savage Deity! One Rival is
presently hired with smiles and hopes, and all the Witchcraft of your Sex, to
cut the Throat of another, to gratify your infernal Pride, and insatiable
revenge: Whereby you have often a double advantage; you get rid of two Lovers
at once, and make room for more, while one of 'em is hanged and the other
murdered.

Nor have your own Sex much fairer Quarter from you then ours. No Truth, nor
Justice, nor Friendship, you are all in Hobbs his State of Nature, Independent
Empires of your selves, and at professed Wars with all the World. Your very
Clothes, your Gowns, much more your Faces are Rivals: You Would scarce one of ye,
give another an Inch of pre-eminence, tho 'twas upon the Edge of a precipice,
and to save both your Lives; so much less wit have you then the two poor Goats,
who meeting upon a narrow Bridge, and finding it impossible to pass by one
another, or to return without falling into the River, one of 'em very
politickly and humbly laid himself down, and the other went over him, by which
both got safely whither they intended. And did they not Act far more like
rational Creatures, then the two Good Wives of Paris the other day, who met in a
narrow street and complimented till Night, getting both Dinner and Supper in
their Leathern-Tabernacle; rather then either of 'em would lessen the Grandeur
of their Family by going backward, and leaving the other in possession.

You show us, how little Beauty is to be really valued by the low esteem you
have of it in any but your selves. Some fault you are sure to find in the most
regular Face, and then, none but all the World knows it.

Yes, truly, she is a pretty sort of a Woman enough, for what there is of her,
for a little Apple Childish Face. Or else, on my word a proper Dame, and
abundant shape she has to recommend her, she would make a good handsome Man enough,
that is the Truth on it. Or the contrary, were she not a thought to slender, a
little do you called, ( cries another Erynis), why she is a MERE SPIDER, a perfect
INSECT, two Pyramids set together. Or, she has a good Complexion, Nay, set down
indifferent, 't has a notable Eye of the WALL in it; either DOUGHBAK'T, or the
OVEN OVERHEATED. Or -- For her FINE EYES all the World ADMIRE her, yes, they
have a Languishing cast with 'em, she is a little CIRCUMSPECT, and has the
advantage, that she can throw one of 'em on her LOVER, and the other on her
HUSBAND, at the same time, without altering her POSTURE, and look equally
amorously on both. Well, but hastn't Madam A -- a very graceful presence? Yes,
and a fine ROLLING-PIN-FACE. She Is tall, as a BELL-ROPE, Lovely WHITE TEETH,
and a mouth like an -- O YES! CURIOUS HAIR, with an Eye of GOLD in it. Round
plump SNOWY HANDS, and you see she is not a little PROUD of SHOWING 'em.
Charming EYEBROWS, why you may see the LEAD SHINE upon 'em. A GOOD FORTUNE,
Those always come SHORT on the telling, or weigh less after Marriage. Of an
UNSPOTTED REPUTATION, -- Pretty well since she broke off with my Lord R -- or
after HANDSOMEG -- had left her -- or where she is not WELL KNOWN; -- or -- Nay,
we ought to hope the best-still; -- Many have bin ABUSED, and we live in a
MALICIOUS WORLD. She TALKS WELL, but affected: Very good HUMORED, but FOOLISH;
a great deal of WIT, and ILL NATURE.

The plain Meaning of all which is just thus, if you would but speak out.

I Am so PROUD, that I hate any should be thought a FINER WOMAN than m^ self, or
so much as equal with me. I Am the prettiest, littlest, softest, roundest,
plumpest, properest, gracefullest Creature that I ever set my Eyes on. Have the
most Virtue, Beauty, Wit and Reputation. The finest EYES, the best Presence,
the prettiest Ways, the loveliest Hair, the evenest Teeth, the most ensnaring
FINGERS, the most surprising Foot, the best Shaped: -- The most charming Elbow,
and Tip of an Ear, of any in CHRISTENDOM.

-- Well, Madam, You are, I see, so ravished with Admiration of your self, that
it is pity now to disturb you, or wake you out of such a pleasing Dream; and
therefore, at present, there I leave you.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter II.
By Madam WILLET --
In a Letter to Madam Godfrey, the Lady who first engaged her in this Female
War.
Madam,
I Doubt you have chosen but a bad second, in a very good Cause, however I
cannot deny to contribute the little I am able, where our common Interest is
concerned; leaving it to your Discretion, either to give these rude Thoughts,
the Honor of a place amongst better Company, or totally to suppress them.

As touching the Accusation of our seemingly angry Antagonist, who charge all
our Sex with Pride and Vanity, we may bear it with the less Concernment,
because almost in the Prelude thereof, he fairly owns what I take to be very
much to our Advantage; namely, that it is not for the sake of their Sex, that
we take so much pains in Dressing and Adorning our selves, but merely, and only
for the Decency of the thing in its own Nature: I hope he will not forbid us to
reverence our selves, or to consider that we are humane Creatures. If we were
to be buried, he would permit us to make use of some Ornaments, which yet
surely he will not also attribute unto Vanity, seeing we shall have none but
Worms to admire us in the Sepulcher.

Let us therefore make the best use of this one piece of Ingenuity, which has,
it seems, undesignedly dropped from him. Let us record it against we have
occasion for it: This Gentleman plainly asserts in the midst of all his
passion, That it is not for the sake of our Lovers that we take so much pains
with our selves; nay, as if he had not bin yet kind enough, he again adds, that
he himself will clear us from this Imputation.

But I do not conceive that we need all that which he so bountifully grants us;
for let us suppose that we did really express something more of Solicitude in
our Dress, when we expected the Visits of a Person, for whom we had a virtuous
friendship, I cannot see any thing criminal in such a Behavior, or, that looks
like Pride and Vanity; nay, rather the contrary, for nothing savours more of
Pride than to affront or slight a Person, who does not merit it, and who be^^^
us any respect, and waits upon us, in order to express the same.

Now, nothing in my Opinion can be a greater Affront to a Person of Condition,
than when we are forewarned of their Visits, to be surpised in a Dress not
suitable to receive them; -- Or, sometimes to repay the Honor of such a Visit
in the same undecent Manner.

Moreover, it is evident, that many Persons express as much Pride and Vanity in
a morose and undecent Dress, and Deportment, as any others can in the most
fashionable Dress, and the most costly Ornaments.

Was not the Cynical Philosopher, Diogenes, guilty of more unexcusable Pride,
than the famous Alexander the Great, who came to make him a Visit, for which
the brutish Fellow could find no handsomer way of Requital than by bidding him
stand out of his Sunshine? We are not to regard what any Person wears, but in
what manner he does it. The most resplendent Monarch in the Universe could not
be more proud of his stately Palace, than that same Tatterdemalion was of his
stinking Tub; nor the most Beautiful and most Magnificent Youth in all Greece,
of his Rich and Splendid Robes, than he of his Squalid Rags, which would
Nauseate to behold them.

These things being agreed to, as I suppose none will deny them, I proceed yet
further in the Defense of our Sex, as to the Articles now under Debate; which I
may fairly do, or at least silence our Accusers, by a just Recrimination. If we
are vain, are they otherwise? If we are proud, are they humble? Let us make an
equal Estimation of things, and the contrary will be indubitable. We have, we
do not deny, some outward Embellishments which are not proper to Men, and
perhaps we use more than they do, and were we somewhat more pleased with them,
a little good Nature would not choose to impute it to a Vice, when at the utmost
it can be no more than a Weakness: But we desire either our ptesent Antagonist,
or any other of our pretended Enemies, to give us Information, if ever they
have seen a Lady, although dressed to the greatest Advantage, who had so much
Complaisance for her self, and so little for another, as when a Gentleman, a
Stranger, was in the Room, who came to make her a formal Visit, to employ a
great part of her time, in admiring her self in the Class, without any regard
to the Company, or to common Civility? And after they have replied to this
Query, we shall desire 'em as ingenuously to satisfy us in two or three more:
How many of their own Sex they know, who will not employ themselves in the same
manner, though their Mistress her self were in Company? And whether this be as
civil, as we know it is a fashionable way of entertaining ^adies? And lastly,
if this be not a clearer Demonstration of their own Sexes insufferable Vanity,
than any which they can affix upon ours.

If you furthermore accuse us, for affecting Dominion over your Sex; and being
restless for the Superiority, at least an Equality with them: For my part I
know no sensible Woman, who desires either.

It is enough for us to share the Government of a Family with you; for which,
Nature designed us, and for which yo^ ought to thank us, and which we man
justly expect. Some Inequality we conc^ between us, but the nearest to Equality
or any Degree that you can assign. Our Governors you were constituted, but not
our Tyrants; we were given you as Wives, not Slaves, and there can be no
greater Indieation of Vanity, than to pretend to an absolute Authority, where
you have no Right to any but what is limited and legal.

But above all things, I stand amazed, that the Gentleman should charge on our
Sexes Pride, those Tragical Events, which we are too often occasioned by the
same Vice in his own. Can we prevent our Lovers Quarrels, which the (...) it
self cannot? Or can we favor all, or may not the most Virtuous, Modest, and
Discre^t Lady living be sometimes the innocent occasion of such Misrortunes, or
when the surious Rivals are engaged, would he have us, (like the Sabine Wives)
run between, to part 'em?

And on this Head I must further add, That if Men were but so peaceable and
quiet, of such soft, such tender, and compassionate Dispositions, as we
generally speaking, must be owned to be; or lastly, of such forgiving,
pardoning Tempers, it is certain, there would not be so much War and Bloodshed,
such Piracy by Sea, and Ravage by Land; so many great and small Robbers and
Murderers, as now oppress and distract Mankind, and make you more Dangerous
and more Savage than the fiercest Beasts toward one another.

Thus, Madam, I have, as well as my mean Abilities would permit, answered the
unknown Gentleman's Letter, and remain

Your Humble Servant, Elizabeth, Willett.

LETTER III. Being an Essay in Defense of the present Fashions of the Female
Sex.
Written by ANONYMA.
Though I have bin something negligent, as to Time, yet the Subject you have
imposed on me to treat of, does sufficiently demonstrate the Power you have
over me: When laying aside all the curious Thoughts, flowing from all the noble
Subjects of Heaven and Earth, you have bound me up to a Woman (forgive me mine
own Sex:) And to that which is taxed as the greatest Vanity, ever committed by
'em; I mean the Extravagancy of their present Fashions, amongst which, that of
their Heads seems to be vainest; Their unreasonable Toppings: And to which they
seem so united, that it is not in the power of Reason or Ridicule to make 'em
part with them. Other Fashions have their short Continuances here, and then
they go off the Stage; this the settled Possession. They are never weary, never
will be ashamed of this, though it prevails beyond all measure, and is become so
Troublesome and Chargeable, that it has forced 'em to lift up the Tops of their
Doors, and of their Coaches, to admit 'em. -- But I forget my Province, which
was to defend, not to accuse the soft and tender Sex: And indeed I speak but
the Language of the Vulgar, and (amongst 'em) of the rudest of either Sex, who
only are Enemies to these Dresses, and Expose 'em. As for the Gentile, and
Understanding, the liveliest, and well Educated part of Mankind, they scruple
not to approve 'em, by using of them. Indeed, few or none have defended 'em by
the Pen; a Sign that their Enemies are so illiterate, that they cannot read;
nor had I undertaken this need lest Task, had it not been in Obedience to your
Commands; and in order to this* I shall speak of Dress in general, and first,
Prove it be no Sin or Folly, and then secondly, Show the Advantages of it, and
that it has some positive Good in it; and then lastly, apply all to the present
Head-Tires of Lad^es in particular.

To begin then, I lay this down as (...) Principle: That there is nothing Uggly
or B^^^tiful in it self, but with respect t^ the or^inary Rule, and Customs of
Na tions. Th^re be two outward Things observable in a D^dy; the Figure or Shape
and the Form (...) of it: For the (...), it is w^^ely contrived ^nt^ that which
nature produces, and that which is Redundant, or Deficient, is said to be
Monstrous or deformed, not that it is so in it self, but in respect of its
deviation from the common Standard, that nature proposes to its self to build
up the Body of Man in. And as Figure; so Form (by which I mean Color) depends
upon the customary Draughts of Nature. And we count a mixture of White and Red
Beautiful, because it has Anciently been counted so; Whereas the Blacks (they
say) have either and contrary Notions of Beauty. A plain Demonstration that
Beauty is sounded in Custom, not Nature, and that nothing is originally and
simply ugly.

2. And as the Form and I ashion of the Body, so the Form and Fashion of those
Garments that cover it, are all Judged handsome or ugly, by the Rules that
Custem have proscribed to it: For there be two ends of Clothes; The first
Natural, to defend the Body from Cold, etc. The other Civil, to distinguish
Sexes, and the several degrees of each Sex, and to set it off and adorn it. And
tho in the first of these a certain Fitness and Proportion of the Garment to
that Member it is designed, or to the whole Body for the use aforesaid, is the
probable Rule it ought to be made by; yet in those that distinguish the Sexes,
and degrees of each Sex, (as some always must be owned to have the only
Authority). And this is the Reason that several Fashions that appear at first
sight strange, if not Monstrous, shall become so agreeable by Cnstome that we
fall in Love with 'em, and admire 'em, and cannot think those we doted on
before tolerable: It Is true, great Persons having always claimed the Richest
works of the Richest Materials; such habits have been usual signs that they
were known by. And wrought Gold and Garments of diverse Colors, are the
outward Indications of Persons of Honor, Greatness and Riches. And meaner
Stuff and Workmanship for the Inferior sort. Thus it has ever been. But we
speak not of the Materials, but Figure of the Distinguishing Garment, and
therefore for those of Ornament, which is the last end of Garments, I must lay
down these General Rules.

1. That as every Creature is bound by the Law of Nature, to build up and
repair his Body by Nutritions, so to adorn it and set it off in the best manner
he can, by the Ornaments necessary thereunto; which is in effect, but to set
off Gods work, and make it appear more Illustrious and worthy of him.

2. The particular way to do this is not fixed, but guided by Fancy. That is, we
first try one way and then another, according to our several Fancies and
Opinions. And having experienced one way, perhaps in time we like it not, and
fall to another, and so to a Third, and so on till perhaps we fall into some of
the Old again, when either they are forgotten, or our Fancy alters, and we
think it again conduceable to that end: And so, though we differ from our selves,
in the Methods and Means of Adorning our Bodies, yet we agree in the end. The
Means are only Trials, wherein we are guided by our Fancy. They are Essays of
poor imperfect Man, to complete himself, which is the end of Human Nature.

3. We have an Estimation for Things we have not tried, and for Persons of
Honor, and true Worth, and the first is the occasion of the Inventors of new
Fashions, and the second, of those that follow 'em. Every one would improve his
Body, and make it appear as perfect as he could; but every one cannot tell how.
The Rich and Great are those that contrive these outward Embellishments; which
having tried and proved, others (that have a great Veneration for what they do)
imitate 'em: So that there is cause in Nature, Viz. Perfection, for the
Invention of new Fashions, and for the Vulgars following 'em. As likewise for
their Change; when we find by Experience that we have mist this end, and
therefore are inclined to try another,

And lastly, When a Dress is grown common, or used by vile and ordinary
Persons, it has lost its Distinguishing and Adorning Quality; and so the End
being lost, it is fit it should be laid aside, and another assumed, till
Authority shall be pleased to Appropriate Garments and Fashions to the several
Sorts and Degrees of Sexes: So that it is the want of such a good Law, that
brings a necessity of Change of Fashions. It Is necessary Persons of Quality
should be known, that they might have their due Honor: And seeing every
ordinary. Creature will break in upon a Fashion, and dress like 'em, and
Authority will not interpose to make an Enclosure, what can, nay, what should
they do but fall into another Mode for distinction? So that the Original of
Fashions, and the Changes thereof, is founded partly in our naturaldesire of
Perfection, and Attempts toward it, and partly in that Order and Distinction,
which should be amongst Mankind, without which, all things will fall into
Confusion.

These things being premised and agreed to (as I suppose they must be) I wonder
why Man (unreasonable Man, that is guilty of the same Crime, if it be one)
should rally upon poor Ladies for the pretended Extravagancies of their
Dresses. Do they pretend they are uggly or monstrous? Why! there is nothing so
in its self; and Custom reconciles every thing, and is the Rule of Decency;
that is decent, which the tried and approved Customs of well-educated Persons
have made so. -- is it because they change and alter? Why! this is nothing but
a continued Essay, to render themselves Beautiful and Complete in Body, as well
as Mind; the Work of Humane Nature. We are sent hither to Adorn and perfect
both the Body and Mind, as far as we may. Education and Study is the Means to
the one, and Dressing to the other.

Each are to be dressed, though in a different way. The Body must be adorned with
such Improvements as it is capable of; and he that does neglect it, is a
Sloven, and a Sinner against the Law of Nature. I do not here make any
Comparison betwixt the Body and the Mind; I am willing to prefer the last, and
its Accomplishments, (and would to God it was more minded) yet I say also, that
whilst these are done, the other ought not to be left undone. Let the Lady be
as long as she will in her Closet, at her Dressing-Box, provided she be not
longer there than at her Prayers. I will not blame her Endeavors, to adorn her
Body, if it does not take up the necessary time of Adorning the Mind. Why! does
not every thing strive at Perfection; and if it fails in one Attempt, try
another? Do we not every day Eat and Drink, though we have tried it so often, and
have found it will cure the Disease called Hunger, for some time only? Is it a
Sin, to render God's Workmanship beautiful, and try every Method of Art or
Nature to effect it? To leave the Dresses as well as Company of the Vulgar, and
to lay aside a Garment when it can distinguish us no longer? Ladies would keep
to their Fashions, if others would keep from them: But the Inferior sort break
in upon 'em: What hurt is it then to forsake the Room? If Authority will not
keep up Decorum, but render all common; yet let Ladies be more prudent and
regular: And though hard-hearted Mankind will not afford their Honor a
Protection; yet I hope the Women will do themselves Justice.

The Sum of all is this -- God makes, and Apparel Shapes, etc. -- Every Man and
Woman is born in a poor Squalid Condition, and Imperfect in Form and figure,
till by Nutrition the Body has attained its due Proportion, Magnitude, and
Beauty; and even then it is so mean a Figure, that it is not fit to be seen
Naked, nor can it distinguish the several Orders of Mankind, and therefore
Nature has taught all Nations to conceal their Imperfections under Clothes, and
to distinguish one from another by them. And because Beauty is the Creature of
Fancy, and that the ordinary sort continually break in upon the distinguishing
Fashions of the Nobility and Gentry; The Form and Mode of Garments are forced
to be changed as often as there is an occasion.

And if there may be given a sufficient reason, not only for the Adorning of
our Bodies, but for the often changing the outward Mode, or Fashion of its
Ornaments, who can deny this to our Female Sex; who ought to keep up the
Advantag^s Nature has bestowed on us, over Men, in Softness, Sweetness and
Beauty. Who are either Married or (I speak only of the Sex in General, and not
of every particular Woman, who may find reasons to resolve the Contrary) to be
Married, and who deservedly stand upon our Beauties, as well as Merits, or
other Accomplishments to Command Love and Respect, and preserve it when
obtained. Why therefore should Envious Man, grudge us a little time to fit our
selves for them? Especially seeing they themselves are the Causes of it?

But you may say our Detractors are of both Sexes, and we are Indicted as
Offenders, Not so much against the Laws of Decorum as Religion: Indeed if this
were so, it is but time to undress and lay aside for ever all our Ornaments, and
wear nothing but Sackcloth. But this is a mistake; Religion does not forbid it,
nor will the Soul be injured by the Ornaments of the Body, its dear Associate;
And the objections are founded upon Ignorance, Mistake, and Swperstition, as
will appear if we consider them.

1. We are accused of Pride, but this common and popular Accusation will
signify nothing to those that consider what Pride is; That it is not any thing
about the Body, but is resident in the mind, and consists in an over valuing a
Man's self, or in ^hinking better of our selves then indeed we deserve, or in
boasting of our Endowments, as tho they were our own, and not derived to us
from Above. And how can Cloath^ng and Adorning our Bodies (which is nothing
else but covering and hiding the De^ects of our Carcass) be any Indication of
the Pride of our minds? Indeed Clothes are nothing else but a tacit confession
of our Native Impersections, and Ornaments seem to confess that the Body it
self wants them -- And what Fool can be Proud of that which is not his own, but
what he must be beholden even to the Beasts of the Field for? And if any Lady
when she has dressed up her self with the utmost care and Curi^sity, can really
think her self better then she was before in her Night Clothes, I must own she
has a mighty Fancy, but little Reason, and I cannot believe that there is any
of our Sex (as foolish as we are) that can think so.

2. There be two places of Scripture, th^^ to the Slovenly Zealote seem to bear
hard upon us; the first in the Old Testament, the second in the New.

That in the Old Testament is Isa. 3.17. and so forward; where there is an
Antiquated Inventory of the Woman's Ornaments; Such as Interpreters know not
well how to render in Euglish, and these are threarned to be taken off the
Daughters of Zion, and they forced to submit to their contraries. But then
these Ornaments are not there Condemned as Sinful in themselves; But the Sin
consisted in their Pride, Wantonness, and Luxury. V. 16. They were haughty and
disdainful, and overlooked their Equals. Besides, they had the Aspect and
Gestures of Harlots: Their Wanton Eyes, and their Nice and Tripping Gate,
Symptoms of the sensuality of their minds; For these Crimes it was, that God
threatens to Strip 'em of their Ornaments, by which it would follow, that
Ornaments are not a Curse but a Blessing, and the being deprived of 'em, a
Punishment.

The other Text is 1 Pet. 3.3. To which I willingly Subscribe, that the
Principal Ornament of a Virtuous Christian Wife, is not the outward ones of the
Head-Tire, or Gold Chains, or putting on Apparel, but that of a Meek and Quie:
Spirit. This is an Ornament indeed, and that which excels all External
Ornaments, and yet it is not exclusive of 'em, unless you would have the Woman
lay by not only her Gold, but go with her Hair about her Ears, and use no
Apparel. And to conclude all on this Head, I dare Appeal to the most Slovenly
and Morose of either Sex, who rail at Pride and the Fashion, because they
cannot come up with it; Whether Dresses, even the most Richest and most Curious
are not Lawful? When God himself is said to be the Dresser, and to Adorn his
adopted Daughter Jerusalem, after the most exquisite Fashion of those Times,
Vide Ezekiel. 16.10, 11, 12. Whether Precious things were not made for our use?
And if so, why they may not be used? Whether a Christian has not as good a
Title to the best things as others? And lastly, Whether we may not wear 'em
under these conditions.

1. That we come by 'em Lawfully.

2. That they are Suitable to our State and Condition of Life.

3. That we be not Fond or Proud of them, or unreasonably think our selves the
better for 'em. And Lastly, that we be willing to part with 'em upon the
Account of Necessity, Justice and Charity. I say, if these considerations are
duly weighed, I dare make our Enemies of either Sex, our Judges in this
Affair, and Stand to their own Arbitrament.

And thus I have, I hope, with some clearness, Vindicated the Lawfulness of
using Ornaments, and of changing and following the Mode, which fancy (to
distinguish the several Degrees of Life, and Adorn all) First invents, and
Custom reconciles and renders decent: Give me leave now to add this positive
Good of this supposed Vanity: For surely none will deny -- That our English in
constancy and change of Fashions (how much Lightness and Vanity soever it is
charged with) does yet advance.

1. Ingenuity and Invention.

2. Industry, and that it is a great Enemy to that which is the Vehicle of all
Temptations (I mean) Idleness. And then,

3. Trade, and keept many Thousands, which won'd otherwise Starve or Invade
others Callings, and so justle others out of a Living, and Strave 'em. And

Lastly, Charity, by inclining Ladies to give away their Clothes to their
Attendance, by reason of the change of the Mode. And these convey 'em to their
Inferiors, and so they go through several hands before they be worn out. And so
tho we have lost the Old Hospitality of the English Nation, and Housekeeping
is Retrenched, yet there is still a Communication of Clothes, which can be
attributed to nothing but this Volubility of the Fashion. So great a good
proceeds from this supposed Evil.

I should now descend to our particular Dresses, and those of the Head
especially, the Subject of so much Wit, Mirth and Railery, for their excessive
heights and other extravagant Circumstances; Against this all sorts of People
have levelled their Laughter and Indignation, and yet they have kept their
Station in spite of 'em all; so that they seem to have the Fate and deserve
the Motto of the Palm Tree.

Depressa resurgo.

The more they are railed at, the more they stick to the Forehead, and grow the
higher; a sure Indication at last that our Sex can be sometimes constant. I
shall upon the former Grounds assert of 'em, that they have no necessary
Immoral Consequences; and therefore are in themselves indifferent; and if they
have lifted up the Tops of the Coaches and Chariots, they have put many to
work, and so preserved Lives, and caused Money to Circulate. If these are high,
it is because every one would at least seem Proper and Tall, and what hurt is in
that? And as Monstrous as they are represented, yet Custom has reconciled 'em,
and made 'em handsome, and a Woman without her Toppings is now a very odd
Creature. I shall only add this of them (1.) That a Head once dressed is soon on
and off; and so does not take up so much time as formerly, and so Ladies have
so much the more leisure to serve God and do Good to the Public. (2.) That
many thousands get an Honest Livelihood by 'em -- But I perceive It have
exceeded all Measure in this Letter, and bestowed too many words on a matter of
so little concern. It was only in obedience to your Injunction; for I am your
very

Aug. 19. 1696. Osequious, tho unknown Anonyma.

Answer to Letter III.
By Sir THOMAS --
Being a Reply to ANONYMA'S Essay, in Defense of Dresses and Topknots, etc.
In a Letter to Madam Godfrey, the First Challenger, and Person engaged in this
Controversy.
NAY Madam, this is not fair Play, and I must needs complain of you for making
War in an unlawful manner, not only bringing more Seconds then I can well deal
with, when we were to meet single hand, but attacking me in my own Quarters,
before I had put my self in a Posture of Defense; whereas I expected you would have
been all purely on the Defensive, as became your Sexes Modesty.

Nay, and Learned Ladies too, for I find your Friend has a Touch of Latin (for
which I Will not forget her in due time and place) and yet worse, so very Grave
she is, that I Am afraid she will not let me Laugh without making her Aagry. But
if she be, I must e'n take it patiently, a sort of self denial with which our
poor suffering Sex is but too well acquainted, when we have any concern with
yours. And I have this comfort, if I am so Fortunate as to Disarm this notable
Champion, who I see is detached from your main Body, like a sort of a single
forlorn hope to try my strength at the beginning, I shall have the fairer
probability of prevailing with greater ease, over the rest of your Disheartened
Army. Pray stand you aside a while, and let us two alone together.

To the most Ingenious Anonyma, Author of the Essay in defense of Dresses, etc.
'TWas really great pity Madam, to take you off from your Metaphisical
Speculations, and to debase your soaring mind to so mean a subject as you are
now engaged in. You deserve I see a better cause, you have so well defended an
ill one, I know not whether so Ingeniously as Wittily, for I Am apt to believe
your mind and your Pen hardly went together. However, we must join issue upon
the matter, and I must ask your Pardon, if I take the boldness to unravel your
involuntary or willful mistakes, and -- confute all your appearances of Reason.
Which yet on better thoughts I know not whether there is so much need of,
because I find we agree very well in the beginning of your Essay, and may
Travel for some time quietly enough together, (tho I doubt our way must soon
part.) You own your Sexes present Fashions are extravagant; you own the height
of their Toppings is unreasonable, and have made a sharp and just observation,
That they yet seem so united to these extravagant and these unreasonable
Customs, that it is not in the Power of Reason, or Ridicule to part 'em. Why
should you and I quarrel, or dispute any further, when we are both so exactly
of the same mind?

But alas, it is not long that you continue in this Ingenuous Temper: The
prejudices of your Sex soon turn your mind, and accordingly mould all your
thoughts ^n defense of what you just before so highly disapproved and so justly
condemned. And you begin with what is insinuating enough, that This is only the
Language of the Vulgar, and that the rudest of both Sexes; but that the
liveliest and best-bred part of the World approve these things by their using
'em.

But I must ask leave Madam to remind you in the first place, that we are not
now enquiring what one or the other does, but what is fitting and reasonable to be
done? And besides, that it is not impossible that the many should be in the
right, nay, it is plain they sometimes are so, and those who call themselves
better bred, because they eat better and dress finer, are very widely mistaken.
But supposing Persons of sense and breeding, which yet you will not affirm are
always to be meafur'd by the Dimentions of the Topknot, should be also guilty
of these Extravagancies, can that ever the more change their Natures, or make
'em agreeable to Decency and Reason? Nay, does it so much as show their
positive and full approbation of 'em? all I tfiink that we can fairly conclude
from it, is, that they make use of 'em, and are really Ridiculous to prevent
their being thought so. Nothing in short is plainer then that in such Instances
as these, they are merely borne down by the Tyranny of custom, and e'n give
themselves up to the stream because 'twou'd be folly to strive against it, when
they are yet certain of being hurried away by its impetuosity.

That none, but a parcel of Ballad-singers and Grubstreet-Authors, have ever
yet writ against 'em, there may be alleged two very good reasons; the first,
because it is such a Gontemptible subject, that a Man of sense would no more
draw his Pen at it, then a Man of Courage would his Sword against a little
yelping Cur, that made a noise at him as he passed the streets. The second,
that as you your self own, your Sex is Incorrigible, and why should any attempt
to wash the Blackamoor white?

But why then do I now take up the Cudgels? Because Madam, you have made such a
cause as was before deplorable, almost formidable again by your espousing it,
and because your Iagenious Sophistry, if it remain undiscovered, will I fear,
harden your Sex yet further in their Obstinacy and Folly.

And new, to examine your most elaborate Oration, or Sermon. I scarce know
which to call it, wherein I shall, as Civility O^^iges me, wait on your
Ladyship in your own method, from the Doctrine to the Application.

You assert Madam in the first place, very victoriously, that Dress in General
is neither Sin nor Folly, and shame and rags on those that ever think it is.
Nor therefore will your second Proposition be denied, that it has advantages in
it, and some real positive Good.

But net a step further, for when you come to apply this to the present
Toppings Headgeer, we must have a sore siruggle before you carry me with you.

Nor must you take it amiss that I deny even Principles, at least the first
assertion whereon you bestow that Name, for we now Live in an Age, that very
unwillingly takes up with any Authority but that of Reason.

You say, there is nothing ugly or beautiful in it self, but with respect to the
ordinary Rules and customs of Nations: Here Madam, in the first place you seem
not to argue clearly, but to confound Decency and Beauty, and Deformity, which
seem to be widely different, at least I Am sure we form Notions sufficiently
distinct about 'em. A Woman may go very decently habited who yet is naturally
very deformed, and one of the most beautiful of your ruinous sex, must be
undecently dressed in your aerial Toppings.

But supposing you only intend to argue from Beauty to Decency, and so on the
contrary, your Foundation is yet weak and deceitful. For I think, all are
agreed that Beauty is something more then Fancy; I know the objection, from the
Blacks, but how can the particular odd opinion of one small part of the World,
and that the most Barbarous, any way affect, or influence the General Judgment
of mankind, any more then we ought to think, eating one another, is not
contrary to the Law of Nature, because some of those Savage Nations constantly
practice it, or that there is no such thing in Nature as modesty, because the
same disown it.

We ought therefore to conclude even of Complexion, which I confess, is but the
least part of Beauty, that there is something in it more then Fancy and Opinion,
because the Blacks are only a sort of Monsters in Nature, at least Deviations
from it, since none suppose the first Man and Woman were Created in that manner.

But even among them there is Proportion, and good Featnres, which is agreed on
by all Civilized mankind, who sure are the most proper Judges, as (those who
see are of Coleurs,) to be the best and most lasting part of Beauty; and you will
never persuade an equal Judge, that a Carnous Nose, thick Blnbber Lips, and a
horrid cruel, distorted Face, is in it self so agreeable as theirs, who are
otherwise And it is as clear on the other side, that there is a just Proportion,
which is pleasing to all that are not prejudiced by Education, or the customs
of their Country, and would be thought so at first sight, even by a person bred
in a Desert.

I Have insisted the longer on this, because of the Parallel you either make or
insinuate between Decency and Beauty, and indeed they are near akin, tho I
think not the same, for Beauty may be called, if you will, the Decency of the
Body, and Decency the Beauty of the attire.

To let pass your small mistake in Philosophy, that Form is Color, whereas
Figure with Color seems its more proper definition, I must yet agree with you,
that nothing is Originally and Simply Ugly, any more then Simply or Originally
Evil; but yet none can doubt but there are Deviations from fair as well as
good, and what is so, must be ugly, and that Independently to any Man's fancy or
opinion; tho not without a respect to those Rules and just Proportions from
which it errs.

And I further am willing to grant, That particular liking depen is on
particular Fancy, and unaccountable Sympathy, Whence it is, that persons differ
so much in their Judgments of these matter, and one may Love one sort of
Beauty, another it may be the quite contrary, but none can ever dear on
Deformity. No Man sure, in his ^ight ^^nces, (...) ^ (...) more then they would
commend such a one for Neatness, when they stunk alive. But if there should
happen to be some Caliban in Nature, an equal Match for such a Sicorax, what
need any envy his Choice, or could he persuade any she was a real Beauty,
because he thought so; any more then Brimstone, or Assafetida can be said to be
a good smell, because some persons Love it more than Roses.

For which reasons neither can I be induced to believe, that the Decency or
Deformity of Dress depends on custom only, and are one or the other as that
preseribes, according to your assertion: Because there is certainly a Natural
Decency, which no custom can ever alter. It Is true, this is not easy to find,
but I think the nearest we can go to the Law of Nature, is by searching into
the Law of Nations, or the generally received customs and usages of all the
Civilized part of mankind, which will sway very much with a modest Man, if they
are not, (as I think they never are) evidently contrary to clear and undoubted
Reason: And the best way I grant, to find out what Dress is Reasonable, is to
consider the ends of Apparel, which you think, Are only three, to defend from
Heat and Cold, to distinguish Sexes and Degrees, and lastly for Ornament. And
'twere well if those ends were well observed, by the present Age, which whether
they are, or no, we may by and by have occesion to enquire. However, I must
remind you Madam, of one End of Clothing besides all these, which I Am sorry
you have forgotten, tho it is an easy thing for your Sex to do it, and that is
the very end, for which Adam and Eve first made such a hard shift, when they
sowed Fig Leaves together, and made themselves Aprons; It Is a Confession of our
Guilt as well as want, and certainly something is still due to shame and
modesty, and the Siamese Garments which are open before, and those in some
parts of Africa, which cover so little of the Body, don't Answer that end, let
their customs be what they will, and therefore it is not all custom, and
whatever Dress offends any ways against it, whatever Nation it is in, such a
Custom could never defend it, -- nay, nor so much as any thing that is extremely
inconvenient to your Sex, vastly extravagant, and evidently contrary to right
Reason. But against how many of these Rules d^ those Ornaments offend, which
your Sex has made use of in your own memory? Did those Gowns keep you warm,
which left your Besoms so far Naked, that it is scarce handsome to think on it?
And could custom ever make this a modest Dress, any more then 'twou'd be so,
for the Woman to wear the Man's Apparel, an Old Ceremony of the Pagan Worship,
in cented for no good Reason, which yet is so common among the French, with
whom Pistols, Hat and Feather, are no more infallible Signs of virility then
riding astride, and which began to be as much in Fashion among their Mimics of
this side the Water, -- and yet, that last, you must own no Custom can
legitimate, because against one great End of Apparel, the Distinction of Sexes,
by your own confession, as well as against another which you never thought of,
whereof I Have bin just now discoursing, -- and yet this Habit chiefly made use
of by Persons of Quality, to distinguish them from those of the Vulgar, whose
Imitation they think so very disgraceful. And will not the Matter of the
Apparel serve for sufficient Distinction? The Richness and the Gravity of the
Fancy, -- whereby true Quality is so easily distinguished from those who vainly
affect to appear like it? Whence your first Assumption will do you but little
Service; That ever Creature is bound to set themselves off as well as they can,
and to make God's Work appear more Illustrious and Worthy of him: -- But alas,
Madam, can you flatter your self, you're more like him, when you have a new
Gown on, than if you were dressed all in Hair-cloth, or Sackcloth. Dress your
Mind, and a little Care will do about the Body. Take Care to be Decent, and
that is sufficient, and the less sollicitous you are, perhaps the better, about
Matters of this Nature.

You say, the particular way of Adorning our selves has no Standard, nor is it
fixed by any Law -- and we may change as often as we please. -- But was it not
better, when we kept to our old Customs, without any Law (...) oblige us, as do
most Nations in the World, besides the French and we? -- and what have we got
by changing our Fashions for theirs, but the Danger of changing Government too,
together with them?

And is it any sign of a stayed and wise Temper, to be always thus newfangled;
to throw away to day what we bought yesterday, though the Money might have bin
infinitely better employed, in the Relief of the Poor and Miserable, or in
clothing it may be half a score poor Creatures, now half naked, with the
unconscionable Serpentine: -- Train of one of your Gowns; which after all,
before you have worn it long enough to be well sitted to ye, must it is likely
augment your Chambermaids Wardrobe, and you are looking abroad for another. And
this Monthly Adorning, this Completing your selves, as you call it, must be in
good time, the " End of HVMANE NATVRE. Pray speak for your selves, and your own
Sex, and involve not all Mankind in so ridiculus a Folly.

You say, Every one would improve their Bodies, if they knew how; but the Rich
and Great are those that contrive those outward Embellishments. -- Upon their
Shop-boards you mean Madam, or in their Exchanges: -- For that the Tailors
invent so many thousand Fashions at home, or brought 'em over from France, in
former Reigns, who sent us their old Fashions for our old Shoes, is, I
suppose, beyond Controversy.

But then these Persons of Quality change these Fashions again, when they find
they have mist their End in 'em, that is, Embellishment and Perfection. And did
they never yet change for the worse? and is there not certainly a more or less
becoming Dress, abstracted from all Fashions? -- And what Folly is it for me to
change what best becomes me, or according to you, Madam, is most conducive to
the Perfection of my Nature; for nothing but mere Novelty, without any manner
of Reason?

But you have a Pretense for that too. -- When a Dress is once profaned, by
being worn by Vile and Ordinary Persons, it has lost its Distinguishing and
Adorning Quality, and is, you say, immediately discarded, and a new one to be
invented, that may better answer those Ends, -- But, methinks, that is not so
very civil neither, when you are imitated by others, purely out of a Veneration
for your bright Example, and profound Judgment (in laying the Skirt of a Gown)
as soon as they are got into your Colors, on purpose to show how highly they
respect and honor you, for you immediately to throw 'em away, and maliciously
leave that Fashion for no other reason.

But for once, let us take what you say for a just occasion of doing so, When
the Mob apes Quality, the end of Distinction is lost; the old Dress must be
abdicated, and your Brains rackt for a n^w one. Well, I desire no fairer a
Concession; for I Am sure it must from hence inevitably follow, that down go all
your Toppings the next moment; for if you say they are not now grown common,
show me one Kitching-wench, at least on Sundays, when her Pail's off, that ever
appears without 'em.

Nor can you deny, that the ancient Method of keeping in one Fashion was much
the better way of Distinction, than yours, of altering every moment, because
while that lasted, 'twas easy for the Law to proportion every one's Dress to
their Quality, and as easy to know 'em by it; but now, according to your own
Concessions, the Vulgar is continually apeing you; you change petpetually,
merely out of spite, and they will still follow you close at the Heels, and put
you to an endless Labor.

Besides, you seem to place the distinction of Quality in what is at best but
very precarious: Is it only in the frequency of changing? Then the Eastern
Nations infinitely outdo all the Gallanty of Europe, a great part of whose
Treasures consist in Vests and Changes of Raiment. Nay, even the barbarous
Americans had this part of Magnificence when Cortez came among 'em, which
perhaps may give us some faint Light into their Original.

Nor is the Alteration of the Fashion any better distinction than that of the
Vest; for a poor Change Girl may turn her tawdry Mantua, and alter the Fashion
on 't as often as any Lady of the greatest Qnality: And suppose one of the best
note, and whose Fancy was most followed, should invent and practice any thing,
monstrous or undecent; as for instance, to mount her Toppings two or three
Yards in height, or to have a Train, long enough to sweep a Street. (they make
nothing of a whole Room already) would this be ever the less undecent or
extravagant? But you recurr to your first Refuge, -- your Skepticism in Manners
-- That there is nothing in it self uggly or handsome, and Custom reconciles
every thing, and is the Rule of Decency. Whence it follows, that the Gentlemen
and Ladies of the Cape, with their delicate Bracelets of stinking Guts, and
rich Lockets of corrupted raw Flesh, are as decently dressed as any Person of
Quality in Christendom.

As for the Advantages you talk of, over Men, in Softness, Sweetness, and
Beauty, I cannot tell what you may have in the two latter, nor am I much
concerned, but I Will own as freely as you can assert it, that you have it in the
former, though in a Sense it may be somewhat wide from that, wherein you
understand it.

But it seems, your Notion of Beauty, as well as Decency, depends upon the
common Custom; for you cannot be so much as handsome, without Top-Gallants, in
your own Opinion; though you may have heard of some ^adies in as polite a Court
as any in Europe, who still continue to dress in their Hair, in spite of the
Fashion, and yet appear as triumphantly as any. And ye cannot but own that this
is generally a more becoming Dress, (as it is more natural and simple) than any
other.

For your Texts, Madam, I think we had even better leave 'em to the Doctor of
your Parish, since I find you make but indifferent Work with 'em, and I Am
afraid I should make worse.

I confess I always thought, Divinity and Topknots had but little to do with
one another, and that 'twas scarce decent to interest any thing so grave in so
frivolous a Matter. I shall therefore leave you in full possession of 'em, and
only admire at the Happiness, a Woman of Learning, I see enjoys above all of
her Sex or ours, that she converses with none such as are vain enough to be
pleased with fine Clothes, ot think better of themselves, when dressed with the
utmost Curiosity, (though that, as she has, the very PERFECTION of HVMANE
NATVRE,) than when Mobb'd up in their Night-cloaths, when they expect no
Spectators nor Admirers.

And here will come in very fitly your three Conditions, which make it lawful;
you think to wear the finest Clothes you can get: First, that they be honestly
come by, which I confess is prudently enough put in; because lifting 'em out of
a Shop, without paying for 'em, is something dangerous, as well as scandalous.
The second, that they be suitable to our Condition; that is, according to your
Rules, frequently change, if of Quality; and if lower, Imitations of those
Changes. Thirdly, That your Sex been't proud of 'em, nor foolishly think
themselves the better for 'em, -- which you have already satisfied us they
never do. And lastly, that they be willing to part with 'em on the account of
Necessity, Justice or Charity: -- Which when they are, I dare promise 'em,
others in their room, more Magnificent than were ever worn by an Empress;
especially, when their Charity is so superabundant, to give away one of their
Favorite Dresses, or to part with 'em, or deny themselves of 'em, to Relieve
the Poorest and most Miserable Creature in Nature.

If you know any such, you would do your Sex a great Kindness, to instance in 'em.
I desire but Twenty in Twenty Years, and give you all England to find 'em.

But you yet plead that your Inconstancy, and Change of Fashions, encourages
Ingenuity and Industry, and Trade, and all that is Good. A home Argument, it
must be owned, for it abundantly laps over, as will plainly appear by the
Consequence; for if whatever encouraged any Art or Trade were defensible for
that Reason, it must be granted, that Quarrels and Injustice it self are very
defensible, because without them the Lawyer could not get his Living. That
Debauchery, Intemperance, Lewdness, are very pretty Qualifications, because the
poor Vintners, and Physicians and Surgeons (to go no further) get very
comfortable Livelihoods on these Occasions, and it is likely, would starve
without 'em.

But above all, who would not admire at your Ladyship, for bearing us in Hand,
That a great deal of good Charity comes from this Variety of Dresses, because
the ladies give away their Clothes to their Attendants. A superabundant piece
of Beneficence, to bestow an old Gown on an old Chambermaid! And is this to
balance the loss of our ancient English Hospitality, which you own is so much
decayed, and that it owes its Ruin in a great part to the Extravagance of your
Sex, you hardly your self ingenuously deny, since this draws all the Ladies to
Town, and you, their Husbands, letting the Seats of their Ancestors drop to the
Ground, for fear you should have the new Fashions a Fortnight too late, if you
went not up to meet 'em.

And besides, this wonderful Charity of you Ladies, in bestowing your Wardrobes
thus plentifully on your Inferiors, which by the way your Husband is sure to
pay for, and making, as you call it, a Circulation of Clothes, unluckily
destroys one of the other Ends, already mentioned, and that is, encouraging
Trade and Industry: For the more of your old Clothes there are in Long-Lane,
the fewer new ones must consequently be made. No, Madam, the true way to be
charitable indeed to those poor Tradesmen, were to deal with your Clothes, as
they say the Dutch do with their Cinnamon, and other Spices; when they have a
great Harvest of 'em in the Eastern Countries, make a huge Bonfire of a great
part of 'em, which effectually prevents a Glut in Europe, and gets 'em a better
Trade for the Remainder,

And now for the Strenuous Defense of your Monumental Head-Dresses, both in
English and Latin, which it seems must not be Condemned, though you fairly own
they have seeded to that Extravagant Height, that we are forced to alter our
Coaches and Houses, to make you room (as the Trojans pulled down their own
Walls to give the fatal Horse Admittance. -- But once more, these very
Alterations employ many poor People, and keep 'em from starving. -- An
extraordinary Advantage, just as a Bullies breaking Windows, makes Work for the
Glazier, though the Landlord will hardly thank him.

But they wear 'em so high, because they would seem proper, and is there any
hurt in that? -- Nay, I confess there is only Pride and Discontent, and a little
aukard Hypocrisy in it, as well as open Folly; for the Wench that dances upon
Stilts, or Jack-Pudding, that stalks with 'em from one Booth to another, may
more properly be therefore accounted Tall, than one, who wears high Toppings
for that Reason. Besides, that is only an Excuse for the Short; but what is this
to those who are already high enough, and by this Addition are made a Match for
a Garagantua.

The most plausible thing that you can urge for 'em, is toward the Close, that
They save time, which your Sex improve to better Uses. This I confess is a good
Defense, if 'twere but a true one: For is it not evident, that your Sexes time
lies dead upon your Hands, and you know not what to do with 't; and if you are
Doing nothing, you will soon be doing Mischief; and on the other side, employing
your selves in what you are capable of, Dressing and Trifling, is at least a
more Tolerable sort of Idleness.

I had like to have overslipt one thing before we part, which well deserves
Notice. You say that the Obstinacy of your Sex in this sort of Dress is a sign,
That you can once be constant. I must grant it is so, but then pray answer me
when you ever were so before, unless when in the wrong? -- And if these odd,
inconvenient, unbecoming, fantastical Windmill-Heads, are not sufficient
Evidence, that you're so in the present Case; then I Will say no more, but that I
am

Your Mistaken Humble Servant, THOMAS --

LETTER IV. That Blushing' s no Sign of Modesty.
By Mr. SANDFORD.
AMong all the Tinctures and Paints that the Pride of your Sex ever invented,
none so cunning as that of Blushing: I know you would have it thought Natural, but
I Am satisfied it is no more so, than it is a sign of Grace or Modesty. You are
grown excellent Proficients in the Arts of Dissembling.

You are Mousers almost as soon as you can creep abroad, and play with you
Fans. You learn to Blush, as you do to Weep and Feign, without any Teacher, --
a Disposition it is in you, that may indeed be much improv'^ by Art and
Practice, and one would not think what vast Progress you will make in a few
Years. Formerly in the almost forgotten days of Virtue and Innocence, to have a
good Hand at Blushing, went as far to the marrying a young Girl as a good
Portion. It looked like a Red Flag of Defiance, hung out, which makes a Man of
Courage more eager for the Onset. It appeared wholesome at once, and pleasing;
'twas so like an Apple next the Sun, or a fine Streaky Katherine Pear, that
every Body's Mouth watered at it. It looked like a lovely Sun-shiny Evening, or
any of the fine things, to which an Amorous Poet compares his Mistress.

But those Days are gone -- We are now come to an Age of much more sinful
Knowledge. Your Sex, even yours, is improved in Deceit, and ours in Caution.
And when we see a young Thing hanging down her Head, and her Face covered with
Blushes, how are we uncharitable when we think there is some reason for it? You
were therefore as good leave this Trick; which, like all others, now it is found
out, can be no longer useful, and which has not the least Shadow of Reason to
be so highly esteemed, both by your Sex, and ours, as it has bin formerly. For
when you Blush, either you have done somewhat, for which you ought to be
ashamed, or you have not: If the latter, as you say, it often happens, why do you
Blush at all? If the former, how come you so ill Dissemblers, to confess it, --
and what are you the better for it? or what Satisfaction is it for an Ill Action?
Or if for some little innocent Mistake, or Misfortune, you have still less
Reason.

A modest Assurance is after all, the best Token of Innocence; but as for
Blushing, the Players themselves can do it; and those who have yet a less
honest Name, in the greatest Perfection.

Theophilus Sandford.

Answer to Letter IV.
By Madam PRESTWOOD.
YOU were best blame Nature, who has both given us Faces, such as they are, and
Blood, to arise in 'em, and Veins to convey it thither; a in other Springs and
Fountains, which she sends up from her inexhausted Store, and yet you will
hardly complain of her for refreshing the World. I confess I know not what to
make of Blushing, but yet I would not be without it; for it is, I think, a
handsome silent Reproof to ye, when your Sex speaks such things as are not fit
for ours to hear; and if we blush for you, who have forgot to do it for your
selves, sure you ought not to be so highly displeased at it.

It Is well you own that Blushing was once reckoned a good Sign, in the Days,
you say, of Virtue and Innocence, and 'twill be hard for you to show a Reason
why it should now be disused, unless because your Sex has driven those her two
Companions out of the World.

A Blush is the Daughter of Modesty, and no wonder you are so ready to quarrel
with her, when you have so long since proclaimed open War against the Mother.
What is more ingenuous than this Emotion in the Young and Innocent, and who is
there that is not pleased to see it?

It Is a sort of a Natural Virtue, and an Indication how good we should all be,
would but you let us alone. Shamefacedness is the first and last Guard of
Innocence, which well may be supposed to bleed at the sight of her Murderers.

Sometimes you pretend there is nothing in it commendable, because it is not
voluntary, but that is easily answered, for that the Habit of Modesty, whence it
flows, may be easily lost, your Sex can furnish us with numerous Examples.

But he must be very much in Love with Paradoxes, who shall pretend to prove
that the Act of Blushing is in our own power, so that any one can Blush when
they please, which you may persuade the World is true, when you can but so much
as sneeze in that manner, without using any thing to provoke it.

You say many Blush, who have no Modesty. I cannot tell that, but am rather
inclined to believe they have still some Sparks on it left, and much more than
those that speak against it, wherein they contradict the Sentiments of all
places, and all Ages, as well as common Experience, Sense and Reason.

Judith Prestwood.

LETTER V. Against Vizard Masks.
By Sir HENRY --
AN Over-grownblack Patch! I Am as Zealous against the Mother, as an old Puritan
would be against all the abominable Daughters. Be as ugly as you will, let us
see you, but you're too wise, for then it is ten to nothing, we avoid you.

Yet there are some of you have indifferent Saleable Faces, and what reason
have those to hide 'em? Is It for fear they should blush and tell Tales, put on
your Masque for once when you read this, least Murder should out before you
are aware on it.

If you are really handsome, you imjure both your selves and us, by clapping
this Potlid-Face between us and you. If you are not, and talk pertly to us, how
many Thousand Lies are you the occasion of? How well are we all of the sudden
acquainted, tho we never saw one another before in our Lives? How sure are we,
that we are intimately acquainted with that Chin, and those Eyes: It Is
impossible we should be mistaken either in the Leer of one, or the Dimple of
the other; besides that inimitable soft Charming Voice of yours, to which, we
could make Affidavit, and know it as well as our own Nurses.

Well, after all this Chatt, which has lasted 2 or 3 Scenes, up goes the
Curtain, and a very Sycorax stares us in the Face, so Frightful perhaps and
Ghastly, that if Macbeth's a Playing, we are teady to take you for one of the
Witches, vanished from the Stage into the Pit or Gallerys, then we Nauseate all
our own compliments, start at the thoughts of a Succubus, and would not stay a
moment longer with you, tho like one of the wayward Sisters before mentioned,
you would give us a Kingdom for our reward.

And yet what honest meaning can you have by thus putting out the Lights? Some
dark work sure you have a mind to be employed in, and by this stratagem you can
defy Day it self, and make it Night whenever you please.

They talk of Witches calling the Moon out of Heaven, but you have found a way
to call the Sun thence, or which is the same thing, make it shine in vain, and
never reproach your crimes, or hinder your satisfactions.

Truth, indeed, seeks the Light, and hates all Disguises, but what is that to
Women, who are never more like themselves, then when they are Incognito, and who
have this still to say for it, that they cannot appear in a worse shape then
their own.

And now we talk of Truth, I wonder how the old doting Moralists, came to make
that, and all the other Virtues of the Feminine Gender. Fortitude it self, or
Manhood, tho it carries the Nobler Sex in its Nature, in most Languages, me yet
is reckoned of the other. If there were no Virtues, but what were to be found
in that Sex, 'twou'd almost tempt one to be of their doting opinion; who
pretend Virtue and Vice are both the same, and differ only in Name, and
Imagination,

But I think, they reckon the seven deadly Sins too of the same Gender, and in
that I confess, they have made some amends.

And there is hardly any of 'em that your Mask would not fit, for what some of
your Flatterers have said of some of your Sex, that if virtue were to take a
visible shape, 'twou'd certainly appear in theirs, may with more Justice and
Reason be said of Vice, at least as to a great part of you, who when once you
give your minds to 't, infinitely exceed Mankind, and are more exquisitely
wicked.

But you wear not this Velvet scurf for nothing. No, it is that the Amorous Sun
may not look upon you; nor the wind kiss you so close till it Chap your pretty
Lips; or for fear Apollo himself and all the Zephirs should fall in Love with
you.

But if that be your Fear, throw your masks by, for it is natural to desire
what is unknown; the Philosophers tells us, that Black drinks in the Rays of the
S^^, more greedily then any other Color: That subtle Chemist makes Gold in the
deepest Caverns of the Earth, however he seldom or never exposes it, without
some thin Crust over it, and who knows but through such a Feeble Curtain, he
may more easily transform your Faces, at least into the same Complexion? He may
double-Gild you, or at worst, Lackar you over, tho he will not be at the Charges
to finish the Process; or go quite through with his Transmutation.

However, of this you cannot be ignorant, that the closer you keep vout selves
from him, the more close he sticks to ye, when once he gets you at an advantage;
while those who are always exposed to his Courtship, and are not so squeamish
as you. he requites 'em with a natural Mask, which can defy all Weathers, and
will last 'em as long as their Lives.

HENRY --

Answer to Letter V.
By DAPHNE --
IF there are really such terrible things Lurking under a poor Mask, as you would
make us believe, and the very harmless Bead, that belongs to it, be as Mortal as
a chaw'd Bullet, I wonder you don't go on with your Reformation, and not only
pluck that off, but serve us as you sometimes do some of our Sex, whom you find
too honesi, gives us an ill Name, and turn us out to the Rabble, to strip us
for all together.

Sometimes we expose our selves overmuch, if but a part of our Necks happen to
be seen, and we Veil 'em not as an African Lady; your Modest Eyes are presently
offended, you are as angry as Olivia, and we are la^ing Nets and Springes for
amorous Woodcocks, and all stark naught to your own certain knowledge.

Will nothing please you? Will you make Laws for us, and repeal 'em again the
next moment, or will you oblige us, by such as are perfectly contradictory to
each other, or rule us absolutely without any Laws at all? Yes, doubtless, that
humors most your perverse Appetites: You Would all be Tyrants if you could, but we
shall claim the liberties of our Country, we are all Free born English
subjects, and had as good have no Government at all as such as we had better be
without. Be as much our Masters and our Sovereigns as you please, the Law is
your best Defense, as well as ours, and you must never hope so far to alter the
Fundamental Constitutions, as to render this the Purgatory of Women, which has
been esteemed and called their Paradise from immemorial Ages.

You must therefore give us leave when our Rights are thus invaded, to stand up
for 'em, at least quietly and modestly. Pray let us have the right of
addressing, lest we should be tempted to take more. Let us however, sigh under
our Grievances, for fear if you should be so unreasonable to deny that easy
remedy, we should be forced on those that would be more violent, and like
over-loaded Camels, throw off the unequal Burden.

My Mask's my Sanctuary, I Am in my own House, my Castle, if you attempt to turn
me out of that, if you dare but so much as draw a Latch, look you to what
follows!

I Will take leave to turn one of your own Canons upon you, since I Am so closely
be^ieg'd: Either you are pleased to see us look well, or you are not: If you
should have no more Wit nor Conscience, then to choose the latter, what is it to
you whether you ever see us or no? If the former, why are you displeased with
our endeavors to preserve that little Beauty Nature has given us? Especially
when you don't stick, to say it is the only thing for which you value us.

I know there is now and then the appurtenances of some Bags, but they are no
more a part of us, then of our Goldsmiths or Guardians.

We must not Paint, nor make use of an innocent Patch or two, to look a little
more Gallant, and distinguish our selves from the very Mob (amongst whom, tho
you're never so well acquainted, you can expect no writing-Ladies) nor hardly I
think so much as wash our Faces. Yet surely they are our own, and we may let
you see 'em or not as we think fit, and if we may not mend 'em, may at least
preserve 'em. Why are you not as Chargin at us for wearing Gloves, which if you
please you may call Masking our Hands, as for thinking fit to hide our Faces,
and yet if we happen but to pull one of those off, either necessary or
innocently, we must be called a thosand Vanitics? 'Twas to show the white hand,
and that all might admite it. Turn the Argument to the Face and try your Skill
in Answering it.

Pray where is the conscience or modesty of your Sex, or at least that so much
boasted Reason, in denying us such perfectly innocent Customs as these, and so
loudly exclaiming against 'em? Is It because you lay so many, and such easy
Restraints on your own Desires? Because you are so very modest, so over
Virtuous, so wonderfully mortified, that you cannot so much as endure any thing
in your Sight, that you are pleased to call Vanity? Shut your Eyes then of all
Loves, break all your great Glasses, make Scare-crows of your Flaming Wigs, and
reform all those Fooleries which we have as fairly told you of, in answer to
one or other of your Letters, as ever you did us of ours.

Daphne --

LETTER VI. That Women are more cruel than Men.
By Sir THOMAS --
WHich will appear beyond Contradiction by an Induction of Particulars. You are
evidently more cruel to Enemies, and even to Friends: To your Rivals, and your
lovers, and your very own dear selves, which would make one less wonder at your
Barbarity to all the rest.

And first for your Enemies, whom if you conquered by Right of War, and only
made use of the Advantages which Fortune gave you, as did your strapping
Amazonian Predecessors, when they rambled about the World, and carried
Slaughter and Destruction with 'em where ever they came; this would be somewhat
more excusable: But a Coward no more dares be Brave, than Merciful, nor is
therefore likely to Attack openly one he hates. You have more Sure and Private
Methods of Destruction: You outdo the very Crocodile, who is said to weep over
her Prey; for you kill smiling, and destroy embracing, like the Tyrant's
Daughter, as he called her; who had an Engine dressed up like a Beautiful
Woman, to whom he led those he had a mind to be rid of, who advancing to Salute
her, she immediately closed her Arms, and Crushed 'em to Death.

It Is a common Observation, that we never hear of any remarkable Mischief,
rarely of any Bloody Murder, but there is a Woman at one end on it; and that you
exceed the most Barbarous Thieves and Banditti in Thirst of Blood, those poor
Travelers feel, who fall into the Hands of such People, when they have any of
your Sex among them. You have all a Touch of the Wild-Irish in ye. You do ten
times more Mischief than the Men; and if Candles are to be made of Heretical
Tallow, or a Sprawling Child or two to be roasted, who but a Woman to dip her
Hands in the Grease of one, and Spit and Baste the other?

And if you can do this in Cold Blood, and from an Innate Love to Cruelty, with
little or no Provocation, what is the Viper then when his Spirits are enraged?
What a Figure do you make when possessed with your own proper Spirit (for you
need no worse) that I mean of Malice and Revenge? How amiable do you all look
when you're angry? How sweetly are all your Museles turned? How mild your Eyes?
How soft your Voice, and how like Incarnate Women all over?

The Worm turns a Serpent, and that a Dragon; you breathe as many Knives as a
Juggler ever swallowed; you von^^ Ropes as he does Ribbons, and have as many
sorts of Poisons as he brings Liquors from the Sponge between his Teeth; you
run-a-muck at all Mankind, Ranverse Nature, and ^ire the World.

This in ordinary Cases, but if you are once wrought to the height, if your
^ealousie or your Ambition urges you on new Methods of Ruin; if your Desires
are defeated, or your Loves refused, or your Crimes exposed, you are then a
thousand times worse than I Have yet described; more Nests of Hells and Furies
swarm within you; you are more Venemously, more rancorously implacable; all
Blasting, Lightning, and Hurricane. In short, so superlatively bad, that none
but you your selves can Conceive or Describe it.

Though after all, I think, you are less dangerous when you appear thus in your
own proper Shapes, than when disguised, almost past Knowledge, in those of Love
and Friendship: For then you perfectly drill us to Death, and murder us, as
they say Witches do, by turning us into Pincushions, and sticking us all over
with Nails and Bodkins, like an Orange with Cloves, or Bergerac with his Flies,
to give us the more lingering Torments.

Or else, to return to Witches again, when you have once Metamorphosed a Man
into that Brute of a Lover, you strait clap a Broomstaff behind him, and switch
him thro'thick and thin in all your Aerial Journeys, which way soever the Vane
happens to turn, the unaccountable Jaunts, and endless wild Goose Chases of
your own Jack-a-Lent Fancies, and unaccountable Humors.

A famous Doctor is of Opinion, that Spirits, though separate, have yet a Plastic
Power over Matter, and can mould a Body into whatsoever Form or Shape they
please, as we can a bit of Wax: For Example -- A Man into a Pudding, -- a Woman
into a Snake or Cat, or any other Mischievous Creature. An old Man, and a Child
into a Cockle, or an Oyster; which last may the more easily be brought about,
if that will but hold, which is very positively asserted by another Grave
Philosopher, that their Souls are the same already, or that he can hardly
imagine any Difference between 'em. But whether or no one word of this be true,
it is sure enough, you make us what you please, and most maliciously alter the
very Form and Figure of many a poor Lover; sometimes you draw out his Neck,
till by Virtue of a loosning Plaster of Hemp, it is as long as the Glutton
wished his own: But much oftener his Ears to that prodigious length, that Midas
was a mere Roundhead to him.

At one time you skrew his Face into a thousand Antic Forms, at another his
whole Body, which looks Asquint after you have once overlooked him, as much as
those Eyes which did it. His Chap falls, he hears with his Mouth, and only eats
with his Eyes; his Hands dangle, if they don't happen to fall cross one
another; and in a word, you steal him away from himself, and leave a perfect
Changling in his Room; and if there can be a higher or baser Instance of
barbarous Cruelty, than not only to do this, but to Triumph in it; and when you
have adorned your Courts and Anti-chambers with such Brutes of your own
transforming, as Circes Palace was stocked with, to divert your self, with
setting the poor Creatures together by the ears, to tear one another Hearts
out. I say, if you can show me any thing more brutally cruel than this, which
is your constant Practice; why, then I must own your Sex has one Reserve of
Mischief, wherewith I was never yet acquainted.

But it is in vain for Man to expect better Quarter, when your own Sex, if any
thing handsome, are as implacably hated by you as old Age, or a foolish
faithful Friend, that tells you all your Faults, in hopes to make you better.
You would all be Eleanors if you had R^samonds to deal with, and what maze so
intricate, that you have not a Model on it in your own Minds? Pulling Quoifs is
nothing, -- Tear out the Jades Eyes; off with her Nose (though war' Coventry;)
stamp her under Feet; she have my Man; she seduce my Husband; she pretend to be
as handsome as me; I Will eat her Heart; I Will gnaw her Soul; I Will grind her till
she is invisible.

Nay, Your Cruelty is extended, even to your selves as dearly as you dote upon
'em: Never were there elsewhere any Cannibals so fierce, as to eat themselves,
and feed on their own Flesh, though they perhaps might now and then make a
luscious Feast on a fat Friend, or Enemy. Envy makes you gnaw your own
Intrails, defeated Malice or Revenge sets you oftentimes quarrelling with your
selves, and wreaking your Spite on your own Minds or Bodies, because you cannot
reach others: But Pride is the most vexatious Devil of all your Tormentors.

To this you are half Martyrs; for this it is that you so often wear a Scotch
Boot all over ye. The Thumbkin's a Jest to it, and no more than a strait pair of
Gloves. You are so far from allowing your selves room to Eat, that you care not
whether you can breathe or no, so you can but look fine, and have your
admirable Shape commended. What a Bastile of Whalebone you drag about with you?
You are more th^^ chained, for you are both Pinioned and Manacled, and can stir
no otherwise than a poor Reynard, caught in a Trap, which he drags after him;
-- though subtle as you are, his Cunning here goes beyond ye; for he will gnaw off
his own Leg to get out of Prison, but you would do the same, rather than be
delivered, -- any more than S -- n in the Jakes, on his own Sabbath; and since
you are so fond of your Cage, 'twere, I think, pity to disturb you, and there I
leave ye.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter VI.
By Madam GODFREY --
BLess us Sir! What Monsters you make us, sure you were never born of a Woman,
or at least will take care never to touch one of those infectious Creatures,
lest you should blister all over.

We used to reckon our selves pretty harmless Creatures, soft and mild, and
tender hearted, and were ready to screek when we did but hear of any Bloody
Murder committed by your Sex, and always afford our Pity to the greatest
Criminals when they are miserable. Nay, a higher instance of our Compassionate
Temper, we have too often no more Wit then to believe you, when you swear and
whine and make ugly Faces, and pretend you have no choice but that of Ragoo,
the Woman or the Gallows, and are of a quite contrary humor to his, for you will
Dangle if you may not have the Woman, he rather then have her. And thus you
seduce us, like other easy Friends, to bail you Body for Body, and soon get
laid up in your Room, while you, when your Turn is ^uce served, never more
value or regard us.

You say we are Cruel to our Enemies, if we were indeed severe toward them,
and justly punished 'em, you could not very reasonably blame us, but it is too
evident, our fault lies on the other side, and we are over-merciful. What more
formidable Enemy have we then Mankind, without whose help the Devil himself
could not hurt us, as they say he cannot Poison without the Witch, to whom but
you, do so many of us owe their Ruin, and how few of ye are there, that do not
bear the same Malice in Heart against our whole Sex, and would, if you had an
opportunity, treat 'em in the same manner; and yet, Ah! you know we are but too
ready to forgive you.

If we should grant that where a Woman is once thoroughly engaged in any
Barbarous Action, so contrary to our Natures, she is then more cruel, even then
you who instruct her, yet all that we can thence conclude is, that a Renegade
is the Bloodiest Turk; that your Company and Conversation can change our
Natures, and make us sometimes run wild like your selves; and lastly, that the
Corruption of the best things is the worst, and that we may therefore guess how
excellent the Wine was once, which is now grown such keen Vinegar.

I well hoped you would have stopped your Career, when you had run so far as to
make us in our Fury, overturn whole Nature, and Fire the World; But it seems,
Sir T. you have more mischief for us still to do: In the case of Jealousy,
Ambition, or Revonge, when we are wrought, you say to the height, but I
confess, I thought both you and we had been in our Altitudes before, and that
you looked and spoke in the last Paragraph, exactly like one that had ^wly ^^st
his Minress, and was just Raving at the Disappointment The Truth is, after you
had made us destroy one World, you ought at least to have taken care for
another, some Foot-hold, and Foundation to play our pranks upon, before you had
brought us upon the Stage, and not left us floating in Chaos without any Mercy.

You are often talking of Witches, Sir T. are you sure none of 'em ever did you
any injury? Authors say they can work strangely upon the Imagination; sometimes
they will make my Lord Mayor himself, and all his Hounds mistake an old Woman for
a Hare, as stout a Puss as ever went panting over Bansted Downs. At other times
they will steal a Trick from Pimperlepimp, and persuade ye, that you see vast
heaps of Money before ye, as large as the Bankers have in their Chests; Anon
they will make you think all you see is Raw-head, and Bloody-Bones, and as
Pentheus's Aunts and Mother mistook him for a Wild-Boar, so you take all our
soft and innocent Sex, for Hyaena's and Tygresses.

If you are really of that opinion, 'twill be in vain to attempt persuading you
out on it, especially while you labor under such an infected imagination. But
if you should happen ever to come to your self again, pray Answer a Question or
two, which you may easily remember, for your memory I find is still indifferent
sound, tho you may be, I fear, a little touched in your other Faculties.

Of What Sex think ye was Phalaris, Mezentius, Sylla, Catiline, Domitian, and
Nere, and all the other Famous Tyrants in the World?

And who are those, who now make so great a disturbance in it, and have for so
many years indeed endeavored to overturn it?

They are, if I mistake not, the Men, who Kill, Burn, and Ravish for Sixpence a
day all over Chistendom, unless you will say they are too Generous to set their
Villainies at so low a rate, and that they rather commit 'em, as we do, for
their own satisfaction and diversion.

And with the same Justice, you would have us Answer for all the Antic Tricks
you are guilty of, when the Spirit of Love has possessed ye. Whatever Beasts
you turn your selves into, let not us Answer for it. Can we help the growth of
your Ears, or would you have us dress all your sham-sore-Hearts, which you
exp^se as other Beggars do their Legs, or Heads, to wring out the Charity of
every well disposed Fool th^^ passes by 'em? No, in these Cases People are now
generally hardened, and much for the same reason, and therefore pray take the
same Answer: We cannot give to all, and there is so many cheats, we know not
whom to believe.

But suppose you could get off the latter, the former will still remain and be
unanswerable. Are we cruel because we don't make minc't Meat of our Hearts, and
give a little to every pretender? Or would every one of you have all, and force
us to work Miracles to content you?

For ought I see, should we Quarter our selves and give every one of ye a
piece, even that would not satisfy, and we should be only reproacht with
Cruclty to our selves, instead of kindness to you; since you already are so
disingenuous to reproach us as guilty of the same vice, because we put our
selves to some inconvenience, and it may be, pain too, in our Dresses, merely
to oblige your Generous Sex, who thus thank us for it.

Rachel Godfrey.

LETTER VII. That in a Dishonorable Arnour the Woman's most to blame.
By Mr. PALMER --
THat you were the first Tempters of Mankind, I think you will not deny, and
'twou'd be to as little purpose, to pretend that you have not followed that Trade
ever since. But supposing that now and then it should be otherwise, yet it is
certain, if you would never yield, none would ever tempt you, which it may be they
begin often in Jest, when you catch 'em at their word, and yield in earnest.

However, I doubt not to prove, that whoever begins such an Intrigue, the women
are always most in fault in the managing it, for they have the Restraints of
Modesty, and Shame and Nature, or if they shake off these, a strong bias of
Interest and Custom, They run much the greater hazard in their Person and
Reputation. They know all this, they have heard a thousand times, that those
Oaths on which they force our Sex in those mac^ers, are reckoned but things of
course, and (...) Obligatory then their own (...) Erernal Friendship. They see
their Neighbors ruined every day, it may be their Kindred, their Sisters,
their Friends, or their near Acquaintance: Yet they will on in the same Road,
it is Green and Pleasant, they have agrecable company in 't, and it humors
their Vanity, they are admired and praised, and kneer'd and sung to, and
treated and caressed, and for this they part with two Worlds, and think they
have a good bargain.

Nay, how can they deny but they tempt their Tempters? For how frequently does
it so fall out, and yet they expect to be pitied for what they are ruined for.
What is it they Dress and Dance, and Patch and Paint, and Sing and Sigh, and
Ogle, and lay all the Love-Nets with which they are furnished, either by Art or
Nature, what is all this ado for, but to please, and why would they plcase but
to be ruined? They dress themselve irresistably, and then complain that they
ca^^e resist others: They triffle in the Flame till they burn their silken
wings, and then buzz unpitied about the Room, or creep into some chink or
corner, and are starved to Death.

The Man has generally none to govern him, or to advise him better, but you
have a Father, a Friend, a Guardian, or it may be a Husband. But I ask your
pardon, since on better thoughts the odds rather lies there on your side; the
very apprehension of restraint is sufficient, to make any true woman break her
Neck to get loose, and she will ten times rather choose to fall, then to accept of
any such Friendly hands to support her.

Again, how equal soever they may be in the Crime, it is certain that custom
makes a wide difference in the Disgrace and Disreputation. It ruins the Woman,
but which of you likes the Man ever the worse? I wish I need not say, you often
like him the better. However, a Slip of youth covers all, but it stands you in
stead to set your Foot firm, for if you fall, Farewell for ever!

And is there not some reason, that the greater weight of shame should be cast
on the Woman, since there is so much depends on her Fidelity and Honesty? The
Estate, if she is false, is carried into another Blood, and the true heirs
irrecoverably injured. Besides the Disgrace that lights on the Husband, his
Honor not being in his own keeping, but enclosed in as slender a viol as
Franeion allots, to something that requires equal care to preserve it.

Lake Palmer --

Answer to Letter VII.
By Madam CROCKFORD.
NOW, could you prove this indeed, 'twou'd be a great piece of Service to your
Sex, and be a Means of giving ye what you could none of ye e're pretend to,
that is, the Reputation of a little good Nature and Modesty: But that the
Charge is notoriously False and Vujusst, and the mere Effect of Malice aad
Revenge, is evident to any Person, that has but a Dram of Sense: -- And indeed
one would admire how it is possible for Man to be guilty of such, more than
Diabolical Villainy, as to use all their Wit and Industry to Court, Flatter,
nay, even Force a Woman to Ruin, and then turn all the Obliquy and Shame of the
Action upon her, and pretend they would never Attempted, had they not bin sure of
Success: -- That there is some of our Sex too Credulous and Weak, we will not
deny; that their good Nature does sometimes betray 'em to Intriegues, that are
not Justifiable, we also grant; but that they are most to blame on these
Occasions, you can never make any unprejudiced Person believe: which Party is
it, pray, makes the first Onset? It Is not the Custom of our Sex, however
Inferior to yours, to become your Petitioners. Is it not you Men that are
always at pains of Courtship: And, if in a Criminal Amor, how many Sighs,
Vows, and Slavish Submissions, must a Man be guilty of, before he can obtain
the least Favor? You say our Sex has the Restraints of Modesty and Reputation,
etc. which yours want: Really, we are obliged to'e, that you will grant us so
much, though I Am pretty well satisfied you would rather we were without those
Restraints, that you might have the Pleasure of Damning your Selves, and
Ruining us at an easier Rate. But I say, how much Time, Watching, Presents,
Bribing of Servants, Carressing of Friends, eternal Waiting, constant unwearied
Importunities must a Man be at the Expense of, before he makes a Complete
Conquest.

Whereas if we were so naturally inclined to Lewduess, we should be glad to
accept the first Offer, or at least, not refuse too long, lest our eager Spark
should retire, without letting us have the Pleasure of Surrend'ring.

But the Truth is, which you all know, though you will be hanged before you will
confess it; Women are naturally more Cold and Chaste then Men, though should we
grant our Passions equal, 'twou'd but more Enhance the Esteem of our Virtue,
since it is more difficult for those Persons to be honest, that have violent
Inclinations to the contrary, than it is for them that have not such Desires:
But we will not pretend to more Virtue than we really have, and therefore
freely own our selves not so Amorous as you.: And consequently, were there any
such thing as a Virtuous Man, he could not have too large Commondations.

You say you have not so many Friends to advise with as we: But pray, whose fault
is that? What hinders your having Good Counsel, beside your own Pride and
Vanity, which makes you scorn to hear it? And what you say of us in this Case,
may with good reason be be returned upon you, should any Friend be so kind to
admonish you, the very Apprehension of such a Restraint would be sufficient to
make any Man Choose, and more eagerly pursue his Destruction. And that way at
least he would justify his pretending to be Absolute Master of himself, by
showing that he dares be Damned, in spite of all Warning, either from Friends
or Enemies.

As for your other Argument, that however Equal in the Crime, the Woman's
Disgrace. is greatest, it is easily answered, to your own Eternal Confusion, --
It Is true, we are more taken Notice of, and Reproached; but why? Is it not
because the almost Universal Debauchery of your Sex keeps People from minding
it; when if a Woman be guilty of Swearing, Drinking, or the other Vice you
charge us with, it is presently carried from one to another, like a piece of
strange incredible News, till at last it becomes the Town Talk. But you say we
like you the better for your Slips of Youth, as you call your worst of Crimes:
-- Did any Woman ever tell ye so? We often marry Men, that are, or have bin
Vicious, and how is it possible to help it? For if we resolved to Marry none
but those of undoubted Virtue and Honesty, 'twou'd be the same thing, as to Vow
perpetual Virginity, since among the vast Number of your Sex, 'twou'd be
impossible to find enough to keep 100 of the Women in England out of a Nunnery.
Your last Argument has the most Reason, though I Am too weery of the Subject, to
talk any more on it, only thus much I shall observe, -- That it is no Argument of
Women's being the Worse, or the Weaker Sex, that Heaven, which cannot err, has
entrusted her with the Estate, Honor, and Quiet of the Family.

Esther Crockford.

LETTER VIII. Against Romances.
By Sir THOMAS --
I Thought I had done with Love; but it is such a Pertinacious Devil, that though
conjured down never so often, 'twill still rise again, and disturb the World.
Now it appears in the Shape of some distressed Damsel, or Pensive Knight, and
erects its Trophys on as many Sacks full of Romances, as ever the old Woman and
the Curate Sacrificed to the Flames, when they cleared Don Quixot's Study, and
b^oke him for a Speculative Knight Errant; and had they sent all the rest
after, and to had bin Death for any Scribbler to have plagued the World with
any more of the same Brood, to had bin a happy thing for us all: But especially
for you Women, whose Libraries one might almost venture to reckon up, and swear
to, without ever seeing 'em. -- Almahide, Ariana, Aristotle's Problems,
Astraea, Clelia, Cleopatra, Culpepper, 'twou'd make a Catalogue indeed, to run
through the whole Alphabet, and would tire the Brazen Lungs of a Stentor, or a
Jeffrys, to repeat one quarter of 'em. -- And if among the Crowd there should
happen to be one stray Solitary Prayer Book, or Practice of Piety, it is sure to
have a Cobweb woven cross the Leaves, instead of a pair of old-fashioned
Strings or Ribbons. There it lies, and has never bin disturbed since the last
great Thunder: You Women, for your parts, know how to employ your Time much
better, at least more to your Satisfaction. In some brisk new airy Romance you
find both your Mattins and Evensongs: -- That Is your Epistle, and Gospel and
all; your first and last Employment. For this you part with Sloth it self; nay,
your darling Pride can hardly Rival it; for you will rather grow old for want of
Sleep; nay, venture firing the House, and bring your self Spitchcockt in the
middle on it, then leave off before you have done the Story.

Which that you may be sure not to forget, you make all the haste you can to
Transcribe it into your own Life and Actions; Spirit away every Lady or Knight
that you most fancy, and make 'em all your own; nor are you more transformed
from your true Selves, in your Bodies, when you appear in public with borrowed
Cheeks, or Teeth, or Eyes, then your Minds are Metamorphosed by the Transfusion
of these Fooleries; -- And when a Woman does change, there is little need of
proving it is for the worse. The Lover must be the sweet Knight, Montelion; the
Mistress, the most Chaste and Virtuous Damsel Dulcinea, Asteria, Statira,
Hortensia, Valeria, and so down to Calia and Phillis. The old Bawd of a
Confident, nothing better or worse than the Sage Vrganda; every little
Gobetween, some Dwarf or Wizzard; and it may be, the Father himself, or
Relation, and best Friend she has, some wicked Enchanter, or cruel Jaylour; and
the Rival to be sure, no less than the confounded Giant Pandafilando. Nay,
worse than all this, we shall find few of those Books but have some fighting
Lady or other, a First-^ate Heroine in the Story, who either in Disguise, or
else barefaced, with her Bever up, and sometimes her Hair about her Ears,
shall rush into the Battle, lay about her like the Amazonian Dame, Penthesilie,
and kill ye for a Breakfast some Forty or Fifty Men. Now, what a dangerous
President this is to their Sex, and of how ill Consequence to ours, I leave to
the practical Judgment of any poor Confessor or M^^^yr in Matrimony, who has
often found (...) honored and obeyed with a Threefoo^ (...), or a Ladle, while
he is forced to wor^^^^ Rampant Spouse in the strictest Sense o^ (...) Word,
fall upon his Knees, to save his S^^ulders, and Adore his Wife Incarnate, as
the Indian does other Fiends, merely in his own Defense, and for fear they
should devour him.

And all this they can do, because they dare. From the E^^^y^ng Examples they
learn from their ^^ad^es, and read in Romances, as Modern Regicides and
Debauchees are hardened, by reading the Atchievments of their Predecessors in
former Ages. And if they fai^ to inspire 'em with a Fighting Familiar, they do
at least with a loving one, which it may be will prove more importunate, aod
trouble^ (...) the former: This renders 'em imper^ment, vain, and uneasy to
themselves and others. They form Ridiculous and Impossible Notions, and attempt
as Absurd Actions. 'T^s true, the Defenders of these sort of Writings will tell
you they must draw their Herce something bigger than the Life, because some
A^^^ wance must be made for Distance; but granting this, yet what need of so
vast and unnatural a disproportion, as we almost always find between a Romantic
and a^ Historical Herce? You Will say true History affords not near so much
Diversion as a well penned Roman^^^ But can your Sex be pleased with (...) but
Lies? or (...) there not (...) noble, as well as instructive in ^^^^ory, (were
that your Province of which, more before you and I part) It Is a strange
Green-Sick^^ss sort of Appetite, which generally and almost universally reigns
in the Minds of your Sex, that nothing will down with you but Trash and Wall,
Trifles and Bawbles, while you turn up your Noses, and pout at wholesome Food.
It Is true, were you always Children, or would you but think your selves what
you really are, 'twou'd be the best Excuse that could be brought for your
doting so much on these sort of writings, which a witty Man says may be of very
good use to Children, to allure 'em to Reading, and the Study of better things:
But you seem to make these the very Top and End of your Learning, and neither
go any further, nor desire to do so: The great Children are still in their
Hornbooks, and very well pleased with 'em too; or if they do take out, it is to
something a Form lower than A^sop's Fables. An infallible Proof of what has bin
often asserted by your humble Dotards, that you have equal Capacity with those
whom Nature has justly made your Masters, and who leave you to take up with
those Exercises, when you come to what should be your Years of Discretion,
which they soon after their Infancy learnt to despise, leaving the reading
Romances, the making ^irt-Pyes, and playing with your Sex altogether.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter VIII. For Reading Romances.
By Madam GODFREY --
WE never had yet, a she- Quixote, that I read or heard of, and therefore it
seems, make not such an ill use of Romances, as you your selves who have
Composed 'em. You can scarce Name two or three, that were ever Written by a
Woman, and if you were the Authors, you published 'em with a Design they should
be Read, and we never yet knew of any Public Act, directed by our Masters to
your poor Slaves, whereby on pain of your displeasure, we were prohibited to
read 'em. It Is hard however, that you put us to defend your Follies, as well as
our own, and contrary to your own Rules, Sir T -- for you threatened us, only
with what was peculiar to our Sex; whence it is evident, that you are not able
to find any great matter against us,

For once however we'll try to split the Hair, and leaving the Extravagance and
ill effects of those sorts of Books, to be defended by their Authors, do not
doubt, but we shall find a way to excuse at least our Reading 'em, and to suck
Honey even out of those Poisonous Flowers, with which you present us.

Not that you could justly blame us, neither were there never so much mischief
in those kind of Books, for we are, you say, weak and innocent Creatures, and
it is not easy for us to know the difference between Good and Evil, yet you take
no manner of care of our Education, you leave us to Servants and Dancing
Masters, instruct us not what to choose, or what to avoid; whereas you are so
partial to your own Sex, that our Brothers have all the assistance of ingenious
Literature, you give 'em an early taste of Science, and by the perusal of Good
Authors. let 'em into the Wisdom of former Ages: We attempt to follow 'em, from
the natural Principle of Imitation, as far as we are able, but Alas! are soon
left for want of some to Guide us; we then take up sometimes with Romance,
instead of Solid History, and how should we know any better, when if you teach
us to Write and Read, that is all we are to expect toward the Cultivation of our
minds, and yet you are so unconscionable to reflect upon us, if they happen to
be more Barren then yours

But yet it is un^enyable, that both the Style and the matter of these Books are
of some Advantage to us: They teach us Words, and let us into the Beauties of
our own Language: They are in some sort more instructive, as well as much more
diverting than many Histories: An Historian relates things as they really are,
or at least ought to do so; but a fine Romance gives 'em us as they ought to
be, or as the Reader would wish 'em; he is sure to bring off the principal Hero,
and his Mistress Triumphant and Happy: The Storms they meet with make their
Future Success more agreeable to the Reader, and besides arm our Minds against
the Reverse of F^^tune. What is it to the Purpose whether the Subjects of the
Relation were Real or Fabulous Persons; or if they ever had any real Existence,
whether they Acted or Spoke just as is there represented? If every thing is
above the Life, it is not likely to make stronger Impressions than if it were
only a faint Imitation of what really happened. Besides, pray what Infallible
Rule can your Wisdoms give us, whereby we may distinguish Truth from Falsehood
in the Gravest Historians? I think you rekon Livy none of the meanest, and
would you have us be such very Oafs to believe Mutius Scevola ever spoke that
fine Oration, when his Fist was a broyling, which he has made for him? No, --
I Will as soon believe all Clelia as one Word on it, any more than that his
Generals had nothing else in their Heads just before Engagements, than to make
fine Orations which it is not likely the thousandth part of their Army could
ever hear.

And when we add to this, the base Partiality, Flattery, Prejudice, Interest,
Malice, which we find in most Historians, and which we lie so bare, that even
we can see it^ Vices, wherewith none can charge our Inn^cent Romances; this
will in great part excuse our reading the latter, and being less concerned that
we cannot so often come by the former.

But yet further, none can deny but that here are excellent Examples o^
Courage, Fidelity, Chastity and Obedience, of the strictest and the nicest
Honor and Virtue that can easily be any where found, which we hope are not the
worse for being described, in an agreeable Style, and Diverting manner.

As for those who dote on 'em to that degree that you represent, as we don't
defend 'em, so we doubt not but many more of your Sex are guilty of such
Extravagancies, because we are generally otherwise employed, and only read 'em
now and then for Diversion; but you, when you are once at your own Disposal,
must do that or worse, and therefore are more universally besotted with 'em.

Rachel Godfrey.

LETTER IX. That a Black-a-moor Woman is the greatest Beauty.
By Mr. BEXFORD
TAke 'em as they come, for I don't pretend Power of Creation, and none who is
without it can bring any order out of a Sex that is all confusion. This Bomb is
levelled directly against one Angle of your Pride, and I hope will lay it low
enough. You generally show that Judgment for which some so much admire you, in
being most pleased with the vainest and most ridiculous things you can think
of, among which I may justly reckon your complexions: I call 'em yours on
supposition you came honestly by 'em, and that they were fairly bought and paid
for: But supposing for once you should be beholden to Nature only for 'em, and
Art had nothing to do in their Composition, have not you, think you, great reason
to be Proud of what a Tulip enjoys in so much greater perfection, and yet a
stinking us^^ess Flower after all; Good for nothing, but like your selves, to
be set a top of a Cupbord, or adorn a Chimney? Nature has however in one thing
been so civil to mankind, that we cannot but admire both her Kindness and her
Justice. She has generally given you a mark, that the you flatter your selves,
you may not be able to deceive us, and the Fairer you are -- I Will only say, we
know you are not the wiser. But after all, since there will be some womaniz'd
Fools of our own Sex, that cannot be kept from running mad for the outside of a
skin, and doting on a fine Complexion, I shall prove, to mortify their Pride
and yours, that a despised Mooress is really a greater Beauty then all your
Finieal chalky-fac'd European Ladies; The Sun has but half-baked you, you are
not arrived to the perfection of Mullattos, much less are such finished pieces,
such double refined Earthen ware as the charming Negro Ladies.

Do You start at the very thoughts of such a Comparison, and Pray what reason?
You are all Blacks as soon as the Impartial Night has drawn her Veil over the
World, and clapped her Velvet Mask on the Face of Nature. And who knows whether
you are not so by day too? Nothing more deceitful then Color, your Hearts are
hardly greater cheats then your Faces: You more properly appear to be then are,
and all your Red and White may have no more reality then the gaudy Colors of
the Rainbow: And would you be persuaded to part but with as much of your skin,
as you cover with one indifferent patch, I cannot tell but a good Microscope
would show so much deformity in it, that it might almost make you out of Love
with your selves. How Yellow and Tawry might it appear? What an odious scurf
upon it? How many Armies of Living-Creatures might we there discover? Most of
which inconveniences, it is very probable a Darker Face never has, for 'twou'd
be but black ^ill, and perhaps much smoother and s^fter then yours. If you
don't in your own Judgment give the Garland to a Black Beauty, why are you all
so fond of Patches? If it is an addition to your Charms to have a part of your
Face of that Color, must you not yield to theirs who are so all over? It Is
true, they have some among 'em, Born much after the same manner that you are
dressed, some motly faced Creatures; with sick unwholesom Complexions: But then
these are hated and abhorred amongst 'em. They reckon that the Leprosy or the
Plague, which you affect and admire: They make these their Conjurers and
Witches, and with Congruity enough to their opinion, that the Devil himself is
white, and accordingly they paint him in that manner; and I believe all our
European World are so far of their mind, that they believe there is more danger
in white-Witches and white-Devils (tho old Wives say, nothing that is hurtful
can appear in that Color) then in the blackest, ugliest, smoak-dry'd Hag or
Fiend, that ever yet frighted the World.

Nor can you deny, that their Complexion is infinitely more lasting then yours,
the consequence whereof seems to be that it is also more perfect. A Fright, a
fit of Sickness, a cold, an Ague changes yours, disturbed and altered like
these lower Regions, while theirs are like the pure Ether above, free from all
Storms and Alterations; or rather like the space beyond the World, there is
something in it that is venerable and almost divine, and it remains undisturbed
in the Serenity of Darkness.

But surely there are the Beauties of the mind too, as well as of the Body, and
those as much more Charming, as well as lasting, then the other, as you think
your Faces beyond a Negro's: But if you once come to a Comparison there, Paris
himself would give it against you. What is there that makes a Wife
handsomely-humour'd, but Industry, Fidelity, Humility, and Obedience? And where
can Europe show us any thing of these, like what we find in he African Ladies?

Even the poor Slaves enjoy these Virtues to Admiration. One of 'em shall be
more useful, and do more work then a whole Seraglio of Lazy, white-liver'd
Europeans. Indeed they are good Slaves, and consequently Answer the end for
which Nature invented their Sex: Will patiently endure Hunger, Cold, or any
Hardship: No Gossipings to torment ye, no costly Lyings-in, or Churchings to
Plague and Ruin ye, but as soon as Pickaninny's Born, and soundly sowst in the
next cold water they meet with, up it goes upon the Mothers Back, and no
further trouble about it.

Then they are the humblest, dociblest, most obedient Creatures; O, that every
English Lady-wife had one of 'em in her House, for an Example, or would but
often look upon Behus Imoinda for the same reason. It may be, it might work
some good upon ye, and the poor Heathens might shame ye into Duty and
Obedience. When I wonder, shall we see one of you so meekly, so gently hold out
your Necks, like innocent Lambs, when your Lord and Husband intimates his will
and pleasure, that you should resign your Lives to his Disposal? But I cannot
tell how far such bright Examples may work upon ye: You may have something of
Generosity, some Sparks of noble Emulation yet remaining, and I Will not yet
despair of ye, but that in time you may all come to be Imoinda's, In every
thing but her End.

W. Bexford.

Answer to Letter IX.
By SAPHO.
YOUR Judgment we see is so sound, it cannot be mended, but you ought, Sir, to
have a better Memory, or at least a readier Invention; since in Answer to my
Friends Essay in Defense of our Sexes Ornaments, you positively affirm that
Beauty is more than Fancy, and that it is a wide Mistake, that a Black is
equally beautiful with an Enropean; but it served your turn then, whereas 'twas
now against you; since the contrary Proposition would help you to a sorry
Reflection upon our Sex, you chopped at it as greedily as possible, and Black's
White, and White, Black in the same moment.

We shall never fight fair if we know not where to meet you, and we can scarce
expect that, when you don't know it your self, for one quarter of an Hour.

However, pray take this along with you, before we come to the Merits of the
Cause, that Women are neither the most fickle Creatures in the World, nor the
only Persons that vary their Minds according to the Occasion.

And now for your pleasant Paradox, -- at the very first sight whereof, one had
need be very Charitable, not to suspect your Honesty. Pray, were you ever
asho^r at St. Johanna, or can you clear your self that you have had no Trading in
the Plantations? or any lovely Female Black of your own, on whom like another
-- you have bin passionately enamored? This, indeed, would be some sort of
Excuse for your Ingenuity, but I cannot tell what to say to your Virtue. That Is
in your own keeping, Mr. B. as well as your Reputation; and (to hope the best)
if you have a Mind to make your bright Sabra a Lady, I know not who can hinder
you.

But yet, as a Friend, give me leave to advise you: We have bin acquainted of
old, Mr. B. tho grown a little stranger now. Come, you have a fine Gentleweman,
and do but make it fairly your own Case: Suppose you should passionately love a
fine Lady, and she should have no more sense nor modesty than to d^at upon some
Dusky Othelio among her Foct^en; some hard-favour'd, thick lipp'd, Degrees nosed,
Heathenish Wretch, and refuse your Addresses, and throw her self into ^is A^as,
as the Spanish Lady manag^d ma^ters with the Moor in the Stable; pray how would
you like this? and should ye, think ye, be oversparing of your Censures on such
an Occasion? I verily believe you would not, and I know not who could blame ye.
But pray then do but be at the pains to turn the Scales, and put your self in
the contrary balance.

Why should so many, not- contemptible Ladies, languish for you, and you more
cruel than an Hyrcanian Tygar? But I Will say no more, only wish for your own
sake, that you had omitted this one fatal Confessing Letter, which as good as
declares the Reason why you are so very angry with all our European Ladies.

Let it be as it will, we must defend our selves, and if possible, will
maintain the Ancient unquestioned Prerogative of our Sex, in all Controversies
to have the last word.

I much wonder, when your hand was in, that you did not affirm a Black Lady was
as fair as a White, as well as beautiful, since a fair Lady, and a Beauty have
never bin thought in our Language, very different from one another.

But who knows not whether we are not all Blacks by Day, as well as by Night?
True, Mr. B. -- and a very shroud Observation. But then you must consider it
returns -- Who knows but your Blacks too are Whites? And then we are still even
-- or you may, if you please, ring the Changes, and make one the other, till
you have mingled us so, that you know not which is which, nor how to part us.

I thought you had bin a better Philosopher than to say the Night is Black. You
cannot say so of the Air; which, as I remember, our Friend, Mr. Boil, says, is
Diaphanous and of no color at all. What is it then, our Faces, which you
compliment in that manner, but with as little Truth or Reason? For how can you
say they are Black when you cannot see 'em? for if you do that, you plainly
discover they are of another hiew.

Besides, if we are all Black, why do you prefer others before us? But alas,
it is too late to complain.

We cannot tell indeed what we might appear, if you looked upon us with a pair
of Virtuoso Spectacles, but then you would do well to consider Mr. B. that we may
in Justice expect the same Advantage, which might be a greater Inconvenience to
you, than you imagine. For who knows but we should discover that Ruby-Face of
yours was actually all a Fire, and ten or twelve Squadrons and Battalions of
little Gentlemen belonging to some invisible Ensurance Office thereabouts,
carrying Buckets of Claret to quench it? How like soever our Faces may be to
the Rainbow, we know what yours is; the Colors there we are certain are real,
and defy any Micr^scope to present us with greater Vari^ty.

Your Black Ladies have, we must confess, this undeniable Advantage over us,
that their Faces can never be worse: Well, Sympathy is a thing not to be
disputed against, and who can blame you for admiring 'em?

If they grow Pale and White with Sickness, we grow Dark and Black, and so far
you cannot give 'em the Pre-eminence.

But their Humors, you say, are more Beautiful: Yes, doubtless, for Nature
generally takes Care to fit a fair Soul with a beautiful Body, of which, Mr. B.
you are an Instance beyond Disputation.

When you tell us plainly what you would be at, and what you expect from us, when
you are so ingenuous to own nothing would content you, but the basest degree of
Subjection and Servitude, and drily persuade us that there is a wonderful Virtue
in planting Tobacco, and having our Throats cut; you must excuse us, Mr. B. if
the Woman begin to stir a little, and we have laid you more open than ever we
intended. Fight fairer for the future, and we promise you that you will meet
with fairer Enemies.

Sapho.

LETTER X. Against Naked Breasts.
By Sir THOMAS --
I Am scarce well resolved, whether I should reprove this fulsome Vanity, which
so many of your Sex are guilty of, or let it quite alone, since it may be the
best way to keep Men from venturing on you in a Lump, would be to show 'em such
a Nauseous Sample.

However, on second thoughts, since you lay your Baits so fair, I think it may
be of some service to let the unwary know what Poison lies hid under 'em, and
to set up a mark near the dangerous Rocks of such mischievous Land-Syrens, who
not content with those broad Signs, hung out in their Eyes and Faces to force a
Trade, must expose their Goods too upon the very Stalls, that all may know what
they deal in. And are these the only remains of your Grandmothers Innocence? Is
your meaning, in throwing off a part, to persuade us you could if you pleased,
as easily be without the whole, and that you are really willing to turn
Adamites, if you could but have any Encouragement to renew the fashion? Or
rather to imitate your Painted Ancestors, differing but in this, that you dawb
your Faces only, while they laid it on equally, and blushed all over?

If you want a President in this Age, you may find enough among the Africans
and Cannibals, who have even outdone you in this instance of Civility and good
Breeding, you uncover a great part, while they keep as little co^er'd.

Were you obliged to such an hardship as this, by the Laws of God or Man, and
forced to expose those tender parts to the Inclemencies of the weather, and the
rough ^alutes of our Northern Air, there would need no more to exasperate you
to the last degree, to make you all turn Atheists and Rebels.

What was clothing made for? And why do you thus Lure, and tempt mankind to your
mutual Destruction? Why do you expose those fatal Glasses to burn our Eyes out,
to blind and enslave and ruin us?

How contrary is this to the custom of all modest and virtuous women, I mean
those who would pass for such, in all Places and Ages? The very Africans Veil
themselves from Head to Foot, and their Cozen-Germans, the Spaniards, are not
less careful: While we, who have more need of covering in our climate, unveil
as much as for shame, we are able.

There Is scarce any Creature, but is Veiled by Nature with something or other,
to Learn us that piece of modesty, but you are perverse Scholars, and don't
much regard her Instructions: Nay, she has given you Hair, which if you would
cherish, would it may be sufficiently hide you: If you are then for appearing
purely as Nature made you, let that but hang dishevelled about your Ears, and
'twill be some relief to our Eyes, and not put such an apparent Rape upon our
Sexes modesty.

In what other thing can you pretend to be either like Truth, or Innocence, but
that you are so very fond of appearing in the same manner?

If shame does naturally attend Nakedness, when there is yet any the least
Footsteps left of native Ingenuity and Modesty; unless you have either no guilt
or no shame, Learn to blush and to amend.

Thomas --

Answer to Letter X. Concerning Naked Breasts.
By Madam WOOD --
THat you begin to rank your own Gravity among the old Fashioned Gentlemen, we
need no more to evince then this last Letter, for you Preach very earnestly
against the vices of your own times, which are now almost forgotten, I wonder
we have not another Letter against Fardingales, and a Pathetick Reclamation, or
two, after your way, concerning the horrid scandal they give to Persons of your
modest Complexion and Conversation. But even when a little of the Neck was more
usually seen in our Dresses, then it is now, Pray what Harm in it, or what more
would there be, should we think sit to take it up again? It Is cool in Summer,
and hardens us against Winter, and why do you blame it? Ill to him that thinks
ill, tho it is hard we must mew our selves up, and keep quite out of sight, on
purpose to prevent your Scandalous Imaginations. Which yet there would be some
pretense for, were there any hopes to reclaim you, or make you ever the better;
for is it not frequent for you to own that you are most mad for what is kept
the most strictly from you, and consequently such Sights as you exclaim
against, should by your own wa^ of Reasoning, make you more Chaste and
Virtuous. Would you have us hide our Faces too, and very Hands, and never
discover either before you, lest we should give Umbrage to so severe a Virtue;
and pray, why then are you so backward to set us an Example? You say our Sex is
more Amorous than yours, spare then at least our Blushes and our Modesty; wear
Masks out of pity to your selves and us.

Hide those lovely rosy Faces, those charming pinking Ey^s, as languishing as
a Pig's, when it is rotten roasted. Expose not those killing Teeth, which grind
the Hearts of our frail Sex to Powder, being scorched long before in the Oven
of Affection, by the Flames of our Passion, while you are unkind and regardless.

O turn that lovely golden Grove away, That shines on either Lip, like Cheeks
of rising Day.

In short, be so kind to take your selves quite out of Sight, and for ever
remain (...). Alas! how hard a Sentence, to prevent any further Mischief.

Elizabeth Wood.

LETTER XI. Against Painting, and other Artificial Beauty.
By Sir WILLIAM --
WHat -- are you not content with your Native Mischiefs? Those Poisons that are
born with you; your Eyes, your Voice, your Faces; but you must be beholding too
to Art for our undoing, and attack us with Auxiliary Destructions? Where will
your Malice end, and what can keep pace with it but your Pride and Vanity?

Would you give us once some Infallible Mark, to know you from your selves -- I
mean what parts of you are Real, and what Ascititious, and Unnatural; for it is
the oddest Idolatry in the World to bow down to the Excrements of a Worm, to
adore Spanish Wool, and Chalk, and Vermilion.

What a high degree of Pride is it to find Fault with what Nature has made you,
to mend the Work of the great Artificer? So Scandalous and Ill-sounding a
Practice, that I Would fain hope most Honest and Virtuous Women were now ashamed
on it.

And yet though there is few of your Sex but find it necessary to pretend at least
to those Characters, how many of 'em are there who lay it on as thick on their
own Faces, as the old Painters did on the Copies of others; you would think
they made use of a Trowel instead of a Pencil, and make such strong Work, you
were almost as good touch a new-plaister'd Wall as one of their Faces.

Either you are already as handsome as you think your selves, or as errand
Dowdies as every Whoremaster thinks his own Wife, or else indifferent; -- a
Layr of one with the other, neither Foul enough to have the same Effect with
Antimony, on touching you, nor so wickedly Charming, as to drive your poor
Vassals to Hemp and Daggers; and in which soever of these Forms you will rank
your selves, I see no need of this Dawbing, nor what advantage you can propose
by it.

If ynu are handsome already, you may learn from all the Court Ladies who use
it, that Painting is the readiest way to make you Grandams before your times;
you must expect to look old, at least Twenty Years sooner.

It Is like mending deep ways with Dirt, you must be perpetually laying on, Load
after Load, or the unfashionable VVrinkles will devour all your Labor.

You know your selves it poisons the Skin, and ruins the Complexion, and yet
you will not be beat off on it, so fond you are of mending Nature, and of a Beauty
that can endure neither Fire nor Air, Heat nor Rain, which lasts not so long as
a Flower's; and which, as it soon withers it self, so will wither you too when
it leaves you.

If you are Indifferent, be contented, and thank Nature, for neither having
made you a Monster of Deformity nor Beauty: For your Gigantick Beauty is
certainly monstrous in Execss, as well as others in Defect, and like the poor
Giants in Romances, must be sure to be Mown o'rethwart, or Cleft downright, --
sooner than any in all the Army. -- Since then you have already all you can
reasonably desire, and are in a more happy Condition than either of the
Extremes; for what reason is it that you would venture such an Alteration, as must
by Turns expose ye to both the Opposite Inconveniences? You Will at first, it may
be, think you look very Charming, which will loo all the real or supposed
Beauties about your Ears, and "She Paints -- is the Word of Battle, which
they will all whisper round, though they have it on so thick themselves, that their
Faces are like to stick to one another.

But after this aukard Flourish, which it may be, for a little while you may
make by this Artificial Beauty, you at last find your self on the sudden,
tumbling into the lowest Class of all, -- that of Real Deformity.

And well remembered for poor Dowdy, who was in danger of being quite
forgotten: -- There she sits, tearing her Face, breaking her Glasses,
shovelling it on, and rendering her self a thousand times more ghastly than when
she was first Cubb'd. -- Like the poor VVench that came to a Country Painter on
a Fair-day, resolving to be a little finer than Ordinary, and gave the Fellow a
Shilling to Paint her, which the Rogue did with a Vengeance; making her a blue
Nose, black Lips, Green Cheeks, scarlet Eyebrows, and the rest proportionable;
that when she came abroad, she scared all the Fair, as if one of the Tygars or
Lions had broke loose amongst 'em.

And pray, Madam, why cannot you be satisfied with all the Vggliness you were
born with? 'Twas a fair Portion. and one would think you should not be so
over-covetous, to augment it.

Nothing will ever go well that is undertaken in spite of Nature: The Beau may
as well set up for a Philosopher, the Bully for a General, or your
Holbourn-Heck for a Statesman (or what is next door to it, an Alderman) as you be
a Beauty, without asking Nature leave; and the more like you are without being
one, you are still the more deformed. Those Monkey Affectations will render you
still more Ridiculous and Odious.

Endeavor then to set your Mind strait, which is in your own Power; make that
well-complexion'd and beautiful, and thus render your self desirable and
amiable, which you may obtain with more Certainty than if you had the finest
Body in the World.

For after all, Ladies, nothing is more demonstrable than that it is not a fine
Face only that either obtains Love, or preserves it, which takes off your last
Pretenses for these Artificial Meliorations, as you call 'em, that you use 'em
out of an honest Intent, to get good Husbands, or to hold fast their Hearts,
when you have 'em once in your Clutches: Nothing of that will cure a rambling
Mind; the likeliest way to do it is, by being quiet and obligeing, which at
least will make you your self more Easy and Happy.

But I forgot I had quarreled with your whole Sex, for which Reason you ought
not to expect to have any of this good Advice from me: However, I imagine 'twill
be much the same thing, and that you are more Women than to make any use on it.

William --

Answer to Letter XI. In Defense of Artificial Beauty.
By Madam GODFREY --
YOur main Argument against our Sex in this particular proves too much, and
therefore nothing at all: We cannot make use of a little innocent Art, in order
to please and oblige you, and preserve your fickle hearts, but you exclaim
immediately that we are for quarrelling Nature; that we are guilty of
intolerable Pride and Vanity, and discontented with him that made us: And why
do you not bring the same accusations against us, for wearing Clothes, or such
Colors as we find most become us -- as you your wigs according to your
Complexion? Deformity is not Nature, and consequently one that endeavors to
hide her crookedness for Example, only strives to conceal what is unnatural; to
throw that behind the scenes which would not so well bear a public view.

Nature it self endeavors to hide whatever is undecent and unseemly: If we do
the same we only imitate her, and you cannot blame us for it without great
Injustice.

But you will perhaps say, what is all this to Painting and Dawbing our Faces,
at which you are so highly displeased? Yes, it affects even that so much, that
it takes off your greatest objection against it, that it is mending the work of
Nature, which certainly may be innocently attempted, or at least rectifying her
mistakes; otherwise you could not Cut a Hair-Lip, or a Wen, that hindered the
sight, which you will hardly say is unlawful.

Whatever then the Inconveniences may be, in any such Practices, they can
hardly amount to any more then what may be fancied in many sorts of Dresses,
which may appear a little oddly at first, but use and custom reconciles 'em:
And this is so evident, even of the point that is here most in controversy
between us, that in some Countries of Europe it is so far from being
Scandalous, that the Ladys let their Lovers hold their Glasses to 'em, while
they are Painting themselves, who esteem it as a favor, and are no ways
displeased at it.

You are as angry, I perceive, with all kind of washes as you are with Painting
it self, and I must confess, with almost as much reason. For what is Paint but
a little more substantial wash, which lasts something longer, or is more
visible then the other?

But if you are against any of those, if you are so Zealons against a little
innocent Water, to clear the Face from Freckles, or any such inconvenience, we
may shortly expect you will forbid us Fountain Water too, and we must not have
leave to wash in that, because it looks like Pride, and being discontented with
Nature. Nay, we may carry it yet higher, for all know some sort of Water, as
it is simply taken from the Well, will add a florid Color to the Face, and both
increase and preserve the Beauty: But will you like wise abridge us of such as
these, or are you resolved to deny us, the most common Blessings of Nature?

You dare not say it is unlawful to remove any thing, even from the Face it
self which renders it deformed, or unpleasing to the Spectators: If you thought
so, you would scarce practice quite contrary to your opinion: It is plain, that
nature designed Man a Grave and Awful Creature: It gave you Beards to strike us
with Reverence: Why then do you envy your selves such an Advantage? What mean
all these Washballs, and Tweezers, and Razors, and Depilatories which you use
once or twice a week, and all that you may look like women, whom you so much
despise?

But what is yet much more inexcusable, you have many of you now Learnt to
patch, nay to Paint as well as we. If you had as Lawful an Excuse for this as
the Women, and did use these Arts merely to please your Wives, as we do to
oblige our Husbands, none could justly blame you: But we have reason to fear
there is something worse at the bottom: It is not for nothing you rail at all
Women; Orpheus did it first, and you know the reason, and he met with too easy
a Punishment.

You are very careful to Communicate your grave advice to all our Sex, whether
Beauties or otherwise; but in this one thing you are ingenuous, when you own
you do not expect it will have any great effect upon us. No body Loves to have
good Counsel crammed down their Throats, and to take it like Pills, or a
Portion; besides, should a declared Enemy just before an Engagement, or in the
very heat of Fight have such an extraordinary qualm of Civility come upon him,
as to desire you to taste of a Cordial that he carried about with him, would
not you, to return his Compliment, desire him to taste it before you, and think
that after him was manners? Which if he refused, you would have just reason to
suspect that all was not right at bottom. But so it is here, you give us some
snarling Documents against Vanity, Pride, Infidelity, Scurrility, Inconstancy,
and a hundred other vices, when your own Sex so notoriously wants reformation,
in all those instances more then ours. And you do this in a sour and
Magisterial manner, when you are at open Wars against us, which looks not so
much like kind admonitions, as unjust reproaches, for when you your selves, who
call us your Slaves, and at least make us your most Humble Subjects, at the
same time you give us such good Instructions, never value how much you unravel
'em all by lewd Examples, it would be a miracle if we should not be more
injured by one, then profited by the other.

I shall here rest our Defense against this Head of Accusations, when I have
observed one thing more to our Sexes Advantage, from your own Concessions in
this Letter: You don't deny but we often use these sort of Arts to please you,
and that virtuously and honestly; you further assure us, that such methods will
extremely decay our Faces, and make us old before our time: Now take all this
for Truth, and reflect upon it again, and try if you can blush at your own
Gratitude: For if we suffer so much, and part with what is so dear to us, only
to please you for a little while, certainly we should deserve something better
from you, then reproaches for our dear Complaisance in those matters.

Rachel Godfrey --

A second Answer to Letter XI. Further proving, That Women ought to Paint.
By another Hand.
FOulness is Loathsome: Can that be so which helps it? Who forbids his Beloved
to gird in her waste? To mend by shoeing her uneven Lameness? To burnish her
Teeth? Or to perfume her Breath? Yet that the Face be more precisely regarded,
it concerns more: For as open confessing sinners are always punished, but the
wary and concealing offenders without Witness, do it also without Punishment;
so the secret parts need the less respect; but of the Face, discovered to all
Examinations and Surveys, there is not too nice a Jealousy. Nor does it only
draw the busy Eyes, but it is subject to the divinest touch of all, to kissing,
the strange and mystical Union of Souls. If she should prostitute her self to a
more unworthy Man than thy self, how earnestly and justly would thou
exclaim: That for want of this easier and ready way of repairing, to betray her
Body (...) and (...) (the (...) sudden De(...) of all Women, what a heinous
Adui^er (...) it? What tho^ love in her Face is Color, and Painting gives
that, but thou (...) it, not because it is, but because th^^ know it. Fool,
whom ignorance makes happy, the Stars, the Sun, the Sky wh^m thou admirest,
alas, have no Color, but are fair, because they seem to be colored: If this
seeming will not satisfy thee in her, thou have good assurance of her Color,
whe^thou see her lay it on. If her Face by Painted on a Board or Wall, thou
w^^ Love it, and the Board, and the (...) Can thou loath it then when it
speaks, smiles, and kisses, because it is Painted? Are we not more delighted
with seeing Birds, Fruits, and Beasts Painted then we are with Naturals? And do
we not with pleasure behold the Painted shape of Monsters and Devils, whom
true, we durst not regard? We repair the ruins of our houses, but first cold
tempests warns us of it, and bites us through it; we mend the wrack and stains
of our Apparel, but first our Eyes, and other Bodies are offended; but by this
Providence of Women, this is prevented. If in Kissing or Breathing upon her,
the Painting fall off, thou art angry, will thou be so, if it stick on? Thou
did Love her, if thou beginnest to hate her, then it is because she is not
Painted. If thou will say now, thou did hate her before, thou did hate her
and love her together, be constant in something, and love her who shows her
great love to thee, in taking this pains to seem lovely to thee.

LETTER XII. Against Women 's Managing Business.
By Sir THOMAS --
THAT House is likely to stand very firm whose Foundation is on a Weathereock,
and that Family or Estate to be wonderfully well managed, which is left to a
Woman's Prudence: Yet though they have neither Capacity for Business, nor
Resolution to go thorough with 't, they will still be meddling with it, and it is
as impossible to keep 'em from it, as it is a Be from a Honey-pot, though like
him, they are sure to chain their Wings up, and to be lost in the pleasant
Quagmire: But yet more excusable is the Animal that carries its Sting behind
only, than the other, who is a perfect Amphisbena; for the former has its Sense
to gratify, and it may be its Hunger; and if it once gets out, carrys home its
sweet Plunder, and is profitable to the whole Commonwealth: But the latter, out
of an empty Ambition, and for the dear pleasure of Ruling, of being necessary,
of giving Orders, and disposing Affairs, values not how much the World is
embroiled by their Foolish managements.

Were they but half as sufficient when they come to Action, as in their own
Theory, and mighty conceit, there would be no such People in the World as they,
no such Solicitors, or Politicians, or Counselors, or Ambassadors: But alas,
when once they Embark in Affairs of this Nature, they are like Phaeton between
the Claws of the Scorpion, stewing in sweat, as black as that which frightened
him and his Horses. The poor Ass, that thinks himself a Stag, when he comes
once to leap over a Ditch, is forced to own he is as errand an Ass as ever. The
Burden is too large for your shoulders. You were never made sor't, nor that for
you. Try first whether you can list it, before you pretend to run away with it.

You have an habitual as well as an actual unfitness for any matter of moment.
Triffling's your Province, and both your first and second Nature.

You may be sometimes great in little things, but you must of necessity be
little in greater: You have neither Fund, nor Credit, nor Skill, nor Industry,
to make any matters out in your way of Trading: Haberdashes of Business, little
under-Springs and Letter-carriers, you may make ashift at, but with Wholesale
you will never do.

Your very Knowledge and Privity in any matter of great concern, is enough to
ruin it: Nay, even in mischief it self, which is more your Element; and the
reason why so few Plots ever take effect, may very well be, because there are
women engaged in 'em. Their Natural Love to mischief makes 'em first embark in
'em, and their as Natural Folly to discover 'em: Nor need we wish our worst
Enemies any greater misfortune, then to have a Parliament of women to direct
'em.

A Temper resolved almost to obstinacy, is required in the happy Transaction of
any considerable concern.

But when were you so long in the same mind, that it might be so much as taken
notice of? Any more then we can say of any determinate part of a rapid stream,
Here it is, when in the very Breath that 'twas said, it is irrecoverably past us.

There Is need of a long head, a deep reach, an extraordinary foresight, to bend
things, when they are stubborn, and will not easily ply as we'd have 'em. We'll
find Men of various Tempers and Interests and Opinions; and there it is not easy
to mould and soften, and bring 'em all into the Train of thoughts that may be
well laid, and to manage 'em with that dexterity that they shall do their own
Business, at the same time they are dispatching ours. Your Sexes way of
thinking is well known, it is Fore-right, like some other Creatures, when the
object is before you, you drive at it immediately. Sense leads you, your
passions drive you, your Humor hurries you; these are your Counselors, and you
Act accordingly. You think as the Ephemeris lives, the present only is your
Lot, you are born half Epicures, for past and future never trouble you. You are
above taking warning either by your own, or others Example.

Smart it self will not make you wise, and yet that, one would think, were the
most proper way to instruct you, to make addresses to your sense, when so
perfectly deaf to all Reason.

I complained just now of your want of Firmness, sufficient for any matter of
moment, yet I never thought of Scandalizing you with want of obstinacy; I know
you possess it in the highest degree, but this is as far from true Courage, as
that is from Rashness, or Good nature from Folly. Prudence will teach us, when
to bend, and when to stand firm, tho we ought to take advise of Honesty
together with it. Your Firmness is like that of melted Iron, it is Brittle, tho
it is hard, 't will rather break all to pieces then confess the least Ductility;
while that of a wise man, is more like Steel, it has an Elastic Power in it,
which will make it give way for a while, and when there is any real occasion,
but it is only to return again afterward to its first Place and Form, with
greater vigor.

Had Hannibal attempted either to have gone strait forward, over the horrid
precipice he found in the Alps, or to have cut directly through the Rock that
opposed his Passage, without making any turnings or windings in it, he must
have buried his Army in those vast Snows, and all he had got would have been
their Ruin.

The strange Variety of your Sex! For tho you are sometimes in a Humor to keep
State, and sit on the Cub-board, like other brittle ware, and be no more seen
then a Persian Lady, yet at other times, when the Tide of whim flows the other
way, you are all Black-Acres, you have as many Papers in your Hands as ever had
at the -- Table -- and just to as much purpose, you must be in the wrong, for
you carry the false Bias within you. I cannot say, you are wilfully mistaken
neither, every time you err, but that you are so, is owing to one grand error,
which may be in your Power to rectify, and that is, 'That you are always in the
Right. If there is any hopes of curing you, I shall give you a short receipt. A
way with your Pen and Ink, back to your Stitching, and remember you are Women.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter XII.
By ARSINDA --
YOU may call us what you please, but I believe 'twill very rarely be found
that any Family or Estate was Ill managed, that was left to a Woman's Prudence;
which shows we have not only Capacity and Resolution for Business, but success
too: And it is this Consciousness of our own Ability, makes us Love to share the
Fatigues of Life, and assist the Husband, who is much too weak by himself to
sustain so great a Charge. But you Men always were, and ever will be
ungrateful; You Love the Benefit, but hate to own the Obligation. Tho after
you have done, and said all you can, and Railed till you have wearied even your
selves, the wife and better part of your Sex will still own, that they owe much
of their Ease, as well as of their Happiness, to the Care and Conduct of those
who share their Fort^^es, as well as their Honors. You confess, we are
sufficient for the Theoretical part o^ Business, and that is almost as much as
we desire, it being our Province to direct, and Advise the Men, and not to do
the Drudgery our selves; Tho were it Customary for our Sex to appear upon the
Stage, it is not in the least to be questioned but they would Acquit themselves
very well, and come off with great Applause. Things would soon be brought to
another pass, and the World once more Reduced to method and order. For let us
contrive, Design, and lay the plan of an Action never so well, it is a 1000 to
one but the Man spoils all by his Foolish and Irregular management of it: Much
less are you likely to be in the right, when you consult only your selves, for
then, as the Proverb says, it is ten to one but you have Fools to your
Counselors.

We'll own secrecy a part of Prudence, and that nothing considerable can be
well managed without it But you say, we cannot keep a secret, then never blame
us more for Dissi^^lation, which yet you esteem so great a (...) of F^^ly:
However, let us ask you whether you ^^n in all ^^story, give us the Name of
(...) Man who bit off his Tongue, rather then he would be compelled by Torm^^s,
(...) discover asecret committed to his charge? You know we can tell ye, of a
Woman who did thus, and after she had done it, spit in the Tyrants Face. And
this in a Plot too, which you say it is so difficult for us to conceal, which
may be often true, out of our Natural aversion to such designs.

When you please we are fickle and unconstant, and don't know our minds: Be it
so, but there you grant we have the highest degree of Secrecy imaginable, for
sure enough, if we are not conscious to our own thoughts, they can never be
betrayed to others.

And that this is more then flourish, we had a notable Instance, not many Ages
since, in our own Nation, of a woman who ruled with at least as much success,
as any Prince that ever yet swayed the Scepter of these Realms, who under an
appearing Fickleness of Temper, disguised the most refined Policy, to that
Degree, that her Enemies grew Mad that they could not penetrate into her
Intentions, which indeed how should they, when oftentimes her most Intimate
Counselors did not know them?

But we are not so firm and resolved as your Sex, and how should we, generally
speaking, or how can you reasonably expect it of us, or do you desire we should
be so, tho you blame us for the contrary? What experience have we in things,
which you take all the care you can to keep us from, and would fain make us
Ignorant, that our Devotion may be the greater toward such Idols as your
selves? But when Women are once well entered into Business and Acquainted with
it, who more Industrious and Indefatigable? More quick to espy all Advantages,
and ward off any cross blows, wherein you cannot deny we excel you. Then we are
more unsuspected, you Men generally carry a Busy Face with you, you would fain
look wise, and sometimes are mistaken for Politicians, just like the good
Long-bearded Shepherds, which are said to dress up in Robes of State at the
Court of Muscovy, and set 'em all round a Room when the Czar gives an Audience,
or Entertainment to any Foreign Ambassador. But the mischief is, you speak and
spoil all, while they are as grave and silent as the Figures in the Hangings,
and if they can but stroke their Beards Majestically, they discharge their
trust like able Ministers of State.

And now we are in Russia, well remembered of the Princess Sophia, who
reconciled two Brothers, equally Jealous of their Authority, which she little
less then shared with 'em both, for many years together. Give us such an
Instance in your own Sex for twenty Ages back, and we'll own 'em equally
capable with our own, of engaging in such matters.

The plain truth is, as I Have already hinted, you dare not ordinarily trust us
with Affairs of Moment, least we should see your Blunders, and Correct 'em; you
dare not Learn us to fence, least we should beat our Masters. Give me leave to
tell ye one story Sir T. and then we'll take breath by consent. Your modest Sex
had formerly Monopoliz'd the whole Art of Medies, and Surgery to your
selves, even Midwisery among the rest, which they would by no means Communicate
to us, how proper soever the knowledge of it was for us?

But it happened that a cunning Slut of a Girl, having a great mind to pick out
somewhat of these matters, disguised her self in Man's Clothes, and got her self
entertained by a Noted Physician, who in process of time taught her his Art:
Well, away she goes from him, when she had Learnt what she came for, and being
soon after sent for by some Women, she made her selt known to 'em, who keeping
it among themselves (tho they were women) employed her with all their
Acquaintance, and broke her Master and the rest of the Physicians; at which
they being enraged, accused this she-man- Midwife before the Magistrates, of
being over-intimate with the Good wives, and that way getting all their custom.
Which slander the poor Innocent had an easy way to confute, and accordingly was
forced to make use on it to the Confusion of her Adversaries, and from that
time, that Art has been chiefly managed by our Sex, and the same success we
have, doubtless, (had we the same advantages) we should likewise meet with in
all others.

ARSINDA --

LETTER XIII. Against Old Maids.
By Sir THOMAS --
BUT I wish I were sure of being out of their Reach before I begun with 'em,
for they have terrible Fangs; and if they get me within 'em, I must be forced
to compound for one Eye and Ear, to save the others.

Nay, it is dangerous venturing so much as within sight of 'em, for Anacreon's
Description, even of a Beauty, agrees to 'em in some Sense, though widely
different from that wherein he intended it.

"They are all Weapon, and they dart,
"Like Porcupines from every part; --
But the greatest Fear of all is, lest, like some other sort of Serpents, they
should dart themselves, twine about the unwary Traveller, and Sting him to
Death.

For, ah! who can their Strength express,
Armed when they themselves Vndress,
Cap-a-pe with -- Vggliness.
As charming a Sight doubtless as Don Quixot in his short Shirt, and full as
invincible. Fate it self holds not faster than one of these loving Furies. The
Story of the Gorgons I Am apt to believe was nothing else but three old Maids,
who lived together so long till they frighted Mankind almost into Marble
whenever their loathsome Faces, and snaky Hairs peeped through the Casement.

And yet one would wonder how so despicable a Creature could be so terrible: Is
there any thing in Nature so mean, so useless, so contemptible? -- An old Moth
is worth a Regiment of 'em: But I ask their pardon, for on better Thoughts I
believe they set up all the Match-brokers and Fortune Tellers in Christendom,
and are constant and liberal Benefactors to those two noble Societies. As
credulous they are, as he must be, who will believe the thousandth part of the
Stories they tell of their youthful Amors: -- When they might have bin
married, they would have you know, (and lick their Lips at the luscious
Imagination) so long since, and so often, in such and such a King's Reign, to
that Parson, and this Lawyer, and the other pretty Gentleman. Thus would they
talk over another Age; and if any thing could make 'em young again, besides what
they dream of every Night, certainly this Discourse would do it. Thus far
however you may venture to believe 'em, that they have had many fair Proffers
in their time, since they themselves have made 'em.

But one good Quality they have; they are not Envious, any more than an elder
Sister, when the younger is married before her: Nor Malicious, any otherwise
than an African Lady to one who refuses her: Nor Talkative, Ten-Fulling-Mills
may make a shift at least to keep pace with one of their Modest Clacks, if not
to silence 'em, and make 'em as dumb as a Paraqueet.

Add to this the Gravity of their Beards, the Decency of their Mustachio's; the
pleasant Downy, charming Mossy Substance, that usually adorns their Lips and
Chins, and qualifies 'em so admirably well for the Honor of being the Countess
of Trifaldi's Waiting-Gentlewomen.

Had they all as many Hands as Briareus, and every one armed with as many
Tweezers, there would be full Employment for 'em all, in eradicating this
Malicious Excrement; which if it grew a little closer, they might perhaps make
a Virtue of Necessity, and find some ingenious Contrivance, to matt it into a
sort of a Velvet Mask, and hide it self as well as their Faces.

An old Maid in a Commonwealth is much such another Impliment as an Eunuch in a
Seraglio; ^^ll out as Jealous and Spiteful as he, and much for the same Reason.

It Is not easy to know for what else she was designed (since it looks harsh to
grant that Sature made any thing in vain) unless to be a Sister in an Hospital,
having spent so much (...) ^wn Life among Issues and Plasters. Sure, there is a
sort of Sympathy between a S^re Leg, and this Lump of Diseases: Whilst her
Gummy Eyes overflow her Spec^acles, poor Vrsula weeps whether she will or no,
and has the good Fortune to be reckoned Compassionate when she is only Infirm,
and her Eyes are troubled with a Diabetes.

How rank this sort of Creatures are, and what an odd sort of Perfume they wear
about 'em, one would guess 'em all of the Race of the Jews, by that, as well as
by their Complexion.

And yet as vain still, as errant, errant Women, in spite of the Song, even at
the same time they are Birds of ill Omen; as Proud, Prying, Conceited, Curious,
Mischievous, Liquorish, Confident, Impertinent, Lazy, Noisie, Empty, Senceless,
Ridiculous Creatures, as their Mothers were at Sixteen.

An old Spider loves young Fli^s, and now poor Souls, they are forced to peach
for Lovers; sometimes we see they truss up a foolish Apprentice; at others a
poor needy Tradesman, away with 'em into their Holes, and immediately devour
'em.

They say the^e's some here in Foreign Countries a subtle Beast, th^^ comes by
Night to their Village-Houses, and exactly counterfeits a Woman's Voice, making
pitiful Moan for Admittance, or crying out for Help, as some of our
Trepanners; whom if the fond Credulity of the Inhabitants can once be prevailed
upon to admit, they pay dear for their good Nature, one of the Company at least
being sure to make their new Guest a Supper.

But these She-Cannibals, these Flesh-Crows, these Man-Catchers, these Old
Maids, are even with him for Scandalizing their Sex, and do more than
counterfeit the Hyaena.

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter XIII. In Defense of Old Maids.
By Madam Snell.
NOthing is more obvious than Recrimination in all these Cases, and the Old
Batchellor Sir T. would be an excellent Match for your Old Maids.

But not to insist always on that Method of Defense, which besides cannot
immediately affect you, Sir T. who would be reckoned a young Widower, I rather
ask leave to insist on some of the Conveniences and Excellencies of Old Maids,
whom your uncivil Sex so much despises.

Uugrateful Men, that you are, though you cannot remember your Infancy, do not
you believe you were once Children? -- Yes, and must be so again, if you live
much longer, and in both those Circumstances, if you considered the
indispensible Use of a careful Old Maid, you would have Gratitude, or at least
more Wit, than thus to rail against 'em

How many wakeful Nights, and weary Days have the poor Souls worn out in young
Master's Service, who now so little regards 'em? How many Garters have they
broke in rocking him? What terrible Colds, and Rheums, and Aches, in taking him
up, and walking up and down the Room with him in cold Frosty Nights, to quiet
him. Nay, how much precious Juice have the poor Creatures wrung out of their
own dry Gums, to mix with his Pap, when feeding him, that it might not burn
him, -- and all, all for ever forgotten? Where Is Gratitude, where is Honor or
Sympathy, or Generosity? Mere Names and Shadows, and Romantic Tales, like those
which these poor forsaken Dry Nurses were wont to tell their Children to quiet
'em.

Well, comfort your selves, Poor Hearts, though. by this time they are got to
their Breeches, and can put 'em up and down, without your help, you will see 'em
again sooner then you imagine. They run fast; their Race will soon be over, and
they will come again, and be a second time under your Jurisdiction, sooner than
you or they are aware.

Do but live honestly, and without fretting; and when they come to be Old Men,
you will find but little difference in your own Ages since you first nurss'd 'em.

This they must come to again, and one would expect they should be more civil
for that reason, as the Fellow once was to the Devil himself, whom he would not
hear abused, because he did not know whose Hands he might fall into.

The same Watching, the same Tucking up, the same warm Clothes, and Flannel,
and Candles they used to have when they were young; It may be too you must come
into Bed to his old Worship, as you did to his young Worship, to cherish him,
and keep him warm, and rub him for the Sciatica, and you may do it without any
Scandal or Danger; alas! the harmless Creature, 't has no more Hurt in it than a
Chrysom Infant.

It may be 'twill Smirk a little, now and den, and be waggish, and chirrup, but
that is all, and you know there is no hurt in it.

It used to Puke mightily when 'twas Young; a good Sign, and a thriving Child I
warn't it: Why just so it spits now for all the World, and Mistress Nurse will
be more put to it to keep it dry, and must be changing its Bib four or five
times in four and twenty Hours.

Some times it wants to rise to -- and then Nurse must be called, and many a
sore tug must she have with him; for now the Child grows heavy, and you would
not think how much Care is required to keep it Sweet.

Besides, it is as froward, poor thing, as if t'had got the Gripes, or was
cutting its Eye-Teeth again. Nurse, -- why Nurse-where are ye (if she is gone for
a Moment about the most necessary Occasions) then away flies the Bedstaff some
two or three Inches, after her, and a Cough comes in the room on it, that just
strangles him, and holds him for half an Hour.

A little Syrup, good Nurse -- Ehe, Ehe, I Am just gone, Ehe: -- So, set me up in
Bed; wipe away here from my Beard this; -- Ah, dear Nurse, -- that ever I
should come --

O! Your Servant, Sir T. How do you like your Picture? Yet this you must be in a
few Years, or nothing; and then an Old Maid must be such a Contemptible
Creature; and if you would not be your self despised and neglected, when you're
Old, your best way will be to treat 'em civilly, before you need 'em.

Eleanor Snell.

LETTER XIV. Against Forwardness, and Fondness in Women.
By Mr. READING --
AMong the other Discourses, I Have formerly maintained with your Nimble-Tongue
Ladyship, you know I blamed your Sexes Forwardness and Fondness; and I think I
justly blamed 'em, which I now intend to prove, and that I may please you, I Will
do it very Methodically, first the matter of Fact it self, and then the
mischief and Folly and Inconvenience of it, to your selves as well as others.

And that you are Fond, that your whole Sex is fond and forward, and have been
coming above these 5000 years, and stealing back to your Ribb again, sure you
your selves will scarce deny. We have no more Instances of it, then there have
been Individuals of your teizing Sex since the Creation.

I have said enough on it I suppose already, and have satisfied you, as to old
Women and old Maids, which let me tell you, make up a great part of your
Corporation, being preserved amongst you, as the Egyptians do their
Grandmothers, dried and sapless, for I know not how many Generations. Now if
even these make a shift to keep a Colts Tooth, when they have hardly had more
then Stumps in their Heads, since the Camp at Tilbury, what a fine set may we
believe are in yours, that are as wild as the wind, and all your youth and
blood about ye? Even they are ready to overrun poor Mankind, and then sure you
must be like to run into 'em. You must own your selves fond or cruel, for you
are always in extremes, the latter you dare not, lest we should take you at
your word, and therefore we may take the Liberty to conclude the former. Is it
not fondness with a Witness to leave your Parents, to run away from your
Friends and Guardians; to straddle over Garden-walls, and fly in the Air like
Witches, and ride over House-Tops like Cats; to rush through Darkness, and wade
through Moats, and almost run through Fire as well as Water? And what is all
this for? Is it not for Man, that Charming Creature, Man, whom when you're in
an ill humor you will not afford a good word, and do you do all this, think ye,
without some little kind of Inclination, some sort of kindly call from Nature,
like that of the Land-Crabbs; who most amorously crawl over Churches and
Houses, or whatever else happens to stand in their way, that they may not fail
the Assignation made 'em, with those of their own Species, who come from Sea, I
know not how many Leagues to meet 'em?

What an infinite of Paper do you spoil in a Year? How many Heydleberg-Tuns full
of Ink do you Squander away, in answering Billet-doux, and Love Letters; -- or
rather, in sending 'em, and challenging all Mankind to do the worst they can at
your Persons and Reputations?

But you need not write, you can speak enough, and you have many ways to do it:
Your Eyes, your Hands, your every Motion, sufficiently express how unwilling
you are to be thought Man-haters.

And though our poor Persecuted Sex should endeavor to keep out of sight, how
many different subtle Ways have you to ensnare us?

Sometimes you get a tame Man, as the Fowler does a Duck, or the Master of the
Elephants one of the same Species, to decoy us from our Native Freedom, into
your fatal Noose. Sometimes a He, though oftener a She-Friend, because you can
serve 'em again in the same manner. I have heard of many, who have merely bin
talked into your Snares, and of some few that have bin beaten, and fairly
cudgelled into an Amor.

And these, and a thousand ways have you more, as various as your Hearts and
Dispositions, to obtain and secure your Lovers, though you know you have already
overruled us in a very great Point, as to those Matters: -- You make us the
Aggressors, that you may have the Honor, and the Pleasure, to see us at your
Feet, and hug your selves at the Excellency of your own Dissimulation. What
Hypocrisy, after all, when you love a Man more than even your Sloth, or Ease,
or Vanity, to hold off still, and pretend you are not as willing as he? No, you
are made of more refined Mould: Another sort of Flesh and Blood you would have us
think, from what we are composed of. Hence the eternal Teizings, the Put-offs,
the Fetches, the Doubles, wherewith your poor Dog in a String, that does not
know you must be a long while tormented: -- And yet it is all Fondness still,
though in another Shape, as they say the Tune-seen Ladies bite hardest, when they
are most furiously pleased. It Is to keep us from discovering the Cheat as long
as you can; for after a while you know it is too late: -- for when you once have
obtained what you desire, you are ten thousand times fonder and madder than
ever: -- And well remembered of the Mischiefs that follow this Burdock Temper.
In the first place, you know, that we know your- Sex in general; and that if
you don't dissemble very artificially, you miss what you aim at, your
Forwardness being so odious, that you lose us before you have us. Nothing can
be imagined more nauseous than your perpetual Siege, and childish Kindness.
Were you all Nector and Ambrasio, you would tire us with cramming us thus every
day. Have you any occasion to make your selves cheaper than you are already, or
more disagreeable? Guess but by your selves whether such a Temper can please,
and if it is possible, cure your selves of it, and avoid it. For you would scarce
take it well your selves to be kissed to Death.

Do you know any thing in the World so tiresome and impertinent as a downright
doting Lover, even while there is yet some relish in him, and before he is a
Husband? He haunts ye like your Shadow, and will hardly give you room to
breathe, especially if you let him have the least Encouragement; for then
there is no enduring him. He Will follow ye to the Garden, to your Chamber, when
you are a visiting: Hound him off never so frequently and earnestly, the
importunate Cur will still be a hanger on, lie upon your Petticoats, lick your
Hands, -- ay, your Lips too if he can come at 'em, with as much Savor, and as
good a Grace as the Ass did his Master's. If you would scarce be pleased with
this, you should take Care to avoid a resembling Practice. Beware of a hoiting
foolish Behavior; been't ambitious of Conquests; if you get one that is worth a
keeping, show your Discretion in retaining him, and above all things, neither
tire him, nor kill him with Kindness.

For if you resolve to persist in these Extravagancies, and of one side Insult
and Triumph over your Adorers, while on the other Extreme you so visibly dote
upon 'em, that you are ready to suck their Eyes out; you ought to take Heed
that you don't at last tire our Patience, and make us perfectly desperate, the
Consequence whereof might be worse than you can imagine; for do but consider
what a Condition you would be in, should you once provoke us to turn all
He-Amazons, and set up a Commonwealth of our own Sex, with Exclusion of yours.

Answer to Letter XIV.
By Madam GODFREY --
IT IS a very hard Task to please such as are resolved to find fault before
hand, and to deal with our poor Sex as the Knavish Fellow thought to have done
with the Oracle, who would prove 'twas in an Error, whether it Answered that
the Sparrow were Alive or Dead.

If we show the least modest Kindness or Inclination, you presently rail at us
for impudent and loose Creatures, if we keep you at a greater distance, and
justly take warning by the Perfidiousness of your Sex, and the misfortunes of
our own; then we are Proud and Insulting, and abuse that Power and that Beauty,
that Nature has given us. However, since it is safer erring of the right hand,
and it will oblige you too so extremely, it is pity but you should be pleased,
and kept as far off as you desire, by all those whom you are so terribly
afraid of.

But in the mean while, I beseech you let us have no more complaints of the
variableness of Women, when you are so much more Camelions your selves, that
the Color of your mind changes every moment: Sometimes you are for Simplicity
and an Ingenuous open temper, and rail at us all for Hypocrites, but before you
have drawn in that railing breath again, you are as angry because we don't
dissemble, and would persuade us, that nothing can please you, but what you
think mere Cheat and Falsehood. The thing in short is this, that if after a
thousand Oaths and Protestations and Adorations, and Vows of inviolable Love
and Service, we have no more wit then to believe you, and it may be at last
give you hopes, only to be rid on you, not being Ignorant of your Generous
Temper, and well knowing that to be the readiest way, then immediately we are
all that you call us, and twenty favors more then you ever received, must be
Boasted of to the next vain Fellow that has Patience to hear you, and Faith to
believe you, or it may be to the next poor Credulous Creature, that you're
designing to ruin.

But is this so very Generous as you would fain be thought, so like those Men of
Honor for which you would be so much valued, first to undo, and then to upbraid;
to tempt first, and then to reproach and torment those with whom you have
prevailed?

If our Sex were really so easy as you pretend, how came you to take so much
pains to win 'em? What makes you so often talk so frightfully of Rapes and
Daggers, and Poisons, and Precipices. Which tho it is true, we are now so well
Acquainted with, that we take 'em only as words of course, and no more to be
heeded then those Oaths, with which you Garnish your Courtship, yet it is not
impossible, that it may be true, since it has been so formerly; There have been
those of your Sagacities, who have thought fit to hang or beat their Brains
out, to show the height of their passion, and the Sincerity of their Love; And
was there over much Kindness, think you, in such cases as these, or was it the
Fondness of their Mistresses, that brought 'em to such an Exit?

But be all this true or false before Marriage, let us then be fond or
otherwise, I Would fain know Sir, why you are so angry with us, for Loving too well
afterward, which I confess, I thought was no Crime, or at least one that might
easily be pardoned; Unless it be, because you are afraid you shall want an
excuse to use us ill, if we should continue thus doting on you. But even that
too may be cured, for I dare promise for my self, and most that I know, that we
are not incorrigible, if you complain of us, we'll try whether we can amend;
all things are easy to a willing mind, and especially to those who are
encouraged by your edifying Examples. But then if you veer about again, as we
doubt not but you suddenly will, and complain of our Coldness, our Infidelity
and our unkindness, Remember you are to blame, and we were forced to turn your
own Weapons upon you, and --

To Love you less, to preserve your delight.

Rachel Godfrey --

LETTER XV. Against Dancing.
By Mr. WOOLHOVSE --
WEre one of our Europeans cast any where on a Barbarous shore, and should he
be saluted at his Arrival with the diverting sight of a Ring of Savages,
capering about with their Gimminy-Gomminy till they foamed and dropped down on
the Spot, would he not have reason to think 'em all, all either Drunk or Mad?

And just the same, it is very probable, would be the opinion of one of them,
should we show 'em one of our Balls or Dancing Schools, for the best we can say
for 'em is, that there is some method in this Madness.

I dare almost be confident, that 'twas some Woman first invented Dancing, it is
so odd, so Whimfical, so Ridiculous an Exercise. Standing still, turning round,
now on one Leg, then the other, running full-drive, stepping Stately; down to the
Ground, up to the Branches forward, backward, sideways, every way, joining
hands, parting 'em, patting, kissing, ogling, touching, whispering, grasping,
besides all that follows, enough to ruin an Angel, for sure if those Spirits
were ever picked up by your Sex, as some of the Learned have fancied, 'twas
Dancing first Debauched 'em.

You have us here just as you desire, you give us a look like a flash of
Lightning, and away again, so quick and short you move, that we have not time to
discover your real imperfections, but are dazzled with your appearing Beauties.

We are warmed before with the violent motion, and then it is no great matter
for you to kindle us, especially when we have such a deal of Tinder, so many
rich Silks Rustling on every side of us.

A convenient School, really to instruct Youth, and a very happy occasion to
bring many a Loving pair together.

Especially your Masks and Balls, where modesty and virtue are hardly so much
as pretended to. Where the Lady may meet her Gallant, and walk off with him,
tho her Husband stands within two steps of her. Where the Curtains are as good
as drawn, as soon as they come thither, and an infallible cure for blushing, if
there should be any sparks of modesty left.

I would ask how many have been ruined at these places? were it not much more
easy to Answer me, how many who have constantly frequented em, did ever escape
Ruin.

I don't at all wonder that Witches are said to use this Dancing, so constantly
at their Detestable Sabbaths and Midnight Revels, since it is a Diversion as
Wild and as Fantastical as their Imaginations. But I cannot be satisfied why any
Persons should practice it, nay dote upon it, who pretend to Sense, Sobriety
and Virtue.

It Is indeed so foolish a custom, and carries so many ill Consequences with it,
that Judicatures of far different Nations, and in other matters of very
opposite opinions have agreed to Condemn it. The Inquisition and Geneva are
both of one mind in this matter, at least the one has forbidden a Sarabrand, as
the other all manner of Dancing.

Yet I don't think it strange, that the French should be so much fonder on it
then all the other Nations of Europe. They speak, and walk, and talk, and sing,
and preach, and I fancy, are almost Born and dye Dancing.

There Is a Palsy sure in their Imagination, a sort of a natural impressed motion
on their Minds and Bodies, which will no more let 'em cease to move then cease
to be. One would think every one of 'em carried a large Bladder of Quicksilver
in their Bellies, and that they Danced about as that will before the Fire, or
as a Leaf is canted round in a Whirlwind, by a purely involuntary motion.

When the French Court some time since fell upon that Mad Frolic, whose
Relation Historians have left us, and would Dance in the shape of wild Horses,
on all four, with abundance of Flax instead of Manes, in one of which a spark
of a Flambeau lit, and set 'em all afire, I wonder the Maskers did not rather
choose to be burnt to Coals then neglect to Dance out their Dance, and how they
could ever be brought to admit of the Ladys Petticoats for Extinguishers, tho
'twas to save their Lives.

Charles Woolhouse.

Anwer to Letter XV.
By Madam FIELD.
I Am easily induced to believe what you advance in the Beginning of your
Letter, that should a Barbarian see the Polite part of the World at a Ball or
Dancing-School, he would think us all what he really was himself, and in a
Barbarian such a Judgment might be excused, who has hardly more skill in
Numbers then one that is Born a Fool, or then a Brute Creature.

But for one who has a Notion of these things, who looks as if he could think,
and would fain persuade us he can reason, for such a one to compare the Courtly
and Regular motions of our Gentlemen and Ladies, directed by the Music, and
keeping time exactly with it, to the Barbarous Anticks of the Savage Africans;
this I confess, would amaze me, had I not before heard his Character, and
understood by all his Letters, I Have yet seen, that his Soul is out of Tune, and
for that reason he can neither endure to hear or see Music.

For Dancing is nothing else but beating those measures with our Feet, which
the Artist does with his Fingers, or some other Instrument.

It Is a sort of a Living Music, and the Heart keeps time with the rest of the
Body.

Nature it self is a greater Dancer then the most volatile Creature she ever
yet framed, she does nothing without motion: Something at first Danced out of
nothing. The Orbs fell a Dancing as soon as they were made, and will continue
so till they are reduced to nothing.

What is there you blame in Dancing? You dare not come where it is for fear of
Temptation, stay away then, and make room for those who are honester, and have
no such bad thoughts to disturb 'em.

If there is no hurt in singly walking, leaping, or turning, how should there be
in these all together? Or does the Music make it Criminal, or the Company,
neither of which would be so if divided? Or is there any Evil inseparably
annexed to it, or have we any Law either Divine or Humane that forbids it,
except that of Geneva and Spain, neither of which I suppose you think
Infallible.

But it nourishes and flatters Love, and feeds and fans the Flame already too
Predominant. And grant it does so, was a Virtuous Love ever esteemed
Disgraceful? Is It not a kindly, a natural and a Generous Passion, and would not
every wise Commonwealth do well, as I Have read some have done, by all Decent and
Lawful ways to Promote and Encourage it?

As for the Abuses of this sprightly, healthy Exercise, to argue from thence
for the taking away its use, is so mean a Fallacy that it is scarce worth the
taking notice of, much less the Answering: I expect you will be shortly for
pulling down Churches too, because it is said, they are too often shamefully
abused by Intrigues and Assignations.

Mary Field.

LETTER XVI. Against Platonic Love and Friendship in different Sexes.
By Mr. RICH.
YOu know who says, You talk of Fires that shine, but never Burn;
In this cold World they will hardly serve our turn.


And would you for once be ingenuous, you must own your selves of the same
mind. As all your Sex is one great Hypocrite, so this is one glareing Instance
of their Prevarication: You may as well talk of Love without Loving as without
defiring, and when you can show the Love Letters between a pair of Souls, or
the History of the Angelical Amors of Nakar and Damilcar, or can tell me the
taste of those Immaterial kisses which your Famous Duchess talked of, then I
shall begin to believe that you believe your selves, when you talk of these
matters, and that you are full as Spiritual as you tell us; tho sure you would
not have us take you at your word.

Not but that I verily believe your Love may still be enough Platonical, and
full as pure, as was that of the Philosopher, who gave it the Name, who if he
were not very much wronged, never loved Virtue so refinedly, as to like or
Court her so Passionately in a foul, or homely Habitation, as he did in those
that were more Beautiful and Lovely.

One of these two things then you cannot hardly deny; either that it is only an
empty Name, or else a sort of a Vizard to something more homely: He that denis
what he really is, makes us sometimes violently suspect him what he is not, and
as often find out what he takes such over-care to conceal.

Who that is wise would attempt to Drink out of a Vial, which he knows has
either nothing at all in it, or if any thing, the surest and most subtle Poison
in the World? If you say, there is a mean, and virtuous Love may be thus
disguised, I Would fain know what need on it? Neither Love, nor Truth, nor Virtue
need seek Corners, not so much as the former, if he comes in Company with the
latter. He ought therefore to be uncased, as Aphrodisius in Psyche, and tho as
finely dressed as he, of whom that Divine Poet.

Upon his Head smiled a soft Grove of Gold:
Two small-half-Heav'ns were bent in either Brow, etc.
Yet you ought to be sure, that you embrace not a Serpent, instead of a God, or
that he hides not a Satyrs deformed and shaggy Figure, under the Wings of an
Angel. The Shipwreck of so many before you, one would be apt to think, should
make you afraid of the dangerous Voyage to Mrs. Behns Island: The Bones that
you see, and the Skulls so near the Cave of this Sleeping-Lyon, should keep you
from venturing within his Paws, tho he sheaths 'em never so Artificially.
Platonic Love has ruined half your Sex, and you cannot but know as much, and
therefore seem to admit the pretenses of it, only with a desire to be undone
more plausibly, and to retain the shadow of Innocence, when the substance i^
vanished. You Guild your Poison, and then fancy it is good Food, or Physic, you
are told so before, you are parties against your selves, who can save you?

If you were but willing to escape Destruction, and to come back from the brink
of the precipice, it may be, it might not yet be impossible. Discover the Viper
before he has played himself into your Bosoms, and then there is at least a
perhaps left that you may avoid him.

Pray do but persuade any of these refined Sparks to admire you at a distance,
not to come near you, or if they do, at least tantalize 'em, so as never to let
'em steal a Grasp or a Touch, and try if they can live on such Airy Diet. The
purer any Flame is, the less aliment it needs to support it. Let 'em by this
make a Trial of theirs: Let 'em live a year, on not so much as a sigh of pity:
Let 'em converse with your Souls only, and make Love to them, for which alone
they pretend so great a Passion; but let 'em not so much as throw a look on
your Body; nor their Eyes fasten one Glance on yours. For what has the
Intuition and Embraces of Souls to do with these dull Material Organs.

But if neither they nor you can be content with such mortifying Diet, if you
feel a sort of a pain, and displeasure, and uneasiness under such a practice,
and find this a force upon your Inclinations, and you begin to sigh, and wish,
and think your selves unhappy: Then beware stings, for there is certainly no
better nor worse then mere Flesh and Blood at the Bottom. For these passions
seem not so properly seated in the mind, as the Body, or only in the sensible
Soul, which is hardly different from it.

The mind it self is pure and Spiritual, Reason is a clam and a Noble
Principle, it admits of no Emotions, or Perturbations; and thus the Angels love
Mankind and one another: Whereas, if we believe Mr. Milton (who might know as
much of that matter as any Heywood of 'em all,) a fallen Angel may (...)
descover'd through all his Disguises, by the violent motions and visible
changes which will appear in him, through the most Glorious Forms imaginable,
and thus may you, if you please, make a certain Judgment of your selves and
others.

And much the same may be said of Friendship between persons of different
Sexes, another cant you have very near akin to Platonic Love: Which at the
beginning may in some Instances be innocent, at least on one side, if not in
both.

But Love's an insinuating Devil, and if he gets but the tip of his Wing into
your Heart, all the rest quickly follows.

His Aguish Train of Pains and Joys, and Inquietudes, his huge Bow and Quiver,
and a thousand Poisoned Arrows, and if you once talk of driving him out again,
tho he lurks there only under the Pretense and Mask of Friendship, how will the
little Villain storm and rave, how big will he look, and try to be terribly
angry, and then by turns will flatter and fawn again, and hang about you so
very importunately, that you can hardly your self be yet so blind but you will
take notice on it. Since,

No Friendship e're languish'd, or looked half so kind. And then, or never, if
it ben't yet too late, work for your self, struggle for Life, assist the
Crisis, for if this moment is gone, never expect another.

You strive for a Noble Empire, no less then that of your own mind and Body
too, at the long run, as it almost always happens. Despair has made Cowards
brave, and what would one not do for Liberty, and what have not Women done on
less occasions? Nor are you without Auxilaries, and those very strong and
powerful, as well as your Enemies, Virtue, and Honor, and Reason, and the Good
wishes, and good words of all Good Men, which are lost, for ever lost, as well
as you with 'em, when ever you abandon your selves to the fatal Deceiver.

And pray remember this one short observation more, before we part with this
Subject.

That Honor and Virtue must needs be things in themselves, very desirable and
amiable, when Vice and Lewdness are so fond of sheltring themselves under their
Names and Colors, tho at the same time they do it, they thereby become the
most formidable Enemies.

Edward Rich --

Answer to Letter XVI.
By Madam GODFREY --
YOU charge our Sex with a variable and unconstant Temper, as fickle we must
all be as the Wind, or as Fortune. It Is Man you would have us think, that is the
only firm and stable part of the Creation, unmoved, as Rocks, and fixed on the
solid Basis of his own Resolution and Reason. Fixed indeed you may be in Evil,
as well as in a very strong conceit of your own Goodness and Wisdom, but
whether as changeable, when you happen to be in the right, as that Sex, which
is the object of your scorn, as inconsistent with your selves, and as false to
your own assertions, if we had not abundant experience to satisfy us, you your
self would be a sufficient Instance. Sometimes it is true, you put on a sort of
a Magisterial Air, and Dictate Morality and Virtue, more as it should seem,
that you might appear Superior to our Sex, then for any real esteem to that or
us. But you soon forget your self, are all infected with the Fashionable
Notions of the Town and Theater, and discourse just at their Rate, who pretend
there is no such thing as Virtue in our Sex, because they would be glad never to
find it.

And to convince any one that we do not scandalize you, we need but remit 'em
to the beginning of your last Letter, which I shall not repeat, but leave it to
any who are better pleased with such discourses.

But pray why are you so furiously angry with Platonic Love, which you are
forced your self to own the same thing, or at least not very different from a
virtuous Friendship? Can any thing that is virtuous be either so Criminal, or so
dangerous as you represent it?

True Friendship, as I think I Have read in some of the Philosophers, can only be
between Virtuous Persons; and are all our Sex either unworthy or incapable of
it, or are you grown Ingenuous, shall we call it, or Malicious, in attempting
to persuade us the same of your own Sex, that you seem to believe of ours, that
there is not one Spark of Virtue and true Generosity left amongst 'em?

Your Grave Lessons, what extraordinary care we should take of ye, might be
admitted: They seem to have some Face of Kindness, and to come from a Friend,
tho a sour one. Had you therefore only advised us to take an extraordinary
Care, with whom we contracted Friendships, to be first very well acquainted
with 'em, to Act with caution at least with 'em. if not too with some Reserve,
to be careful these Friendships did not cross any other Obligations; nay, after
all, to be still upon our Guard against you, considering how generous you are,
and how virtuous, and to take care of our Reputations, as well as Innocence;
all this, I say, we might have thankt you for, tho no more then what our Sex
too often Learns from yours, in a more dangerous manner, since it is no such
great wonder to find among you a perjured and Faithless Friend, we have reason
to wish it were not much more difficult to discover the contrary.

But what we think we have reason to be angry at, is, that you would totally
exclude us from what is the Happiness, as well as Perfection of our Natures,
and one of the greatest Blessings of Life.

And yet we fondly flatter our selves, we shall either find you all Virtuous
and Capable of Friendship, or prevail with you to be so, or else why do we ever
Marry you?

None would be a Slave to one that they believed False and Perfidious, none in
their Wits would give their all to one they thought not so much as capable of
Honesty, or Honor, or a lasting Amity. Why do you take so much pains before you
have us fast, to persuade us you have those Qualifications which may make you
worthy our Friendship, Courage, Bounty, Fidelity, and the like? And where is it
more likely, where would one expect to find a perfect Unity of Sentiments, or
Condescension, where there is any inconsiderable difference, which I look upon
as much of the Essence of Friendship? where that true and unbyast tenderness
and kindness, which is the inseparable effect of that Noble Virtue, as well as
that entire Confidence which is rarely or never divided from it, but where
Interest, and God, and Nature, and the Policies of States, and the Laws of
Nations have before made the strictest Union?

And if you are seldom capable of it, if you soon Learn to despise us, if you
have little or no tenderness for us, or confidence, or esteem, or so much as
Inclination, and if we rarely see in a Married State, lasting Instances of
Friendship, we would ask you whether it be either just, or modest, to upbraid
us with your own Faults, and our great unhappiness?

But tho you're at Liberty, it must be confessed, to make your selves as bad as
you please, we will not make you worse, and as ill as you are, as meanly as you
think of us, and I wish there were no reason to say of Virtue too, yet we are
satisfied you are not so Universally Corrupted, but there is some Faith and
Friendship left amongst you. There are some Instances of Love after Marriage,
which I reckon only a higher Name for Friendship, and that shows it not
impossible: Some happy Pairs, who know no Contentions, but who shall Love best
and oblige most: Whose Flame is still refining and still increasing, some
Phenix-Men, who scorn to take a Woman into their Arms, whom they cannot admit
into their Hearts too, and let them reign there without a Rival.

And is not this betwixt different Sexes, and call you not this Friendship?

And tho I grant, considering what your Sex generally are, ours can hardly be
too much afraid of you, since too many of you are like some Venomous
Creatures, Blasting all you Breath on, and tho further Friendships of an
extraordinary intimacy after Marriage between different Sexes, not related, be,
to speak no worse, very suspicious and ill sounding, and I agree with you, and
fatal experience has put it beyond Contradiction, that there is no more specious
way to ruin then under such pretenses; tho I say all this may be granted, yet
I cannot see how it follows, that after Marriage we are to live like Turkish
Wives, to be mewed up and Imprisoned all our Lives, and to dye if we but see
any Man besides our Husbands. Nor do I see any better reason, Why we should
shut our Eyes to their Merits, any more then their Persons, why we may not put a
modest value on those who deserve it, on a brave and good Man, more then on one
that is Villainous and Wicked, and this may at last amount to the Name of a
General Friendship. The same we have for the Names of the great Men of former
Ages, the same concern for them that we have, when we read the History of
Timoleon, or Brutus, or any of the Ancient Heroes.

Nay, yet further, our own Affairs may often make it necessary to place a
greater Confidence in one Man then another, and to entertain a more particular
Correspondence with him, and yet all this far enough within the strictest
bounds of Modesty and Virtue. We know not what you think of your selves, or how
you feed on your own Vanity, but for our parts, we don't find you such terrible
Charming dangerous Creatures, that there is no casting our Eyes on you, without
stark falling in Love with you. We are not conscious of any such thoughts; if
you are so wicked, you had best keep from us, and make the Experiment whether
we'll trouble you with our Invitations. Let us but alone, and we'll be bound
not to ravish you.

But suppose a young Lady no ways engaged, should be pleased with Honorable
Addresses and Profers of Service, from a Person not unsuitable to her Birth and
Fortune: Suppose she contracted a real esteem, a particular tenderness for him,
and were touched with his sufferings and merits, and should be willing to make
him all the returns that a Man of Honor could expect, or Virtue let her give.
Where Is the crime of all this, I Would fain know, or where the shame of it? Or what
is there Unnatural or Immoral, or so much as undecent in it? Or who that is not
Brutish would condemn it, or not wish 'em happy?

And if you find or think any thing worse, if you have any thing that is ill in
your own Breast, when you come near us, once more pray keep the Guilt, and
share the shame among your selves, and don't involve the Innocent.

In the mean time, we believe Honor and Virtue, really as aimable as you can
represent 'em, and Friendship not much behind 'em: Nor are all your Sexes abuse
of those excellent Names, and making 'em a covex for the worst designs, make us
out of Love with them, tho we shall endeavor to follow your advise, and to
have a care of you.

Rachel Godfrey --

LETTER XVII. That Women are not more Religious then Men.
By Mr. RANDAL --
AND one would think none should ever pretend they were, nor will your Sex, I
suppose, think themselves much obliged by such a Compliment, since the very
thoughts of it must be as uneasy to you, as hereafter is to the Atheists, and
will go near to sour all your mirth. If you would be thought Religious, some
say you must not Patch nor Paint, but all are agreed that you must not trick,
nor dissemble, nor lure in such Flights of Lovers, nor admit a Gallant, nor
abuse your Husbands; and what a condition would you be in, if all this should
be struck off together? They tell a pleasant story of a Georgian Woman; who
having lived such a Life as is common enough with your Sex, and entertained a
great many Friends, as was notoriously known to all her Acquaintance; when she
was stopped in the midst of her Career by a violent Fit of Sickness, sent for her
Confessor for Ghostly Counsel, and promised faithfully she would live a chaste
Life, and forsake all her old Friends, if ever she recovered: No, says the
conscionable Father, that is too much to promise, and I know you would never be able
to perform it: I Would advise you therefore, he went on, to keep to two or three
only, if you should recover, and this would be a good step to your thorough
Amendment. Such Religion as this perhaps might do well enough with you, 'twou'd
sit much more jaunty and easy, and for that reason I wonder you are not all
Catholics, unless it be the fear of Hair-Cloth, and going Barefoot that keeps
you from their Communion.

Who, you not Religions? Why, what signs of it would we have? You go to Church
as fine and as often, and clap the Pue-Door as hard, and repeat the Responses
as loud as any: You say your Prayers when it Thunders; and tremble at the
sight, or but the News of a Blazing Star, or a Cat with two Heads, or a Foal
with a Top-knot, or a Whale rolling up the Thames, or any other ^rodigy. You
don't go so often to the Taverns, as Men, nor get Drunk, nor Swear nor Quarrel
like them, nor Fight for Punk, nor run one another through the Lungs, poor
injured Creatures! As innocent as a New kindled Viper. As if in the first place
you knew not how better to improve your Time, then to go to Church only out of
pure Devotion.

Alas, you have great business there, which you think of greater moment: A
Spark to meet, or a great many to stare at, till you grow giddy with turning
round so often to throw kind looks at 'em, or squinting over your shoulder. Can
you deny that this is the most usual place of Assignations, or that such
thoughts as these are entertained and welcomed, most of the time that you
should be better employed? It Is time enough you think, to be Religious and
Formal when you grow old, when the diversions and pleasures of youth are past,
and you have no further relish for such matters, and when the Practice of
Piety, and the London Dispensatory will be good Company for you, and for one
another.

But in the mean time, any one may read your Devotion both in your Dress and
your Eyes, your Looks and your Gesture, and your whole Behavior, when you
would be thought in your greatest Fits of Piety and Goodness: And it is not
difficult to guess at the Deity you come thither to Worship.

If you give not Billets about to your Lovers instead of Bills to the Reader,
you have yet a well known way of discoursing with 'em: A Look upon one, a
half-smile on another, a whole one to the third, a nod to the fourth, your Fine
Teeth showed to the fifth, your Hand to the sixth, a Languishing Glance to the
seventh; And so on as many as will come, for you could dispatch 'em all, if
there were a hundred.

There may be, you will perhaps reply, some vain young Creatures that employ
themselves after this manner; But no Reflection on those who do otherwise,
whose behavior is grave and scrious, and whose thoughts are fixed on something
better then such Foolleries.

Be it so then, and we'll take this excuse as you have laid it; but first, you
must show one of these Saintlike Ladies, if never so little a pretender to
Youth and Beauty, who will not leave all these grave thoughts, if she sees but a
Spark she likes, fixing his Eyes intently on hers, who will not be pleased with
it, and return it, and split Glances with him, and say, by your leave Devotion,
on such an occasion?

You do indeed come to Church, especially in the Afternoons, as soon as you are
Dressed, when it is fair weather, when there is a Preacher you like, when it is not
very hot, nor very cold, nor you have not a Cough, or like to be thronged in your
Seat, or Mr. Thimbleman's Wife does not sit above ye, of you have no Visitants
at home, or no new Play, or Novel, or cannot sleep there as conveniently, or out
of Complaisance, or because all the Street besides does it, or when you have an
Assignation, or hopes of seeing one you like, or your next Neighbors New Gown,
or Triumphant Topping. Nay, to Judge the most Charitably, when you know there is
fine Music, or a delicate Anthem. And if you can find any better Reasons which
bring the bigger half of your Sex thither, I Will freely own 'em all as devout as
St. Katharine.

But supposing you have no business there, neither with Lads nor Lasses,
supposing your meaning as good, and Intention as pure as you would desire, nay,
pick out the very best of your Sex, choose you Representatives in every Church
in Town, and let us see how they will behave themselves. Their first work is
certainly to throw their Eyes all round, to fish out their Acquaintance, and
when once they find 'em, nothing but dopping and curtsying for a Quarter of an
Hour. They are wonderful civil to all the Guests, only mythinks they would do well
not to forget the Master of the House for altogether.

Tho I cannot tell how they should do otherwise, when if they happen to be
awake, it is Chat and loud Whispers, and Laughter that keeps 'em so. They would
not be guilty of so rude a thing as to hearken to the Parson for a whole half
hour, they are better bred then to mind what he says; They are not such Fools
as to need his Homilies.

Well, when they have half chatted, and half nodded out the Sermon, and once
get to the joyful Door again, you will see more of their Religion in their
abundant Charity; and if they have any, here is indeed a very convenient place
to show it, in the worst sense of the word. The small pence fly about, that
you would think it a Coronation, and there is at least a brazen shower, if not a
Silver one, among the poor thirsty Mumpers: But no more of this, lest we should
discourage you from this little Kind of Goodness, which would be a great deal
better, if Vanity did not lie at the Core; a Worm which Cankers the fairest
Fruit, and makes it good for nothing.

It Is a violent suspicion that the Vessel is very empty, which makes so loud a
Noise: That all this Art and Paint is to cover some great Deformity. Why so
much Parade and Clutter, and Pretense, if all were right? Religion is modest,
and Calm and Silent; It dwells retired in the deepest recesses of the mind: It
will, it is true, sometimes break out, and shine Gloriously, like the M^^n from
behind a Cloud, but its lusture is not fierce, nor glaring: It Is sweet, and
natural, and is seen whether it will or no, but it is contented to shine alone,
it is equally beautiful when no Eye sees it, it has no need of spectators, nor
does it ever desire 'em. Compare this with yours, and see whether you know it.

Superstitious you are, we must own, to the very height, and consequently you
would have been Religious among the Heathens, who use the same word to signify
both. You made excellent Bacchanals, but I cannot tell whether so good
Christians. O! The Devotion of your Brass Kettles, when you taber'd upon 'em
with such abundant Zeal, to wake poor Dame Luna when she fell into a Fit of the
Mother. Horrid Music indeed! But rarely well fitted to the Gods, and to the
Worshippers.

How has your tattling Sex debauched mankind in their very Cradle! How many
ridiculous foolish Hobgoblin-Tales have you invented, and so often repeated 'em
till you your selves believed 'em, with which in all Ages, you have
prepossessed us in our Infancy, the only time when you can impose upon us,
without our leaves, and endeavored to render our minds as Weak and Timorous as
your own, which tho some grow out, by a happy Genius, and peculiar strength of
Nature, yet it gives others a sort of kickets in their understandings, which
they never get shut off after.

Some Crimes, it is true, you are not so frequently guilty of as our Sex, for
which there are several Reasons, Murders you need not Act your selves, for you
have Bravo's enough to perform 'em without your appearing in 'em. From others
your way of Life secures you, and you are good, if we may therefore call you
so, because you cannot help it; as a Robber, or a Pick-pocket are very honest,
(all but their minds) when they are Laden with Irons. But still you make a
hard shift to break out now and then, as they say those People do from Prisons,
to exercise their Art, and return to that sanctuary unsuspected, yet you are
sometimes snapt, however they get off, and we need but observe every Sessions
Paper, and reckon whether is the greater Number, of your Sex or ours, who are
there Monthly Condemned, to form an infallible Judgment how far yours excells,
both in Honesty and Goodness.

Timothy Randal --

Answer to Letter XVII. That Women are more Religious then Men.
By Madam CARTER --
In a Letter to the Lady who defends our Sex.
Madam,
I must once more then draw my Pen in the defense of my Sex: My General lays
her commands upon me, and I am all Acquiescence.

You have indeed given me the Post of Honor, that part where the Enemy makes
his first attacks, and if he misses here, and is beaten off again, we need not
much apprehend him any where else.

For, as some of their Sex have endeavored to persuade ours, that we have no
Souls, for a very Transparent Reason, so if others of 'em could bring us to
forget we had any Religion, they would then be on the Square with us, and would
not be much afraid of what that Bugbear Honor could do against them.

Malice I see will pervert and poison the fairest Action, nay, will contradict
it self rather then not blast the Reputation of its Neighbor.

If we go to Church we are Hypocrites, if we have any necessary occasions that
forbid us that Happiness, it is according to this Gentleman's Charitable
Judgment, because we slight it, and make it our Aversion.

If we manifest any respect, or awful reverence at the extraordinary
manifestations of that Divine Power, which makes even Atheists tremble, why,
it is nothing but Superstition and Folly; if we are but civil to an Acquaintance
at Church, at our first Entrance; for I never knew we were to put off Civility
there, any more then any where else, this too must be viewed through false
optics: Our Charity it self must be mere Ostentation, as our design in
rendering our selves at the public place of Worship, only to meet, or ensnare
some of their Innocent Sex, who had no such vain Imaginations. But he has one
Accusation, which I acknowledge lies heavier then all the rest: That we go to
Church to hear a fine Anthem: And if we went thither to Sing one, would there
be any thing in it blameworthy? I expected the next Crime he would lay to our
charge, would be, that we went thither to say our Prayers.

Some there are, even of our Sex, whom you and I Madam have often observed,
with grief and shame, who too often abuse this sacred place with Tattling and
Laughter: Let the Satyr of our Antagonist fall as hard as he sees convenient on
such as these, and let him, if he please, Whip 'em out of our Churches, like
other Troublesome Animals; but then let him be sure not to overlook any of his
own Sex, who are guilty of the same Miscarriage, and let him not unjustly blame
those who are free from it.

We are all Flesh and Blood, there is no dispute of it: Both Sexes are molded
of the same Clay, we do not pretend to be Angels, tho our Flatterers would
sometimes persuade us so, in order to make us like themselves.

If they find our Weakness, why are they so ungenerous as to make us betray it?
Why can they not desist from tempting us, even when we take Sanctuary to avoid
them?

But yet they cannot affirm without Injustice, that they find our Sex of such I
inder- Constitutions; since they know many of their own, who have dogged a Lady
to Church often enough, without seeing so much as her Face while they were
there, at least, if that could not be avoided, meeting no Encouragement to
their Amorous Follys, but all their Glances and Oglings lost in the Air, like
the Curses they cast on the Insensible fair Saint, for not returning them.

As bad as we are in general, nay, as much depraved as the other Sex really is,
I am not willing to believe so ill even of them, as this Gentleman would
Insinuate, only to blast us; not unlike the Envious Wretch that pulled out one
of his own Eyes, that his Neighbor might lose both.

He represents things indeed, in a more deplorable condition then I would hope
they deserve, our Churches, like those in other Countries, little better then
Theaters, and the same Intrigues managed in both, or rather, as they were of
old, and as the Turkish Spy describes some others, like the old Heathenish
Temples of Cupid and Venus.

Pity those who abuse 'em should ever enter 'em, unless there were more hopes
of their Reformation by 'em. But I cannot think those things are so common as
he would have us believe.

I declare, I have known but few such Instances, and I never heard you, Madam,
mention many more. It Is possible that in five or six hundred, or a Thousand
People, there may be some few who make this the End of their coming thither.
But what just reflection can this be upon all the rest, who may be as reasonably
charged with Picking Pockets, because it is Notorious that many wretches come
constantly to Church with no other Intention.

It Is indubitably evident, that there may be Hypocrisy in frequenting the
Public Worship, but it is as certain, that in ordinary cases, there can be no
Religion without it: Admit but this, which I do not fatter my self in my own
cause, will appear very reasonable, and it will be soon visible, whether Sex
has more Religion: The Gentleman, civilly remits us to the Sessions Paper to
make the Computation, but I must ask his pardon, if I cannot think that a fair
way of Trial. Supposing it true, which he Asserts, there may be many reasons
assigned for it, without granting Women are the more wicked: For when Men have
brought 'em into the Snares of the Law, they generally leave 'em, and can shift
for themselves well enough; besides, there are some Capital faults whereof Men
cannot be guilty: And when they are Obnoxious to the Law, have many more
Conveniences for making their Escapes, then a weak helpless Woman: These I take
to be some of the reasons, why we sometimes find more Women in the Black Lift
then Men, I say sometimes, because I know the contrary often happens.

But now we have waited on our Antagonist to the Jayls, I hope he will go with us
to Church, without suspecting we have any design upon him by drawing him
thither. We will not confine him to St. Brides neither, let him choose any
Church in Town, and he will easily see how far the Men are out-number'd by the
Women, who without Compulsion fill those Seats, which would be very empty
without 'em.

And I Am apt to believe, notwithstanding all his wrath against us, he does
really go to Church now and then himself, for he seems to have remembered
several pretty things about Religion, which we own, as well as he, ought to be
principally inward and silent; but yet if it be there, he knows it will work
outward: Nor will he, I hope, affirm with many others, that there is no need of
any public Worship.

The next bad thing he lays to our Charge is Superstition, wherein he is so
civil to acknowledge we exceed the Men, although not in true Religion: But he
knows every Virtue runs nearer one extreme then the other, and he who is too
Religious, too Unreasonably afraid of the Supreme Being, may yet in time have
juster Notions of him, while a desperate Atheist is like to continue as he is,
till another World convince him. He cannot say, there are yet many of that
Impious Sect amongst us. He can Name no Hobbs's, (he knows their Names better
then we) nor any other such Universal Poysoners and Corrupters of Mankind, of
our Sex, although we have had those as Famous for many sorts of Learning, as ever
theirs could boast of: An Argument, by the way, that we are the sounder
Philosophers too, because it has been observed, that a thorough and well
digested Knowledge of things, inclines more to the belief of a Deity; whil'lt
huddled, confused, and crude Notions, we see by experience, often render Men
Atheistical and Irreligious.

The Gentleman owns we have not the same Temptations to Vice, wherewith his own
Sex is Assaulted, and we wish we had less still, as we should have, were it not
for them: However, in these cases where we have no Tempter, let us be as frail
as he can suppose us, we are not like to Err, and Freedom from Vice I take to
be a good Degree of Virtue, and Innocence a good Foundation for Religion. They
may discourse while they please, of knowing the World, and the Advantages of
Experience, we envy 'em not their dear bought knowledge, but think those who
know it least, are both the safest and the happiest.

There is one passage more wherein he blames us, for our way of Educating
Children, rendering their minds VVea^ and Feeble, and filling 'em with our own
Superstitious Notions.

But I must needs tell him, this Objection is no great Argument of his own
Religion, but sounds very much like his Divinity, who said, Fear first made
Gods.

We grant, and suppose he will scarce deny, that a Just and Awful sense of what
is infinite and invisible, is very proper to be Imprinted on the Minds of
Children, while they are yet a Blank Table, and as useful to confirm and clear
such Notions, if there already: To make 'em honest in the Dark, and to lay the
Foundations of Piety and Virtue, and I should think this was the greatest
Service could be done to mankind, and for which we deserve Laurels rather then
Reproaches.

Abigail Carter. --

LETTER XVIII. That Uggliness is most desirable in a Wife.
By Sir HENRY --
IT IS but a Cowardly sort of Virtue, that is forced to wink, in order to avoid a
Beautiful Enemy: -- Nor will I so much as make use of your own Arms against
you, that this Beauty that makes such Ashes of us all, is only in the
Imagination: -- Let it be in the Sense too if it will, but I Am resolved it
shall never domineer over my Reason. Nay, I Will not only think it, but even look
it into an Indifference, and the Subtlest, the Loveliest, the Veriest Woman of
ye all shall no more debauch my Judgment, than one of your Predecessors could
the Person of that honest Philosopher. You may say, if you think fit, as she
did, that I Am a Stone, and not a Man, but I Will prove my Reason beyond
Contradiction, by despising such Irrational Creatures as you are. Nay, never
Dress, nor Patch, nor Powder, nor Twire, nor Brustle up at me thus; for you will
all lose your Labor. My Choice is made; and if I must have a Wife, I Am
resolved a good convenient Parcel of Vggliness shall be her principal
Recommendation.

And a thousand Conveniences shall I meet with by this honest Policy. First, I
shall vex you, and mortify your vain Sex a little, which will do me more Good
than a Thousand Guineas more in her Portion, -- and it may be you may be the
better for it too; at least, 'twill be your own faults, if you be not: For there
might be some Hopes of you, if we could but once make you humble.

But order you Matters as you please, for I Will still go on with my Story.

In the next place, I shall need no Seraglio, no Black or White Eunuchs, to
keep that safe, which no Body but my self will meddle with. Who would disquiet
himself for the vain Satisfaction of having what is left of a Beauty, when he
may be so much more happy, with one of a different Character. A thousand
Towers, and Looks, and Bars, and Fathers and Husbands cannot preserve an
Alemena, or a Danae: What Eternal Catterwawling there is about one of these
Pestilent Beauties; what purring of one side, and scratching of the other? How
often a Man may have bin Skin-pinckt, for presuming but to lead home his own
natural Wife? With what Fear and Reverence must he Salute her How tenderly must
he touch such China Ware, and how slight a matter reduces it to its Primitive
Earth again? Give me a good plain Earthen Platter, that will endure a sound
Bang, and while I eat in it, I Am safer from Poison, then if all my Meat were
served up in Unicorns Horns.

A fine Woman must be conceited, if she has any Eyes, and consequently be
pleased her self, that she pleases others. Then should I have a thousand
Fop-doodles, Primeing, and Cocking, and Dressing, and Singing at her, and
Corrupting all my Servants, and if by Miracle he should at last, beyond my
Expectation and his own, find her honest, he takes care to prefer her to one of
the Boxes in the next Lampoon, or so publicly abuse her, that I must be forced
to slit his Windpipe, or he mine, in attempting her Vindication.

No, since our Honor is by the abundant Civility of our Country, in our
Wives keeping, I would have my Cabinet made as plain and as strong as
possible, that none should attempt to break it open, or if they did, might lose
their Labor.

And as I shall not be troubled from others, so neither from her self. My Dear
Joan and I shall agree well enough together. She cannot be Proud; for what has
she to be Proud of, except of my affections? She cannot be Ill-natured, for she
has nothing but the Agreeableness of her Temper to retain my Heart. Nay, she
cannot be so much as Jealous, for she shall know I chose her before a Beauty,
because I liked her better. She Will be content with any thing, because she is
humble, and Name me one Beauty that ever had that Virtue; she will not trouble
me, or ruin me in Expenses. Not in Clothes, because she shall be so
superlatively Ugly (if my kind Stars would but send me such a Jewel) that no
Finery shall make her better. Nor in Housekeeping, because she will not care for
much Company; nor in Journeys for the same Reason. She must Love me entirely,
because none else will Love her, and that must needs make me Love her again,
and how ardently shall I embrace her Fair Soul, through her homely Body? And
how quiet and happy shall we sit at home, and pity the Miserable Beauties, and
those who possess 'em, as Jove did Semele in the midst of Storms and Thunder;
while their Reputations are Blasted, their content Banished, their Estates
Ruined, their Hearts Tormented, and in a few Years, or perhaps Hours, that
which was the occasion of all this, is no more: The fatal cause is ceased, but
the effects still remain. The Beauty is gone, but the Woman still Lives and
Hangs on ye, and would fain be a Beauty still, and when all the World is weary,
you must begin, and Cringe and Court as much as ever.

Whilst my dear Dowdy has such a Face that she defys Age, nay, Death it self to
hurt it. It Is as invulnerable as the heel of Achilles, and by the looks on it
you would think it had been dipped in the same Water. Time must have a good stomach
if he meddles with it. It must be merely for the sake of Malice, and therefore I
hope, he will let her alone as well as all the rest of Mankind: For my own use
I Would have her, and what should I care whether she pleases others? she will be a
Guard to my House, her Face will fright Theves away, and my Children need no
other Raw-head and Bloody-bones, to keep 'em in order. What pretty Cubbs
they will be, and how like their own dear Father and Mother?

Come hither and draw her sweet Picture Apelles,
With a Face like the Fire-pan, and a Nose like the Bellows:
Her Body all Grid-Ir'n ( Mr. Printer! depend on it:)
Or a Worm-eaten Carot with two sticks at the End on it,
Teeth, Fair as a Sloe, by kind nature's direction
Tho in vain, as a Foyl to her darker Complexion.
Her thin Lips how Pale, and her Gills, how all Rosy?
But such Charms in her Breath, that each whiff overthrows ye.
Such, such is my Fair one, no uglier I make her,
And to show I Am not Jealous, he that likes her may take her.
HENRY --

Answer to Letter XVIII. In Defense of Beauty.
By Madam DENT.
CIvility requires, Sir H. that we should leave you in the unenvied possession
of what you so much delight in, the very Imagination of whose Charms had
snatched you away into such a Rapture of Dogrel, as neither Wither, nor H.
himself could equal.

Let us then return to that against which you profess so utter an Aversion, and
which all the World besides so justly admire. The Defense of Beauty, tho it
needs no Champion.

My subject I feel is too big for me, and now only I repent my accepting your
Challenge. Not that I fear any Antagonist, but that so weighty a cause has not
a more equal strength to support it: It staggers me at once, and dazles me, and
if Sappho, or Behn her self were alive, they must undergo the same misfortune.

Yet if I must fall, it shall be Honorably, I Will wish I could do more, and
will at least attempt it, and perhaps might succeed, had I but all the Beautys
in the World before me, that out of 'em, like the Painter, I might make one
Venus.

What art thou, thou strange Unaccountable Every thing! Or by what Names, or
Titles, shall we salute thee? We see thee every where, and yet none can define
thee. Thou art the same, and yet infinitely diversified. Harmony is most like
thee, and thou art the Concord, or rather the Virtue of all that is visible. The
Almighty Artist has seatter'd thee through all his work. A Flower, a Blade of
Grass, a Fly, a Mite possesses thee. We see thee in all shapes and dresses, we
admire thee in the Picture of a Storm, or a Battle, and discover a Beauty even
in Horror.

Light it self is thy near Relation, or rather Lightning, could we separate it
from the fatal effects it carrys with it: Thy Darts are all peaceful and
innocent, yet we feel 'em trill through our Hearts, and bless the wound that
makes us Mad with Pleasure.

It Is in a humane Face thy Throne's erected,
There do thou Triumph with a Peaceful sway,
Thy Scepter makes the trembling World obey.
See the little Monarchs, the puny Princes and Conquerors, all the Greats, and
the Immortals and Invincibles! How they creep and cover about thy Throne! Yet
there is one that dares meet thy Beams, and that deserves 'em: He has lately
lost a Beauty would have disputed Empires even with thee: Try if thou can
make it up, tho that could scarce be done, should thou thy self descend into
his Arms!

Whither, O Beauty! VVhither have thou drawn me?
Why, O ye Peaceful Plains are you forsaken.
For noisy Camps and Courts and glittring Thrones?
I Will home again -- Hail all ye happy shades
Where untaught Nature, beautiful and young,
Displays unborrow'd charms; where thou and I,
My Damon, Life's unenvied sweets may prove,
And all the Luxury of Virtuous Love.
Where we may see a thousand diverting objects, a thousand Beautys on every
side, and bewilder our Eyes in the pleasing variety, and return to Living
Beaatys, when they are tired with insensible objects, I know where my Eyes can
meet their Acquaintance, and find as much Love as they bring with 'em. Such
unaffected Gracefulness, such a manly Noble Air, such Eyes, such very Lovely
speaking Eyes; Such modesty, such softness, such firmness, such a happy
mixture, just such as I would wish in him I Love. And while he Loves, I have no
more to wish.

Who can think, or talk, or write temporately when Beauty is the Subject:
Nothing could now be cold that had a Spark of Life, or motion.

The pleasure it gives is more refined and more removed from sense, even then
that of Music: Brute Creatures seem in some Instances to be moved by the
latter, but only what has Reason by the former: That is too Spiritual a
pleasure for their inferior Natures. I cannot therefore think they have Reason,
because they have no Choice in these matters: Their Appetites hurry 'em on for
the preservation of their Kind, but Beauty never strikes 'em, and the Herd
knows no more Distinction then it does Propriety.

And if there should be any Creatures in humane shape, who had the same Tempers
and Inclinations, who could remain insensible before such an object as commands
reverence and respect from the greatest Barbarians, they ought rather to be
rankt with those Inferior Animals, with whom they Sympathize, or at least among
the Mimicry and Sports of Nature, who may seem to have taken pleasure in making
a Figure so like a Man, which yet might puzzle the Philosophers to describe
him, or to know what Species they ought to rank him under.

Had Beauty only Barbarians to deal with, it would civilize 'em, had it the
worst of Men, so they are but Men, it might work upon them, refine the Oar,
smooth the rugged'st Temper, cultivate the most barren soil, and every day
produce New wonders.

But then it must keep company with Virtue, for if once that leaves it, how
soon will it Pine and Languish? It Is like the Vine without the Elm, the
Jessamine without its Support. It tumbles to Earth, and is Trodden into the
Mire, by every one that passes by it.

The more difficulty there is in preserving Beauty unblemisht, the more
glorious are those who do so. It Is possible to be done, for it has been, and
still is, in many instances. Heaven is not so envious, or malicious as Earth,
but can give Beauty and Virtue to the same Person, and they agree so well
together, it is pity they should ever be parted.

It is the envy and wicked Revenge of disappointed Wickedness, which often
endeavors to sully what it cannot ruin; and the rest of mankind is so
ill-natured, and so very partial, that any of this Kind is greedily received
and easily believed.

Yet after all, if there are really so many ill Women in the World as some
would persuade us, who pretend to be very well acquainted with 'em, it is easily
Demonstrable, that Beauty is not the cause on it, nay, that the smaller part of
those who deserve that Character are really Beautiful, because homely Faces
make up the most of the World.

And it is still more likely, on some Accounts, that a fine Woman should be
Virtuous then one who is more indifferent, because she is naturally and justly
conscious of her own worth.

There is a decent Pride, which will not let her have such cheap thoughts of
her self as other People.

If it is objected, that she values her self for it; and why should she not, so
she does it Soberly and Moderately? What Man is there who has more Strength, or
Wealth, or Wit, or Prudence then his Neighbors, who does not find his mind
Proportionably to his Endowments, and expect a just deference from such as come
behind him in any of those Qualifications.

Beauty, it is true, decays, and so does every thing that is Mortal; but it is
better to be happy some part of Life, then none at all; and the Ruins of a
good Face, must be better then those of a bad one; Nay, more agreeable in Age,
then the other, when it had the Freshest Youth to recommend it.

Deformity strikes the mind with Horror, as Beauty with Love: It Is, I confess,
a deep Piece of Policy to Marry such a Person as a Man cannot Love himself, for
fear any body else should Love her, Nor is he always so sure of that neither,
since a mishaped body oftentimes covers a more awkward and misshapen mind. And
Nature seems to cry, Beware! whenever it shows us one of those Antic Figures,
and this they are so sensible of themselves, that they are generally either
negligent, and squalid of one side, because indeed, they despair of pleasing
after all their pains, or else Spiteful and Malicious Enemies to all the World,
because they think they have but few Friends in it. Nor has it been rarely
found, that such Persons as these have been lost in the lowest degrees of the
most fordid Vices, agreeable to their Nature and Inclination: Tho this must be
owned, in the last place, to prevent the Imputation of Ill Nature and
Injustice, that where such as these apply themselves vigorously to the
Prosecution of Virtue, they become as Famous as any, through a happy resolution
of mind.

But yet on the other side, none can deny that Virtue looks much more Charming
in a Beautiful Dress, then in one that is more indifferent or displeasing.

Katharine Dent

LETTER XIX. Against a She-wit.
By Sir THOMAS --
She Is such an Heterogeneous Creature as Africa never produced, for Nature will
have her Fegaries too, now and then, in these colder Regions. The French have
made it a Question, whether there can be such a thing as a Wit of the Breed of
some Nations: I think they will allow it with much ado, once or twice in an Age
amongst us Insularies; not that we have any great reason to thank them for it,
any more than those who first transported other Wild-Beasts into our Island.
But above all the Forest, defend me from a She-wit, and a She-Tyger, though of
the Two, I should think the former the more terrible, and that I was scarce
safe, though the wooden Bars in the Tower kept the Peace between us. Her Face I
should not much quarrel with, though generally cut out of the same piece with the
He wit's, nor so much as her Tongue, though as melodious as a Cornet: But it is
her Teeth and Nails that I Am afraid of, for they rankle at the least touch, and
are more furiously venomous than can be imagined. Besides, she is as dangerous
at a distance, as at baudy-blows; she is stuck round with Pens, as a Porcupine
with Quills, and can dart 'em more speedily and inevitably.

The Turkish Spy tells us of a rare Fellow that could shoot Twenty-five shot
within the compass of a Penny, out of a little Pocket-Cross-bow; but the French
spoiled his sport, and got him assassinated, for fear of the worst, and because
he might do 'em a mischief. You She-wits will shoot faster, and farther, and
deeper, and make use of poisoned Arrows, and yet you live under so mild a
Government, that it takes no care to prevent the mischiefs you may occasion,
does not so much as make you find Sureties for your good Behavior: However,
abuse not its Lenity, lest it should turn into Fury, and at last order your
Arms to be seized, like those of other dangerous and disaffected Persons.

But if you have Beauty added to your Wit, the Poison is still stronger, and
the Infection more mortal; you fight then as unlawfully, as those who wear
Charms about; 'em; ^ou can kill every body else, and are your selves
invulnerable. Besides, you are the Representatives of all your Sex, the
Treasurers of all its Pride and Vanity, its Revenge and Malice, and there would
be danger of your Monopolizing 'em, had you not such an inexhaustible Fund
amongst ye; Potozis and Mexico's pil'd one upon the other, whose bottom it is as
hard to find, as that of the King of Spain's Treasure: Nor have you any need of
a Flota to convoy it home; it is your native growth, and spreads incredibly; it
lies on the very Surface, and kills whatever is near it.

There Is indeed no touching one of those sort of Creatures, nor so much as
venturing safely within sight of you: It Is as dangerous approaching you, as
it is to disturb a Painter when he is about some extraordinary piece of Work; a
Man must expect as soon as it is finished, to see his Face on some Devil's
Shoulders: He Is sure to fill a Gap in your next Lampoon, or furnish a Character
in your new Comedy; for if he gives way to the Stream, and lets you have all
the Discourse, he is a Dull Fellow, and for that must be made an Example; if he
ventures to put in a word now and then, he is impertinent, and hinders you from
pleasing your self, and entertaining the Company with your agreeable
Conversation.

But above all, woe to the Wretch that is in love with you, for his Torment is
such, that nothing can equal it. The Fantastic Devil will be sure to
will-o-the wisp him about, till he is not able to stir, and it may be give him
at last a dirty Ditch or Quagmire to rest in. He must be the veriest Fetch-and
Carry, the most arrand Lover, the gentlest, tamest, Creature that ever was good
for nothing but to make a Husband. Everlasting Teizing is his Portion;
sometimes you will no more let him approach ye, than a Persian Bride, and it may
be, a Minute hence, the Wind changes, and you stifle him to Death with your
kindness.

Now you are all Thunder, by and by nothing to be heard but gentle Murmurs; and
presently you are changed into Tehee and Laughter; but to be sure your merry
Humor comes when he is grave, and if the Lover's pleasant, for that very reason
you can once be silent.

You Will wink upon his Rival before his Eyes, and yet he shall not dare complain,
nay, not so much as sigh, or look displeased, unless he would eternally lose you.
And yet still you find a way to twist your selves about his Heart again, that
it shall neither be in his power to hate or forsake you, though he knows not
how to love you. Away he flies, when you have provoked him beyond measure, but
you can lure him down again, stroke him and please him, make him shut his blew
Broad Eyes, and sleep in your Bosom.

And then if you do pinion him, when you have him at such an advantage, whom
can he blame but his own easiness and folly?

What should you do with wit? it always oversets you, your Sail is
unproportionable to your Ballast, when a Storm comes, you must down with all,
or inevitably to the bottom.

I know no good it does ye, or ever can, or what you are the better for it,
unless that it teaches ye to despise your Husband, and to dispute with 'em,
instead of obeying 'em.

Well rest the Ghost of poor Milton, who when you had blinded him, like his own
Sampson, yet made a shift to give you one Sparring Blow, before he died. For
thus he compliments you, and instructs us in his Sampson Agonistes.

-- Heavens Universal Law,
Gave to the Man despotick Power,
Over his Female, in due awe,
Nor from that right to part an Hour;
Smile she or lour.
So shall he least Confusion draw,
On his own Life, not swayed
By Female Usurpation, nor dismayed.
And now we are fallen upon Poetry, pray how many honest Poetesses can you
reckon among ye? From Granny Sappho, down to Mother Behu? If Boccalin been't
too grave an Author for ye, pray be at the trouble to read a very edifying
Story in him -- It Is the 22d Advertisement, That the Gentlemen of Parnassus
having, contrary to their ancient Laws, admitted into their Academy, several
virtuous Lady-Poetesses, they were at first wonderfully applauded by the
Virtuosi, and what with Emulation, and what with Love, never were there finer
Performances in their public Schools. But within a little while, Apollo smelt
out some doings amongst 'em, which did not at all please him; on which he
immediately called a Parliament, and ordered all the Poetesses to be banished
out of his Territories, as Plato served the Poets, making a strict Law, that
never any more of 'em should be admitted afterward, giving this Reason, worthy
his wisdom for so severe a Decree, because he had found by experience, that
Women's best Poetry was in their Distaff and their Needle, and that their
Exercises in common with the Virtuosi, was like Dogs Play, which generally ends
in getting upon one another's Backs.

They tell a Story of a little pigmy sort of a Poetaster, who was so very
light, he was forced to wear Lead in his Shoes, to prevent his being whiskt
round like a Straw, and blown away by every blast of Wind. You Lady Poets, are
often said to be obliged to our Sex for assistance in your Composures; but if
one of you could but have stolen this little Fellow's Shoes, and had others
made by their Model for all your Sisterhood, 'twou'd have done you more service
than the best Plot or pair of Verses that any of your Sex ever made bold with
from the works of your Neighbors.

THOMAS.

Answer to Letter XIX. Being a Defense of Wit and Poetry in Women.
By Madam GODFREY.
WHy so angry with Wit, Sir T. Remember what a Good Natured Gentleman, like
your self, replies to his Antagonist on such an occasion; you might have been
made a Wit your self, and should you have taken it well, if others had been so
angry with you for no other Reason?

Ay -- but it is the She-wits that you declare War against; you are afraid of
'em, and yet you provoke 'em. You make 'em a parcel of Tygresses and
Cata-mountains, and all the Monsters in the Tower, and yet as valiantly as your
Brother Knight of the Ill-favored Countenance, go and set open their Cage, nay
thrust in a Staff, and make 'em cuff it about, without any fear of their
sallying out against you: And I believe, after all, you need not fear 'em: For
have you not seen a harmless Familiar Creature, walk about in the same Cage
with the Lions, who yet have scorned to touch him, and thought him below their
Anger? Nothing but Hunger could ever drive 'em to lift up their Mighty Paw
against him. Even so, Sir T. But so much for Similies, and now to the merits of
the Cause in controversy between us.

I confess, I always thought that Wit and Learning had polished the Manners,
and rendered all Persons more refined, and more conversible; and that nothing
was more fierce, or more untractable, than a Dunce or a Fool. But it is an Age
of Paradoxes, Sir T. This that we live in, and you are born, I perceive, to do
service to Humanekind, and to set us right, and clear our Judgments from these
and many other vulgar Errors. You assure us, that a Wit is the most fierce and
most formidable Creature in the World: A thing with a long Tail, huge Horns,
vast Glareing Basin Eyes, unsufferable tremendous Claws, and a Tail, as long as
a Blazing-Star, and as mischievous as a Scorpion's.

But is it not strange that in Creatures of the same Species, there should be
so vast a difference? Why, there is not more between a tiney Newt, or a
harmless little Lizzard, and your vast and terrible Crocodiles, or Alligadors,
then between a He, and a Shee-Wit, according to your way of describing the
one, and what we know of the other. Since your Hee-Wits, Sir T. by all that we
could ever observe, and as you know by experience, are often the gentlest
tamest Creatures, that we Ladys are no more afraid of, then of our Squirrils:
We have 'em in a Chain, they fling themselves about from one place to the other,
are never at rest, but always good humored and diverting, and give 'em but a
handful of Filberts, you shall have 'em the best Company in the World. Tho
these, I confess, are only the Tame-Wits of whom I Am discoursing, and are among
whom our Acquaintance chiefly lies; Those who are resin'd and polished by their
Conversation with the Fairer Sex, whose company you must own, exceeds the best
Academys in these matters, since for those of ye who run wild, and only herd
with one another, how should you but retain your Native Fierceness, and yet
certainly you might be tamed too, with our good management, unless you are
worse then Elephants.

You are afraid of our Painting; Sir T. and lest you should see your own sweet
Face exposed by some of our Pencils more to the Life then you would desire: But yet
a wise Man would not be too much afraid of a distant and only possible danger:
Besides, there are some Faces so very hard to hit, so full of so many pretty
oddnesses, and particularities, and so very Jenesceay-quoyish, that a Good
Artist would hardly venture his Reputatition in attempting 'em. However, should
we ever venture to draw it, we promise you we won'not be so Malicious as to put
a Tail to it.

But you say, it is ill trusting such Edge-Tools, as wit in our Hands. I
confess, Sir, you have reason, for if we once knew how to use 'em, we should
soon beat ye at your own Weapons; at Mother-Wit, you own we outdo ye already;
and who can blame you for endeavoring to keep us from improving it, since we
should then be doubly your Masters?

It were but fair tho, after after all these quarrels about Wit, that you would
be so kind to tell us what it is, lest we should dispute, and you should blame
us for what yet never had a real being.

If it be, a just Imaging of Nature, why may not our Sex attempt it as well as
yours, and what inconvenience could follow, should they succeed in it, and why
may not they do it Masterly as well as Bungling? Success in these things
depending partly upon Observation, and partly on custom, but chiefly on a
lively Imagination and a happy Genius. And indeed it is in this quickness of the
Imagination, wherein Wit may be thought Principally to consist, according to
the most usual acceptance of the word, although, if considered to the bottom, it
may be this Definition would be found to fall in with the former. However, all
are agreed, that Readiness of Thought, and Sharpness of Repartee, are great
Instances of Wit, and that in such Lucky turns we may see the liveliest Glances
of it. And if in these you will not pretend to come near us, what is there in
them, I beseech you to tell us, for which you can justly blame us? These things
are Diverting, and Surprising, and Agreeable, and for which you value your
selves very highly, and you pretend you are fond of 'em too in us, when you can
find 'em.

That Wit, in Woman found so rare as one of your own assuming Sex describes it,
and yet when you have found it, you are always envying and pecking at it;
Neither Folly nor Wit in our Sex will please ye, and yet you have Indifference
as much as either.

But our next Accusation is for Poetry, another Mortal Sin, which no Indulgence
from your Infallibilities, it seems, must Pardon.

And why should you envy us the little we have of it? A few Airy Songs, o^ a
Copy of whineing Love-Verses to our Faithless unconscionable Bajazet, is, for
the most part, all that we pretend to. If by a Miracle, we Write a New Play now
and then, or Vamp up an old one, you know that is our Top, and seldom there, any
higher then Farce or Comedy. But for High and Mighty Epic, for the most perfect
work of Humane Nature, we leave that entirely unto you, none of ours having
ever invaded that province; you may, as long as you please, Write Dull Foli^'s
yourselves, nor shall we envy the Honor you have in Composing 'em, nor the
Happiness of others in Perusing 'em.

But you are most troubled at our want of Henesty: As much, I suppose, as most
of your Chaste and Virtuous Sex; tho you are more troubled where you find that
Accusation a Slander, as it is much more frequently then Truth and Justice. But
however, pray whether of these two is it, Poetry, or W^^, that makes us
dishonest, and how come either of 'em to have such dismal effects on us, and no
such thing in you? O! It Is the strength of your Tempers, the Firmness of your
minds, and your Consummated Habits of Virtue, it is these doubtless that are
such Powerful Antidotes, that they can resist such subtle Poisons, and whereof
you are so plentifully stored, that if you think they would have the same
effect in us, 'twou'd be a Noble Piece of Charity to assist us with a good
quantity of it, since it is to be supposed you have very large Funds of your
own, which high Obligation should be ever acknowledged by

Your Humble, etc. Rachel Godfrey.

LETTER XX. Against Women's Jealousy.
By Mr. TRENCHFEILD.
WHen it is your own case, you have a ready excuse for the basest Infidelity,
and when you have given us the broadest Signs of your Falsehood, and we must
pull out our Eyes if we would not see them yet forsooth, we legitimate all your
Injustice by daring to suspect it: And would you be willing to have this turned
upon you, or where is the Equity, that you will allow this to be very fair of
your side, but not of ours? There Is nothing more vexatious nor more common
amongst you then this Tormenting Vice of Jealousy: It Is almost as natural to ye
as Pride and Peevishness, for it is an apparent mixture of born. It argues the
meaness of your Tempers too, as well as, too often, your own Infidelity. Little
minds are most apt to ^u^p^^ion, (of which Argus is a notable (...) which the
great and (...) much rather be ill (...) then causelessly suspect any Injury.
Guilt it self is the most Jealous thing in Nature: It Is a sore suspicion you
have been formerly in the Oven, by your peeping so often into it. There Is no
possibility of satisfying a Jealous Woman; were you Married to an Eunuch, you
would scarce trust him out of your sight, any more then the Famous Turkish
Emperor: I wonder you have never yet invented Male Padlocks, since you would gladly
keep the Men up as close as the Easterlings do their Women: And when they have
escaped Prison for an hour, or a day, never a Prince in Europe has more Spies
about him then a poor Husband: Who shall scarce look on another Woman, but his
own hears on it almost as soon as the Glance is over; but if he dares proceed so
far as a civil Salute, he is a gone Man, and I know not how he will dare lift up
his Face any more before his Lady Wife: Alas, poor Husband! This is his
condition, and so much worse that one can scarce conceive it without the hazard
of a very dangerous experiment, and actually entering into the Noose to Learn
what it is. How many Lives have been sacrificed to that insatiate Fiend, a
Female Jealousy, and what Hecatombs would be sufficient to appease it! You are
all Medaea's and Circe's, and Poisons and Daggers are your mildest presents on
such occasions, and the very suspicion of one Crime in the Man, shall too often
be followed with the Perpetration of many much blacker from his implacable
Governess.

Or if you are not quite so outrageous, you make it out, as far as you are
able, in lesser, but perpetual Vexations! As importunate you are as Flies in
July, and like them, as impotent as you appear, you can yet draw Blood where
e're you settle. You 'wurry us with your Peals, as your foresaid Friend
complains of one of your Predecessors. What an incredible Copia you have? How
came you by such an Inexhaustible stock of words, and so much Natural
Eloquence? Here you display all your Figures, and envy us none of your
Rhetoric. You are never at a stand unless when you are out of Breath, or
Chap-fall'n with too violent motion; and what haste ought an honest man to make
in such a case for a Surgeon, to get all set right again?

Even Night it self, the Easer of all other Cares, brings no benefit to the
miserable wretch that is haunted with such a Domestic Fieud: What makes up all
other Breaches only widens theirs: The Sun may set and rise, and set again, but
she is no Changeling: The Bed's her Chapel, and she says her Prayers there, but
it is as Witches do, all backward.

She has an admirable Memory, that is the Truth on it, and shall run ye back ten,
or twenty years, and give the poor Man as exact a Catalogue of all his Sins, as
if she had been his Evil Genius, that tempted him to commit 'em. He rests, but
it is as the Saint did upon Gridirons: When she is tired, which may be about
Cock-crowing, and sleep with much a ado Tongue-bolts her for a few moments,
he is still but little the better, and even she is her own Tormentor; she dreams
every moment that she surprises him in another Arms, Screeches out and
snatches after him, till she wakes him in as great a fright as her self; unless
he is disturbed and starts up before, at her terrible shape, that still creeps
in through her closed Eyelids, and repeats all the Lectures she had just been
giving him.

Even the Church is no Sanctuary to him from her intolerable vexation, she
accompanys him thither more out of Spite then Devotion, watches him as sharp as
an old Usurer his Rich Hieress, keeps her Eye as intently fixed on his, as if
she were duelling him, and if it ever chance to fall on any Female Face in the
whole Company, she is ready to unsheath her Talons, fly out of the Seat at her,
and fasten like a Catt, to the Destruction of her innocent rigging. And here is
abundant matter for Repetition, when they get home again, as well as for
Invention and Malice a long time after. She Is such a deepsighted Politician,
that, with her, whatever may be, always is; she never wants Circumstances to
set off her Venomous Imaginations, she Poisons the fairest Fame with but
breathing on it. All Womankind, in her opinion, is one great Strumpet, and she is
Jealous of 'em all, lest her Grand Signior should reduce 'em into one Seraglio.

Nay, she is Jealous even of her self, lest he should think of others while he is
embracing her, and not content of Persecuting him in this World, would fain
carry her cruelty even beyond the Grave. She Is Mortally afraid of dying first,
lest he should Marry again, she thinks Second Marriages but another sort of
Adultery, and absolutely unlawful, and if any thing could make her content to
leave him, 'twou'd be the hopes of haunting him in the time of his Second Wife,
drawing the Curtains, glaring in upon 'em, pulling off the Clothes from 'em,
and sliding in cold between 'em. And earnestly wishes for the Enchanted Ring
they talk of, which made one of the French Kings so mad for his Mistress, and
dote upon her very Carcass.

Robert Trenchfield.

Answer to Letter XX. Concerning Jealousy in Women.
By Madam BRIGGINSHAW.
YOU must own Jealousy is sometimes a Sign of Love; you so often give us reason
to be Jealouse, there is not a Creature in the World more Jealouse then a
Husband, and yet you run on in the Old Track, load us with all the odium you
can rake together, and would have us believe your Sex is perfectly innocent.

Why should a Wife ever concern her self at what her Husband did, had she not
an extraordinary tenderness for him? And does she not deserve better returns
then she generally meets with, for enduring so painful a Passion only on his
Account, whereas if she never Loved him, she would know nothing of it?

You are all ready enough to blame our Sex, whether with, or without Reason,
and to exclaim against 'em, if they manifest the least Resentment in cases of
this Nature: You would have us be all such perfect Grizzles as the Woman that
Lucy talks of, who furnishf a Chamber for her Husbands Conveniences: But you
cannot think it so very easy for a Woman of Spirit to digest an affront of so
high a Nature: We do not care for being slighted any more then you, we think we
deserve Love, and may reasonably expect it: But when after the most Solemn
Vows, the most passionate and private Oaths, and public Solemnities, a Fine
Woman shall be left in a few Months, it may be, for some contemptable disease,
or at least common and mercenary Creature; this would provoke any thing that is
not all a Saint, which Character not very many; either of us or you can pretend
to: And no other Reason given for this Treatment but, she is a Wife, with a
Curse at one end on it. And how common this is at present, how difficult to find
any of your Sex who are Masters of any more fidelity or honesty, all the
Surgeons in Town can Witness, as well as the unwholesome dwindling Remains of
many considerable Families. I can scarce forbear Naming some of 'em, did not
decency forbid it: There are few Letters in the Alphabet that would not point
at one or other.

There Is my Lord, A. and B. and C. and D. and Sir E. F. and G. H. and J. K. and
L. M. N. and Sir O. P. and Squire Q. R. tho I think there is but one of that
Name, and even Mr. S. T. and V. W. and I might go on at the same rate were
there a Hundred Letters in the Alphabet, or should I repeat it an hundred times
over, or Ring as many Changes upon it as one may upon Four and Twenty Bells. And
while mankind is so Universally false, whether would you think it a piece of
Charity, or Folly in a Woman never to suspect, Nay, not to believe her Eyes,
when the Baseness and Villainy of your Sex appears so Glaringly before 'em? It
is not indeed, properly Jealousy or Suspicion, but certainty and demonstration,
when matters are once brought to this pass: But you will say, suppose an Husband
has been once false, he may be better, and we ought to hope better of him: Why
truly, I know no absolute Impossibility in the Repentance of the Devils
themselves, but yet I Am sure they are fallen; and have not so large a Charity
for them, as I have heard one of the Fathers had, who fully believed they
should be saved: It is not often that Men repent, when arrived to any height of
Wickedness: They should have stopped short before they had got so far; when they
are fallen, they must needs be down, and who can undo what is once done in such
cases? or how can we help Remembering the Treason, when we have the Traitor
always before our Eyes? When it is your own Case, you plead that the Marriage
is effectually dissolved by any one Act, on the Woman's side of this Nature. But
pray how many must go to it on the Man's? Or if one were sufficient, how few
Marriages would remain undissolv'd? It is indeed this consideration, and the
kindness we have to our Families, and the order of the World, and even to our
False and Tyrannical Masters, which inclines us to put up more Affronts of this
Nature, then it were possible for us to digest, were we not more unpassionate
and more capable of Reason then you generally represent us; Especially when you
have so far suborned custom to your side, as unreasonable a Tyrant as your
selves, that it has past it into one of its own unequal Laws, that it is the
Duty of a Woman to be all Milk and Butter, all sweetness and softness, when her
Husband keeps a Brace, or a Leash of Rampant Whores under her Nose, it may be
in the very House, and maintained by her Fortune, to bring Beggary and Diseases
into the Family: Whereas when a Gentleman is but seen near a VVomans Apartment,
if he dares but peep into the Avenues of the Seraglio, immediately nothing's to
be heard but Pistols and Daggers, and Divorces and Acts of Parliament, and all
the terrible things in Nature. Now although you are pleased for some Politic
Reasons, to give your selves so great an Advantage, without any regard to the
weakness of our Sex, or the Temptations of your own, or Generosity, or so much
as common Justice; yet you might permit us still to keep that little Portion of
Common Sense, which Nature has given us, and tho we have so little means to
right our selves, give us leave to know when we are injured, and to be uneasy
under the Injustice. For suppose us, for once, to have all the Charity and
Goodness which you think we want, yet one such wound, one Act of Infidelity, if
it should not be Mortal to our Love, must yet needs leave a deep and a lasting
Scar behind it. Such too well grounded Suspicions, with such Ruinous matter of
Fact to support 'em, as you can never blame us for 'em, unless you do the same
for having Eyes, or for thinking, and making use of our Reflection and Reason.

I cannot deny but we know we are never the better, for all the discoveries we
make of this Nature, nay, that it would be on some Accounts the wiser way to
rest our selves content in ignorance, rather then by enquiring into your
Infidelitys, to have only a miserable choice left us, either to be disappointed
in our search by your deeper cunning, and so lose all our expense and time, or
it we find what we expect, to give our selves the most sensible Affliction and
Torment: Yet on the other side, you must acknowledge that suspense is one of
the most uneasy conditions of Life, and you can hardly with Justice blame us if
we desire to get out of it, and to know the worst, whatever it costs us. LYDIAH
BIGGINSHAVV.

LETTER XXI. That a True Wife 's Incorrigible.
By Mr. AXTEL --
I don't mean that she ought not to be corrected, but that if she be, she will be
never the better for it, and that she is so consummately perverse, that there is
no manner of way to work upon her. A Tiger may be tamed, a Lion may have his
Teeth knocked out, and Claws pared, and any other sort of Viper its Sting pulled
out; but do all this to a Woman, she will be a mere Woman still: If you knock out
her Teeth, she will mumble you with her implacable Gums; nay, if you pull out her
Tongue, she will certainly scold with the stump on it, while the least bit is
left. A Ducking Stool is but a sort of Chair of State with 'em, when enthroned
there, they are at the top of their Preferment: The Water is so far from
cooling a seasoned Scold, that she is more likely to heat the Water; she sizzes
as she goes down, and makes it at least Summer about her. She Is like Achilles
dipped in Styx, perfectly invulnerable, and contracts as much additional hardness
as Steel, by being quenched in Water. The whole Sex are akin to the Taylor's
Wife, they will be snapping their Fingers as soon as they rise, sink 'em as deep
as ye will; and when you see an Anvile the softer for being hammered every Day,
you may hope the same good effect from disciplining a Woman, whose depraved
Stomach turns not only Food, but wholesome Physic into the rankest Poison.

Were I to direct a Painter to draw the Labor in vain, he should throw aside
the old Story of Lathering the Blackmoor, and instead of it, should paint the
Taming of the Shrew, which is scarce probable enough to make a Play of it,
because none can affirm it is a true Image of Life. An Opera indeed might be
made on it, such another business as the Tempest, but the Characters would be as
incredible, and much stranger than the two Cubbs begot by an Incubus.

There Is a dark sullenness, a black rooted obstinacy in all the Sex, the same
keen sturdiness that we find in the Blacks, and though ye should cut the Snakes
all to pieces, every little bit of 'em would fly in your Face.

Well, will fair means do any better with 'em? will kindness and lenity work on
their good Natures? Yes, just as much as 'twill upon a Wolfs, whom ye have
saved from the Tree, and brought home to make a House Dog of him: Have at your
Mutton, if he can any ways get a fling at it, and if he once breaks loose, he is
ten times worse than ever.

Whoever knew a Woman the better for being kindly used? No, it is your Duty, you
ought to do no less; nay, you dare do no otherwise, and who should thank you
only for paying them their own?

This it is to be so very well opinion'd of themselves, they have such an
abundant stock of Conceit, that they merit more than all; they are out of reach
of Civility, and it is impossible to oblige them.

It shows indeed the Generosity of their Temper, that the more they are loved,
the more still they insult. They have then a Handle, an Excuse for domineering,
the couchant Husband or Lover must bid Farewell to the Reins and Saddle, know
his distance, and learn obedience.

But your Patience shall prevail as little as your Love: Who would not tread
upon a Footstool? And the more you have born already, the more you are like to
bear, as you are the better able. Your Brains lie in your Shoulders, for there
is all your Wisdom. It Is pity such excellent Virtues should rust, for want of
due Exercise and Employment ^ Doubtless, Matrimony is a state of great
Perfection, it has in it so much Mortification.

Be the Wife Virtuous or False, it is much the same thing as to the Man's Ease
and Happiness, for if she is incorrigibly Virtuous, there is nothing in the World
so imperious and assuming; and because she is not a Whore, expects you can do
no less than fall down and worship her; though it may be, it is want of Beauty or
Opportunity that keeps her -- I will not say honest, but as she is. An Honest
Shrew there is as little hopes of, as of a Precise Hypocrite. They stand upon
their Honor, and are both so good, you know not how to mend 'em; and they
neither envy the World the knowledge of their Virtues, for you never need fear
but you shall hear of 'em. Ah -- did I serve you as other Women do their
Husbands, and keep a brace or two o'Gallands under your Nose, I should not be
used thus. I should not wear such a Toad of a Gown here, not fit to make
Shoe-Clouts: I should have more respect and Benevolence, and Worship, and
Obedience.

O'tother side, if she is a Grain too light, though you throw in whole Mountains,
you could not turn the Scale. You must not believe your own dear Eyes in those
cases, much less your Ears, though your Dishonor be peeling in (...) every
moment. Base, Jealous, Suspicious. Dog in a Manger, are it may be, some of the
finest Salutations the poor humble wretch must expect, to make his Horns sit
easy; or if she once fear he begins to use his Eyes, and resent it in earnest,
then all the Sexes Magazine is presently opened, the Dressing-Box of their
Minds, which they can paint too, when they please, and disguise beyond
knowledge, as well as their Faces. The Sobs, and Tears, and Smiles, and Fits,
and cunning half Confessions, and impudent sturdy Denials, as occasion serves,
and she finds it most convenient, and according as his Heart is unguarded, and
his soft side lies open. Milton will once more show 'em their Picture, and they
cannot deny but it is to the Life.

-- 'These are they wonted Arts,
'And Arts of every. Woman false like thee,
'To break all Faith, all Vows, Deceive, Betray.
'Then, as Repentant to submit, beseech,
'And Reconcilement move, with feigned remorse,
'Confess, and promise Wonders in her Change,
'Not truly Penitent, but chief to try
'Her Husband, how far urged his Patience bears
'His Virtue or weakness which way to assail:
'Then with more cautious and instructed Skill,
'Again Transgresses, and again Submits.
Like to a Miracle; for if he doats on, and believes heartily, they are safe
enough, and just as much altered as the Sea is by the shining of the Sun, or
the Motion of the Wind. The Surface is a little varied, but the unfathomable
bottom is still the same, the Water as salt and bitter as ever, and the Waves
as dangerous and unconstant. What it loses in one Place, it gains in another;
and though it cannot dash the Rock in pieces at one stroke, 'twill wear it by
degrees, and in time it may make it moulder away to nothing.

And thus it is, if a Man arms himself with never so much Resolution against his
vexatious Spouse, she will find a way to get within him some way or other, and
trip up his Heels, though never so much upon his Guard. She Will weather out
even his Patience, and make him as weak and peevssh as her self, if he has not a
sharp Eye upon her, and observe how ugly it looks in her, and how ill a
Physician he must needs be esteemed, who is himself infected by that Disease he
pretends to cure.

Nay, though he help himself with his Wit, though he takes never so many
different Methods, turns his Thoughts never so many ways, she will easily
countermine him; the natural vanity of a Woman renders all ineffectual. The
Symptoms change every Hour, and then there is little likelihood of so much as
discovering the Distemper, much less removing it. The Wind roars round the
Compass every Glass, and then the most skilful Steersman in all the Watery
World, must needs be at a loss.

There are so many Mazes in a Female Mind, that they often lose themselves in
'em; much more may they lose us. I despair to find a Clue to conduct me quite
through it, and therefore here I leave it, without venturing any farther.

Ralph Axtel.

Answer to Letter XXI. That an III Wife 's not Incorrigible.
By Madam BARNES.
SEvere Censures indeed! that will not so much as give us leave to mend, after
you have reckoned up all the Faults we are guilty of, and a Thousand more,
which never entered into our Minds. I confess I thought all Creatures that were
indu'd with Reason, were by that Faculty also capacitated to review their
Actions, and where they had formerly done amiss, to do better: Nay, I have
observed even Creatures without Reason, will travel more carefully when they
come to a Place where they have formerly stumbled, or bin in danger: But have
we less Sense even than what is Irrational? or will you not allow us so much as
that shadow of Reason, which all give to Beasts themselves? or must a true
Wife, as you call her, be necessarily of the same Temper with a true Husband,
rather to go on and break her Neck, than acknowledge she was mistaken in the
Road, and ask the Direction of her Fellow Travelers? Thus far indeed I must
confess, that some Persons have such a way of Teaching, that they plainly
confess they have no mind any should learn ought from them, especially if the
Scholar's of a free and ingenuous Temper. You never knew a Bird taught to sing,
when you held him by the Throat, and the poor little Creature was just
struggling for Life. Let us at least hop about our Cage, if you will not allow us
an Aviary: This may in time bring us off from our wild Notes, and make us sing
whatever you please: Unless you expect we should say that white's black, and
pay you such an Obedience, as the Church of Rome requires of her Votaries: But
were it not more desirable to have a Reasonable Creature in your Bosom, than
one whom you had rendered perfectly stupid, without any Choice or Will? And can
you deny that we are obliged in some Cases to disobey you? which we can never
do, though you should command us to perperrate the greatest Crimes, or to
endure the worst of Villainies, if you have once taken away that Reason which
must be the guide of all our Actions.

A generous Nature is easily to be wrought upon, if you go about it the right
way; but Force is only a fit Argument for a Beast or a Slave; and if you make
use of it on those who have the same Principle of Reasoning with your selves,
you may perhaps make 'em fear ye, but it is certain they will never love ye:
Nay, even that Fear will by degrees wear away, since it is very natural to
slight frequent and unreasonable Anger, which like any other Correction managed
at the same rate may harden, but not amend us. Now why should not you Men, who
fancy your selves indu'd with such a Supererrogation of Prudence, make choice
of such means as would infallibly attain the ends you propose, rather than such
as you know would effect the quite contrary? especially when those Methods are
more pleasing and easy to you, as well as us? You say you would fain have us
better, and reform some Vanities and Follies whereof you think us guilty: If
you are in earnest, and had not rather have us continue faulty, on purpose that
you may have the pleasure of finding fault with us, learn for once from a Woman
how to deal with Women, for we should be best acquainted with our selves.

And in the first place, we don't desire to be thought full out such Angels as
you represented us for your own Ends, at your first Acquaintance. How can you
expect to have us make good what you your selves did never believe, though you
have often enough said and sworn it, in the heat of Courtship? Set off all
those heightnings, allow for 'em all when you come nearer. You take us at last
for better for worse, as we do you, Person, and Portion, and Faults, and all
together; and as you would hardly refuse or throw back a good Portion for one
Brass Half-Crown in it, you should, we would hope, allow us as fair Play as you
do our adorable Bags; take good and bad in a Lump; at least overlook the one,
if but tolerable and inconsiderable, for the sake of the other. In short,
little Faults, in some cases, can hardly be taken notice of without a greater,
especially if severely insisted on, and unconscionably aggravated, and never
forgotten; which must needs by degrees sower our Minds; and were they not
generally more confirmed in Patience and other Virtues than your Sex, which
gives 'em sufficient occasion to exercise 'em, would be apt to throw 'em into
the worst Extravagancies.

But if your Example and Conversation should incline us to greater Faults, yet
why may not we amend, as we have known some of your selves, when there has been
but little hopes of you? A calm, a kind, a seasonable and rational representing
our Errors, with the ill-consequences of 'em, can hardly miss Success. But when
did you know a Furious Reproof work any good effect; or how should it, when the
Reprover himself, as he manages, is guilty of, it may be, as great a fault as
those against whom he exclaims with so much bitterness, and so little
discretion? A harsh Reproof is like cold Water thrown on a Bed of Salla^ing
after it is newly sown; it hardens the Earth, and starves the Seed: But one that
carries Kindness and Concern with it, is like warm Water; it enters kindly,
cherishes the little sprouting Principles of Life, softens the Earth, and
brings a plentiful Crop, to recompense the Gardiner's Industry and Labor.
Violence, and Noise, and Eagerness, have so little of Reason in themselves,
that they ever discredit the best Reason, and for the most part render it
unprofitable, when it lights into such bad Company. It looks like an Abuse, and
an Attack, rather than a Kindness, and we are apt to be upon our Guard in such
Cases, to keep the Gate shut, and even exclude a Friend, for fear of admitting
an Enemy.

Especially when all this is done in public, for every little Fault, and often
none at all, in the more provoking and assuming manner, beyond the patience
even of a Woman to suffer it.

Wherefore would you be at the pains to use the quite contrary Methods, would
you observe our Tempers and Inclinations, and work us accordingly, and bend us
by degrees, and take time and pains about us, you might bring us to take
whatever Ply you desire, and make your own Lives and ours, much happier.

Dorothy Barnes.

LETTER XXII. Against Plays.
By Mr. KINGHAM. --
YES, here you're in your Element, and 'twou'd be a more difficult matter to
make you renounce Plays, then to embrace the Alcoran, and you like 'em the
better for what Pryn tells you of 'em, that they were formerly expressly
reckoned among the Pomps and Vanities of the World; nor will it much move you,
that Satan and they were used to stand and fall together. The Playhouse is
your Church, and you had much rather be Excommunicated from dear St. Brides it
self, then from that yet more convenient place of Assignation. Here you Learn
all that you think is necessary for your Sex to know, and yet more, see it put
in practice at least, if you don't just then do it your selves. To disobey your
Parents, disoblige your Friends, ogle, and then bilk your Lover, cheat your
Husband, talk pertly and lewdly, and laugh at all that is graver and better then
your selves. This is the rare Academy to form your minds, or rather to ruin
'em, and often your Estates and Bodies with 'em. How many Modern Plays can you
show me without a more then moderate share of Impiety and Lewduess. The best
are patterns of Revenge and Foolish Love, that either weaken the mind or
mislead it: The most I Am sure are so unfit for any civilized Country, that
I Have often wondered how any of your Sex, who are not Professed -- could have
Impudence to sit 'em out, or read 'em, or their Authors to set their Names to
'em: For them indeed, they have an excuse, which you best know the Truth of,
that the Stage is an Image of Life, and that they only represent things as they
find 'em, and Women just what they are; which if true, is very much for your
Sexes and the present Ages Reputation. For your selves, they have either taught
you the way, or you have Learnt it from Mother Nature, to set out as fulsom
stuff as N. Lees, Princess of Cleve, without Blushing. You don't understand it,
pretty Innocents! No more then a Viper does Poison, which is his daily Food,
and almost the Air he breaths; for there is a great harmony, it seems, between
Sabina's senses and your understandings.

But suppose, for once, there could a modest play be found, I mean in the
Expressions, what are we the better if the whole Action, as it generally
happens, insinuates nothing but looseness and lewdness? Are you all such
Vestals to be proof against the Allurements of Music, and the more fatal
Witchcraft of Poetry and Example, when it may be at the same time a Bevy of
Fops hang about your Ears, (as Milton says, the old Traitor did at Eves, tho in
a little more proper shape,) and prodigally squander their Wit and Souls, and
all, striving who shall damn theirs fastest to persuade you to damn yours.

Not that I Would scandalize 'em with being always witty neither: No, they seldom
offend against that rule of Mr. Cowley, and are well enough pleased with
following his advice; Rather then all be wit, let none be there. For I Am apt to
believe the greatest part of their Conversation is just such as pleases you,
and such as you're capable of, as dull as you could hear in e're a Country
Church in Christendom.

But your wise discourse has carried me off from the Play; which is the only
good it does in the Theater, where your chat can hardly be worse then the
Actors, and therefore the louder the better.

How often is it you there see Virtue prosperous, and vice unhappy? So far from
it that the Play-wrights tell you now positively, it is none of their business
to make 'em so. They have got possession, they make their own Rules, and you
must take their Herces as you find 'em.

Or if they do now and then kill a Don John, or a Maximinian, to thin the Stage
a little, and turn off some overgrown Villain, they yet generally take a
particular care not to let him repent; they kill him while he is in an ill mind,
staring and blaspheming at such a rate, that even when he falls, you must think
him an even-match for Heaven.

But what is this still to common Life, where Vice is exposed indeed, but only
in order to Imitation. A little Atheism, or whoring, tho with the Aggravation
of Infidelity, Incest, and all the Fowlest Blackest Names that could raise
blushes in a very Heathen, shall break no squares: The Spark still shall obtain
his beautiful and wealthy Mistress, three or four of his last conveniences
soder'd up again, and married to some plodding Country Gentleman, and all is as
well as ever.

They tell you it is a sign he Repents when he Marrys, if they had said this
brought him in a fair way to it, they had said something, but as it is, they are
for the most part a Mouth or two short of the mark.

After all, one would wonder how dullness could be so Charming, were it not a
little set off with Lewdness, and how the same heavy Tale, only a new turn of
words, it may be, and a silly nasty Song, or two, chopped in at the opening of a
Scene, with perhaps some ingenious Dance of Devils and Hobby-Horses; how such
stuff as this should be heard, or read with so much as patience, much more with
diversion. For I dare affirm, that some hundreds of our Modern Plays have the
very same Plot at bottom, either stolen from some of the Ancients, or a Spanish
Novel, or from one another. The Squire and the Lady talk always alike. Tell me
the Character, I Will as surely tell you their Conversation, as from one of --
Rymes I Will guess at another, and would any one be at the pains to make a
Scrutiny through all our Comedys, there would be much fewer distinct Characters
then he would imagine, tho we have the advantage of humor too above all the World.

But you can Learn more, you say, sometimes by one Play then by 10 Sermons; and
that may be too, as you may manage the matter, you sometimes hearken to one,
but you sleep out all the other.

There may indeed, some good Herbs be found among so many Poisonous Weeds, but
when they grow all together, and ten of the deadly plants to one that is
wholesome, who that regarded their Life or Health, would go in blindfold
amongst 'em, and gather promiscuously to make a Sallad, in hopes only to meet
with those that would not hurt him?

They may many of 'em appear inviting, but never the less dangerous, any more
then the Manchinel, or Eve's Apple in the Indies, is a good Fruit, because it
looks Tempting and Glorious, but you ought to make your Will before you taste
it; which you may do if you are of their wise opinion, who are resolved to try
all things before they conclude against any.

I shall not torment you any more, or teize you any longer for what I Am afraid
you will never part with; I Would only ask you one reasonable question before I leave
you, whether you ever found your selves really the wiser, or better for reading
any of these Modern Comedys (Farces rather, for the most of 'em now are no
other)? I ask again those who have any sense of Sobriety and Modesty, what sort
of relish you find they generally leave on your minds; whether they make you
love Virtue, or Honor, or Chastity, or your Parents, or other Relatives, more
then you did before you read 'em?

If you find quite the contrary, (and if you don't, you have very good Fortune,
or a very happy temper,) then pray be persuaded to leave 'em to the Seeing and
Reading of such sort of Persons only as are usually described in 'em.

Richard Kingham,

Answer to Letter XXII. In Defense of Plays.
By Madam CHASE.
We Are as little ashamed to own the Charge, as to defend our Practice; nor do
we like the Playhouse e're the less for what Pryn says against it, since not
only he, but many of the same stamp, will speak as rudely of any thing else,
that teaches People either Decency or Politeness. That Plays in themselves are
not only Diverting but Useful, none but Persons of your Sense will deny; the
Business of the Stage being to reform Mankind, which is to be done by showing
Vice as well as Virtue. A Moral Representation can never be thought either
unprofitable, or unlawful; and if we may read or repeat the History of an Ill
Man in Prose, how comes the turning it into Verse, to alter its Nature? Poetry
has been always thought to teach with more Life and Success than Prose, and the
Poet than the Historian. Epic Poetry is above the Heads of the common People,
it is Dramatic then must work upon 'em; where they see, as in a Glass, their own
Vices and Follies, and may, if it be not their own Faults, learn to amend 'em.

It Is true, that Comedies using a lower walk, especially our Modern, being as
you justly accuse 'em, too near allied to Farce, meaner and more common Vices
must be therefore represented in them. If the Poet does this too grossly, he is a
Dauber, not an Artist, and there is as much difference betwixt his Work, and
that of a true Master, as between a piece of the most wretched
Sign-Post-Painter, and the last hand of Lely or Vario. But this you cannot make
a Reflection upon the Art it self, any more than a rash and mischievous Quack
can be reckoned for an excellent Physician.

Yet after all, there is more weight in what they usually allege for their
Defense, than you will willingly allow: If a Play is to be a true Image of
Life, and if your Lives be such as will not so decently bear the Stage, whether
should they or you more justly bear the blame? I know you would fain shift it
over to our Sex, but you cannot pretend it is we that have corrupted the Age,
how much soever you have endeavored to do so by us: It is not our Sex that are
represented in your Theaters, Drinking, Swearing, Scowring and Raking: Such a
Character would be monstrous, and therefore could never please, although all
the Malice of your Sex should club to defend it. Now would any tolerable Judge
find fault with a Painter for drawing too much to the Life, though the veriest
Antic in Nature? If the Poet takes his Characters from your Persons, they must
be such as you are, and no wonder that the more he hits you, the less he should
please you. But the Chyrurgion must probe the Wound, be it never so tender,

You say he makes Vice successful, and granting this true, where almost is it
otherwise? will you avoid an Acquaintance your selves, for being the vilest
Rake in the World? Does Lewdness ever dissolve your Friendships? nay, is it not
that which for the most part unites and cements 'em? Is not your common and
ordinary Conversation made up of fulsom Boasting, the fowlest Villainies? Much
like the Entertainments of the Witches at their Sabbaths, who, they say, are
obliged to repeat there, all the Mischiefs they have acted since their last
meeting.

Now when any of this comes upon the Stage, though touched infinitely softer than
the Life, who would admire if you do not like it? it is like your own Claret at
secone hand; as well as you loved it before, you now nauseat and abhor it.

Why then will not you mend, and afford better Copies for our Artists to work by?
Do but reform your selves, and you will see the Stage will reform insensibly by
your Example.

Nor is that true which you affirm, that we have no virtuous Characters
presented on our Theater in any of our Plays; so far from this, that you would,
I believe, be put to it, to name any Play without 'em: And if they are not so
frequent there as the contrary, I wish there were not too good reason for it,
because neither Truth, nor so much as Probability could bear it.

But suppose the Expressions as indefensible, and the principal Characters, and
whole Management of all your Plays, as dangerous to Virtue, as lewd and as
immoral as you could desire them, yet pray whom are we to thank for all this,
and who generally are the Authors, your Sex or ours? We have some Two or Three,
or it may be Half-a-dozen on the Stage written by Women, but how many
Dust-Carts would be sufficient to clear Paul's-Church-Yard of those wherewith
your Sex have vexed the World? If you write Plays, would you not have 'em seen?
and if they are such as are not fit to be seen, the more shame for the Authors.

Besides, of what Sex are those whose Business and Office it is to regulate the
Stage, and to take care of these matters? We have not the power of correcting
'em, nor are they brought to us for our Imprimatur, nor can we know what is in a
New-Play, before we come to see it. And would you indeed, when there are any
Passages unfit for us to hear, have us stand up immediately, and in a Set
Speech bear our Testimony against them; or else abruptly leave the Place, and
drive the crowding Pit before us, lest we should by our Presence encourage any
thing of that nature.

If the Springs be poisoned, the blacker are those who perpetrate such an
abhorred piece of Villainy: Let them be punished, and the Fountains cleared, or
new discovered; but deny not the Thirsty-Traveller the common Refreshments of
Nature. Nay, if even the Tragedies themselves be infected, if they are filled
with false Notions of Honor, and the very Heroes are made up of Revenge and
Criminal Love, first, let those very Notions be regulated in common Lise; for
while the best of your Sex think it honorable to cut one another Throats for
the least Affront, and on the most frivolous Occasions, a Cast at Dice, an
hasty Word, and (for what, Sir, you, I suppose, esteem less than all these) a
Silly Woman; nay, while you meet in cold Blood, only out of a Compliment to
your lewd and hotheaded Friend, and without any manner of Quarrel, send one
another's Souls who knows whither? how can you blame the Stage for transcribing
the same bloody Honor, and giving it to its greatest Heroes? since, should
they do otherwise, it would be as ridiculous, as if they brought in our
Warriors, like those of the Ancients, engaging in Chariots, and flinging Darts
at one another.

After all, none can deny but there are excellent Lessons of Morality to be
found in these Writers; indeed any Play without a Moral, is a Body without a
Soul, I mean one grand Moral Truth, which is aimed at through the whole
Representation, which are generally of greater concern and moment in Tragic,
than in other Writings. Besides those which are interspersed through the
several parts of those Composures, which may often sink into the Minds of the
Auditors, when delivered in such a manner, though otherwise, it may be, they
would have no effect upon them: And if any should be so unjust and scrupulous,
as to object against a known Truth, because it is found in these Authors, as if
it were spoiled with the other ill Company about it, they must be absolutely
silenced, would they but reflect that some such Sentences are transscrib'd, not
only from other Poets, but even from the Dramatics into better VVritings.

Bettrice Chase.

LETTER XXIII. To an Old Gentlewoman about to marry a Young Man.
By Sir THOMAS --
Madam, May it please your Venerability,
HAd it been any Lady of ordinary Years and Character that had made an attempt
of this Nature, I should not so much have wondered at it: But for you who have
been the Standard at least this 40 Years, and have had the best School-Mistress
in the World, much longer to instruct you; for you, I say, to endeavor to Ogle
in a poor young Fellow, that never did you any harm, and no more thought of
making Love to you, than to his own Grandmother: It Is this Madam, that
stupifies me, amazes me, and confounds me to that degree, that I cannot speak a
word more, till I have sat still a quarter of an Hour, knaw'd my Pen, snuff'd
my Candle, and looked on the Picture of your Ladyship which I have just here
before me.

It Is true Madam, that your Shape is indifferently well, tall and strait, you
have been only a little too much of the Heroine, and if you begin to bend a
little now about those ample Shoulders of yours, we ought not to think it is any
Decay of Nature, or Sympathy with the Earth, either in Disposition or
Complexion; but rather the mildness and goodness of your Temper, a sort of a
Condescension to the Stature of that blooming Lad, whom like a Carthaginian
God, you would fain take up in your Arms to make him happy.

Doubtless Madam, there is a most inimitable Leer in that admirable Face of
yours, such a Harmony between all its Parts, both with one another, and the
whole Frame of your Venerable Structure, that I believe it is as difficult for
any to look upon it, or see you Show with it (as the Sun does with his,) without
feeling some extraordinary Motions, as it is to conceal those Motions when once
we feel 'em.

What Art have you to make your pretty Chin and Nose keep time so exactly
together? scarce one of your Temples beats truer to one another; without
Controversy, they are both very Harmonious.

But every part of you contains a Nest of Wonders,
That Chin, that lovely, rosy dimpled Chin -- One
Charming killing Dimple now all over,
As sweet (to let your Lips awhile alone)
As fair as dropping Combs from Hybla 's Hive.
Or th'Essence of a Thousand fragrant Flowers
In Natur's rich Alembic, wrought and thrown
With liberal Hand (as liberal as your own)
Thrown with a careless Cast, and richly spread
Upon the grateful Earth's green Mossy Bed;
Pleased to that height, her utmost strength she shows,
Through the thin Mass, a newborn Garden grows.
Such is -- Madam, I most heartily ask your Pardon; I Have forgot what
transported and amazed; O your Chin -- but such a Lip (for the thickness on it)
such Teeth, only this Roguy Painter, has served you as his Brother did the
Gentleman, who bid him draw a Dog in a Castle. When one looks for 'em, you
always shut your Mouth and hide 'em. Nor is there any heed to be given to the
Malicious World, who say you have made Pills of 'em, or swallowed 'em all
Twenty Year since for the Cholic, to save the Charge of Golden Bullets.
However, if there be any thing in it, who knows but your pretty Teeth might be
of that Substance too, as well as Color, like the Silesian Lads? which if they
were, t'had been worth the while to have raked for 'em again, as the Jews at
the Seige of Jerusalem (but pray let no Body see you) to string 'em all, for
it is possible they might be Hollow, and make a Gold Necklace of 'em, which
would have excellently set off that scarce Fairer Neck of yours.

And must I leave that Mouth -- scarce with more pain,
The gentle Breezes of delicious Air,
By a too happy Fate imprisoned there,
Enjoy their hated Liberty again.
No, I must not, before I have endeavored to do Justice to the inestimable
Jewel, shut up in that fair Cabinet -- a Tongue as sweet, as soft as Innocence,
as quiet as an Angel's. It Is understood, not heard; or if it does speak, it is
like Lovers Whispers, or gentle Murmurs, or falling Streams, or the Tide going
through Bridge, or Infant Thunders. (I mean when the Stream is even, and the
Thunder a great way off.)

And after that Thunder, it is very likely we shall have Rain, as Socrates said
to your Predecessor, the most accomplished Xantippe. And it comes from those
fine Hands of yours, in liberal and plentiful Showers to refresh the Earth. You
have no Poor near you; it is impossible they should continue so; you will not
let 'em bear that Name; you will not see 'em want; some may think this a bad
President, and that 'twill encourage Laziness, but I Am satisfied there would
soon be not a Beggar left in England, were all but as willing as you to relieve
'em.

Nothing certainly is a more bewitching thing than graceful motion: It Is a
great part of a good Mind, if not the same with it. What shall I say then of
yours, which if you are dancing, appears sometimes as swift as the Wood-Nymphs,
or that of Venus her self clambring over Hedge and Ditch, through Brakes and
Briars after her fair Adonis, as you now after yours. At other times you move
like the Earth, on your own Axis, so equally, that it is insensible, or, as Ovid
says, the Gods do, with both your Feet together, so imperceptibly, one would
think you never stirred an Inch out of your Place. They may talk of
Posture-Clark while they will, but if ever he could mimic so exactly, or handle
a Broom-staff so handsomely, or show the Changeling so naturally, or raise his
Shoulders so prodigiously, or shrink in one Hip so profoundly, as I have seen
some do it, that shall be nameless, and who it may be, don't value themselves
so much on those Qualifications, as many others -- why then, may I never have
the diversion of seeing the like again.

Then for your Youth; for that Eternal Youth that hovers round you. That spite
of Nature says you shall not grow old -- What Nectar is it that still preserves it
flourishing as ever?

No Must, no Tarnish, not the least Corruption.

Hardly so much as renders Venison grateful. Sure you have found out a way to Pot
your self up, and keep the Presumptuous Air from ever kissing those Sacred Lips
only reserved for him you honor with your Love.

Or like Conserves, which to choice Friends appear,
You're closely covered more then half the year.
And whose mouth would not water after such a Marmalade Face as yours (for
sweetness to be sure I mean).

But we must all dye, there is no remedy: Feladon's the Man, for him you dress,
you dance, you dye, you come to Life again, you live and love and tread your
years all backward, and you say you will Marry him.

You defy Coughs, Catarrhs, Sore Eyes, no Teeth, a Demiculverin Breath, and
tell Time and Death they have nothing to do with you yet these twenty years.
Buy him you will, you have Money enough, he is a Jewel fit only for your
wearing, and nothing but the Sexton shall ever part you. Dear Nine and Fifty!
Let me be plain with thee; for I have now Complimented long enough.

What should that Skull of a Face, those Cabidg-stump Arms, that Mummy of a
Carcass do with a Husband, especially such a young lively Fellow as thou haste
most ungraciously pitched upon? It Is absolute Incest for certain, for him so
much as to come near thee. It Is the worst, the most unnatural Villainy? Thou art
dead, all but one sense stark Dead, a Dozen year since, nay, thou haste scarce
so much as the sense of Scolding left: Thy very Tongue begins to have the
Palsy, with long and frequent use and hard Labor. It retains only a weak sort
of an unheeded motion, like the Ringing of a Bell long after the stroke;
besides, thy Clapper is worn, and the Bell cracked, and then it is easy to guess
thou art like to make good Music.

Leave him, leave him for shame; untwine thy Clammy Arms from his Neck and
Bosom, or we'll infallibly have thee burnt for a Witch, for getting up poor
Young Men and Sucking their fresh Blood to fill thy old Wrizzled Veins, after
this inhumane manner.

Mind thy Prayers, buy thee a Coffin, throw away thy whole Pothecaries Shop of
Druggs, and Paints, and Slops, and Washes, out with thy Cart Loads of Pride and
Vanity. Death will be here by and by, lie down and be forgotten!

THOMAS --

Answer to Letter XXIII. From the Old Gentlewoman aforesaid.
HA! ha! But indeed good Sir T. That you should ever trouble your self so as to
write such a long Letter to me! That you should Load me and oppress me so with
Compliments; indeed you do, indeed you do: Ah Sir, you very well know how to
please Ladys; our Feeble Hearts, tho never so deeply pre-engag'd (would mine
were at Liberty) hardly know how to refist you.

I Remember very well in your Good Grandmothers time, (rest her clack!) I ask
your pardon Sir T. I protest, I meant your Mothers, or your Sisters rather, for
we may be much of an Age, it may be, the advantage may lie on her side, what
there is on it; I remember, I went out of hanging sleeves just as she came into
'em.

But as I was saying, I beg your pardon, Sir T. what was it? The decays of Age,
(nay, now I must beg my own). The usual Infirmity of witty People, you know it
by experience Sir T. is to forget what is just over, tho they remember as
perfectly as an Almanac, all that passed 40 or 50 years before.

But 'twas your Grandmother I think I was talking of, how she would play with
you, and how prettily she would talk to ye, Good old Creature as she was (as I Have
heard my Nurses tell me) and clap your Cheeks and guess at your future
proficiency, a Wag my Lise on it, an errant Wag, thus would she talk and laugh
and talk again, till 'twou'd almost make one cry to hear her.

But how little did she think, when she sat dandling you upon one knee, and me
upon another, how far was she from Dreaming, there would afterward be such an
intimate Conversation between us, so perfect a considence and extraordinary a
Friendship?

That covers many Faults, and excuses much Freedom: And indeed I would have my
Friends be free, very free with me, as I would be with them. And therefore
cannot be really angry with any thing that comes from Sir T. tho it seems never
so severe, because he says so many other kind things to weigh against it, and
because indeed I have met with so much true kindness from him.

Ah Sir T. you cannot I believe forget, I Am sure I never can, how Sweetly you
and I have some years agone, rode together in my Fathers Coach in the Park. How
many foolish ogling Dukes and Lords, would have handed me into the Coach, and
out again, and drove along by us with their Eyes nailed to the Glasses: For
that was all I let 'em see, tho they made never so many Cringes and Ugly Faces;
as thus Sir, (give me a Sword or Cane) and thus, and then the other way, (once
more your pardon, I thought I had been all this while talking with you) and
then throw their Wiggs one way, and their Eves the other, that 'twou'd have made
ones Heart almost melt to have seen 'em. But I stood my Ground still: I valued
not all their Civilitys any more then I did their railing: I let 'em despair
on, and make choice either of the Ponds, or Trees to ease their Love, according
as they found themselves most inclined, and could hear 'em Curse my
Countrey-breeding without any concern, while I remained safe and immovable in
my own Virtue and Innocence.

But really Sir T. do you, do your old Acquaintance and Humble Servant the
Henour still, to keep my Picture by you, and that at full length?

Protest Sir T. if I know how I shall requite this favor, any more then when I
shall be Married; all I can say is, that for your respects to the Copy you
have, I Am sure you have a right always to command the Original.

I wonder whose hand it is: I wish it was not done when I was a Green young
Girl, when my Old Aunt used, I remember, to call me a Bud of Beauty: But
there is nothing like Maturity: The midst of Life is the Harvest, and Autumn it
self has Charms that the flanting Spring could never Boast of. Besides, I fear,
I had not then the Advantage of Dress, by which you know Sir T. an indifferent
Face is much Recommended, and even a good one looks better. I have been drawn
in several Figures, sometimes like a Sheepherdess stroking the tender Lambs, or
Soliciting the Duggs of a Fruitful Ew (as one most elegantly expresses it) at
others, with a Glass and Dressing-Box before me, my Prayer Book the unlucky
knave painted fallen off the Table.) But that which hit me most, was the shape
of an Amazon, with a Generals Staff in my Hand, stradling over Towns and
Castles, and kicking about whole Armies.

And were not the Amazons in Love Sir T. did not Theseus Marry one of 'em after
he had soundly banged her? I think, I Have read some such thing in my Ovids
Epistles; and why then should not I be in Love too, since at worst I can only
be beaten after Marriage?

It Is true, I Have Cancelled four Husbands already, thank my Good Stars and Heart
of Oak here, all of whom I must confess, I have often respectively banged into
their Good Behavior, and yet they seemed to Love me the better for it, and as
the greatest Argument of it, were pleased to dye very fast, and leave me at
Liberty for a New Venture; and if this last pay all their Old Scores, why might
not I Love him the better as they did me? And at worst your Sex and mine would
be but just even.

When you came to the End of your Epistle, your Eye seemed to be off my
Picture, and fixed again on some Antic, or other in the Room that hung near
it, so intently, that you forgot to whom you were Writing, and (the prettiest
Jest in the World) on a sudden changed your Style, and made your addresses to
her in a Language worthy of her, and what you say to her I Will show you when we
meet next, and we'll have a hearty laugh at it.

SARAH PRAT

A Second Answer to Letter XXIII.
By a Young Lady.
HOw witty you are upon your poor Old Woman of Clouts, whom you have set up to
say what you will against her, and then make her answer what you please.

A fine Pindarical way of Writing, this which you are fallen into, or rather
seem to affect above all Mankind, wherein you need not much fear being
excelled, since I dare promise you will never be imitated.

Your Wit, or at least your Satyr, appears rather to be levelled at Age in
general, than at any particular Person, and not so much at any voluntary
Weakness, as its inseparable Infirmities. In this you talk like one of our Town
Sparks, who employ all their time in railing at whatever is wiser and graver
than themselves, and contemn Age as they do Virtue, because they live at such a
rate, that they have little hopes of attaining it.

But are there none that live to be old of your Sex as well as ours? Or is the
reason why you expect fairer Quarter and more Reverence, because as you manage
Life, an Old Man is so great a Rarity?

Be as severe as you please against Vice, and none can blame you for laughing
at Folly, which is in it self Ridiculous; but blame not Nature, unless you
would justly be esteemed Inhumane, nor laugh at the Miserable, which if you do,
you cannot escape the mark of Barbarity. Some of the Seythians seem to have much
the same Civility with yours, who when their Parents grow decrepid and useless,
turn 'em out alive to wild Beasts, or hang 'em up on Trees for the Vultures and
other Ravenous Fowls to devour 'em. Yet there are some Creatures to whom we
don't allow Reason, who may teach both them and you more Compassion and
Humanity: The Young Stork carries its Aged Parent through the raging Flames,
and over the widest Ocean, to a more Temperate Climate, and Place of Retirement
and Safety, as the Hero did his Father from burning Troy, to a happier Country,
and a Peaceable End.

It Is true, Old Age is it self a Disease, or rather a Complication of many. --
But would you your self take it kindly, if you lay racked by the Gout and
Stone, should others that were in Health laugh at you, instead of pitying you,
and at least wishing, if not endeavoring to ease you?

You must needs grant, there are many things in Age very desirable; the
advantage of their Experience, the extent of their Knowledge, the coolness of
their Thought, the steddiness of their Judgment, while the Force and Warmth of
Youth runs 'em into a Thousand Extravagancies, and were there not graver Heads
to manage 'em, they would soon, like Phaeton, fire the World.

And these Advantages of Age, we hope vou will not be so partial, as to
Monopolize to your own Sex: If you would attempt any such thing, I only desire
you would answer me one short Question; When was our Nation happier, than when our
Queen was an Old Woman?

But it is neither our Sex, you say, nor Age with which you are so angry. It Is
only the Peevishness, the Frowardness, the Fondness, the Affectation, the
Garrulity, the Vanity of an Old Woman, that you cannot endure: Be it so then
only, be content we should turn the Tables, and see how you like it. You know
those weaknesses are not confined to our Sex, they are often charged in Gross
on those who are the farthest from them. It Is not impossible to find Good
Humor and Age together, which more than countervails for the decay of Beauty.
If there is sometimes a little too much Sowrness, try first how you can bear
Contempt your self, before you are so ready to blame others. The Fondness for
which you fault 'em, I rather take to be the Providence of Nature, for this
makes 'em good Grandmothers and tender Nurses. If you should find some one or
two in an Age, such awkward, affected Pieces as you have painted, you must
reckon 'em as Monsters only, not a Sample of their Kind, else why do you wonder
and hoot at 'em, when you fee 'em? and why are they despised, or at least
pitied by their own Sex, as much as they can be by yours?

But what, if I mistake not, pinches closer than all the rest; pray who have
the most Fools of their Party? And whether is the greater number of
Young-Old-Men, or Women? It Is not fair to insult, because you have got the
advantage of us in Dress it self, our own proper Province.

A Man is never old now, till he is Bedrid, and there are more Beaus of
Threescore, then there used to be of Twenty. Gray-Hairs you reckon as great a
Disgrace as Gravity, and you seem to have utterly discarded your Beards, for
fear they should so much as put you in mind of Wisdom, and you have stripped our
Sex to disguise indeed, rather than adorn your own. And proud of our Spoils,
you turn the War against us, and fight us with our own Weapons, while many a
poor young Woman is married to a Broom-staff-Husband, who is little else but
Hat and Periwig, and serves for nothing but a Warming-Pan for the old Decrepid
Satyr, and loses the best part of her Life, it may be all of it, betwixt
Cawdles and Diseases.

Ann Herbert.

LETTER XXIV. Against the Sexes Prodigality.
By Sir Thomas --
THE Friars and the Mint would be very thinly tenanted, did not the good Wives
send their Husbands thither in such Shoals, that there is hardly room enough to
receive 'em: Those Places are even over-stockt, as the Churchyards were in the
Plague-time; and there need new Holes to pile up the Cartloads that come
thither; and one would think the Women were in Fee with the Heads of those
Famous Societies, they make such have to transplant their Families into their
Territories.

You can meet a Woman at no Place, no Age, no Circumstances, but she is
expensive enough to ruin a Midas: In her Education. In Courtship, whether you
Marry or Bury her, or Church her, at the middle and both ends of her Life. For
which reason the Greek Epigrammatist is visibly partial to your Sex, when he
says, A Man has two good Hours with ye, that of Day of Marriage, and Day of
Death, since even the latter of 'em is a bitter-sweet, and the Expense a Man is
at in covering you safely, does almost countervail the Convenience.

You cost ten times more than you are worth in rearing: You Will never pay for
your keeping, and we were even as good let ye run wild, and trust Nature with
you.

Besides the difference in the Education of one of your Sex and one of ours,
there is some comfort in what is expended for a Man, because we may hope to see
some good on it; but all that is bestowed on one of your unprofitable kind, is
cast on such a Barren Soil, that we give it for lost.

A Man may seek and make his Fortune, but scarce one Woman in Ten Thousand.
What they have must be given 'em, and unless there is good booty allowed,
they will never off. The Exchange runs high with 'em, none will accept 'em
without great Discount. They are such bitter Pills, that no wonder they will not
go down well without gilding.

And yet the mischief is, we must pay, as well as pray, for our own undoing.
Not a few have been at such vast Expenses in the Courtship of their Wives, as
were never reimburs'd by their Fortunes. Eternal Treats and Presents. Art must
be tired, and Imagination jaded in Ministering to their Luxury and Prodigality:
Now they show us a Sample of themselves, and by the Mistress we may learn the
Wife. A Lord Mayor's Officer scarce eats more Custard in a Twelve Month than
they will devour in one Evening at a Spring-Garden. One would think it went into
a Bottomless-bag, and slipped out again as glibly as it went in.

And this even the poor Prentice knows by sad Experience, who, when he marches
out to -- in Triumph with his Greasy Beloved, as soon as he has seen her
seated in an Arbor, and the Cheescake appears before him, stands amazed to see
what dreadful Dilapidations she makes amongst 'em in a quarter of an hour. It Is
then time to feel the weight of his Pouch, and consider how the Ready stands
affected; and when he finds she has almost eat to the bottom of his Pocket, how
does his poor Heart beat, and he thinks a piece of it goes away every new Cake
she breaks, lest he should be forced to pawn his Gloves and Cane for the
Postscript of the Reckoning?

And thus it is, in Proportion, when the Amor is in an higher Sphere; for the
greater the Quality, the greater still the Expenses. Masks, and Balls, and
Music, and Equipages, and Entertainments without number. The Mistress is a
great Abyss, and all about her, Horse-leaches feeding on its Banks. You must
make a Golden Bridge (which is hard) for your Enemy to come to you, whereas
none would think much if 'twere to get shut of such troublesome Company. Every
Servant is daubed round with Bird-lime, or if you will, stuck with
Tenter-hooks, to Gaunch you in your Fall, and pull out each a piece of your
Flesh in your passage by 'em. A Lover runs the Gauntlet amongst his Mistresses
Acquaintance, every one will have a stroke at him, unless he Fees 'em all round.

And when that is over, then comes the Wedding-Feast, the odious Sack-Posset,
the Ragged Regiment of Tartarian Musicians, that smell ye out next Morning, as
if you were a dead Horse, and all the Matrimonial Expenses, which we'll dwell
no longer upon, because it is such a Melancholy Subject.

And now the Unfortunate Creature may make his Will when he pleases, for he has
the Incurable Cancer, the Live Wolf in his Breast, that must at last carry him
off (I need not say, I mean a Wife) after to has drained every drop of moisture
from his frightful Carcass, and left him a Spectacle and Example to all
Desperate Husbands.

She expects to be a Mistress still, to Command like one, to be treated in the
same manner, and with the same Expense and Vanity.

The Sex are all Miranda's, and though every Husband had the Philosophers Stone,
he could not transmute Lead into Gold, so fast as they would change that into
Rich Furniture, Magnificent Hangings, and Extravagant Dresses and
Entertainments.

Glorious Coaches, and a vast Retinue abroad, Plate and Jewels at home, without
measure, and without end.

You must not hope any thing mean or vulgar can please so nice, and so refined
a Fancy. If Gold were cheap, she would not esteem it: She Is of the same mind the
English King was in, about his Hose.

It often enough falls out, to make a Husband completely Happy, that the Wife's
possessed with the Devil of Building too, and then away go Twenty Coach and
Horses and Suits of Clothes at one clap. This part of the House is
inconvenient, that is too low, the other is not uniform. I hate such a sneaking
Staircase. What Fools our Fore fathers were to build us such Hovels of Houses.
Pray Sir -- let me have this stack of Chimneys pulled down. Here Is a
Dining Room would make a pretty good Pantry. I have no manner of Conveniences
in these Chambers; it is a shame they should be seen by any thing of Quality.
And without Doors it is all like the rest. There stands a Coach-House hardly fit
for a Dog-Kennel.

Certainly these Gardens were designed for a Dunghill. Grub me up those
cankered Trees, that have stood rotting there, Sir R -- ever since your Great
Grandmother. Level that awkward Mount. Let me have three or four handsome
Tarrass-walks run up in the room on it. Some Grotto's and Green Houses would do
well in that corner, and here you might have as fine a Visto as any in Europe.

Well, let us suppose all finished to her heart's content, the Old House pulled
down, and a new one erected, and Vario's Hand in every Room, and as very a
Paradise as Burleigh-House, or Windsor. Perhaps this may please for two or
three Months, but think not a Woman should continue in the same mind much
longer. The Air is sharp, or unwholesome, the Water is not good: There Is no Wood
nor Parks about it; or if there are, it hinders the Prospect, and keeps the
Vapors from getting up. Or if none of these, yet it is at too great a distance
from the Town, and we have no good Neighbors. Even sell it, Sir R -- and let us
go Build at your other Seat, or buy one, as we easily may, that is more
convenient.

And if all this han't yet quite drained him, what think you of one Plague
more, that of Gaming? If this wont do his Business, he is inexhaustible. Dear
Basset! who would not leave a snoring Husband Twenty Nights together for thy
Charming Entertainment? Do we call the Indians Inhumane, for Playing away their
Wives and Children, and staking themselves at last, either for so many Years
Slavery, or for Life, when nothing else is left? And shall we be more partial
toward those that are nearer us, who set their Joyntures, Husbands, Bodies,
and Souls sometimes, on one Chance of a Die? And when those gone, are yet so
besotted with the senseless Love of Gaming, that could they retrieve 'em again,
or had they any thing more precious, they would still venture in the same
manner.

I have read somewhere of a mad Fellow, who, when he and several of his
Camerades were for some Misdemeanor, forced to cast Lots for their Lives, when
a white one fell to his share, and one of his Companions that was yet to draw,
was very much afraid, he sold him his Lot for a small matter, and ventured his
Life a second time, and had as good Fortune as before, though he little deserved
it. Few Gamesters come off as he did, though all run little less hazards.

Should I run out in the foolish Prodigalities that are the perpetual
Appendages of this vain Sex, and which they think as necessary as their Food
and Raiment, all the clutter of Childbed, Christnings, and the like, you would say,
I had transcribed all the Batchclor's Banquet.

To leave this therefore, and come to a little more comfortable Subject.
Suppose for once a Woman her self should be so good-natured as to think of some
way to make you amends for all this Vexation; in short, to keep ye no longer in
suspense, should be so kind to make a Dye on it, why yet here you are n't rid of
her, she has a sting in her Farewell, whose stroke is often Mortal, like other
such Creatures, even after she her self is dead. The Charge of her Burial will
serve as a sound alloy to the satisfaction of your fair parting, and either
break you or the Tradesinen, as Cromwell's did before.

And this you can no way avoid, without drawing the full cry of the Women
against you. This is the best way for a Widower to make his Court, or pave his
way to a Second Fortune; for such is the Vanity of that Sex, that if they were
put to their Choice, whether they would live handsomely, or have a Magnificent
Funeral, I verily believe they would most of 'em rather take the latter, whatever
shift they made while they were living.

Thomas --

Answer to LETTER XXIV. Concerning the Sexes Prodigality.
By Madam Hastings.
YOU often tell us of Cleopatra, but who remembers Artemisia? The first
lavished away a Pearl in a Glass of Wine, though thereto one of your own Sex
was the occasion; but the other built a Magnificent Monument to perpetuate the
Memory of her Husband, which had perished long since in all probability, had he
not left such a Queen behind him. You Will say it may be that she was a VVonder,
as well as the Mausoleum, and that we have never heard of another like her: I
confess there are not many Queens, but we may find many in a lower station who
owe all they have to the excellent management of a Prudent and Virtuous Woman;
and we may affirm without Partiality to our selves, or the least vanity, that
many more Estates have been honestly preserved by our Sex, than ever were
honestly gotten by yours, it being the Wives part to take care of what comes
home, and by her Frugality and good Housewifry, to make the most of what ever
comes into her Hands, without which, Midas himself would soon be Ruined; That
ill natured Proverb having too much of Truth in it, So many Servants so many
Thieves: And it being as certain that not the largeness of the Income, but the
regulation of the Expenses is that which brings Wealth and Plenty into a
Family, which consists generally most in little things, which you think below
you to regard.

You introduce indeed a perfect Miranda in your Accusation of our Prodigality;
nay, have outdone your Original, and thence would very fairly Argue the rest of
our Sex like her, at which wise way of reasoning we might conclude all yours
were Don John's, and shun you as we would Want, or Age, or Diseases. I think we
may challenge you to find us out one such real person in all our Sex as you
have there described, nay, with one half of her Extravagancies: and yet there
may be something real in them too at the bottom, but you have cunningly turned
the Tables, and dressed a Woman in one of your own He-Bear-skins, and then how
unmercifully you Bait her? You have scumm'd up all the Extravagancies of your
own Sex, and most ingenuously thrown them upon ours, and though the Idea you
have drawn be no more fit for us than the Tyrant's Bed for every Guest, yet you
will serve us as he did them, either rack us longer, or cut us shorter.

I confess I always thought the Groom-Porters, and Gaming-Houses had been full
of Men; that 'twas that wise Creature Man who used to mawl the poor Dice and
his own Knuckles when the Jade Fortune turned her wrong side at him, and
drein'd him as lank as Jacinta did her Spark's Pockets in the Mock-Astrologer:
I was so ignorant to believe the Stories I Have often heard, that such and such
Dukes, and Lords, and Knights, and Squires, who played away so many fair
Manners in a night, and Felled so many thousand stately Trees at a stroke, with
a very small jerk of the Elbow, only it may be something more of smartness in
it, if the last cast went amiss; that all these had been as arrant Men as ever
Swore or Dissembled, or deceived a Woman, or Exposed her after he had Ruined
her.

I thought too, it had been the very same Creatures that were for building so
many stately Castles in the Air: So many Glorious fine Palaces and Houses; for
keeping so many Stables of Horses, such an Equipage, such Armies of Hounds and
Servants; besides a Retinue of W -- larger than follows any Camp in
Christendom: And that I am not like to continue in my Ignorance, it is to your
care Sir T. that I must always own my self obliged, who have found out the
secret that a few Toppings and a new Gown now, and then, will Ruin a Family,
on the VVomans side, though Expenses a thousand times larger on the Man's will
do it no manner of Injury: They are all necessary for the Grandeur of his
Birth, and the Port of his Character. Let his Lady Beg, his Children Starve or
trail a Pike, or hawl at a Cable for Bread, let his Creditors Break or Hang
themselves, or to Clipping, or the Highway: Let the cries of a whole Regiment
of poor starving Creatures, who Besiege his Door, and Petition for some small
part of what he owes them, assault him as duly as he rises, or at least when
ever he dares walk abroad; all is a case, he is impenetrable, his Vice must not
want, his dear Luxury must not starve: he deals, with 'em as well as he does by
himself, dispatches 'em with a Curse or too, or which is worse, recommends 'em
to his Steward, to drill 'em on from year to year, and murder 'em with greater
torment.

On the other side, as for the little Extravagancies of our Sex, if we should
run something beyond our Quality, it can be but a seratch in the Estate, while
the Prodigality of the Man strikes at the very heart on it; gives it a mortal
wound, which unless cut off in time, (some part sold to redeem the rest) will
infallibly gangrene, and infect the whole Body with an incurable poison.

And yet after all, we see this Lavish and Prosuse Temper in Men, throws 'em
into the contrary Extreme, and makes 'em oftentimes the most basely and
sordidly Covetous toward their Wives and Families; who, if they have not a
Jointure to secure 'em, shall not have so much as Pin-Money, or what is
sufficient to supply the extremest Necessities of Life. And the same it is in a
lower Rank. For it is common enough for an ordinary Tradesman not to sleep
without three or four Bottles swagging in his Belly, while his poor Wife at
home is often glad of small Beer or Water. Sum up the Evidence your self Sir
T. and be you on the whole for once both Judge and Jury, to decide the Quarrel
between us, whether your Sex or ours are, generally speaking, most guilty of
Prodigality.

Rebecca Hastings.

LETTER XXV. Against Marrying a Widow.
By Sir Thomas --
YOU complain, Madam, I Have forgotten to whom I Am writing, and often address my
self to the Men, without any regard to my Antagonist: For this I must beg your
Pardon, since the love of the Truth and concern for poor abused Mankind, makes
me, I find, sometimes take off my eye from my Antagonist, before I Am aware. But
I hope you will forgive me, since it is for the public Good, and though I may
happen to step out of the way a little now and then, fear not but I Will return
again, and fight out the Battle.

And now for the jolly Widow, since Maid and Wife have pretty well wearied us.
And though you, Madam, are yet two or three degrees from that state of Life, yet
you may in time arrive to it, and therefore you would do well often to read over
the Directions of a very sage Philosopher for the management of your Affairs
that you may not be surprised when you should come to Action. You know who says,

Widows who have tried one Lover,
Trust none again, till they have made over.
Or if they do before they Marry,
The Fox's weigh the Geese they carry;
Whence wittiest Ladies always choose
To undertake the heaviest Goose.
Now if we did not sometimes take out Reprisals against your Sex, and some of
our He-Foxes, though Poor and Lean, snap up one of your heaviest Geese, we
should never be upon the Square with you, though a sad Choice a Man's in when
he is brought to that Condition; only the forementioned Gentleman's short
Questions cannot easily be answered.

What an Amorous thing is Want,
How Debts and Mortgages Inchant*
What Graces must that Lady have
That can from Execution save?
But the worst is, that oftentimes she only brings the Execution sooner on the
poor mistaken Husband, who catches Two Tartars at once: For he that ventures on
that terrible Creature a Widow, must prepare for the worst, and not think she
has been Married, and buried one Husband for, nothing, and having once got out
of the Grate, she remembers all her old Tricks again, and is full as wild and
more cunning than ever. And 'twould, at least make one cautious if we came to a
Ditch which another had attempted to leap, and stuck in the middle, how we
overhastily ventured after him. A Widow is a double Woman, she has in her all
the Poison of her Sex, highly rectified, and rendered infinitely more Subtle and
Mortal. When the Cannibal has once tasted the Blood of one Man, though she weep
never so many Crocadiles Tears over his Grave, she hardly ever leaves off till
she has tried another. Like a Dog that has once found the sweetness of
Sheeps-Blood, nothing but the Branch can make him give it over.

Believe her not, though she immures her self never so closely, mourns never so
unconsoleably, and remains never so Obstinate in her Melancholy Recess, that
she may accompany her dear Lord to the place of Silence. Then, even then, when
her Peak is but just put on, when her Mourning hardly handselled, would she not
refuse Comfort upon reasonable Terms; alas! Pity and Love are near akin, and
the heart that melted so lately by one Passion, that of Grief, and has not yet
had time to harden, will easily enough admit an Impression from another, though
very different. Love has a thousand disguises, he sometimes gets a long black
Cloak on, and struts in it as mournfully and gravely as the nearest Relations;
but when once he is alone, Widow, have at your heart, off goes his disguise, and
he is a God again.

But let him be what he will, Angel or Fiend, we may safely turn a very Widow
loose to him, without any great fear of their hurting one another. Should he be
as subtle a Cur as Matchiavel's Married Devil, she would soon make him hang his
Ears as he did, and desire to be dismissed of the Employment. She Would hamper him
in Links as substantial as any he had left behind him, give him just his meat
for his working and no more, hold him close to a quantum valuit, and make over
her Soul and her Estate to some other, even though he had Possession of her
Body, but would fain be rid on it if he knew how; since she would haunt and
possess him, rather than on the contrary.

And what then should a poor Mortal do with her, or how should he be able to
deal with her? Suppose him in the worst condition, and no way but this or a
Gaol, would it not look more like Freedom to live out of the Prisoner's Basket
than out of Hers? It Is true he would have nothing but Scraps from both, but then
for the former he would not be upbraided; besides, he would have a much more mild
Durance, a sort of a King's- Bench Prison wherever he was, in comparison of
being turned over to a Widow, till Death cleared him at the General
Jail-deliver.

But the most diverting Scene is, when they are Geese of both sides, and cheat
one another. The Citizen turned Gentleman, and the German-Princess rarely well
met, and neither have just cause to complain. When the Widow lives high, keeps
a noble House and splendid Table, and has nothing but Sham-Deeds and bastard
Mortgages at the bottom: And the Noble 'Squire Eats, Drinks, Presents, Treats
and Plays as high as any, and yet's in debt for every Rag he wears, and had
much ado to rig himself out for this weighty Expedition. But the Jest is when
they come to weigh one another, and find nothing but Feathers of both sides, to
see how they look, and how exactly like one another, only the Bride a little
more Chagrin of the two, because she has disgraced the Honor of her Character,
and proved a Reproach to the Gravity and discretion of Widow-hood, by being
imposed on by another, when a true Widow ought to Cheat all Mankind.

Yet once more we'll suppose the very best, and that an honest Fellow should
chance to light on a Widow a little more free of her Purse, though a most
hide-bound Carcass: Osborn has exactly told such a Man's Fortune. The things (
says he) required to read the apprehension of such a loathsome Companion will
prove so chargeable, as in a short time her Gold will be spent, and nothing
left but the Foul Beast that carried ^t.

Thomas --

Answer to LETTER XXV. In Defense of Widows.
By a Young Widow.
AND is a Widow really such a frightful thing, Sir T. so much your aversion?
And were you always of that mind? Are we all of us such perfect Witches, such
abominable Blood-suckers, such Cheats and Impostors, such unreasonable,
unconscionable Creatures, as you represent us? Or did you never hear of a sly
Thief, that cried, The Grapes were sour, when he could not come at 'em? Or of a
lewd Spark of your Acquaintance, who has often enough made it his business to
defame that Virtue which he could not corrupt and ruin? Just thus, I fancy, did
that doughty Knight, Sir Hudibras, rail at his dear Widow, when he could not
catch her, and when he found both his sham-Oaths and Whipping lost upon her.
But to Harp no more upon that string, which it may be you will think makes but
very jarring Music, I must ask leave to enter into the Merits of the Cause,
and consider your angry waspish complaints against poor Widows, who I find, as
helpless as they are, and how much soever entitled to Heaven's Protection, must
expect but little of yours. The more Discourteous Knight you, the while, and
unmindful of the Laws of Chivalry and Honor. O! but we do not need it, we are
cunning enough of our selves, you say, to deceive all the World. But pray give
me leave to ask you, Sir T. how came a poor simple Woman to be in a little
while so strangely altered? If we killed our Husbands indeed, and eat 'em
afterward, there might be something in it, and the Riddle might easily be
solved, according to the Faith of the Cannibals; because if we believe them, we
should have all their Prudence transfused into us: But that mere Cohabitation
should work such a Prodigious change, that only conversing with a Man for a few
Years, or it may be Months, should thus transform the most foolish and helpless
thing in Nature into a mere She-Matchiavel, and make us too hard for all your
Politic Noddles; This I confess is unaccountable, and admirable; and it must
needs follow from it, that either we are very apt Scholars, or you are
excellent Masters.

But have not your Sex too the like Advantage by Widow-hood? If you have,
certainly, Sir T. it is very dangerous meddling with you: For when you have
swallowed such a Serpent as a Woman, you must be perfect Dragons; especially if
it happens to be a Widow that you have thus got rid of, at whose Happy
Departure you would doubtless Triumph as much as the Man when he buried his
Twentieth Wife, and wear Garlands all your Life after. And yet (you know, Sir
T.) the same expense of Vows and Oaths is required to gain one of us, that you
use with others; nay, you are often forced to double your Files, to clinch your
Perjuries when you attack a Widow, though you pretend to know our weak side
never so exactly, because we are sure we know your Sex well enough, whatever
you may know of ours; and having been deceived once before, as it is great odds
if when we were married, we met with any better Fortune, we expect you should
juggle more artificially, and hang and drown more pathetically than our former
Lovers, before you decoy us into a second Noose.

And when once you have your desire, what Assurance have we after all our
cunning, that we shall not catch a Tartar, that a Widower shall not outwidow
us, and over-shoot us in our own Bow? Have not you Contrivances and Conveyances
as well as we, and Sham-Joyntures, and Airy Estates, which all vanish after
Marriage, like the Ink of some of your false Deeds, by which you lured us into
your clutches? It may be we may with much ado continue in your good Graces for
some half a Year after Marriage; and a long time that too it is like many of you
will say, and an unconscionable while to be constant to one Woman: But when
once that is past, and you can drain us of no more comfortable Old Gold, a few
Pieces whereof we may have laid up for a comfort in Age, or for Legacies, or
any extraordinary Accident, then we presently see you appear in your own
shapes, and those sufficiently horrid: Nothing but Oaths and Curses, and
kicking out of Doors. For if you turn us up to Alimony, and cannot find a way
to cheat us of that too, we must take it as a great Favor, while you Drink,
and Game, and worse, and Revel in our Estates, to your Hearts desire.

Thus you see your Pictures may be drawn, Sir T. as well as ours; and there are
some Lines so remarkable in many of your Sex, that it is almost impossible not
to hit 'em; and I appeal to the common Experience of the World, whether they do
not know many Widow-Hunters, to whom this Description agrees as well, and whom
it fits as exactly, as if they had been taken measure of, and it had been made
on purpose for them.

After all, to be ingenuous, and acknowledge a Truth, though if the consequence
be not strained, it will not hurt us, all Estates and Conditions have some
Persons that are a Scandal and Reproach to them, and to their Relations: There
are, it cannot be denied, unquiet and ill-temper'd, as well as crafty and
overreaching Persons, of all sorts and degrees, Maids, Wives, and Widows; ay,
and of all Sexes too, Sir T. as I hope I have satisfied you already, of your
own as well as ours.

But why a Widow, who has more Experience in the World, who knows better how to
manage a Family, than another, and how to value a good Husband, either by the
Loss of one of that Character, or the enduring the Tyranny of a bad one? Why
such a Person should not be at least as desirable a Partner as a raw, young,
giddy-headed Girl of sixteen, who has just left playing with Lifeless Babbies,
when she comes to have Living ones of her own to entertain her, and knows not
what to do with them; I profess I am not sharp-sighted enough to discern, and
therefore, Sir T. must refer the decision of so weighty an Affair to your nicer
Judgment.

Jane Hill.

LETTER XXVI. That there is no such thing as Love after Marriage.
By Mr. Strattford.
EVen this Fool's Paradise quickly withers, and that Tinsil sort of Happiness
which a Man finds in Love, soon wears off. After Marriage your Sex thinks it
not worth the while to Dissemble any longer; you have caught the Fish, and the
Net is laid by: You have entrapt your Prey, and now the Panther's Face is
shown, which before you so so carefully concealed.

You say your selves that Fools cannot Love, and if not before Marriage, much
less after it, so there is three quarters of the World struck off, and how many
think ye will there be of your Sex included, certainly not the smallest number.

Nor can a wise Man love a Fool, for that is unnatural: There is nothing
agreeable between them, they don't Tally. It Is true, he may be a little tickled
and pleased before Marriage: The Beauty hides the Folly, he was prepossessed
and hoodwinked; now the truth is, Matrimony often does Men that kindness, it
gets 'em their eyes again, though it is something a sharp Remedy.

Nay, suppose two wise persons should by a Miracle, meet between one pair of
Sheets, by the Parson's leave, I know not but these would be more incapable of
Loving than any of the other: The Felicities of Marriage (says one that is
thought to have tasted deeply enough of its Infelicities) generally perishing
in the Conflict arising between Man and Wife of equal Spirits and
Understanding; It being impossible there should want Contests where both lay
claim to a capacity fit only to be obeyed.

But still further, to give Matrimony as fair play as possible, let us suppose
a pair as agreeably Matched as Nature can make 'em; neither too wise, the Man a
little the advantage, but no Statesman; the Woman no Fool, but wise enough to
know or think she has less Wit than her Husband, yet there is a sort of
necessity of Nature for the ebb of their Passion after Marriage, (and he that
loves not passionately, cannot be said to love at all.) For what is strained to
the highth must needs either give again, or snap in pieces, and it is impossible
Nature can furnish sufficient Spirits to make the Woman. "Each happy night a
Bride -- whatever Songs may be made on it the next Morning by some doting
Bridegroom. Indeed if in any thing we ought to complain of Nature, we might
seem to do it with the greatest Justice for this apparent Cheat it puts upon
us, for it works the expectations and desires to the greatest Extravagance, and
yet afterward gives us nothing proportionable to her profuse promises and our
own exalted Fancies, at least all ingenuous Married Men I ever met with, have
frankly owned this great Truth, and it is strange if there should be such a real
Felicity in that Estate, such an inestimable Philosopher's Stone, that none yet
should ever have the good fortune to find it.

Hear your Friend Osborn, who doated upon you so much even in his Gray Hairs,
when he should have been wiser, that he owns in his youth his Heart was your
Triumphant Chariot, hear but what Truth and better Experience wrung from him on
this Subject. Those Virtues, Graces, and reciprocal Desires ( says he) which
bewitched, Affection expected (before Marriage) to meet and enjoy, Fruition and
Experience will find absent, and nothing left but a painted Box, which Children
and Time will empty of Delight, leaving Diseases behind, or at best incurable
Antiquity.

But yet worse, it is no Miracle for Want and Poverty to assault the happy pair,
and then what becomes of all their Love? It Is strange Humane Nature should have
no more sagacity then to let it self be made one great Bubble: Never were any
paired together, if Love brought 'em into the Noose, but had a strong fancy
that alone would feed and cloth 'em: They take that for their Semstress and
their Cook, as the Poet tells us others formerly did Religion; and yet let us
see one Instance of any that when they tried the experiment, could grow fat on
such airy diet; nay, or so much as live upon it any better than the Welch-man's
Horse upon an Oat a Day. And when once Want comes in at one Window out creeps
Love infallibly at another, especially when the Brats begin to sprawl and stink
about in every corner, yelping for the Dug, with scarce clothes enough to hide
their Nastiness. Ay, -- now let us see who Loves, and if we find one Pair in all
Europe that hold stubbornly to their first Folly, that have all the old Flames
and Darts when shivering with cold and tormented with shame, and griped through
with Hunger, then we'll vote 'em, not only the Flitch at Dunmow, but a Monument
at their death as famous as the Mausoleum, and ever by my consent every hundred
pair who live unhappily in the same circumstances, should, while they live, pay
'em the tribute of a single Maravedi every year, which I am apt to believe
would amount to a sum almost beyond Arithmetic to reckon it.

To speak Truth, I know not how Love should possibly last after Marriage, when
Freedom and Liberty are its very Breath and Nature. If we would, it is not
likely your Sex should be able to continue it: You are a sullen sort of Birds,
take never so much care of you, cram you never so well, yet you will hang the
wing, and moult as soon as ever you are Caged, and one must expect no Music
from you ever after. Satiety as naturally produces Loathing, as Hunger does an
eager Appetite, and Novelty, Pleasure. To see the same dull greasy face every
day, is worse then seeing the same Play for a Twelvemonth together. Nothing but
Pork would tire a very Flemming. Or if our Stomachs should hold to the same
Dish, yet you Cook it so sluttishly as would make one nauseate it in spite of a
Siege: You use us like Strangers no longer, that is the truth on it, now we are
so well acquainted. The brown Loaf and cold Meat must be esteemed a great
favor. In short, all the care you took to disguise your Minds and Bodies, all
your intellectual Toppings and Washes, as well as the Gayety and Judgment, Wit
and good Humor of your outward Dress, are perfectly vanished. We have you in
your native Homeliness, though not Innocence: If you have not too contracted
some additional countercharms, and add Sluttishness to your other
Accomplishments, to make you more completely Odious. For where is that care and
solicitous exactness, and womanish diligence, and even affected neatness which
were so remarkable in you before you had noos'd us? You take no more care then
to bolster up your minds, to hide those mental Deformities which would fright
even a Satyr from your Bosoms. You are no more those gay pretty airy foolish
diverting things, you were when upon your good behavior. You give us a Sample
indeed, but it is like a Snowy Hand to a Sooty Face. You trade too sharp for us
Plain-Dealers, expose your best Goods to sale, but pack up those that are
Damaged in the middle; Give us a Taste of good Wine, but when we come to send
for the whole Piece home, and draw it out, it is so pricked and paul'd that
there is no enduring it.

Not but that you are careful enough still to look as gay as ever on some
extraordinary Occasions: If King Edgar be to make a Visit, Alfreda will be sure
to on with all her Jewels, though it costs her Husband's Life: If you do dress
at all, you are not sure so much out of the Fashion to do it for your Husbands,
it is either for all the World, or for some favored Gallant: When he approaches
you recall the old Leer, resume your Virgin smiles and prettinesses, though it
may be awkwardly enough too, for want of practice. New Tallow your
weather-beaten Vessel, repair your Rigging, pick your Eyebrows, blubb your Lip,
and say over the fine things you can think on, which used to charm all your
Adorers, and make 'em run as mad for your Commonplace Wit, as for your no more
natural Beauty.

And how should most Marriages ever thrive any better, when they are so far
from being made in Heaven, that the Banker has much more to do in 'em than the
Parson. It Is but a sort of Stock-Jobbing, to make the best on it: You ask no
other Qualifications in a Man, than what has he, not, what is he? And what
Estate, what Jointure can he make, not what Character, what Reputation has he
in the World. Let him make never so Monkey a Figure, and be distinguished by
nothing but want of a Brush behind, and going always upon his hind-legs, he is
never the worse Bedfellow if he can but settle the Substantial Acres. A goodly
Marriage in the mean time this is like to make, and a great deal of Comfort
they will have between 'em; such a Surplusage of Conjugal Love and Affection,
that they will scarce know what to do with it all, but be very ready, it is likely,
to spare some to their Neighbors.

Nor even so much as here are ye upon the Square, which is still harder; for
since you have reduced the whole Affair to mere Bargain and Sale, both Parties
ought to stand upon even Ground. But it is like all other Trades, one side must
be sure to be cheated. Your Sex are seldom without False Dice about ye: Your
Fortunes, the only things that would make one bear the Encumbrance at the end
of 'em with any tolerable Patience and Satisfaction, are looked upon by a
Magnifying-glass, as well as your other Perfections; though indeed they may seem
to have some Right to the same Advantage with all the rest, because the most
Ravishing Charm that belongs to ye. Substantial, lasting Felicities, and almost
a Valuable Consideration, even for Matrimony; at least 'twou'd make any thing
but that godown with a great deal of Pleasure.

Thus, Ladies, have you taught us to Discount, by letting us see the Ready is
the main thing you expect from us, and why should we not be as ingenuous with
you?

Love, if any thing, is modest and silent; 't has but a weak Head, and hates
noise and clamor; and is it then any more likely to be found in the House
where a Woman has entered before it, than silence in a Monastery?

Who can Love where they do not Esteem? And how can the Woman esteem the Man,
whom she reckons as her Rival in Government, if not a Tyrant and Usurper upon
her Rights and Liberties, as she will be sure to think him? Such a Republican
Spirit has she, though he is the most Just and Merciful Monarch in the World. And
on the other side, how can she expect he should love one who is daily
conspiring against him, to wrest away his Legal Patrimony, and Ancient
Inheritance? Man was born her Sovereign, and it looks like no very great piece
of Kindness to exclude or dethrone him.

I Will not insist on those many Diseases so incident to your Sex, and almost
inseparable from them, lest I should render that horrid and nauseous, which I
only design to represent as it really is, dreadful, and avoidable. But thus
much is certain, if these are not in your own Power, they ought to be in ours,
and not to Yoke our selves to what would make our Lives as uncomfortable as
yours: Especially when you cannot expect Love should last, when the Cement of
it, and the very End of Matrimony ceases; unless you can give an Instance of
any that fell in Love in an Hospital; always excepting the Famous Gondibert and
his Apothecary's Daughter.

James Strattford.

Answer to LETTER XXVI. That it is possible to love as well after Marriage as
before, and the way to do it.
By M -- H --
WHen the Histories of all Nations are full of the Examples of excellent Wives,
who for their Constancy and Fidelity to their Husbands, and Conjugal Duty and
Affection have justly been made Immortal, it looks like a very ill-natured
Paradox to assert that never can be, which so often has been, and therefore may
be again, and of which we have as many present living Instances as there are of
married Persons that live happily, which I am apt to believe are many more than
live otherwise, because Happiness and Content are generally silent, but Misery
is querulous and noisy; and we hear every where of the Disorders which happen
in any such unfortunate Families. Indeed it is observeable of most of the
Arguments that are brought against Marriage, or the Happiness of such a State,
that not one in twenty of them have so much as the shadow of Reason, but are
just such as an ingenious Person says of them, fit for Men rather to wheedle
with, than in good earnest think what they speak. And of this sort are all
those which pretend to prove there is no such thing as Love after Marriage; for
we will not stand to the Experience of a bad Husband in these matters.

Grant that they never had any, that something baser than Love was the motive
of their Courtship, and that their Flame was so impure, that it could not long
shine after it was lighted by the Torch of Hymen: Yet it is so far from Truth,
that Love cannot last at all after Marriage, that I am satisfied many have
loved much better after than they did before; nay, in some Instances, have
loved very tenderly after that Sacred Bond had united 'em, though perfectly
indifferent, if not averse, when both single; although Instances of these last
are so rare, that it is ill venturing together unless there be at least some
Affection between them. But this I affirm, as Magisterially as ever our
Antagonist can the contrary, although with much more Truth and Reason, that
married Persons have more cause to Love better than others, and more Advantages
to do so: For they have now left all the World for each other, which must needs
be a great Endearment on both sides: their Word, and Honor, and Oath are all
publicly engaged, and unless they forfeit all these, they must continue to
Love one another, and cannot but be Happy. Their Love is both Honorable and
Lawful, and now they have all they sighed for, and possess each other's
Affections, and Persons, and Fortunes without any fear of a Rival. Shame on him
that loves a fine Woman less when he has her in his Arms, than when he only
throws sheeps-eyes, and makes ugly Faces at her. It is true, if Men form
Romantic Notions of Love and Friendship, and find themselves deceived when
they come to apply 'em to common Life, they may be angry without pity or
regard. He that expects more from a Mortal than it can give him, deserves to be
disappointed. There Is no perfect Happiness here, and it is pity there should;
but yet we may make a shift to pick up a good comfortable share of it with good
Management, and there are certainly degrees of it, and one is much more Happy
than another, and I am still of the mind that a married condition is in it self
the happiest Estate of Life, and will never believe but that it would always be
so, did not Lewdness, or Imprudence, or some uncommon Misfortune prevent it;
and thus happy I am sure it never could be, without a good degree of Love. The
little Endearments of a married condition, the soft Hours, the very Fondnesses
and Follies and Particularities, and to others, insignificant Fancies and
Humors, have yet all of 'em something new in 'em, and diverting and obliging.

Nay, even the little Matrimonial Quarrels, the short-lived Anger of Lovers,
makes 'em but love better: A little Water sprinkled on their Fire, makes it
blaze more strongly than before, if there be not enough to Quench it.

Most kinds of Pleasure seem to be little more than the curing of some Pain.
What else is that we perceive in the Gust of the most delicious Wines, when
extreme Thirsty? or the Taste or Smell of a well cooked Dish, when soundly
Hungry? And the longer we have been Fasting, the sharper we are kept, the more
ravenously we fall to, when once we sit down to Table. However, none but
Gluttons will gorge themselves; and if afterward they complain of want of
Appetite, Would they not be laughed at, rather than pitied?

Yet you cannot tell, Mr. S --, whether the Answerer of this Letter be a Man,
or a Woman, a Maid, Wife, or Widow; nor shall you ever know it, if I can help
it. But whatever I am, Zeal for Truth has engaged me in the Controversy, and
no Aversion to Marriage has drawn these Thoughts from me, which you must take
as they come, without any more Accuracy, or Regularity, than I find in some of
yours.

But to return to my Subject: Even Absence it self is so far from divorcing
Lovers, that it only more closely cements their Affections. Every occasional
Journey renders the happy Pair more impatient of meeting; and when they meet
again, more pleased with each other; increases their virtuous Love, and
heightens their mutual Satisfaction; and the longer they live together, the
closer still is the Knot tied, the more indissoluble it grows, and yet the more
easy. Time and Age file off by degrees any little roughness in their Temper,
and polishes the Inequalities of their Humor, while they grow more acquainted
with each others Excellencies and Virtues, and therefore more in love with
them, and can more easily bear with those unavoidable Imperfections, those
little Blebs, which will be found in whatever is molded of Clay, and therefore
with the less difficulty may be mutually overlooked and forgiven. Though were
there nothing but length and continuance of Acquaintance, and a long Intimacy,
under the same Roof, on the same Road, and in the same Circumstances of Life;
yet even from hence we often see such Friendships contracted, that nothing but
Death can divide 'em. And these of necessity must be much stronger, where the
Obligations are dearer, and the Intimacy closer, and the Secrecy more entire:
Where Tenderness, and Interest, and Inclination, join their Forces; and it is so
much the Concern of both Parties to make each other Happy.

I never said or thought that Love was more furious the longer it lasted; for I
believe the quite contrary. It Is more calm and rational; but 'twou'd be
strange, if it should therefore be the less perfect. It burns like subterranean
Lamps, undisturbed and even, and therefore must be immortal; at least, the
Light can only be extinguished when the Lamp it self moulders: Its Death is
owing not to any inward Decay, but merely to the Weakness of the Materials.

Yet if Souls know Souls hereafter, what Heresy is it, to believe, that a
virtuous Friendship, here commenced, shall last, nay shall be perfected, like
all other good Qualities, in another World! You Will say, it may be, I Am too
grave on such Subjects: But I must ask your Pardon, if I only let you and
others know what I think my self. I love to follow a Thought as far as I can
see it. And I have read, that some of the brave old Heathens were wont mightily
to please themselves with the Friendships of Elysium, and the Satisfaction they
expected in a more intimate Correspondence with wise and good Men in another
World.

But well remembered: We are yet in this; and I hope I should do my Fellow
Citizens no disservice, if I could put all married Persons, or at least the
very greatest part of 'em, in a way to be certainly Happy with each other; and
the longer they live, to love still the better, and be more beloved.

Let the Husband, if he desires this, neither Dote nor Tyrannize: The Wife
neither assume beyond what Nature, and the (indulgent) Laws have given her, nor
yet so basely crouch, as to render her self cheap and despicable. If they ever
have any little Differences, let 'em no more take air than Fire in a Cellar.
Keep 'em even from Servants, and let the Pillow alone decide 'em, where many a
Flint is broken. If both are Passionate, take turns to adjourn your Anger; if
only one, it is the easier to agree; though there is this Advantage even in an
hasty Temper, that as it soon kindles, it is never long a burning; it may
sputter a little, but 'twill do no great hurt; while a sour Log, that is a whole
day a lighting, shall, it may be, be half a dozen, before it is extinguished.

In the last place, learn the Act of Memory, and the greater Act of
Forgetfulness, and you will not fail of being Happy. That is, remember all the
kind things, forget all that is harsh or ungrateful that ever past between ye;
at least never repeat 'em, which will be the best way to forget 'em: Which
Advice if you carefully observe, I see no Reason to doubt but you will live as
contentedly as

Your Humble Servant, M -- H --

LETTER XXVII. That no Woman can be Faithful in Absence.
By Sir Thomas --
YOur ingenious Sex finds out many Exceptions from that General Rule, Till
Death us do part; and it is worthy Chronicle indeed to find one of ye constant
half so long. I think we have Instances of some one or two that have made a
shift to keep Honest without good looking after, and you may well boast of your
Phoenix, Penelope, who held out a Siege as long as that of Troy, where her
Husband was carrying on one of the Principal Attacks: But you are forced to go
as high as the Fabulous Age for one such Story, while we see there is few
Husbands need go over their Thresholds to find the contrary; for if they are
but absent in another Room, it may be as effectual, as if at the utmost
distance the four Seas would allow him. Which, by the way, are the exact
measure of a Woman's Conscience, and our Great Grandfathers Wisdom; for was
there ever such a Law made in any other Nation of the World, that a Man must
thankfully receive all the two legged Blessings his Bountiful Wife will bestow
upon him, though he has no more to do with 'em than the Great Mogul? If it be
pleaded for you, that you are tempted to Falsehood by the Remissness of the Laws
on these occasions; may it not with more Reason be retorted, that had you any
Ingenuity, you would therefore be the more Faithful. Sometimes you don't love
Restraint, and it is being tied up so close makes you break your Halter. But
what can you say in this case, unless that even this Law has not left you Rope
enough, and that the four Seas ought, in Chancery at least, to be extended to
both the Indies, which would doubtless have several good Consequences, and make
your Husbands Absence more comfortable to you, and profitable to themselves;
and in the mean while you would not be such unfruitful, unprofitable Members of
the Commonwealth. 'Twou'd effectually prevent much Jealoufie and ill Blood in
the Nation. A Man would not then look sour upon his Spouse, at his return from
a long Voyage, only because she had been Trading too in his absence, and
improving that little Stock he left her; whose unkindness to her might have
very ill Effects, make her, it may be, lose what she goes with, if not break
her tender heart.

But then if one Law be favorable to the Sex, there is another Custom that I
wonder you don't Petition against, and try to get it altered in Parliament, and
that is, the unconscionable time you are obliged to stay without hearing from
your Husband, before you dare hope him dead, and admit the consolation of
another.

Seven Years! why, it is a Lifetime, and such a tedious state of Widow-hood,
more properly a Civil-Death, than Rowing Ten Years in the Galleys. The only
Comfort is, you can set one Law against the other, and then the Scales will be
pretty even.

The greatest wonder to me is, that any should be so unreasonable as to expect
Fidelity and Constancy from you. Why does he not as well expect softness from a
Flint, or Oil from a Pumice-stone? The Winds and Seas are old Similies, for
their Constancy as well as their Silence: And if it is not in their Nature to be
constant, hardly in Evil, much less sure in Virtue, and least of all, in so
strong a Virtue as Fidelity, which they may pretend is too rough and masculine
for their softer Natures. And if this ben't to be expected, even after
Marriage, where there are all the most Sacred Ties imaginable, all the
Obligations of Gratitude, and Conscience, and Interest, and Honor to keep 'em
steady, how thick must his Swerd be, who hopes for it before Marriage, in the
absence of him to whom they vowed Eternal Friendship? Is It not fair for a Woman
to stand to her Word, while you are by, to remember her of it? We know they are
forgetful Creatures, they are weak, and if they venture alone, we must expect
they will fall, and so brittle, that if they do, we may be sure they will be
broken. But they will say, I Am now Arguing on their side. Let 'em make what use
they please on it, but this is matter of Fact, and shows that they are not, or
cannot be constant if you trust 'em out of sight. For the Lover takes his
Mistresses Vows and Promises along with him: He has 'em in his own keeping, as
afterward, if he gets her, the Writings of her Estate, and let him look to
'em, and not blame her if they are lost, nor be so unreasonable to expect her
Constancy should follow him all the World over.

A Woman's Oaths and Promises are certainly what they report of ours: She Will
claim the Clergy of a Lover, and pretend they may be broken upon good
occasions, and those she will never want, till she wants Invention or Confidence:
And concludes without any.

Her Friends are against the Match, and she dares not go against her Conscience
and Interest in a matter of such great concern. Or he is unfaithful first, and
gives her both Example and Authority to treat him in that manner. Or he is not
in a capacity to make good the Proposals he made her; and if they married, they
should only live miserably, and stock the World with a Race of Beggars: Or he
has neglected and affronted her, either by Silence, or want of that Respect
which becomes a Faithful Lover. Or she has heard of some of his former Pranks,
and, forsooth, cannot think she is bound by any Promise to a Person of so little
Virtue. All these she thinks good Reasons, though the true one lies still at the
bottom.

His Fortune is not plentiful enough to maintain her Extravagance and Pride, or
she has some richer Fool that makes his Addresses, and outbids the Jointure
offered by the former: Or it may be he is a Man of Sense, and then he is half
condemned before any other tenders his Service: However, if some brisk Fop
attacks her, he infallibly carries all before him, having the Fate of her Sex
to favor his Pretensions; and oftentimes she only changes for the sake of
change, for dear charming irresistible Variety. The Impression of her former
Vows wears off from her Memory as fast as the Face of him to whom she made 'em:
There are none of those pretty little Amorous Quarrels, which used to blow up
and feed their Passion when present. Nor are Letters strong enough to supply
the want of actual Management, and appearance in proper Person: They are too
cold to keep Love long alive, or to continue it in an unconstant Heart, where
at least it is easily driven out by a newer, and therefore more fashionable
Amor. There Is as much difference between actual Personal Addresses, and
Epistolary Confabulations, as there is between a disputable Bill and good hard
Ready Money. Woman is indeed so far like a New discovered Country, that the
first comer pleads a Right to her; but if he withdraws for a while, and a
stronger Rival steps in, he seizes the Ground as his own, cuts up the Turff,
and Heirs the whole Plantation.

Sometimes, it is true, you have something more of Excuse for your Infidelity:
The Unhappy Lover is betrayed by a false Friend, or misrepresented and abused
by the Malice of his Enemies. But were that Generosity in your Sex which you
pretend to, half that real firmness which you have in an ill Cause, you would
weigh the Circumstances, and hear his Defense, and not run away with the first
heat of Passion, throw your selves away (if that can be) on one that cannot
Merit you, or is, it may be, as false as your selves, and give poor forsaken
Manly one Reason more to Curse the World by your unkindr^ and baseness.

But you are Faithful to your Love (...) it may be you will boast, even after
Death and much more when they are only absen^ but still living. Yes doubtless,
if we granted the one, we should scarce stand to quarrel with you upon the
other: But how many Artemisia's and Portia's have you to boast of? The latter
of whom seems rather to have suspected her Constancy, than to have given such
an Illustrious Trial thereof, as is generally apprehended: The most Charitable
Interpretation we can make of what she did, is, that she was afraid she should
not keep up the Grandeur of her Name, and the Glory of Cato's Wife, and
therefore took a Cordial of Live coals to settle her while she was in a good
Mind, and prevent any second Marriage.

Thomas --

Answer to LETTER XXVII. For Absence.
By Madam Godfrey.
WHether or no Absence be the more advantageous to a Lover, or his being
present to solicit his Suit with the Fair One; which side soever of the
Question I should engage in, it could be no Reflection on our Sex, at least not
distinctly from yours; for there have bin more false Theseus's then
Clytemnestra's, and till you could show us one of your Sex that would be proof
against Interest and Opportunity, that when his Mistress was absent would
refuse a Richer, and a Handsomer if the Offer was made, you must not lay all
the weight on others shoulders, but support at least an equal share in your
proper Persons.

But letting that rest, I shall now examine what you Advance on this Subject,
and doubt not to prove that in many Cases, and on several Accounts, Absence is
more favorable to a Lover than the contrary; he has many Advantages by it,
which he could not have if present with her he loves. For he can write to her,
and express many things that way which he could not any other. It remedies his
Bashfulness, (if any of your Sex are yet Oppressed with that unfashionable
Malady:) However, he avoids being confounded and dazzled with the Splendour of
her Beauty, which has often struck dumb as stout Men as Sir T. without any
Reflection upon his Valor. The fear least any Expression less proper or
respective should drop out unawares, as it often happens in Conversation, is
here avoided: A Lady will bear many things in black and white, which it may be
she would not care to have told her by the Writer if he were present. Many
don't love to hear they are loved, or at least, think it not decent to sit
still and hear their own Panegyric, which yet they can read well enough, if
there be not too much daubing in it. A Lover may talk on as long as he please
with his Pen, and reveal all his Passion without fear of being interrupted,
either by the Wit, or Ill Nature, or Modesty of his Mistress. Many can write
better than they can speak, especially Men of Sense, and this Observation
scarce ever fails if they have not had much acquaintance or conversation in the
World; and to such as these, Absence gives a mighty advantage: A Lover has time
to think twice, to choose his thoughts, and only represent such as will be most
favorable to his Passion, when he makes it known by Letter; but in Discourse
he has no time nor room to turn an Idea, but his Mistress must take it as she
finds it. Generosity and Fidelity plead hard for him in his absence, if he has
made any Progress in his Amor before he leaves her, which the Question
supposes: Lovers love to please themselves, and represent the dear Object as
amiable as their Affection and Imagination can describe it, and as the Man sees
his Lady in this advantageous Dress, she contemplates him in one that is full as
agreeable, and both are sure to forget what may displease 'em, or make excuses
and alleviations, which they cannot so well do when they have the Object it self
before their Eyes.

Then if to all this there be a faithful Friend of either side, a Confident to
the Amor, it may go better on, and make a larger progress in Absence than
otherwise. When Persons are long present and conversing with one another, they
are apt to find out each others Faults and Imperfections: It is impossible but
they must repeat the same things over and over, unless of an extraordinary Wit,
Invention, Memory, and Judgment: At best there is but a dull Satiety, and Wit
it self, with nothing else for a long while together, would be apt to be
tiresome and offensive: Now Absence heightens and sharpens the Passion, as
Hunger does the Appetite, and then none but a Lover can guess the Transports
that parted Lovers experiment when they meet again. How eagerly they clasp each
other to their Breasts, and look, and sigh, and clasp again, and are never
weary. A sight that would be enough to Convert the most averse to Love, or at
least make 'em Envy such a Happiness as the sourness of their Natures would
never let them possess.

I had like to have forgot Songs, and Verses, and a hundred pretty Fancies,
which a Lover may send to his Mistress when absent, though it looks often but
scurvily to repeat 'em himself when present, which is like carrying a Letter
from himself to the Person to whom it is directed. Besides the partiality of, I
think, all Men living, at least that ever I have observed, for their own Works,
would be apt to render the poor Author uneasy, and divest him of that
complaisance which is so necessary to one that pretends to our Hearts, if we
should think fit to dislike any thing in them, either for the Trial of his Good
Nature or Understanding.

But besides, as a Lady can bear much more in Writing than Face to Face, and
her Lover express himself more to his Satisfaction, so she can say more to him
this way if she is secure of his Fidelity, Discretion, and Loyalty, than if he
were actually present. She can tell him a thousand things here, which would put
a terrible Violence on the Reservedness of our Sex, should she venture to say
half as much before him: Nor would she be this way in danger of his Transports,
or seeing him throw himself out of Window for Joy that she has granted him such
a Favor. On all which Accounts, besides diverse and sundry Reasons more, too
long to repeat, I conclude, that Absence is most Advantageous to a favored
Lover.

Rachel Godfrey.

LETTER XXVIII. Against Nunneries.
By Mr. Preston.
WEre it an Infallible, or so much as a probable Consequence, that Nunneries
would keep you Honest, I should for several Reasons, heartily wish that we had
more in every City than we had in former Ages, and that all your Sex might be
immured in 'em by your selves, which would almost restore Man to his first
Paradise. You want all imaginable helps to Virtue, but I wonder a certain
Politic Communion should ever fancy this would prove so. And I wish there were
not reason to suspect they had quite different Motives for such an
Establishment, since they could not be so little acquainted with your
Inclinations, as not to know that this was the direct way to make you long for
what they pretended to deny you. A long Lent in truth they impose on your
tender Stomachs, not only for two or three Weeks, or a Year, but all your Lives
together, unless some Charitable Confessor will give you a Dispensation from
the Severity of your Rule. I once more entreat you not to flatter your selves,
that it is my fondness for your Company that renders me averse from having you
clapped into these Pinfolds. No, you may assure your selves it is the quite
contrary; for I think there is just ground to fear that restraining the Fire to
so narrow a compass, will make it blaze more furiously, unless it could be
quite stifled. When it is thus reverberated, what can withstand it? The damming
up this vast weight of Waters is very dangerous, for if they once find a way
through the Banks, as it is hard if they long contain so slippery an Element,
then there is no Remedy, but they bear all down before 'em.

To be plain, I Am afraid thus would you deal with us, were your Sex generally
confined to Nunneries. You Would make a desperate Sally at one time or other, fall
upon our Sex when unprepared to resist ye, overrun all Mankind, and beat us,
as the Amazons did their Neighbors, till they made 'em Ravish 'em in their own
Defense, and merely to save their Lives.

All the Passion and Fire we see and wonder at in the Letters from a Nun to a
Cavalier, are no more than painted Flames, in comparison of those which must
needs torment such as are thus fatally immured. This they fan, but can never
allay by their Conversation at the Grates, which sure must be a lively Emblem
of a darker Prison, since this must needs keep their Desires enraged, without
giving, 'em any satisfaction, unless you will suppose 'em all such very Vestals,
as to feel no more tingling when their Hands are pressed and kissed through the
Grate, than those very conscious Bars that part the eager Lovers.

And when it is once come so far, and a settled Amor is formed between 'em,
it is well if scaling Walls, and breaking Necks don't shortly follow, or it may
be, more mischievous Consequences than either.

That poor Saint had a great deal of Injury done her, who put her self in Man's
Clothes on purpose to get into a Monastery, and having there behaved her self
so well, as to gain the favor of her Superiors, was it seems so envied by the
rest of the Fraternity, that they most Feloniously hired a Strumpet to lay a
Bastard to her Charge, likely enough of their own begetting. For which the poor
Innocent, not daring to discover her self, was confined to her Cell, and
condemned to very rigorous Penance all her Life. In which modest silence she at
last died, and then all came out; for she was not only found a Woman, but
Intacta too, if we'll believe the Skilful Monk that relates it.

Now 'twas very well for this poor Girl that she had no Companion assigned her,
no Bedfellow to comfort her all that while, nor none in her Sickness to undress
her, or to administer any thing whereof there might have been occasion.

And 'twou'd be yet worse, I fancy, if some devout Brother should for some such
Reason, and out of mere contempt of the World, and hatred of the Vices of our
bad Sex, resolve to disguise himself in the Habit of a Woman, and so by that
means get introduced among the Sisters, which they say, has not been without
President. How sweetly, how innocently would he live amongst 'em? And if he
should happen to die there, like the She-Monk already mentioned, how many Ehs!
and squeeks would the poor Nuns make when they went to lay him out, and made
the Discovery?

'Twou'd be well if Mother Abbess her self did not come running in, as once
before, with the Fryar's Breeches about her Shoulders, to see what was the
matter.

What caution soever is used in these concerns, something or other will now and
then break out, to the Scandal of Mother Church, and Diversion of us Heretics,
whence we cannot help concluding that how Angelical soever their Profession may
be, their Practice is just like that of other pieces of Flesh and Blood, that
other French Nuns may be like those who have bin discovered to be no better
then they should be, and that the Nuns of France may be of a piece with those
throughout all the World.

If this be thought too Uncharitable a Censure, we'll find out another way for
Nature to work for it self, for it cannot be perfectly unactive, as long as
there is Heat and Motion.

We'll believe then that all their Fishponds are not stocked at the same rate,
and that they don't all kill their Children because they have not occasion for it.
But then they often kill themselves, and one can scarce tell which is worse.
They see Visions and Revelations, are filled with new Light and Prophecy,
commence all Pazzis and Julians, and Bridgets and Kates, are Canonized and
Prayed to, and their Lives entered in their glorious Legends, to the
encouragement of Catholics and confusion of Infidels, -- and all this because
the Blast works upward. Progenies coeli est, and conscia Flammina futuri -- I
ask your Pardon, Ladies, for that scrap of that Beastly Language, which slipped
from me before I was aware, but as big as it sounds, your learned Advocate
(Anonyma) who yoaked me so hard in defense of your Topknots, can easily tell
you the meaning on it, which on the word of an honorable Enemy, is no manner of
hurt, and nothing else but an end of Hudibras before recited, though dressed so
fine that he himself would hardly know it.

Once more pardon for this digression, which if you do not give me presently, I
must be forced to make another as long to excuse it.

But I think we were talking of Enthusiasm, which if any of your Sex inclines
to Devotion, will be sure to have a large share in it. It Commands in you all,
but it Reigns, it Triumphs in a Cloister, where either Guilt or Weakness makes
People Superstitious, gives 'em false Notions of Religion, and wild and
extravagant Fancies; making 'em all Spiritual.

Then perpetual poring on their Lives of Saints and old musty Legends, gives
'em a strong Bias that way, makes 'em all Spiritual Don Quixots, and sets 'em
agog for some redoubted Adventure in their Religious sort of Knight Errantry,
which they themselves confess have been the Original of several of their
Orders, particularly of good St. Loyola's, whose Peaceable and disinterested
Society have been ever since they were first cubb'd so great a Blessing to the
World.

But what is all this, you will perhaps answer, to the English Ladies? You know we
are good Protestants, and renounce Nunneries and all their works (except their
Point and pretty Pictures) and should not care to be of any Order amongst 'em,
except we might either be Gallopping Nuns, or, -- But 'twould be enough to
reply, that impartial Justice falls without respect on all your Sex, of
whatever Age, or Country, or Religion, and these Nunneries being what you so
much boast of, to show you can live without us, they deserved that particular
notice which I have taken of 'em.

Nor is that all, for you your selves, you Protestant Ladies, who have
renounced all venial Sins and Confessions, and no more believe Virginity the
most excellent state of Life, than you believe Transubstantiation, even you
have lately had a serious proposal to make a Schism among your Sex, set up
Protestant Nunneries, and exclude your selves from the World: The surest way I
must confess, to procure you Husbands. But if you design any thing else, it is
easy to show how widely you would be mistaken: To say nothing of the pleasantness
of the Proposal how seriously soever it might be intended, and not to enquire
whether or no 'twould be practicable to set up a new Society of St. Cyr, here
in England, or what Discipline could possibly be observed amongst 'em, or if
they did voluntarily enter into a mutual compact, how many Moons 'twould be,
before their Minds would change, and they would be all dispatched again, and
ranging the Commons of Nature as wildly as ever; not to trouble you, I say,
with any thing of this nature, there is one or two Reasons which I shall
ingenuously acknowledge prevails most with me, and determines me to persuade
you against such a course of life; one is for your own sake and the other for
ours: As for your selves, you know the Customs of your Country will not allow you
such comfortable Confessors in those melancholy places, as you might have in
foreign Countries. As for our Sex, I am only concerned, as in the case
beforementioned, lest your abused Patience should be turned into Madness, and
we should be all in danger, if like some new Goths and Vandals, you made an
Irruption into our Territories; but least our own Sex too, when you kept your
selves thus charily, should be tempted to think there was something precious in
you, and merely from the natural desire after what is forbidden, should relapse
from our Original Reason, and again learn to esteem and value that Trifle Woman.

JOHN PRESTON.

Answer to LETTER XXVIII. In Defense of Nunneries.
By Madam Lake.
I Wonder what Fit of Ingenuity has lately possessed our angry Antagonist, that
he so fairly confesses in this Letter, that the very Reason of his being
against our enclosing our selves in Nunneries, is, least for that very Cause he
should be more passionately enamored of us.

It is not only Women then, I perceive, who are eagerly desirous of what is
forbidden them, and that for no other Reason.

But yet we would be so civil to this Gentleman, although our declared Enemy,
that we are willing to own his Ingenuity has had a resembling Effect upon us;
we are not wholly proof against so much Goodnature; and we must acknowledge,
if any thing could make us out of Love with Nunneries, it would be the very
same Reason that he brings against 'em: For fear they should make him too
violently in Love with us.

For what Pity would it be, that a hopeful Gentleman, in the Flower of his
Manhood, the Ripeness of his Experience, and the sedatest Years of his Life,
should be seized with all those inexcusable Tricks of Youth that he talks of,
and fall a scaling the Hesperian Gardens, to rob them of their golden Fruit,
while the old Dragonist lay snoring under the Tree, and dreamt nothing of it!
But if Mother Abbess should chance to 'wake, Mr. Preston, what a miserable
plight would you be in! I know you do not mightily affect old Women; but sure
an old Abbess would fright ye into a Swoon, beyond the help of tweaking to
revive ye.

Better therefore let us alone, as we promise we will you, and never ravish you
into our Nunneries, if you do not ravish us out of 'em. And whatever the Abuses
of those Places might have formerly been, I must needs say, I think the Use
would be excellent, and we are extremely obliged to the Proposer of any such
Expedient. For what could be more desirable than such a Voluntary, and, if we
pleased, only temporary withdrawing from the Public? Which is what all great
and good Men have desired, to end their Days in Peace and Silence, or at least
to breathe a little, and get free from the huge Crowd of Fools and Knaves that
pester the World.

Here we should have the Happiness of ingenious and religious Conversation: We
would keep the Doors so fast, that none of your scandalous Sex, nor Scandal it
self, would enter: We would employ our selves in nothing but innocent and
diverting Studies, and the Exercise of Devotion: Improve our Minds, Exercise,
and thereby strengthen our Faculties, and try if we could not Think and Reason
as well as you, although you pretend to monopolize those common Gifts of Nature.

You will scarce deny but there have been excellent devout Men who have
formerly lived retired Lives, and forsaken the World. I have my self the
Picture of St. Jerome by me, (as they say, from whom I bought it,) painted upon
Glass, with a Death's Head on one side, an Hourglass o'tother, a large Book, I
suppose it may be a Bible, open before him, in the midst of a dark Cave, which,
I confess, I can never look upon, but it strikes me with a sort of a Religious
Horror. Such as him you cannot condemn, who in Times of Persecution fled for
that Safety to the wild Beasts and Deserts, which they could not find amongst
Men, and the more unhospitable Cities and Villages. This was not in it self
evil; nor can it be therefore Criminal for any of our Sex, although the
Circumstances should not be exactly the same, to live much in the same manner:
But I propose not an Heremetical, but only a recluse way of living; such as
that of Scholars should be in the Universities, with Fellowships, and suitable
Encouragements for Ingenuity and Learning. Or, if you dare not trust us with
such Advantages, least we should soon exceed our Masters, let us at least, if
our Nation has not the Ingenuity of the French, who admit the Ladies to contend
for the Prize of Wit and Eloquence, who often carry 'em away from the whole
Academy, let us, I say, enjoy however our dear Privacy, our Quiet, our charming
Solitude, our Peace and Content, and Indisturbance, either from you, or any
thing equally impertinent. All the Follies of Dress and Complements, and
Visits, and the useless Chat, with which you so frequently accuse us, would
there be struck off: We should find other and better Employment than hearing or
spreading those venomous Scandals with which your Sex first generally
bespatters ours, and after you have done it, make it your Business, I confess,
through our own Follies, to lay upon us the odious Drudgery of dispersing 'em.

There might we enjoy Friendship fit for Desire, above Scandal, and beyond the
reach of Envy. We might every Day converse with all the mighty Dead, read and
digest the excellent Historians, and admirable Moralists of former Ages, take
all the substance and sense, and not envy you the husk of Languages: And at
other times, the great Men of our own Nation; the Philosophers, the Divines,
and some few Poets. And thus, either return again to the World, after we had
been thus for a settled time retired from it, to try if we could make it
better, or as our Circumstances required: Or else wear out a long and peaceful
Age in some blessed Retirement with more Wisdom and less Contempt than
generally falls to our share in those Circumstances when we live abroad in the
World, till at length the Lamp of Life goes out without any offense or
struggle, and we sink into the Shades of Immortality without a Groan or a
Murmur, and leave the World with a Smile, to think how happily we have 'scap'd
it.

Joice Lake.

LETTER XXIX. Against the Unquietness, Impertinence, and Garrulity of Women.
By Sir Charles --
THat any who talks so little to the purpose should yet talk so fast, and so
loud, would seem very unreasonable, had you not this to plead for your selves,
that it is very natural that want of Sense should be supplied with some other
qualification: and you have both sound and volubility to compensate for it,
either of which oftentimes go farther than the strongest Reason.

But would you then only tattle for the sake of tatling, for your own
recreation, or the exercise of your Talent, or to clear the Air in Plague-time,
or when the Nation was troubled with thick Vapors, or other unseasonable
weather, you might be at least pardonable, nay, in somes case useful, and it
may be, 'twould be worth the while to get your Clacks Consecrated like the
Popish Bells, to preserve us from Thunder and Lightning.

But when the fair Xantippe most undutifully turns her whole Forces against her
Lord and Husband, when she uses that dreadful Weapon which was given her to
fright away Enemies from his House, most ungratefully and preposterously to
fright away the right owner, we must needs say this is a little of the most,
and she ought either to be totally Disarmed, or, if a Woman without a Tongue
would be thought Monstrous and Ominous, that at least her mouth should be
something contracted, and if not sown up like a Ferret's, yet haspt a little at
both ends, that it might be kept in some compass and tolerable order.

Were your Music so very sweet, there might be more pretense for your love to
hear your selves Sing, Enchanting I confess it is, and its Harmony was never
better described than by your fast Friend beforementioned, who thus very
remarkably of your most Ravishing Marriage Music,

Sweet, as a Screech-Owl's Serenade,
Or those Enchanting Murmurs made
By the Husband-Mandrake and his Wife,
Both buried (like themselves) alive.
Here he gives an Account of the sweetness of your Cadence, and the harmony of
your Numbers, as a little before he lets us know how soft it is, and how like
the Music of the Spheres, too delicate for the ears of Mortals.

That Conjugal Petarr, that tears
Down all Portcullices of Ears,
And makes the Volley of one Tongue
For all their Leathern Shields too strong.
I must confess I cannot tell whether the greatest Amazon can with exact
propriety of Speech be said to fire a whole Volley out of one Piece though
never so often repeated, unless they commend the double barrelled Invention,
and let off a whole File by one Touchhole. This however must be granted, that
Echo will repeat the sound almost incredibly, and the Female Head being
generally not too full, there is the advantage of the hollow place, for the
Reverberation, which may return the Sound oftener than that of Tibbalds or
Woodstock, and like the famous Whispering Wall, render that or a Speaking
Trumpet, as loud as Thunder, which was in it self but a gentle whisper, hardly
audible from one Ear to the other.

Yet if your Discourse were but worth the hearing, we might bear a little
better with the vehemence of the Expression, but such perfect Froth, such
unsufferable Impertinence who can endure, unless another Woman. For among your
selves there is seldom any Nonsense lost, you talk to each others Capacities,
and all is well enough -- E^ther what an extraordinary pretty Gown you have,
Madam pray, who made it? Or how does little Master and Miss. do this Evening?
well, they are the prettiest Creatures, -- and then a long Narration of their
Childish Follies, which their Age renders excusable, if not diverting at first
hand, though nothing more nauseous than when repeated by a Mother's fondness a
hundred times over.

And well if they escape with bare Folly, which can only be for want of
substantial Scandal to work upon. This Railing at their Neighbors is a more
necessary and gentile part of the Entertainment, than Tea, or Chocolate. It Is
true, Dullness may in a great measure force 'em on such a Practice; they Rail at
others, as many Swear, merely for want of Discourse, and to stop Gaps in
Conversation: and this would, but even this cannot excuse 'em, since this
Dullness is so visibly affected: They never desire to be better employed; they
are wonderfully taken with this mischievous apish sort of pleasure, they will not
be abridg'd of it for the sake of their dearest Friends, or their own Mothers.
Yet still, you would be more tolerable, would you keep your Conversation to your
selves, and not break out upon us, and even infect us with your Follies.

Whom are we to thank that all ingenious and profitable discourse is almost
utterly banished out of the World, but only the Women, who taking the advantage
of the fondness of the English Customs, will be every where intruding amongst
us; and having the odds both in swiftness and loudness, will either talk all
themselves, or soon drown any other who offers to talk Sense, because it is to
them an unknown Language. And when once they begin, who should stop 'em, any
more than a Bowl rolling down a Hill, which is only set forwards by the Rubs it
meets with, which it easily leaps over, and descends with greater Fury.

I value my Sense of Hearing too much to venture in amongst a Hive of 'em, when
they are just Swarming at a Gossiping. I have often wondered how it is possible
for their Mind to keep pace with their Tongue, believing they spoke Rationally
like other People, till at last the thing was easy, since it is plain their
Speech is only a sort of a Mechanical Motion, and they cannot afford to think
with it. Travelers describe the Chattering of a whole Neighborhood of Monkeys
in the Woods in the East Indies, as one of the most Importunate and Ungrateful
sound imaginable, and therefore the most like that of the Tatling Sex, who
would fain be accounted Humane.

The Fable of Midas had a good Moral in it. The Woman could no more forbear
Tatling of her Husband's long Ears, than all the rest of her Sex in the same
condition; nay I believe there is no doubt, if he had Horns as long as his Ears,
but she would have published one as freely as the other.

Answer to LETTER XXIX. Concerning the Garrulity, Impertinence, and-Unquietness
of Women.
By Madam Haithorn.
DID Women ever plead Causes, or pull Quoifs in Westminster Hall? Or, have
there not been Times, far enough within our Memory, when Billingsgate it self
might have learnt from the Bench, and a Judge would have made nothing at fair
Scolding to have run down an Oyster-Wife.

Do we ever write Books against one another, and scold in Mode, and Figure, and
Greek, and Latin? Did you ever hear of a Council of Women, that hanged, and
damned, and burnt one another, for what (...) one of us understood, after so
many hundred Years jangling? Is it we that make Wars, and usurp upon the
Territories of our Neighbors, and cause Confederacies and Taxes, and so many
Hundred Thousand Lives to set all right again?

If you dare not say we are guilty of one of all these Accusations, it will be
easy to answer who is; and from thence it will as easily appear, who are the
great Disturbers of the World.

If you did not tell your Tale to your selves, how could you expect to gain
Belief when your Malice is so ill contrived, and so unlikely? That ever a
Creature made for Love, her Mind, and her Body, and even her Voice, so much
more softly turned than that of rough and brutish Man, should yet be accused
of those very Crimes, whereof our Accusers are so notoriously guilty! You
accuse us, that a great part of our Conversation is made up of Scandal against
our Neighbors: Sometimes indeed we are no better employed than in talking of
you; And then how should we mention you, without hearing something ill or
scandalous concerning you, since such sort of Actions you boast of, and make
'em the great Employment of your Lives? And if the Subject be one of our own
Sex, Of what can we discourse more beneficially than our own Faults, that we
may learn to amend 'em?

But you will say, we don't so much trouble our selves about those, as the
Miscarriages of others. But in them we see our selves. Every Woman is her
Neighbor's Glass; and if any of us are Criminal, Fr^edom of Speech, in
Censuring our Crimes among our selves, one would think should be the likeliest
way to amend them. Besides, you forget that this Method of Conversation, were
it so general as you would have it believed, has this one good Effect, That it
often puts the innocent in a way to clear themselves; which they could never
do, should we mutter about Scandal as you do, in Corners, and by Inuendo's,
stab the fairest Reputation with a smile and a side-blow, in such a manner as
it is impossible to be armed against you.

And after all, let us manage our Discourses how we will, you cannot deny but
the subject of 'em is for the most part more Noble than yours, When the
Clothes removed, and we retire to our Tea-Table, and leave our Masters at
their Claret, pray is not our Loss extremely great, in being deprived of their
beneficial Converse? Dogs and Foxes, and Hares, and Horses are the Top of your
Entertainment, or else a little grumbling at Taxes, and banning the confounded
Bankers; but that must be after the third Bottle, when the Spirit of Politics
begins to come upon ye. But then, what a Harmony is there, and how many Rooms
off may it be heard? Never blame us for Gossiping once a Year, when you do it
every day. A dozen Women, talking with all their might, and stretching to the
utmost the weak Pipes that Nature has given 'em, would easily be drowned by one
small knot of Good-Fellows got together. Sometimes every one talks to every
one, then you single, and each takes his Antagonist at this terrible
Tongue-Combat, which, defend every poor Woman from falling into! Can any thing
be louder or more impertinent than you are, on these occasions, as if you were
disputing for Lives and Fortunes, and no less were upon the Wheel than some
Grand Affair of Christendom? And yet, this is you who blame us for noises, and
tattling, and Impertinence, when we can defy you, as wise as you are, in
twenty Conversations with any of your Cronies, to bring away so much as one
single Sentence worth remembering.

You say, a Woman is never weary of talking, and you guess without doubt from
your own inexhaustible Faculty in Billingsgate Eloquence; but I Am sure we are
often enough weary of hearing you, both your Anger and your Love being equally
troublesome: Your best is even bad enough, and tedious enough, and how many
Thrumms of Plays, what an abominable deal of ill-contriv'd Fustian must we
patiently hear during the Quarantain of your Courtship, though we believe just
as much of it as you your selves.

But when you once get us fast, you soon treat us with clear another sort of
Eloquence, a Snarling Rhetoric at best, if not downright opening and worrying.

And yet in the mean time where is your Conscience, and the boasted Civility of
your Laws toward us? What a piece of unexperimented Barbarity is it, and how
much does it relish of your first naked Pictish Ancestors? If a hasty word
happens to escape a poor Woman, away presently to hurry her to the
Ducking-stool; your Mobbish selves being the Judges and Executioners, mount her
in the Air, and plunge her in the Water in the most rigorous Seasons of the
Year, to the imminent hazard of her Life: Though we must needs say you have no
more Law for this inhumane Practice, than for your Water-Tryal of poor Old
Women for Witches, when you have no choice but to hang or drown. Thus we yield
you the day both in Noise and Nonsense, in talking loud, and fast, and a great
deal, and a little to the purpose; and therefore pray let us no more hear you
exclaim at your usual rate, as if it were impossible for the greatest
Tongue-Hector of you all to silence a Woman.

Frances Haithorn.

LETTER XXX. Of Women's Longing.
By Mr. Hollis.
WHatever your Sex does at all, you overdo it. Your Love, your Friendship, your
Anger, your Hatred, your Devotion, your Irreligion; whatever it is, you are
still in the Extremes, and equally Extravagant: Yet in all this you have some
Excuse, something or other that leads you into it, either the tempers of your
Bodies, or the weakness of your Minds; but what is it, in the name of Wonder,
that throws you into this Gigantick Whimsie, more unaccountable than any of the
rest? Longing, if it be any thing, is perfect Humor; you do it because you
will do it, for there would be some Excuse for it if you could not avoid it. Not
that I believe you can choose whether you will Long or no when you have once
wound up your Imaginations to the height, and let your Fancies run away with
you so far that they have once got the weak Curb of your little Reason between
their Teeth; for then, if you had never so much mind to it, you might pull your
Heart out without stopping 'em.

But one would think if you would but suffer your selves never so little to
reflect on the Folly and Madness of this Affection, you would take care to stop
it while it was in your power. You are Proud enough, and Vain enough in other
matters, and don't very well like to be made a Public Ridicule: Why will you
be so here, when it is so easy to avoid it?

Can you ever persuade any Rational Creature that you cannot help Longing for a
New Gown, a Set of Pendants, a fine Locket or Jewel, or a Coach and Six? Well,
let us grant these are such things as it is Natural for the mouths of all your
Sex to water after 'em; nay, were it only delicate Fruit, a fine Dish of Fish,
or a Haunch of Venison. But what can you say to a Tarr-Loaf, or the wind of a
pair of Bellows, or the delicious Gravy dripping from a pair of sweaty
Stockings, or worse than all this, two or three lusty plucks at that Part of a
brawny Porter, from whence Taliacotius transplanted his Noses? I don't so much
as mention your Longing to give your Husbands a good thundering Box of the Ear,
or it may be two or three one after another, because I suppose you need not
pretend a great Belly for such a Liberty.

Could there be any Consequence more frightful to you than your being ridicul^d
and laughed at for this wretched Folly, I would urge the Expense that it is to
your Family, and the many Inconveniences it carries along with it: But this
would be to suppose you capable of Reason, and that you had some concern for
the Ease or Fortunes of your Husbands. Let Us try therefore if Sense can move
you: If your own Children, a part of your selves, can prevail any thing with
you. What hurt have they ever done you, that you should render 'em both
ridiculous and deformed, before they come into the World; that you bestow so
many Cherries, and Cow-heels, and Hare-lips upon 'em before they see the Light?
Or d 'ye do this out of mere Revenge, because they spoil your shapes, and make
you so sickly and qualmish, that you can neither endure your selves, nor any
body else endure ye.

You're a common Nuisance wherever you come when in this condition. All the
Company must eat in as much fear of ye as the Scotchman did of the Wolf, that
invited himself to Dinner with him when he was Traveling through the Forest;
or as a Tyrant, lest he should be poisoned with every bit he eats.

The Markets, the Stalls, the Poulterers, the Shambles cannot escape ye, and
woe to him that denies a poor Creature in that Condition, though nothing but an
Old Cushion is often in danger, and no need of a Midwife, when an Vpholsterer
will serve the turn.

You are ready enough all of you to exclaim at one or two miserable wretches,
who make a hard shift to live by cheating those who are good-natured enough to
believe 'em, in that manner: They have a better Excuse than the most of their
Sex, they make a noise out of Necessity, but you out of Wantonness, and when
you have no manner of need on it.

And then you are as extravagant in the Quantity as you are in the Quality.
Wood and Marriot were but Green Sickness Girls to ye; you have an Art beyond
Transubstantiation, and can swallow a greater bulk than your selves; as the
Serpents in Africa, a whole Calf, while their Bodies give way to make room
for it.

And if the Whim runs of the other side, and you are rather for Liquids, you will
make no more to fuddle your Husbands with Drinking with you, than you would if
they were to eat with you to burst 'em: By which you gain a double Advantage,
and satisfy the Canine Appetite of your Mind as well as Body; for when you
have once' turned your Masters into Brutes, who so fit as you to ride 'em?

It may be you will pretend there is a necessity of Nature in these Infirmities,
and that we our selves occasion it: This would be something if you never longed
till you were married; but alas, you began it a great while before; you were in
a Longing Condition from your Infancy, nay, from your very Creation. You begin
it in your Hanging-Sleeves, there is a sort of oddness in your Palate, that you
always had, and which will never be reformed. You begin with Chalk, and Wall,
and Oatmeal; you eat your Dirt-Pies as soon as ever you have made 'em. You show
your Judgment in your Choice, Trash is your Delight, and will be so. In this
only you are of a Thread, and you as surely dote on Trifles from the beginning,
as you will afterward flight a Man of Sense, and throw your selves away on a
Blockhead.

If you had but so much as a Chance to be in the right, and were but upon even
Ground, you might as well sometimes light on a Prize as otherwise. But where
there is but any possibility of erring, you have a Million to One against you.
You are false within, you have a Jaundice in your Minds, that discolours every
thing you do but think on. Neither can you cast the blame on your Sex only, for
no She-Creature ever longs but a Woman, especially for what is forbidden; and as
an infallible Proof on it, let but any when you are walking in a Garden forbid
you any one Tree, though the veriest Crabs in Nature, and your Grandmother will
certainly work in you, and you will fall upon that without mercy, though you had a
Paradise round about you.

Gabriel Hollis.

Answer to LETTER XXX. In Defense of Women's Longing.
By Madam Radford.
I Cannot tell whether you will be so Charitable to give me Credit if I should
assure you I am not yet in a Longing Condition, and probably never may be, and
therefore may not perhaps sufficiently understand the Subject to give you a
complete Answer. But when you fall thus foully on our Sex only for being Women,
when you are so disingenuous, and so unnatural to accuse 'em for what is no more
in their own power than those other Miseries of Life, which but for you they
could never know; it is then a Common Cause, and we are all engaged in it, and
must try according to the best of our knowledge to defend one another.

And in the first place then, how much soever you pretend to hedge your Betts,
it is a clear Case that if this be a mischief, it is to your selves that its
Original is owing: It Is the perverseness of your own Sex wherewith you have
infected ours; all other Longing is but trifling, some little Qualms which we
owe to our Fathers, and brought with us from them into the World. Most of the
Instances you bring, do evidently relate to your own handiwork. Much in the
same manner you deal with those of our Sex, who without something surer than
your own Oaths and Honors, have no more Wit or Virtue than to believe you;
first ruin 'em, and then insult over 'em. And when we have you as fast as the
Laws of Heaven and Earth together can hold ye, what strange Creatures do you
quickly make us? Our Beauty vanishes, almost as soon as you blow upon it; our
Complexion, our Shape, our Health is utterly ruined; we contract a Hundred
Diseases, which we owe either to your Vice, or at least to your Pleasure; we
undergo the most terrible Pains, and the greatest Hazards, and often more than
die for every Child is born you; and these are your Thanks, this your Kindness,
these the Generous Returns you make for all we endure for your Satisfaction.

Would any be in pain unless they could help it, or mortally tormented, and run
the imminent hazard of their Lives, if they knew how to avoid it? What Pleasure
is it to Long, any more than to be Hungry? We are forced for the sake of
Decency to put a constant Violence upon our Nature on these Occasions. Are your
Minds indeed as you boast, so much stronger than ours? Has your Reason so
absolute a Command over your Appetites? Let us then see you refuse a Glass of
Delicious Wine sparkling before ye, when you are just ready to die for Thirst:
We do this and more, and for you, and often repeat these and greater pieces of
Self-denial, and thus it is you Reward us.

If it is so painful, as you seem to acknowledge, to be despised and ridiculed,
why do you treat us in that manner your selves, when you have first exposed us
to all that know us? If we Long sometimes for such things as are nauseous and
frightful by the common Rule of Taste, this is a demonstration that from the
very beginning, it is not in our power to avoid it. Were it only for the best
Viands, and most Delicious Dainties, you would have some Pretense to think ours
was no more; but when you acknowledge the contrary, one would think you might
be contented with your own Answer.

You had pleaded enough for us already, but you still extend your Kindness
farther, and allege another Argument, which proves as strongly as the last,
that this troublesome Affection of many of our Sex, when in that Condition, is
perfectly involuntary: And that is, that it often injures our Children, which
are parts of our own Bodies: Well, and are we so unnatural to do this out of
Delight and Choice? Would any Mother choose to have a Child deformed and
monstrous? But there is more than this in the case, for both Child and Mother
not rarely lose their Lives on these Occasions.

It may be, you will say, they were desperate. Yes, it may be the ill Usage of
the Brute their Husband made the miserables desirous to leave the World, and
not leave any of their unhappy Race behind 'em. But you cannot say it is always
so, for we must be so just to Mankind, to acknowledge there are some few who
know better how to value us, who have a juster tenderness for us, and from whom
we meet with fairer Usage.

And I Am mistaken if such as these think much of every Glass of Wine that goes
besides their own Insatiable Weasand; or are so extremely Thrifty, as not to
allow their the other self, what a Friend, nay, a Servant has every day at his
Command.

But if you are of that Mind, good Mr. H. never spoil two Families; let the
Widow you wot of alone, and disturb her no further: Be contented that you have
turned one Wife over, and got rid of her by one means or another: But if you
think to make your Court to a Second in this manner, certainly unless she Longs
already, and that for some such odd things you were lately discoursing of,
she will never take you to save her from Miscarrying; for all Women don't dote on
such as you speak of, though sometimes the Proverb helps 'em.

If we have this Discase from our Cradles, which on my word if it be true, is a
rare Discovery in Nature, why then are you so unjust as to bear so hard upon us
for what, for that further Reason, we cannot alter? Why don't you chide your
selves, or your Friends for bringing the Gout, or Stone, or other Hereditary
Distempers with 'em into the World? Which if it be true, never blame 'em as if
their own Extravagancy had pulled 'em on them.

But no Creature Longs but Woman: The more unhappy she then, and the more pity
does she deserve. But are you in earnest, Mr. H? Did you never hear of Men that
longed too, and that as passionately and violently as any of those whom they
despise and reproach for the same Reason: Nay, even for those very Persons, at
least their Fortunes, and had Infallibly miscarried, had hanged or stabbed
themselves (or else they are lustily Perjured) if they had not obtained 'em.

But more than this, Men have longed for some of those silly things for which
they make such loud outcries on the poor Women, for Fruit, for a Dish of Meat,
and twenty other things, after which their depraved Appetites have rambled to
that degree, that they have swoon'd away when disappointed. And when they will
assign us a Reason of such an odd Effect, as well as of those ridiculous
Antipathies which disturb many Men all their Lives, then we Promise to give 'em
another, and a better, why Teeming Women are so often afflicted with Longing,
contrary to their own desires.

Prudence Radford.

LETTER XXXI. Of the Remedies of Love.
By Sir Thomas --
AFter the innumerable Mischiefs whereof your vexations Sex are the Causes and
Authors, some of which I have endeavored to set in a just light, that the
World may beware both of them and you, I shall end as I began with Love, the
most dangerous and fatal of 'em all, and take my leave of that and you
together. And that I may not only discover this Epidemical Distemper, but like
a good Physician, apply some Remedies to those who are visited with it, I
intend to conclude my present Address to your most egregious Vanities, with a
few choice Receipts for the Cure of this Fatal Passion, which if taken time
enough, is not perhaps so impossible as you would have us imagine.

And in order to this desirable Alteration on all such as are not yet quite
past hope, I must first advise 'em to remove the Cause, which I could never
find was any other than an Idle and wretchless disposition. Laziness is as near
akin to Love, as a Fever is to an Ague; and I verily believe that hard Working
would be as good a Cure for one as it is for the other. Chambers, and Couches, and
Alcoves, and Beds of Moss or Roses, are the dear delight of that Jack a-napes
of a God, that Celestial Bastard, the Son of Venus and -- she scarce her self
knew whom. There he lolls and stretches himself, and swaggers and domineers,
and is wonderful Valiant on his own Dunghill. Where you would almost mistake him
for Mars himself, his Mothers Gallant, he looks so big and terrible on all
those who are tame enough, and Fools enough to be his Vassals; who lie
groaning, and cry, it is impossible to break their Chain, or rise from under so
many Pelions and Ossa's of Flowers and Billet-deuxs which Oppress and Fetter
'em, because they have not the Resolution to make one brave Effort to recover
their Freedom. It must be then a full Tide of Business, their Hands and Heads
full of some Honest, and Brave, and Useful Employment, which is one of the most
proper and probable means to effect a Cure on such as have a mind to be rid of
their Distemper, and who for the most part fell in Love at first for no better
Reason than because they had nothing else to do: As is evident from the
Character and Quality of those who make up the greatest number of Lovers, among
whom you rarely or never find Men of Age, or Business, or confirmed and ripened
Judgments, but loose Young Men, dissolved in Riot and Idleness, either not
capable of any more Noble and Manly Employments, or rendering themselves
actually unfit for it by affecting to remain unbent and useless to themselves
and all Mankind, mere Ciphers and Blanks in the Creation.

But I talk on this Subject like a Lover who is commending his Mistress, and
scarce know when I Have done. Let Us leave this therefore, which I look on as the
most Effectual Remedy of any other, and proceed to enquire what further helps
may be found against so dangerous a Distemper.

There was an honest old rough Fellow among the Grecians, who being asked what
Remedies should be used for one in Love? He bluntly assigned only these three
following: Either, says he, let 'em Fast it out, or let Time Cure it, or if
both these fail, there is no Cure but one, and that is a Halter.

The two first will be thought too gross for the nice Pallats of our Silken
Gallants, yet if they are wise, they will rather make use of 'em, than come to
the last, which however must be confessed that many of their Tribe have found
Infallible.

If they would stop short of this last, let 'em use others less violent, e're
the Disease be arrived to too great an height. Let 'em fly from the fair
Cockatrice -- shut their Eyes, their very Souls, their Memories, their
Imaginations. Turn her out, never so much as Dream of her, at least without
chiding themselves afterward. Never talk of her, nor let others do it in their
hearing, or fly such Discourse, and even all those who are themselves in Love,
and be as careful to weather 'em as you would one that was newly come out of a
Pesthouse, and scattered Infection, Plague, and certain Fate around 'em. Fly
your Country, as you would for any other Tyrant, or if it were infected with
continual Pestilence. For change of Air is sometimes as wholesome to the Mind
as it is to the Body. Don't think of her though you cannot help it; that is,
resolve you will not, though you do, and must at present, for in time at least
you will get some Ground, and if it be never so little at first, your Heart will
by degrees be all your own. If she intrude never so often, tell her, she has
nothing to do there, her Reign's at an end, and drive her out, as you would a
Fury. Think how like a Fool you look, and how many Monkey-tricks this Love
makes you play daily. Consider what you get if you obtain your desires, either
to be fairly cheated, and turned off to make room for some new Fool, or tired
with an odious Satiety, or at best, pay dear for Repentance. To all which, do
but add a real will to be cured, and a firm belief that you may be so, and
(believe one that has tried) your Recovery is more than half perfected.

Thomas --

Answer to LETTER XXXI. Of the ways to be Loved.
By Madam Godfrey.
HOW extremely you are afraid of being too much pleased, and how much concerned
for fear your Sex should be over-happy! You take a great deal of care to unman
all Humane kind, and to reduce 'em to a Stoical sort of Insensibility, to cut
off a part of their Souls, though it is so far from being Gangreen'd, or useless,
that it is the most vigorous and necessary part of 'em, if you consider 'em as
Members of the Universe, and sensible and conversible Creatures: I mean, the
Passions, which are the Feet, or rather the Wings of the Soul, and nothing
that is Great and Noble can be achieved without 'em; for I can hardly believe,
when you are so earnest to force Love it self into Exile, that you would leave any
of its Kindred behind it. Delight, and Joy, and even Hope are its near Allies,
there is a strict Confederacy between them, you can never hope to sever 'em, and
they will certainly run the same Fortune. You would make your self incapable of
Sense as well as Happiness, render all you hear, and see, and taste, insipid and
indifferent; reduce your selves to the condition of a Stone or a Log, and
what is that better than being nothing? I expect in your next Essay that you
should publish some Choice Remedies against the Fatigue of Breathing, and give
us some of the most speedy and Infallible ways to Cure the great Disease of
Life: Though I should think 'twou'd be a more Friendly Employment to let us know
how we might Improve Life, sweeten it, and make the best on it, and doubly enjoy
all its Innocent Satisfactions: And I Am mistaken if a Virtuous and Honorable
Love will not produce all these Happy Effects, and a great many others which I
have not named, For whether or no 'twill make us more beautiful, as Lady Single
is at last convinced by such another Railmore as your self; this is certain,
that 'twill make any Person more careful to appear so; it has changed the most
Remarkable Slovens into Complete Gentlemen, it refines the Manners, and softens
and gilds the Conversation.

But this having been already better managed by other Hands, I shall rather
choose to close the Campaign with an Attempt to force your Line, to level all
the Entrenchments you have made against this Powerful God, nay, to take you
Prisoner, and show you how you may be Happy whether you will or no, which you
can never be completely, unless you Love.

And the first great Secret in the Art of Love, is Love it self, how great a
Paradox soever that may appear: My meaning is, that any one who desires to be
loved, must himself Love with all his might, and to the utmost of his Power;
for there is no such Charm for Love, as Love, resolved, vigorous, constant,
which is almost irresistible. For it is in Love much as it is in other Passions,
if you would transcribe 'em into another's Breast, write 'em first legibly on
your own.

And when you have once begun the Attack, be sure you push it home, regarding
no consequences, but that your Intentions be Honorable and Virtuous, without
which, Love it self is but a Dream of Happiness. Take care your Addresses be
Lawful, and then the warmer the better; for none of our Sex but hate a
lukewarm Zealous Love, which is of it self so warm and active a Passion, that
where the Pretender is cold and heavy, how should he make us believe he is in
Love at all, any more than that there is any Fire where we see nothing but
Ashes, not the least appearance of Heat or Motion.

You cannot think I mean the Old Romantic way of downright dangling for a
Mistress, or that the poor enamored Knight should lug out cold Iron, and make
a Window in his Breast, that the obdurate Lady might see what a huge Hole he
has in his Heart: No, this is now as justly ridiculous as powdering a Mistress
all over with Ruby and Diamond: Or the other Extreme, the Lubber-Gallant's
lolling upon a Couch, Courting none but his sweet self; or if he can afford a
word or two, only makes Love in stylo recitativo, and humms out a few ends of
Verse, or Scraps of Songs, as if he thought our Hearts were to be won the same
way they took of old, by Muttering and Incantation: But it is the middle way
between both of these that can only expect to be prosperous, and the same
application of Mind is here required that is necessary in any other Affair of
equal weight and moment, and whereon depends the Happiness of a Man's whole
Life.

Nor must this be only for a spurt and away, we should be Cowards indeed,
should we yield at the first Summons, and you would think us very ill provided,
could we not beat ye off the first Storm. You will not let us be ingenuous if
we had a mind to it: You hate a cheap Conquest, and part with it as easily as
you gained it. Let Us Humor you then for once, and Please you at your own
costs, while at the same time we preserve our Sexes Decency and Modesty. The
Girdle of Venus (as one who knew it very well assures us) was made up of
Denials as well as Grants.

But yet at the same time we'd have ye importunate, you must take care to find
the way not to be troublesome. You must not turn your Courtship into a
Persecution. You must give us some space to breath in, and to consider of
Articles and Terms of Surrender, which you may safely allow, so the Truce be
not overlong; which will retard your Approaches, and make us think you mean to
Raise the Siege, and that you either despair of Conquest, or do not think us
worth your Labor.

And more than all this, we expect you should treat us very fairly, and humor
us at least before we yield, and we think we have reason, for we know 'twill be
your time afterward. You may be Humble for a little while, and lay by your
Majesty, rebate your Rays, and sheath your Thunder, as Jove himself did on
those Occasions. Such a short Disguise one would think should be a Diversion to
ye, since there is no fear you should get a Habit on it; but Nature will break
out some time or other, and we must be that all our Lives to please you, which
you with so much violence to your selves appear to be, in order to oblige us
for a few hours only.

Though if by endeavoring to gain your Mistress you should also regain your
selves; if by striving so earnestly to please us, you come at last to be really
like us; if by having continually before you the Charming Idea's of Meekness,
Complaisance, Gentleness, Humility, Compassion, and Goodness, you should become
e're you were aware, infected with those Virtues, and wonder at the change
without comprehending it; you would yet have no Reason surely to complain of the
Alteration.

In short, if you desire the favor of a Woman of Sense, you cannot expect it
without some difficulty, and for such Gold you can never pay too dear; You must
be brave, courageous, discreet, constant, and liberal, and in a word, a wise
and virtuous Man; and then, if she has not Engagements to the contrary, what
should hinder you from succeeding?

Rachel Godfrey.

LETTER XXXII. That Women are the oddest things in Nasture, in a particular
Letter to Madam --
By Mr. --
THIS is now the second time I have told you in Print, that you Women are the
oddest things in Nature; if any one of Sincerity tells you of their Esteem, you
presently despise him, but your manner of doing it is wonderfully particular,
your Language uncommon, and your Action so full of unmannerly Pride, that
should my Footman have the Esteem I had for you, I should conclude him Fool,
and discharge him of my Service. I had the Opinion you were Mistress of some
Understanding, and more Goodness, and that Opinion laid me open to an
Impression troublesome enough, but the brutish returns made me, has rased that
Character, and stained every drop of Blood I have, with the much truer one of
haughty, insolently proud and vain. Proud and Vain were given you in your
earlier Age, and then you were excuseable; but in declining Years, when scarce
any thing but Goodness is left to recommend you, to double the Humor, is
intolerable. You think possibly the Title of Sir -- and my Lady's Daughter, a
Coach, and the Reputation of a Thousand Pounds a Year, (though something
over-valued) with the Acquaintance of a Neighboring Earl or two, entitle you
to your Fantastic Air, your haughty Toss and Step, and to despise implicitly
all without the Title of my Lord, Sir -- or your Ladyship. I Am sure this
Opinion suits your Mien, and I mistake if not your Understanding, and in
Complaisance take this Wish at parting -- May your Pride have the lofty Title,
and the empty thing familiarly tacked to it, and may that Idolized Title be
your only Satisfaction, and be assured when next you make my Prospect a
Contemning Smile, remember me, that towering Vanity in her proudest dress must
down, though set in Beauty; that the Beggar will level with us all, and have six
Foot of Ground as good as the proudest she; nay, perhaps better; for Osborn
says, which you had known had you consulted Books half so much as your
Looking-Glass, He that lies under the Hearse of Heaven is convertible into
Sweet-Herbs and Flowers that may rest in their Bosoms, who would shriek at the
ugly Buggs may crawl in the Arched and Costly Tombs of Kings -- And now adieu,
Incomparably Proud and Violently affected -- fondled into Folly by doting
Parents, who having none but you to represent 'em, have hugged their Image
'till they have defaced it.

Answer to LETTER XXXII. (Which was dropped at a certain Coffee-House.)
Written by a Club of -- and directed to the Lady concerned.
IT IS a swinger we must confess; though after all, the Style speaks the Writer a
Person of Sense, and a Gentleman; nay, as strange as that seems, a Lover too,
for that is a vain, capricious, testy, angry thing, that knows not what he
writes, nor does, nor says -- We confess, Madam, he has wounded you in the most
sensible Part: If he had only called you Vain, or Haughty, they had been but
such Characters as may indifferently serve for almost all Persons. We say, if
this had been all, 't had been no great matter; but to tell you you were Old
too, if you would please ingenuously to confess, this makes it sting deeper than
all the rest; and did you not need all the Goodness your Lover says you are
Mistress of, to forgive it: However, if your Ladyship thinks fit to take our
foolish Opinion in this matter, We think you may honorably enough forgive him,
for this Reason, because you are not to believe one word that a Lover says or
writes either for or against you, since that Arch Wag Cupid as soon as e're he
has caught 'em, puts his own Muffler about their Eyes, and make 'em play at
Blind-man's-Buff, running about like Madfolks, feeling and stumbling, and
breaking their own Noses and Shins, and other Folks, and woe to them that stand
in their way, or come within their Clutches. But now to be graver: We think,
Madam, your Goodness will, and your Honor may forgive him, because he gives
you the satisfaction of asking your Pardon, on which Account you may still
entertain his Honorable Love, it being very possible for him to Write such a
Letter as he is a Passionate Lover, nay, very Natural, Love and Anger being
both great Passions, and very near akin, though so far different, as the same
Muscles of the Face, are made use of for laughing and crying. Yet in our
Opinion, you ought to seem to be as angry with him as you can, as long as you
can, (a few Moments) and to make him pass a Purgatory before he gets to his
Elysium. Nor need you do more, we think, effectually to mortify him, than now
and then to show him his Letter, and when he sues for any Favor -- a Touch or
Kiss -- of your Hand -- remember him you are -- Old -- Keep him thus at
Eyes-end and Lips end but for a Week or a Fortnight, and we'll Undertake for
him he becomes as true a Humble Spaniel-Lover as any in Christendom.

MADAM, Your Ladyship's Humble Servants, etc.

LETTER XXXIII. Against the Sexes Inconstancy.
By Mr. Harcourt.
SO various you are, that it cannot satisfy you to change Servants, Humors,
Lovers, Fashions, Complexions, Eyes, Teeth, and Hair; nay, your Religion (if
one knew what 'twas) but you must sometimes take a Fegary to change even Sexes
too, and really transform your selves into ours, on purpose to disgrace it. For
we have several Modern Instances, which satisfy us, the Story of Tiresias was
more than Fable. See but to what a Condition your Levity exposes both your
selves and us: We can never be sure of ye, you are the Moral of Proteus, and
how sadly would it scare any poor Husband (as who knows whose Case it may be
next?) to go to Bed with a smooth, soft Wife, and when he turns about the next
Morning, should find her perfectly altered, a huge Hee-Face and brawny
Shoulders, ten times worse than the Bear-fac'd Lady?

What is there to which you are ever true and constant, so much as Fortune her
self, to your own Inconstancy; for if you ever happen to remain five live long
Minutes in the same Mind, it is purely out of Crossness, and for the sake of
dear Variety. You will, you will not, you dote, you scorn, you hate, you love
by turns, and all in a quarter of an hour. Those who compare you to the Moon,
are hardly so near the Truth as she is to the Earth, for she changes but once a
Month, and we know when to expect it; but your Circle is much shorter, and all
the Flamsteds in the World could never give us your exact Theory. One great
Benefit however this is to Mankind, that you can scarce be resolved, even in
Mischief, at least Variety pleases there too, and you are in search of another,
before you have finished the former. It Is said, our Nation is richer in Humor
than any it Europe, and though the Stage has large Supplies from it, yet it can
never be exhausted. If it be so, Ben. Johnson stands fairest for Treasurer,
though he need not have gone farther than any one of his Merry Wives of Windsor
to have employed him all his Life: He needed but have shown one Face in one
Play to have had sufficient Variety. The Vulgar are apt to stare at strange
Customs and Habits, and should there happen to meet in the Exchange but one
Person of every several Dress in the World, 'twou'd be thought a very odd
medley. There Is this and more in Women, they are all Rainbow in their Minds,
whatever color their Faces; or rather it is a Scandal on that more beautiful
and stable Meteor to be compared with them, for that remains fixed as long as
the Sun and Clouds that make it: Nay, though the Rain is but successive, and new
drops are still a falling, that unites it self with 'em all, and is still
immovable; nor does it so much as shift its Colors, but the blue, and red,
and green, and yellow, and that lovely mixture of 'em all, which we can scarce
describe, remain in the same Order when it begins to faint and wither, as they
did when it first appeared or shined in its greatest Glory. But what is all this
to Women? Truly not much, for they are quite the contrary. They are all shift,
and alteration; have the perpetual motion in their Minds as well as Heads, and
think it as ridiculous to stay long in the same Opinion as in the same Gown or
Toppings, or to have the same Lover.

And there indeed is the Cream of your Constancy, for you are as Remarkable for
your stability in Love, as you are in Virtue. Forsaken Lovers, we are to
believe, are only Tales invented by the malicious, the unfortunate, and the
undeserving. So that we durst not think so unworthily of your Sex, as that
you would suffer a Person of Merit to languish, or that any of you could prove
false to him, or forsake him, had we not almost as many Instances of it as we
have of such Lovers, who after all perhaps ought to made Examples, because by
their own they infect others with the same Folly. She that has not a new Amor
to appear in once a Month, is as Melancholy as a poor Girl at a Country Wake,
that is taken out to Dance without a new Wastcoat. It Is well the World is not
now much in the Humor of dying for Love; if it were, what would you have to
Answer for? And how many Graves would you tread on of your own making? And how
many Lovers Ghosts would haunt you, and upbraid you with your Infidelity, and
their Ruin?

And yet after all, why should you not be constant? Is It because you have no
Notion of it, or think there is no Pleasure in it? Do but try it, and you will soon
understand it, and own how much you have been mistaken. If Constancy and
Fidelity are in themselves very Noble and Charming Virtues, why should they not
become a Woman? And how far would they outweigh the Satisfaction you receive
in the empty Vanity of seeing every day a new Adorer? Who is there that can
read the stories of Ancient Friendships, though some of 'em perhaps Fabulous,
without Motions of Admiration and Love?

Of inviolable Faith of Women to their Lovers, Ladies to their Husbands, and
the like, which you hardly believe all Romances; and why if they are worthy
Admiration, why not too of your Imitation, unless because Constancy is rendered
almost impossible to ye, by the Levity of your Tempers, and by a contrary Habit?
For when you do once get into the Humor, you have all of you Resolution enough
to make Ephesian Matrons.

I should Discourse too a little with you concerning your Constancy to your own
Sex in your most Sacred Professions of Friendship. But you have one Convenience
more than we, and that is, that you are all upon the Square, Cheat that Cheat
can, is your Motto, and there is no Deceit or Infidelity ever lost amongst you.

Thomas Harcourt.

Answer to LETTER XXXIII.
By Madam H --
I AM sensibly touched with Commiseration for this poor Gentleman, whom I
perceive has received a Wound from one of those Proteus's he speaks of, who
having thrown her Granado into his Heart, it has in the breaking much damnified
his Brain; sure nothing less could excuse this great perturbation that
obstructs his Discerning Faculty, else why might not he as well as others
acknowledge all things must obey this Fatal Law of Change? Not to mention more
remote Instances, I Will go no farther than your self, who have no doubt changed
from Infancy to Youth, and it is to be hoped have changed your Ignorance to a
little Understanding, and 't may be, a Hobbyhorse for a Mistress, your
Innocence for some experienced Evil, your Money for many changeable Trifles;
nay, to show you how impossible it is to avoid change, consider but your
Respiration, you will find every puff of Breath you send out changes Atoms with
what we receive: And now I hope I Have said enough for your Conviction, let me,
pray, but recommend one Change to you, which will be much for your ease, do but
change from a -- to a wise Man, and then I Will engage the Inconstancy of Women
will never trouble you.

A. H.

LETTER XXXIV. Being a second Answer to Mr. Harcourt's Letter concerning Women's
Inconstancy; wherein is proved, That Women are more Constant than Men.
By Ephelia.
THrough the Universal Charity and Good Will I bear to my Fellow Creatures
indifferently of either Sex, I have been willing to hope that one day Men would
become such lovers of Truth and Justice, and so free from the Natural
Prejudices of Self-love, as to allow of, and be pleased with the many good
Qualities in ours, and leave off their malicious and groundless Reproaches;
though I think I may be allowed to speak in the Defense of oppressed Innocence,
since I see there is but little probability of a change in our Enemies; for one
can hardly pass a Bookseller's Shop, without seeing something upon the Stall
against us; nor be in a Conversation, but some of the would be Wits must
ridicule our Sex, it is even become as fashionable an Error as it is to laugh at
Priestcraft, or Religion it self. Perhaps our Adversaries may tell us, it is an
Argument for their being in the right; that it is not only the Opinion of some,
but almost all: To which we Answer, That will prove nothing in their Favor,
since it is so common to be mistaken in the Judgments made of things, that there
is but here and there a wise Man that can distinguish Truth from Falsehood; and
especially in such cases as this, where they imagine their Interest concerned;
for should it be once owned by 'em, that we have as great a share in Virtue,
Prudence, Affability, Good Manners, and whatever may render Society agreeable,
as they themselves have, what appearance of Reason could they bring for
treating us so despicably and unmannerly as they do? But they think by that
means to make us have an ill Opinion of our selves, through a mistaken Policy,
believing that then we shall the more easily submit to their Yoke; which is
doubtless an Error, for every wise Woman will obey the reasonable Commands of
her Husband, since not only her Duty, but the Custom of our Country oblige her
to it, both for her own and his Reputation. And what Excuse could a false and
treacherous Lover, or Ill-natured, Vicious, Fantastical Husband find, but by
endeavoring to make us as like 'em as possible? And thus by throwing their
faults upon us, they think they justify and clear themselves. Which of 'em our
present Enemy is, I will not determine, yet methinks he writes with so much
eagerness and fury, that he must needs have a tang of one of these Perfections;
nay, I believe hardly ever any Person under other Circumstances appeared
against us; for though a deserving Man may be forsaken, or a good Husband ill
treated (for I will not pretend to justify all my Sex) yet they will immediately
reflect, that it is their Misfortune, and not falsely conclude all Women are base
and ungrateful, because they have found some so. And that our Antagonist has
more Malice than Truth of his side, we shall soon find by Examination: He gives
us not one Instance of our Variousness, as he calls it, but we can give a good
Reason for it, or show the Men to equal, if not exceed us; -- We change our
Servants, why not where they are undeserving? Our Humors, I believe there will
be no need of proving that we are always more Obliging, Courteous, and ready to
do good Services to others, than you are; less resenting, and more easy to
forgive. If there is any Place of Honor or Profit to be gained, he is the surest
to succeed, who makes the Ladies his Friends; for where they Promise any
Service, or Friendly Office, they are indefatigable till it is obtained. Let any
one that Affronts us, but acknowledge the Fault, and beg Pardon, we are
reconciled, whereas nothing but Blood can quiet your Revenge. -- Our Lovers,
Ay, there you gain the Point; we yield, we yield; perhaps here and there a Lady
may find reason to discard a Lover or two in her whole Life, because of the
disadvantages we lie under in that Affair, since we have not the Privilege of
choosing where we please, but by Custom are obliged to accept of such as offer
themselves, therefore may sometimes chance to admit a Lover, whose
Imperfections once discovered, will in some measure justify this change; but
you, poor Souls, are such constant, pretty, whining things, that for fear of
missing of being Happy in some, you will Court the whole Sex, and are true to
one, but till you see the next Face; and such a value you put upon these
Conquests, that he that has betrayed half a dozen Ladies, thinks he has done
more to brag of than Alexander. Whereas our Love, when placed on a worthy
Object, is great and lasting; David acknowledges it as such, and we have more
Examples in History of the surprising and constant Love of Women to their
Husbands, than of Men to their Wives: Nay, in our time, to hear of a Wife
that is indifferent (till Weather-beaten to it) is very rare; whereas most Men
impudently declare, there is no Love after Marriage. -- Well, but we alter our
Fashions, the Men do just the same; and our Complexions, Eyes, etc. Who would
not change a bad one for a good? Besides, Friends, here you are in for Cakes
and Ale, and perhaps, lick, scrub up, and powder, as much as we; the better
sort of either Sex have their share in this Vanity. Our Religion, if we have any,
there I think we are well met, if I Am not mistaken. Sir, I might go on in making
Remarks on other Parts of your Letter, but Madam H -- having already so
ingeniously defended our Sexes Constancy, and proved you guilty of what you
charge us with, the less is needful to be said by

EPHELIA.

LETTER XXXV. Against Learning in Women.
By Mr. Harcourt.
I Know many who are against so much as extraordinary Sense in a Woman, and the
Reason they give for it is, because even a good Judgment it self, which is a
sort of a Ballast in Mankind, will be apt to sink your light Vessels: You will
be always full of your selves, as a Bubble is of Air, how empty soever you are
of any thing solid and commendable; but if there happens to be any substance
too firm for your feeble contexture, it breaks it immediately, as in the case
of your Lively Emblem already mentioned.

But whatever we conclude of Sense in Women, I am sure Learning is a most
mi^chievous and dangerous Qualification for an^ of 'em. This puffs the Bubble
to an immense bigness, and hurries it into the Air, till lost in Clouds, and
its slender frame dissolving, it drops into nothing.

The Frog would fain be an Ox, but what did it get by it is big looks? Only one
Advantage, that it soon burst its self, and let out the Wind that tormented it.

You are neither qualified for Learning, nor equal to it, could you, beyond
expectation, attain to any Proficiency in it. It Is so far from being necessary,
or so much as useful to ye, that it is rather mischievous and hurtful, and is
very inconvenient, both for us and you. A Hee-Spinster and learned Woman, being
equal Absurdities.

Why should a vain Ambition thus urge you against Nature? To attain any good
degree of Science, there must not only be quickness of Apprehension, and
soundness of Judgment, but besides this, an unwearied Diligence, an Unshaken
Constancy, an Indefatigable Industry. And pray, for which of these Virtues are
your Sex the most commended? Much Reading is not Learning, any more than the
richest Stationer is the best Philosopher; or than it is an Argument of Health
and Strength, to have a Canine Appetite.

The Knowledge of Things, and the useful ranging 'em in the Memory, and working
'em into the Practical Judgment, so as to have 'em at hand on every occasion,
this I Am afraid is too hard a Task for your Sexes Undertaking.

The Causes of things are so far removed from sense, that you will not find it so
easy to come at 'em. Truth lies in so deep a Well, that I wish you are not
tired a long while before you have drawn it up. Philosophy is so vast a Field,
that you can scarce hope not to be lost in it. The Knowledge of all Knowables,
Divine and Humane, how should it ever be contained in your puny Nutshell?

The greater the Genius, the more things doubtless a Man may attend to at once
without Distraction; the wider his grasp, the faster his hold: But how can you
who are sufficiently employed with your little Family Affairs, or your own
Follies and Vanities, and almost over-set with 'em too, and often unequal for
'em; how can you pretend to aim at what has as much more of difficulty in it as
it has of variety and distraction? You are ready to split when you are but
Coasters, and who then will Insure you when you launch out into the vast Ocean?
Learn first to spell well, and you will have done a great matter, a piece of
Learning a little more suitable to your Capacities, though so very few of you
ever attain it. No, from the first, you have had an inveterate inclination to
Rambling: Any where, but where you should be; and any Thing, but what is your
Business.

Besides, could you get Learning, what would you do with it? For so much is any
one the better for his Knowledge, as he is capable of bettering others by it,
and filling his Post, and discharging his Part, as becomes a Citizen of the
World, a Member of the great Commonwealth of Nature. But pray what need of
Metaphysics to make a Pudding, or of knowing who beat who, at Pharsalia, or
Marathon; to make Point, or thread a Needle? To know for the sake of knowing,
and that such things only as neither teach us to regulate the Passions, or
exalt the Mind, is a loss of Time as criminal as it is ridiculous. But you can
Advantage others, you will say, and improve your own useful Knowledge either by
Discourse or Writing -- It Is so often indeed you have that calmness of Temper,
that coolness of Thought, and freedom from Prejudice, and pliableness to
Conviction, which is so necessary to all who would gain any thing by Discourse
themselves, or Instruct others. And besides, would it not be as creditable for
us to learn of our Inferiors, as 'twould be modest for you to pretend to
Documentize your Masters? The old Romans, it is true, often made use of their
Slaves as Schoolmasters for their Children, but one would think they hardly
learnt of 'em themselves, or submitted to a Servile Ferula, when they were
Lords of the World.

And for your Writing, it is yet more intolerable: Have not we Paper-spoilers
enough of our own Sex, that you must come in to help us? A Wise Man doubtless
he was, that first taught ye to Write, when your Mark it self had been too
much. But if you must scribble now and then, that you may not quite forget it,
one would think a Billet-deux would suffice you, or at least a passionate
Love-Letter; or if you pretend so far as a Verse or Song, you meddle beyond
your Province, and ought to be sent back from one Constable to another. No, I Am
so far from thinking it Decent or Lawful for your trifling Sex to write for
Public view, that though it would sound like your own Cruelty to Vote that your
three Writing-fingers might be served as the Breasts of the Amazons, yet I
could heartily wish there were a Law to tie 'em up a little, both for our sakes
and yours; or to pin 'em down by your sides, as they do Childrens, never to be
let loose till you had found sufficient Sureties for their Good Behavior.

If even that could secure us, for we know it is as Natural for you to scratch
with 'em, as 'twas for Puss to Mouse, when she was transformed into one of you.
If a Man desires to see Ill-Huswifry and Sluttery in Perfection, let him find
one of these Learned Women. But you will be at your Old Cant I know of improving
your Minds, and cultivating your Hearts, and advancing in Wisdom. We take you
for once at your words, none will envy you such Learning as is useful for you,
but then we hope you will not be for Riding the Great Horse, or for the Noble
Science of Defense, or Gunnery, or Fortification, or the Art of War. Nor have
you any more to do with Logic, for you have enough of the Natural without the
Artificial, and chop that fast enough with your Husbands. You have all the
Topics of Railing, and can make admirable use of the Fallacies without ever
learning 'em. If you are fond of the Mathematics, we shall not be so ill-natured
to deny your venturing so far in that crabbed Study, till by the unsearchable
depths of Algebra you are able to discover this great Secret, that Two and Two
make Four, and that Three and Five are even and odd. Learn so much Ethics as
to know your Duty to your Husband, which is best taught you at the end of your
own Matrimony. Forget not Oeconomicks, and the care of your own Household.

Surgery enough to cure a Whitloe, and Physic enough to fright away an Ague.
Music enough to be tuned as exactly to your Husbands Temper as one Unison to
another; and Rhetoric enough to be silent, and then the World will no more
find fault with a Learned Woman.

Thomas Harcourt.

Answer to LETTER XXXV.
By Madam H --
SURE it is either for your Ease or Diversion, you go so far out of your way to
consider, Whether Women should be learned, so little Sense and Judgment as you
allow 'em, should methinks put 'em out of the danger, and then of what use is
all your Declamation for fear we should beyond expectation attain to any
Proficiency in a thing so mischievous, hurtful, and inconvenient to our selves,
and you, I fear your Apprehension has been too quick for your Judgment, to
suffer you to run away with such a Mistake.

By your leave, Sir, I think it is no equal Absurdity, a Woman's Ambition to
raise her self above her Sex, and suppose she could do it; as for a Man so
meanly to degrade himself, that when designed for such Great and Noble
Employments, he should be content with the most contemptible of Female
Perfections, and become a Spinster.

We Are obliged to you for telling us the way of attaining any good degree of
Science; you say, it requires a quick Apprehension, soundness of Judgment, an
unwearied Diligence, an unshaken Constancy, an indefatigable Industry; all
which Virtues, whatever you may think, are no strangers to our Sex, nor against
our Natures, as perhaps the Stationer by his Reading may know better than you
with all your Philosophy.

We envy not your strong Dogs Stomach to digest those hard Bones of Philosophy,
and the Causes of Things, We can content our selves with guessing, which is as
far as you can go, and our puny Nut-shells will contain as many may-be's as
yours; and you're not so sure of all knowables Divine and Humane, but that with
some degree of Application we can go as far as you, and in the Practick part of
Divinity, far out go you.

I cannot deny the facility a large Genius may give to Learning, but suppose
Women's should be more contracted, dos't follow, they must deny their Genius all
Improvement, and throw all away on Folly, Vanity, and Domestic Affairs, for
fear of Shipwreck, when they launch out into the vast Ocean of Learning,
without your Insurance, which we may be sure you will never give us whilst under
the Mistake of believing we cannot spell, and yet pretend to Learning, only
because 'tisn't so much our business as yours? A great sign you do it ill, we have
such a mind to mend it.

If a Woman's a Member of the Commonwealth of Nature (which cannot be denied)
and ought to fill her Post, and discharge her Part as a Citizen of the World,
she will have use enough of her Learning in her Converse with Men, and so much
Wit, no doubt, to employ't in regulating her Passions, exalting her Mind, and
freeing't from Prejudice, Heat, and Obstinacy, rather than apply 'em in making
a Pudding, threading a Needle, and teaching Domestic Affairs, knowing by
Experience how ill Men succeed whenever they go by such learned Rules to
instruct their Wives in Family-Business, which does as ill become your Sex, as
it does ours by Discourse or Writing to pretend to Documentize our Masters.

Undoubtedly the Man that first taught us to Write, appears as wise, if not a
little wiser, and perhaps more just than those, that for tenderness of spoiling
Paper, (which afterward serves for so many uses) would condemn us to so severe
a Punishment, as to deprive us of three Fingers, which would for ever disable
us from making a Pudding, or threading a Needle, the highest Perfection of our
Trifling Sex, according to Mr. Wiseacre.

I Am surpised to find a Man of so great Undertaking, as that confining our
Sex's Scribbling to a Billet-deux, or Passionate Love-Letter, should at the same
time be so afraid of us as to call in the help of Laws, and require us to bring
Sureties for our Good Behavior, and yet after all, can hardly think himself
secure from scratching; you had better have secured your self by Law before you
had meddl'd with us; for it is not your Wife's being an ill House-wife, and a
Slut, will hinder us from scrawling and blotting Paper, and doing all those
things you are so afraid of. Truly, Sir, you're mistaken in this last, fear of
our Old Cant of Improving our Minds, Cultivating our Heads, and advancing in
Wisdom, for now we are convinced of the Error, and perceive in you that Learning
works none of those Effects.

Nor shall we quarrel with you for the Military part of Learning, since we have,
by your own Confession, so much as enables us to make War with our Husbands
when they invade our Privilege or Prerogatives. And for that part of Ethics,
Mathematics, and Music, your good Nature allows us, we return it you with
many Thanks, for we have Naturally as much of those as serves our Occasions, for
the Man I fear with all his Learning discharges his Duty to his Wife no better
than the Wife to the Husband; and to require the Wife should be tuned exactly
to the Temper of her Husband, shows the weakness of his Reason, whilst not
that, but his Temper, must govern both himself and Wife.

I only beg a greater Liberty in Surgery and Physic, supposing it is none of
your Province, but that without danger you may grant it, for we shall neither
Write nor Teach it, nor Practice on our Husbands, for there the Law secures
you; nor shall Oeconomies be forgotten, if that will please you.

But the hardest Task you impose, is to learn Rhetoric enough to put us to
silence, and then give over; we are all fond of Praise, and a thing so
commendable as the Art of Speaking, weighs more with us than the Virtue of
Silence, 'twill be hard to stop us in a pursuit of so much Glory; if any thing
prevail, it must be the only consideration, that observing your Rules, the
World must needs be very much obliged by such a sort of Learned Women.

A. H.

The End of the First Battle.
Subjects designed for [the Second Battle] which are here inserted, that so
every Lady (that will join with Madam Godfrey, etc. against Sir Thomas, and his
Adherents) may choose what Points they can best defend -- What Letters they will
Answer, shall be sent to 'em, if they will send their Names, and Place of Abode
to Mr. Darker's (in Bull-Head-Court, near Cripplegate) the General Place of
Rendevouz.
Note, That those Subjects that have this Mark, are already Chosen by the
Ladies, and those with this Mark*, are Chosen by the Men.
1. AGainst Women's Riding astride. Defended by Madam --
2. That no kept Mistress was ever true to one Man. Denied by Madam --
3. Against Women's making use of Perfumes. Answered by Madam --
4. Against Red-hair'd Women. In Praise of Red Hair, by Madam --
5. Against wearing Earrings, etc. In Praise of 'em, by Madam --
6. Against Women's powdering their Hair. Defended by Madam --
7. Against trying Tricks to dream of Husbands. Defended by Madam --
8. Against the Practice of Choosing Valentines. Answered by Madam --
9. Against Night-Roils. Defended by Madam --
* 10. That there is a Sex in Souls. By Leander. Denied by Madam --
11. That there is no Love without a mixture of Lust. Denied by Madam --
12. Against Black-patches. Defended by Madam --
13. Against Ladies keeping Lap-dogs. Defended by Madam --
14. In praise of Hermaphrodites. Answered by Madam --
15. Against Kissing Defended by Madam --
16. That Women have more Imperfections than Men. Denied by Madam --
17. That it is better marrying a Whore than a Slutt. Answered by Madam --
18. That Women, when lewd, are more Impudent than Men. Answered by Madam --
19. That Men always love their second Wives best. By Madam -- * Denied by Sir
Henry.
20. Against loving several Women at the same time. Answered by Madam --
21. That a long Courtship is best. Denied by Madam --
22. That the falling out of Lovers is not the renewing of Love. Denied by
Madam --
23. Against Women's smoking Tobacco. Defended by Madam --
24. Against Women's taking the upper hand. Answered by Madam --
25. Against making Joyntures. Answered by Madam --
26. Against Women's Preaching in the Church. Defended by Madam --
27. An Essay upon Match-making. Answered by Madam --
28. Against Fruition. By Madam -- * Answered by Sir Charles
29. That it is good to have Rivals in the Courting of a Coy Mistress. Denied by
Madam --
30. That crooked Women are the best natured, and make the fondest Wives. By
Madam -- * Denied by Sir Thomas.
31. That Singing is the best accomplishment for a Woman By Madam Prestwood. *
Denied by Mr. Harman.
* 32. That Drunkenness is worse in Women than Men. By Mr. Hallet. Denied by
Madam --
33. That it is best marrying an Old Woman. Answered by Madam --
34. That Poor Women love best. Denied by Madam --
35. Against Confidence in Women. Answered by Madam --
36. Against Clandestine Marriages. Defended by Madam --
37. Against giving Presents before Marriage. Answered by Madam --
38. Against changing the VVomans Name in Marriage. Answered by Madam --
39. Against VVomens wearing the Breeches. Defended by Madam --
40. That there be Virgins, whose Chastity is invincible. By Madam Godfrey. *
Denied by Mr. Brooks, in an Essay upon the Virgins of this Age.
41. That it is a great Happiness to have a Scolding Wife. Answered by Madam --
42. That little Woman are the most fruitful. Denied by Madam --
43. That a Midwife is the most Honorable Employment for a Woman. * Denied by
Sir Henry --
* 44. Against the Old fashion of wearing Fardingales, and Ruffs. By Mr. Bruce.
Defended by Madam --
45. That a mercenary Woman is the greatest Whore. Denied by Madam --
46. Against Ladies long Trains. Defended by Madam --
47. That a Friendship 'tween Persons of a different Sex may be very innocent.
Answered by Madam --
* 48. That no Woman ever dyed for Love. By Sir Thomas. Denied by Madam
Godfrey.
49. That it is Lawful for a man to Marry his Cousin-German. Answered by Madam
--
50. That it is Lawful for a Man, having buried his Wife, to Marry her own
Sister. Answered by --
51. That most Women marry too young. Answered by Madam --
52. Against Quakers Marriages. Defended by Ariadne.
53. Against crying in the Act of Marriage. Defended by Madam --
54. That a private Courtship is best. Denied by Madam --
* 55. That if Females went a Courting, there would be more Marriages than now
there are. By Sir Thomas. Denied by Madam Godfrey.
56. That all Beauty is imaginary. Answered by Madam --
57. That it is Lawful for a Man to beat his Wife. Answered by Madam --
58. That a Person Divorced by Law may Lawfully marry another, though those
they were first married to, are yet living. Answered by Madam --
59. Against Polygamy. By Madam Prat. * Answered by Sir Charles.
* 60. Against stealing of looks. By Mr. Breme. Answered by Madam --
61. Against VVomens answering Love Letters. By Madam Axtel. * Defended by Mr.
Harcourt.
62. That it is not modest for a VVidow to Marry in less than a Year after her
Husband's Decease. Denied by Madam --
63. That the Eye is of greater Service than the Tongue in making of Love.
Denied by Madam --
64. An Essay upon Godmothers. By Madam Sland. * Answered by Sir Thomas.
65. Against those Ladies who refuse to Bed with their Husbands. Answered by
Madam --
66. That it is much safer going to the Wars, than to Marry. Denied by Madam --
67. That they never thrive, who Promise Marriage to one man, and wed another.
Denied by Madam --
68. That Coyness is the only thing valuable in a Woman. Answered by Madam --
69. That our Laws against Adultery are too favorable to the Women. Answered
by Madam --
69. That he that is once a Cuckold, is ever so. Denied by Madam --
70. That a VVomans wit is best at a pinch. By Madam -- * Denied by Mr.
Harcourt.
71. That all Whores are Jacobites. Denied by Madam --
72. That the Barren Woman is more happy than the Child-hearing. Answered by
Madam --
73. That it is possible to find some Virtue in some Women. By Madam Grimes. *
Answered by Sir Thomas.
74. Against hanging Pictures in the Chambers of Big-belly'd Women. Defended
by Madam --
75. That Women are more prone to Love than other Creatures. Denied by Madam
--
76. That it is possible to be deeply in Love with a Lady we never saw. By
Leander. 77. Answered by Ariadne. 78. That Love is blind. Denied by Madam --
* 79. That the Passion of Love cannot be kept secret. By Sir Henry. Denied by
Madam Godfrey.
* 80. That there may be a greater Love between Man and Man, than between Man
and Woman. By Mr. Graves. Denied by Madam Hoy.
81. An Essay upon the Churching of Women. Answered by Madam --
82. That Women hate the more for being loved. Denied by Madam --
83. An Essay upon Honey-moon. Answered by Madam --
84. That it is more Noble to love, than to be loved. Answered by Madam --
85. The Brutes love. Denied by Madam --
* 86. An Essay upon the Ladies Dressing Room, Library, and several Trinkets
belonging to her Closet and Wardrobe. By Leander. Answered by Ephelia.
87. Against Ringing the Bell on the Wedding night. By Madam Grange. Defended
by Sir Charles --
88. That the Poetesses of the present excel all former Ages. By Madam --
Denied by Madam Plaisto.
89. That no Bawd ever died Rich. Answered by Madam --
90. That there has been no Instance of a converted Whore this Fifty Years.
Denied by Madam --
91. An Essay upon Chamber-maids to Persons of Quality. The Conduct of
Chamber-maids defended by Madam --
92. That Women are capable of as high Improvements as Men. * Denied by Sir
Thomas --
93. That it is Ominous to lose the Wedding-Ring. Denied by Madam --
94. A Paradox upon the first Fashion of going Naked. Answered by Madam --
* 95. Against Black-patches. By Sir William -- Defended by Madam Astford.
96. Against Lap-dalliance. Answered by Madam --
97. Against Dowries. Answered by Madam --
* 98. A Satyr upon the Flitch of Bacon given at Dunmow in Essex, to those that
Marry, and don't Repent. By Mr. Heart. Answered by Madam Licot.
99. Against Importunity. Answered by Madam --
100. That Love makes men valiant. Denied by Madam --
101. Against unequal Matches. Answered by Madam --
102. An Essay upon the London Nightwalkers. Answered by Madam --
103. That Passive Obedience is the chief Duty of a Wife. Denied by Madam --
* 104. Against making use of Philters, Amulets, and Charms in Love-Affairs, By
Mr. Carter. Defended by Madam --
105. That all Women love those Men best who had their first Affections. Denied
by Madam --
106. Against VVomens gazing in the Church. Defended by Madam --
107. Against VVomens Acting in Plays. Defended by Madam --
108. Against a sweet Breath. Defended by Madam --
109. A Satyr upon the Stews. Answered by Madam --
110. Against the Salique Law. By Caliste. * Defended by Mr. Valdo.
* 111. Against a man's trusting his Wife with his Secrets. By Mr. Field.
Defended by Madam Egleston.
112. A Satyr against the use of Fans. By Mr. -- Answered by Madam --
113. The equality of both Sexes asserted. By Madam -- Denied by Mr. --
* 114. An Essay in Vindication of Jocular writing. By Leander. Answered by
Madam --
115. Against Commodes. By Mr. -- Defended by Madam --
116. Against Women having their Pictures drawn. By Mr. -- Defended by Madam
--
117. That it is not possible to hate those we have really loved. By Mr. --
Denied by Madam --
118. That the Pleasures of Love consist chiefly in the Chase. By Mr. -- Denied
by Madam --
119. Against an incredulous Woman. By Mr. -- Answered by Madam --
* 120. Against second Marriages. By Philaret. Defended by Madam --

These are but part of the Challenges designed for the Female War: And that the
Men may have no occasion to laugh at what they fancy ridiculous in Women,
before the Peace is concluded, there will be added by the Ladies, viz.
1. A Satyr against the Town-Fops. By Madam Crawford. Defended by Mr. --
2. Against long Wiggs. By Madam Godfrey. Defended by Mr. --
3. Against Cotqueans. By Madam Chase. Defended by Mr. --
4. Against men's wearing of Muffs. Defended by Mr. --
5. Against the Sword-Knot now in Fashion. By Madam Gilford. * Defended by Sir
Thomas.
6. Against the men's taking Smish. By Madam Rose. * Defended by Sir Charles.
7. Against Saluting by the Hat. By Madam Stafford. * Defended by Sir Henry.
8. Against Old Batchelors. By Madam Godfrey. * Defended by Mr. Graves, in an
Essay, proving that a single Life is best.
9. Against Drinking Healths. By Madam Floid. Defended by Mr. --
10. Against Beardless men. By Madam Turpit. * Defended by Sir Henry. --
11. That black men are the most Amorous. By Madam -- * Denied by Sir Thomas --
12. That Bastards always resemble the unlawful Father. By Madam Haithorn *
Denied by Mr. Reading.
13. Against Promising Marriage to another Woman whilst the first Wife is
living. By Madam -- Defended by Mr. --
14. Against Enjoyment before Marriage. By Madam Beesly. * Answered by Mr.
Colet.
15. A Satyr against the Italian Husbands. By Madam Harford. * Answered by Mr.
Breme.
16. Against the Husband's crying down his Wife. By Madam -- Defended by Mr.
--
17. Against Batchelors keeping Young Housekeepers. By Ariadne. * Defended by
Leander.
18. Against the Annual Lampooning the Ladies at Tunbridge Wells. By Madam --
Defended by Mr. --
19. Against bragging of Women's favors. By Madam Godfrey. * Defended by Sir
Thomas --
20. Against Duelling for a Mistress, by Madam -- Defended by Mr. --
21. Against the Husband's telling his Wives Secrets. by Madam -- Defended by
Mr. --
22. Against Stock-Jobbers. By Madam -- Answered by Mr. --
23. Against writing Love-Verses. By Madam -- Defended by Mr. --
24. Against admiring a handsome man. By Madam -- Defended by Mr. --
25. That it is better to marry for Virtue than either Beauty or Riches. By
Madam -- * Answered by Mr. Hill.
26. That Sighs are the truest marks of a great Love. By Madam -- Denied by Mr.
--
27. An Essay on Modesty. by Madam -- Answered by Mr. -- 28. Against men's
Kissing one another. By Madam Bail. * Defended by Mr. Royse.

This is likewise but Part of the Ladies Charge against the Men, but here is
enough relating to both Sexes, to give an Idea of the whole Encounter; at the
end of which will be added, 1. A Form of Courtship, writ by Mr. Grot. 2. The
Character of what Wife Sir Thomas would have, if he ever marries. 3. The Ladies
Form of Prayer for Husbands, with a Project to provide 'em with good ones. 4.
The Articles of Peace betwixt both Sexes.


Newly Published
The Secret History of Whitehall, writ at the Request of a Noble Lord, and
conveyed to him in Letters by a Gentleman who was Secretary-Interpreter to the
Marquess of Louvois, and who by that means had the perusal of all the Private
Minutes between England and France for many Years.

THE New Discoveries made in this Book are concerning, (1.) The French Court's
opposing K. Charles the Second's Restoration. (2.) The Matches proposed to K.
Charles the Second by the French, with His Majesty's Answers thereunto. (3.)
The Sale of Dunkirk. (4.) The Firing of the City of London in 1666. (5.) An
Account of a Letter sent by the Dutch to K. Charles the Second, and of its
being privately sent to the French Court. (6.) The Secret of the Duke of
Buckingham's Embassy into France. (7.) What passed at the Private Interview
between K. Charles the Second and his Sister the Duchess of Orleance in 1670.
(8.) How Mrs. Carewell, Woman to the Duchess of Orleance, (and afterward
Duchess of Portsmouth) came to be introduced to be K. Charles's Miss. (9.) The
Private League between K. Charles the Second and the French King. (10.) The
Duke of York's Secret Correspondence with that Court, with an Account of his
Pension from thence. (11.) Coleman's Intervention with both for his own
Advantage, and the Topics he went upon, his Rencounter with the French
Ambassador, and his Private Papers. (12.) The Interest the French made both in
England and Holland, among the several Sects, to prevent the late Queen's being
married to King William. (13.) The Methods concerted to trapan Her late Majesty
into France, with her Father's concurrence, and how prevented. (14.) Father St.
German's attempting K. Charles the Second in his Religion, with the King's
Answer, etc. (15.) Coleman's Wife's Petition to the French King, with his
Answer; and an Account of her Hanging her self. (16.) M. Le Telier's Speech
about the Invasion of England. (17.) The Duke of York's Perversion to the
Church of Rome. (18.) K. James's Private League with France, when Regnant.
(19.) The Essay made by the Spanish Ambassador, to draw him into the Austrian
Interest, with his Answer and Refusal, in favor of France. (20.) How Father
Peter's came to be made a Privy-Counsellor. (21.) Why Mr. Skeleton was Imprisoned
in the Tower. (22.) Of the shutting up the Exchequer by K. Charles the Second.
(23.) An Account of the Five Persons that made up the Cabal in England in 1671.
(24.) The Methods used by the French Ministers to corrupt our Ambassadors.
(25.) The Offers made by the French King of the Sovereignty of the United
Provinces to King William, then Prince of Orange, with his rejection of them.
(26.) The Earl of Shaftsbury's Advice to K. Charles the Second, to send an
Embassy to the French King. (27.) How my Lord Shaftsbury came to be removed
from being Chancellor. (28.) How the French gained their Point, in Marrying the
Princess of Modena to the Duke of York. (29.) The Attempts made to engage the
Prince of Orange in the French Interest. (30.) Of the Duke of York's moving the
French Court for Money, according to his Private Agreement. (31.) Of K. Charles
the Second's urging the French Court for his Remittances. (32.) The Arguments
used against the Duke of York's Marrying his Daughter to the Prince of Orange.
(33.) The Embassy sent by the French King to K. Charles, in order to break off
that Match. (34.) Some Secrets relating to the Popish Plot. (35.) Of the Duke
of York's retiring to Brussels, with K. Charles's Promises to him before his
departure. (36.) The Overtures made for K. Charles's Divorce from Queen
Katherine. (37.) Of the Duke of York's being twice privately in France, and
Closeted by the French King. (38.) Of the Marquess of Louvois's being Privately
in England several times in K. Charles the Second's Reign; and of his being
Closeted by him. (39.) The Mystery of the Presbyterian Plot. (40.) Of King
Charles the Second's Death. (41.) An Account of K. James's Design of destroying
the Duke of Monmouth in Holland. (42.) Why K. James was not Crowned by a Popish
Bishop. (43.) The true Reasons why the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Argile
miscarried in their Invading England and Scotland. (44.) Of the Opposition made
by several Noblemen against K. James's discarding the Militia. (45.)
Propositions made by the French Agents to K. James the Second, for Modelling
and Bridling of Parliaments. (46.) The Intrigue of the Trial and Suspension of
the Bishop of London. (47.) Of K. James's Closeting several Persons, etc. (48.)
A particular Account how my Lord Castlemain came to be sent Ambassador to Rome;
and of K. James's receiving the Pope's Nuncio in England. (49.) The Design in
Committing the Seven Bishops to the Tower of London. (50.) The Sense of the
French Court, with respect to the Prince of Wales's Birth. (51.) An Account of
K. James's ordering Mass to be said on Board his Fleet; and of his going on
Board himself, to engage the Officers to turn Roman Catholics. (52.) Of the
Count D'Avaux acquainting the French King with the Prince of Orange's
Preparations against England. (53.) Of the means whereby Mr. Skeleton came to
know of the Designs in Holland against K. James, and of his acquainting the
King his Master therewith; as also his Negotiations in France. (54.) Of the
Slights used to make K. James negligent to provide against the Invasion from
Holland. (55.) My Lord S -- charged with Treachery to his Master K. James.
(56.) Of my Lord S's. being excused by some of the French Faction. (57.) The
Arguments used by the French Agents to gain K. James's Consent to receive
French Succors into England, answered by my Lord S -- (58.) K. James's Speech
to his Officers upon the Prince of Orange's Landing in England. (59.) The
motives for the Queen's carrying the Prince of Wales into France. (60.)
Instructions given to the French Emissaries, on K. James's deserting the Crown.
(61.) How the French Court received the News of the Prince and Princess of
Orange's being Proclaimed King and Queen of England.

These New Discoveries, to name no more, though the rest are of equal Curiosity,
(and complete this Secret History, from the Restoration of Charles II. down to
the Abdication of the late K. James) had been for ever buried in Oblivion, had
not the Fate and Address of this Gentleman led him to fetch 'em out of the dark
and almost inscrutable Recesses of the French Cabinet Minutes. The whole
Published from the Original Papers, By D. Jones, Gent.

THere is also Published -- A New Undertaking, Entituld, The Night-Walker, Or,
Evening Rambles, in search after lewd Women, with the Conferences held with
them, to be Published Monthly, till a Discovery be made of all the Chief
Prostitutes in England, from the Pentionary Miss, down to the Common Strumpet.
The first Night-Walker, for October, was Dedicated to the Whore-Masters of
London and Westminster, and this for November (just now published) is Dedicated
to the Duchess of -- Price of each 6 d. Both Sold by R. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.


