CERTAIN PAPERS CONCERNING The Earl of LINDSEY his Fennes.

In which is showed the Committees Advice to the Owners and Commoners friendly
to agree the Differences between them and the Drainers, that an Act may be
passed this next Term for the settling those Works, so beneficial to the
Commonwealth.

With a Paper Directed to Sir William Killigrew, and Signed William Howett.

And also an Answer to that Paper by Sir William Killigrew.

Committee for the Fens, 2 Aug. 1649.
FOrasmuch as both Parties do desire to be satisfied the sense of the
Committee at their last sitting, which was delivered verbally by me to this
purpose, The Committee taking into consideration, that it was now Harvest time,
did adjourne unto Michaelmas Term, and did desire in the mean time, that both
Parties would meet and settle the differences amongst themselves, so as an Act
may be prepared against the next sitting to pass the House: And that the
Committee would move the House that satisfaction might be made to the
Commoners for such grievances as shall appear to be just, out of the Lands
Assigned to the late King, The Commoners and their Counsel there present
expressing that the said Drayning was beneficial to the Commonwealth.

Io. Goodwyn.

This following Paper was sent to Sir WILLIAM KILLIGREVV
We the Owners and Commoners in the Level of Fens between Bourne and Kyme-Eae,
declare to Sir William Killigrew, and the rest of the Adventurers there upon
the Motion of an Agreement by the Chaireman of that Committee of Parliament
before whom their Petition depends.

THat if We the Owners and Commoners which have formerly Petitioned the
Honorable Parliament against the ilegall proceedings of the said Adventurers,
and fully proved our Petition before a Committee of Parliament, of which
William Ellis Esquire was Chaire-man, and has been a long time sit for a report,
may without incurring the Parliaments displeasure (to whom we bear a tender
respect, and would be loath in the least manner to disclame their Justice)
treat with the said adventures, and that the Parliament will admit them
undertakers, with such of the owners as desire to draine their owneland, we who
are content to admit of such undertakers as the Parliament shall commend to us,
will treat with them upon such terms as may be most profitable to the
parties interested, and for the advance of the public.

At a meeting at Donington Aug. 27. 1649. I was desired by Charles Hussy,
Robert Caudron, Thomas Hall, Esquires, William Trollop, Mathias Brown, Samuel
Jackson, Gentlemen, John Hardwicke, Robert Hardwick, Richard Toller, Tho.
Burton, and Obed Cust, to send this Paper unto you: Some Towns being absent at
this meeting, and diverse Owners there present, did desire me to take notice
they did not consent to this Paper.

WILL. HOWETT.

Sir WILL. KILLIGREVVS Answer in the behalf of himself, and the rest of the
Drayners, to the Paper he received from Mr. HOVVET.
THat the Owners and Commoners Petition above mentioned, (which they fay was
fully proved at a Committee) we say was untrue and scandalous, and in no point
proved, as touching the Undertakers proceedings, which were by many Witnesses
at the same Committee proved to be just, and legal; and those proofs do now
remain in Master Ellis his hands, with all the Decrees made in that business:
And we do further say, that the Owners and Commoners did not then, nor can now
prove any of their unjust Accusations against the Drayners, nor was the cause
so fully heard that Master Ellis can be capable to report it who had not any
Vote or Authority from that Committee to make a Report, the said Committee
being under Adjornment for some Months, during which Adjournment some of the
Commoners, with those that now hold up this Contest against us, did reject the
Justice of the said Committee, and Parliament, by destroying the Undertakers
Works, possessing themselves of their Lands, and so became their own Judges
while the cause depended: by which it appears, that their proofs then were
not such as they now pretend, or durst then trust to: Nor was Master Ellis then
fit for a Report of the cause as now they say he is; and that Committee being
now nine years elapsed, He is less fit to make 2 Report.

To the next part of Master Howetts Paper we answer, That by the Authority of
a Grand Commission of Sewers, we are Undertakers indisputably by the known
Laws of the Land; and that the Parliament has admitted us Undertakers, in
their Order to this Committee; and the Committee have recommended to the Owners
and Commoners, with their Counsel at the Bar, this Treaty with us the
Undertakers, and Adventurers with the Earl of Lindsey: Which now it seems
those Owners and Commoners will not allow of, unless themselves may become
(after the work finished upon our particular charges) joint undertakers with
us; without which they will not treat of any Agreement; Wilfully mistaking the
intent of the Committee, which was, that we should Treat of satisfaction to be
made by both Parties, for the Injuries complained of on both sides. We expected
to hear of some Demands to repair the Losses and the great Damage by us done
to the poor Commoners, by our illegal proceedings (as they say) and they give
us only a Demand that some of those who have against all Law and Equity
destroyed our Works and Possessions should now be admitted Drayners with us;
as if that would cleanse us from guilt, if we were guilty, and fully satisfy
the injured Commoners, if they were injured. It Is indeed a very modest demand,
that those our Destroyers may now be Undertakers with us, to Drain what we
have already Drayned; They have torn our Coats from our backs, and would now
have a large share of our Coats to help us mend what they have torn; this
were an excellent President to encourage the like Impiety, and a pretty way to
incite any multitude to rob any man of his rightful inheritance: for so they
have used us by pulling down our houses, by destroying the corn, and ruining
those public works.

Thirdly, to let the world see, that a few men's ingratitude, who appear at the
Committee against us, shall not have power to alter our intentions to give all
just satisfaction to the Country, who have been generally misled, and
misinformed by some uncharitable guides, who hope to bear out their own
guilts by the poor Commoners innocence; We say, that if the poor Commoners
do desire our Friendship, we will forget and forgive all our Losses, and
Injuries by them done to us, as by men misled; (and if the generallity of the
Country do desire it,) we will admit such of the Lords and Owners as they
shall nominate, and the Parliament allow of, to become Undertakers, and
Adventurers with us in our second Level not yet finished; or if they like
better, we will remit unto them the whole undertaking of that Level not yet
finished, so we may have a part proportionable to our Charge already expended
to wards that Work, for we are willing to satisfy the Country any way we
can. But 'twere a madness to speak of admitting any of them Undertakers with
us in our first Level, long since Drained at our own Charge, and all those
Lands of ours, long since disposed of to such men as have paid more for the
Purchase, than any of the Lords or Commoners will now repurchase them at.

Fourthly, since they do reject the Committees advice, to Treat of an
Accommodation with us the Drainers, for wrongs alleged to be done on both
sides, and do not accept that gracious proffer of the Committee, to bestow the
Kings Lands on them; We shall be humble Suitors to the Committee, to become
Suitors to the Parliament, that those Lands may be allotted to repair the Works
for the good of the Commonwealth; and let our Lands be liable to make a just
satisfaction for all the wrongs by us done to the Country: for our Adversaries
will find that we do not value those Clamorous Scandalls they vent against
us; And we do Declare, that it is no dread of any guilt, that moves us to
embrace a Treaty with them, but a real desire to gain the Countries Love,
that we may live like Christians together; which some men for their own guilts
do hinder, others for private ends, and their particular profit do oppose.
For when those Papers, and those Decrees in Master Ellis his hands shall be
delivered into the Committee, our Adversaries Ingratitude and Impudence will
blush for calling us Projectors, and Oppressors of the Poor; By which Papers
we say it will appear, that we are as innocent from the first guilt, as they
alone guilty of the last: Who do eat out the poor Commoners with their great
Stocks; and do now gather the poor men's money to maintain their own
oppressions on them, to the discontent of the major part of the Commoners, who
say they date not complain for fear of more and more oppression from their
rich Neighbors, who do make them pay equal charge for repairing and
maintaining the Drains, though they have no benefit by the Commons, as will be
shortly proved: And no doubt the poor Commoners will be relieved, when their
Cause is known in Parliament, and their Commons be stinted for the future
benefit of the poor, in case they do desire it.

Fifthly, lest some of our Adversaries do not know, and others have forgotten
upon what terms we became Undertakers, it is thought fit we put them in mind,
that in Master Ellis his hands does remain the Countries first invitation to
the Earl of Lindseyes undertaking this work; which cleares the Earl from
being a Projector as they allege.

Sixthly, It will also appear by the Records of Sewers in Master Ellis his
hands, that this Contract for the Drayning was above three years in agitation
after the Tax of 13 s. 4 d. was laid on the Fennes, by 35 Commissioners, the
prime Gentlemen of that Country; for 'twas three years after this taxing,
that the bar^^ine was completed with the Earl by 32 Commissioners, and this
done with the general applause of a great assembly of Commoners then present,
who wrought in the said works above two years, and were enriched by our
moneys; and in all this time, no word of any dislike to the Earls undertaking;
which shows that the people were not displeased with the Draining, nor did
then think it a Project.

Seventhly, it will appear by the writings with Master Ellis, that Sir John
Brook, since Lord Cobham, and Sir Edward Hern, did become purchasers of their
own. Fennes, at forty shillings the acre, which was the price offered by the
Earl to the whole Country, though Master William Langron, with them two before
named, did only value those lands, in those days so much worth, by reason of
the charge, and hazard in Draining; and by the Dates of their Bills of
Adventure, it will appear they became Adventurers five years after their
first Tax, and above two years after the Contract was made with the Earl; so
they could not be parties interessed, and Judges at making the Contract for the
Drayning, as our Adveriaries do maliciously aver against their own
Consciences. Thus clearly we can confute all the roast of their Clamours
against us; and so doing we have no doubt but the Parliament having lately
settled Bedford Level by an Act, which is a work yet to do, they will also
settle Landsey Level, which is a work done; and the best work of that kind
that was ever yet done in this Land; all the Earls proceedings in the work
being after the Example of former Draining heretofore encouraged, and settled by
former Parliaments; and the same with the Earl of Bedfords, which is by all
past Parliaments, and by this Parliament, allowed to be greatly beneficial to
the Commonwealth: hoping also that the Parliament in their Wisdoms will not
permit our Adversaries (by giving us the Title of Delinquents) to eclipse our
good deserving in the Undertaking, and accomplishing so great and beneficial a
Work for the Commonwealth, as we have done by this Drayning: and also will
take into Consideration, that the Profits of our Lands for these last nine
years ought to have been sequestered to the use of the State, and not imbeseled
to the particular Interests of a few rich men; and also will look on us with
equal favor; because after our Compositions made, and upon our good behavior
since, all occasion of that advantage to call us Delinquents, is clearly taken
off. We do therefore Declare to our Adversaries, who reject a Treaty with us,
that we do wholly rely on our just cause, and the Justice of the Parliament, to
restore us, and repare us, that have done the Commonwealth so great a Service
by this Drayning. Yet not withstanding all the asperity that has passed between
us and some of the Owners and Commoners, we are still so well-affected to
them, that if all the Lords, Owners, and Commoners shall think fit to meet us
with the like Affection, and come to a friendly Agreement with us, before the
next day of Hearing, we will give them full satisfaction for any Injuries we
have done them, and will forgive them all Injuries by them done to us: and will
remit unto them all the Melioration we are to have out of their severalls,
which is like to be a fifth part of our Contract, and our right, beyond
Contradiction. And we think this a sufficient expression of our Affection to
the Country, who know no guilt to make us dread their displeasure and yet do
seek to purchase their loves at so dear a rate.

WILL, KILLIGREVV.
Peterburrow, the last of Aug. 1649.
FINIS.

