THE PRESENT WAR PARALLELED.

OR A brief Relation of the five years Civil Wars of HENRY the Third, King
of England, with the Event and Issue of that unnatural War, and by what
course the Kingdom was then settled again.

Extracted out of the most Authenticke Historians and Records.

Vt prospicias futura, respicias praeterita.

The most probable way to know what will be, is to observe what has been.

Qui respicit quae fuerunt, and inspicit quae sunt, prospicit etiam quae futura
sunt.

The Historian by running back to Ages past, and then forward to present
Affairs, comparing one with the other, can give a verdict of the State, well
near Prophetic.

Printed in the year, 1647.

THE PRESENT WAR PARALLELED. OR, A brief Relation of the 5. years Civil
Wars of HENRY the third, King of England, with the event and issue of that
unnatural War, and by what course the Kingdom was then settled again.
HENRY the Third of that Name, (a man more pious then prudent; a better man
then King) swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom 56. years. The former part of
his Reign was very calm, the latter as tempestuous.

The main tempest was thus raised. The King for many years, during that high
calm, had sequestered himself wholly to his harmless sports and recreations,
and entrusted the whole managery of the State to his officers and ministers.
These taking advantage of his Majesty's carelessenesse (the maine fault of this
King) insensibly sucked and drayned the revenues of Crown and Kingdom; till
the King awakened by extreme necessity, began to enquire, not how he came in
(for his necessities would not permit that) but how he might get out.

The best way that his evil Counselors could find to releeve their Master,
and save themselves, was (the ordinary way of supply in Parliament declined) to
have recourse to Monopolies, Patents, and other extraordinary and illegal
Taxations. But (praeter-naturall courses are never long-lived) the freeborn
English would not long endure such slavery.

When the King saw there was no other remedy, he throws himself into the
bosom of his people for relief, and advise in Anciently called the wood o^
mad Parliament, or (...) in (...) styled, (...) Parli^mentum, Fabian.
Parliament, Chron. Norwic.
where they undutifully taking advantage of his Majesty's extremities, instead
of relief, outbrave him publicly, with a Like the Remonst. of December, 15.
1641. Matthew. Westminster. and Math. Paris.
Catalogue of all the mistakes, and all the misfortunes of his former
government; which coming to the peoples ears soon stole away their hearts,
and alienated their affections from their Sovereign, and left him wholly to
the mercy and will of his Parliament. They sensible hereof, and that the reins
of Government were now cast upon their necks, (like Apollo's Horses, when
Phaeton had the driving of them) ran violent by-courses, till they set the
whole kingdom on fire.

So far they went as to make an Ordinance, That whereas there was present want
of a through-reformation in the State, the government thereof should be put
into the hands of four and twenty, Qui Regia potestate suffulti, who being
armed with Sovereign power, should take upon them the whole care and
government of the Kingdom, should nominate and appoint the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Chief Justices, Governors of Forts, Castles, and Navy, and all
other great Officers, and Ministers of State for all times to come.

Matthew. Westminster.
To this traitorous Ordinance, the King, Metu incarcerationis perpetuae
compulsus est consentire, for fear of perpetual imprisonment, was enforced to
give his Royal assent: And for further security, to be content to give it
under the great Seal, and upon Oath, that whenever he attempted to assume
unto him his Regal power, Chron. orig. sub sigillo.
Lice at omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, and ad gravamen nostrum
opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur. It should be lawful for
all his Subjects to rise against him and oppose him, as if they owed no
alleigeance to him.

Nil nisi pro umbra nominis habebatur. Matthew. Westminster.
Strange it is that he should be content to be a mere Cipher, that so lat^ly
was the only Figure of the whole Kingdom, that he should be content to part
at once with every tittle of Sovereignty, but the bare title! But prodigious,
that so many choice Senators, so many Fathers and Judges of Law and Conscience,
should so forget God and themselves, as to give their assent for the total
subverting of the Regal authority, when as they had all taken their corporal
Oaths, De terreno honor dicto Regi and haeredibus ejus servando. Matthew. Westminster.
Which Oath was well kept (says mine Author) Ordinando ne unquam regerent, sed
semper ab aliis regerentur: by making an Ordinance that they should never rule
again, but always be ruled by others.

These four and twenty thus settled, continue the Parliament during their
pleasure, put the Kingdom in a posture of defense, Regist. Rossen.
place governors of their own choosing, such as they could confide in, in the
chief Forts, nominate and appoint Judges of Assise, Sheriffs of Counties,
Coroners, Bailifes, (discharging those that were made by the King) took an oath
of them all respectively.

And here they would make the people believe they should never be troubled with
licencious Sovereignty again; (but never more as it proved:) for now every one
of them began to value his own worth, and to hammer his head on every design
that might enlarge his own power and command. In brief, of so many subjects,
they became totidem Tyranni, (as the book of St. Albanes speaks) so many
Tyrants, and for one bad King before, they have four and twenty worse.

But England (like old Rome) cannot long endure more Kings then one: great
faction and deadly feud arose between the chiefest of them; which the rest
taking into consideration, and perceiving that by so many heads, not only
Monarchy was dissolved, but faction and debate every day increased upon them,
so wrought that all, but five, agreed that the foresaid Ordinance should be
repealed, and the King restored to his pristine power. Matthew. Westminster. Preaching
that Religion could never be thoroughly reformed, or the differe^es fully
compeled, sine gladio (...), and that all that (...) lose their lives in this
cause were Martyrs. (...).


But those five Members stiffly oppose this agreement, and for the maintenance
of their cause, trahunt multos pseudoprophetas, lupos, in ovium vestimentis,
qui contra Christi Vicarios, and Christum Domini Regem ipsum murmurant, non ut
Spiritus Sanctus eloqui; sed ut superioris potestatis contemptores obloqui
dabant: they drew to their side many lying Ministers, (Wolves in sheeps
clothing) who murmr and speak evil against the Lords Anointed, not as the
Holy Spirit gave them utterance, bu^ as the despisers of dignities gave them
their lessons.

These Incendiaries by their sheeps clothing (a fair conversation) drew the
people every where to side with them against the King, and those that wish the
King his former power. Which the King perceiving, and how the multitude grew
every day more and more tumultuous, Chron. Dunst.
(for all things were now ca^^^ed by tumults) was advised by his Privy
Council, to withdraw himself (least His person might be endangered) from the
Parliament (then held at Westminster) to His Castle at Windesor.

After some contestation at this distance, it was agreed upon by the King and
his adherents, and the five Members and their adherents, that the difference
should be referred to the French Kings arbitrament. Rishanger.
The King of France upon the day of hearing, gave sentence that the said
Ordinance, whereby the King was deprived of his regal power, should be made
null.

The five Members and their accomplices seeing this, (notwithstanding they had
bound themselves by oath to stand to his award) flew off, and resolving to have
their own wills, drew into arms, made choice of the Earl of Leicester for
their General, and (for their own private interest, pretending the public
good) drew the greatest part of the Kingdom after them, ( Cotton.
so easy it is to draw the fickle multitude to the wrong side) crying every
where at first, Liberty and Religion, though toward the end of the war not a
word of either.

Hollinsh.
By their fair pretenses, they gained so far upon the Londoners, that they
generally enter into a Covenant to assist the Earl: For which purpose (besides
a new Major or Bailiffe) they chose two Commanders, Thomas Pywelsden and
Stephen Buckerell, at whose command, by the tolling of St. Paul's great bell,
they were to be in Arms upon any occasion. Their first exploit was a march to
Isleworth in a tumultuous manner, where they plundered and fired the Kings
brothers Mannour-house.

The Earls Army by this time on their march, plundered all that were
disaffected to their cause and proceedings, and imprisoned them: Rishanger.
Especially those that stood any way affected to the Queen: for they all (but
most of all the Londoners) were most maliciously bent against her; insomuch
that as she was passing the Thames near the Bridge, For dissuading the King to
stand to the foresaid Ordinance of Parliament.
a rude rabble of the City got together on the Bridge, and with confused
yellings cried, Drown the witch, etc. and by throwing dirt and stones at her,
drove her back: which impious affront was punctually remembered in the first
fight; as you shall hear anon:

Rishanger.
Besides this main army under the Earl of Leicester, they had another army
under the command of the Lord Ferrers (of whom descended the late Lord of
Essex) who behaved himself insolently toward the King, in destroying his
Parks as he marched, etc. which in the conclusion cost him dear; yet to delude
the people, the main Army bore before them the Kings Arms: And to show they
were for the King, when they had displaced the old Governors of the Kings
Castles and Forts, and placed in such as they could confide in, they gave them
an Oath to be true to the King, and to keep those holds to the use and benefit
of the King and State: yet when the King demanded entrance at one of his Forts,
Dover. Chron. Dunstan.
wherein they had placed a Governor, he was kept out.

At Sea, the Barons of the Cinque Ports seized the Kings Ships, took great
Prizes, but they that sat at Stern upon Land shared in those Prizes, as the
fame then went.

By this time the King began to rouse himself, and finding nothing now left
him, but a good Cause and the hearts of his wiser Subjects, yet by that, and
these, and the assistance of his Brother Richard, King of the Romans, in a
short space he had raised a considerable Army. (A King can never be so down,
but he will rise again) with these he marched (and like a snow-ball increased
by motion) plundering the Rebels lands as he went to Northampton, which was
fortified against him by some of the chiefest of the Rebels; yet by a furious
assault he soon gained it.

Thence continuing his march into Sussex, near Jews, he received a Message
from the Earl, the tenor whereof was, That as for his Majesty they intended
no harm against him, but only desired that he would remove his evil
Counselors that did advise his Majesty against them, against the honor of the
King, and welfare of the Kingdom. The King in his Answer charges them with
Rebellion and disloyalty, and commands them to lay down their arms and to
return to their obedience, that they might be received to mercy: but the Earl
rejecting the offer ( Cambdens observation in the case of Robert Earl of Essex.
when Subjects have once broken their fealty and trust to their Sovereign, they
never dare trust their Sovereign again) resolves to give the King battle.

Near Jews both armies meet: One wing of the Earls Army was made up of London
Troops, which the Prince being then General of the Kings horse, observing,
Equites haec haec seditionum seclerumque omnium capita sunt, nunc nunc fortiter
adjicite tela.
and remembering (not without indignation) the abuse offered by the Londoners to
the Queen his Mother, he clapped spurs to his horse, and all his Cavalrie after
him, crying, [ Here, here, (my brave Cavaliers) are the main contrivers of all
rebellions and mischief; Now, now, if ever charge home,] and so fell on with
that fury, that they presently fly: the Prince in an eager and hot pursuit
does great execution upon them for four miles. But this prosperous beginning of
the fight on the Kings side was the utter overthrow of the Kings forces: for
when the Earl perceived that the Prince (a young fiery spirit) with all the
Kings horse was gone so far in pursuit of the Londoners, he fell violently on
the Kings foot, and soon routed them; took the King, (his horse being slain
under him) prisoner. The Prince at length retreating (when he saw all lost)
surrendered himself. There were taken in this fight (besides those royal
prisoners, the King, the Prince, the Kings brother and his eldest Son) above
twenty Noblemen that were for the King; and slain about Southwell.
3400.

Rishanger.
The Earl having thus gotten a complete victory, forthwith endeavors to seize
all the Militia, and power of the Kingdom, for which end he carries the King
about with him to countenance his actions; but the rest of the royal Prisoners
he disposes in several garrisons.

And now the Earl believes all his own, and the people dream of nothing but
Peace, but alas the war was not begun till now: For when the torn remainder
of the Loyal army that escaped at L^wes, now keeping garrison in Bristow, and
other noble spirits saw how insolently the Earl dealt with his and their
Sovereign in barring him of his liberty, etc. They soon raised a considerable
power under the command of Roger Mortimer Earl of March: unto whom many flockt
out of Shropshire, Cheshire, Herefordshire, and Worcester, that were well
affected to the King.

Moreover the Queen (who was a French woman) got over beyond sea, to try her
friends for their assistance to restore her Husband to his former liberty and
authority, Quod ad laudem and magnificentiam Aelionora Anglorum Reginae libet
intexere (says one of that Age) quod Domino suo, and Edvardo filio tam strenue
and tam viriliter tanquam virago potentissima succurrendis fortiter insudaverit.

But before these forces were well united, the Rebels forces were as well
divided: for debate arising (as is usual in all confederations, where all
parties must be pleased, or else the knot will dissolve) between his Excellency
the Earl of Leicester, and the Earl of Gloucester, because his Excellency,
minding his own private, more then the public good of his fellow Rebels,
(without any respect had to his adjutants) ingrosses all to himself, disposes
of the Royal prisoners at his own pleasure, seized on the revenues of the
Crown, and composition of Delinquents for his own use, (whereas they had
privately agreed before, Ea omnia aqua sort inter eos dividenda fore). In
brief he shared all places of power and profit between himself, his sons,
and his allies. Whereat Gloucester (as good a man as he) stomackt and fell off
with his followers to the Prince, who by this time ( disponente domino
clavigero carcerum, every thing working for the King) had made his escape out
of prison at Hereford: (for being allowed by his keepers to air himself
sometimes on horse back in the town meadow, after he had tired two or three, at
length he mounts a special fleet Nag, and putting spurs custodibus valedixit)
and came safe to Wigmore Castle, where the Lord Mortimer lay with his forces
raised for the King, so marched on with a great power, taking in (as they went)
some strong garrisons of the rebels, plundered their houses, drove their
cattle, etc.

Here the war grew hot, each side fortifying towns and houses, plundering and
driving all round about to store the garrisons: Men's houses (which were wont to
be their own castles) were now made castles, but the owners were least Masters;
all left to the mercy of the rude soldier, the poor Countrymans dwelling house
pillaged every where and searched, Rishanger.
usque ad lectorum stramentum, to the very bedstraw: nor only men's houses, but
even Gods houses, the very Churches were not free from the profane hands of
plunderers; the high ways lay unoccupied, no passing from town to town without
danger of robbing.

When the Prince, the Earl of Gloucester, the Earl of March, with the relics
of the royal army were united and well ordered, they resolved to give his
Excellency (the Earl of Leicester) bat^ell: At Evesham in Worcestershire by a
speedy and unexpected march, they came upon him. The Earl seeing himself
engaged to fight, gave order that his own coat armor should be put upon the
King, who was then a prisoner in the Army, and that the King (for the safety of
his person forsooth) should be placed in the front of the battle, that so if
the battle went against him, the King might be aimed at as General, and his
Excellency thereby make his escape. But the King at first charge called out to
the loyal army, that he was their King, and so was preserved; yet not without
the loss of some of his own, (being wounded by a javelin) as well as his
subjects blood: the battle was very violent, and went sore against the Rebels;
at length the Earl himself (the head of this Rebellion) was cut off; at the
instant of whose death, there happened such extraordinary lightening, thunder,
and thick darkness, that it struck a general horror and amazement into the
hearts of the Rebels, as if the King of Kings would now at last visibly revenge
the Kings quarrel, or as if they had seen Gods immediate hand against them, as
once against Corah, and the 250. Assembly men, Numb. 16. v. 35. for the like
rebellious practices.

In this signal Battle were slain, besides the Earl and his son) sixteen
Lords and Knights, and about ten thousand more of the Rebels part.

The Earls Corpse was strangely (though not undeservedly) handled by the
people, who were so enraged against him, the chief actour and author of their
so much mischief and misery, that (in despite of him) they lopt off his head,
hands, feet, and privy members, and sent them (in scorn) for tokens to
several places; his body was buried in Evesham Church. Notwithstanding this,
there were many ignorant people (who had been by specious pretenses abused, and
seduced to that side) that were of opinion for a long time after, that he died
a Martyr, because it was in defense of their holy (as they thought, but indeed
impious) Covenant and Oath.

Two of the Earls sons were at the same fight taken Prisoners: not long
after they made an escape out of Prison, but could not escape Gods vengeance on
Rebels; for in France, In miseriis dies suos finiverunt.

The Countess, being banished, died a Nun in France* All the Earls Honors
and Possessions were conferred upon Edmond Earl of Lancaster the Kings second
son. And thus ended this great fiery Meteor in a stench. Thus fell ou^ English
Catalin^, (as M. Cambden styles him) a man in show fair and honest, but
indeed, Vir pravo ingenio and profunda perfidia: of a perverse disposition, and
treacherous beyond any man's suspicion; after his Sovereign had heaped upon him
many high favors, as the Earledom of Leicester, and that high and honorable
office of Lord high Steward, and (to endear him the more) had given him his own
Sister in marriage: In token of thankfulness, he does his utmost endeavor to
diminish the Kings known authority, to subject him to the wills of his
Subjects, to pull down Monarchical government, and set up a factious
Oligarchy, and all under that fair common pretense of restoring Religion to
its purity, and the People to their Liberty.

The King thus happily preserved, and almost miraculously (all things
considered) set at liberty; about a Month after calls a Parliament at
Winchester, (no more at London, until it was more loyal, Fabian.
and less tumultuous) where by a full Convention it was enacted. That all
Statutes and Ordinances made by the former Parliament (called the wood or mad
Parliament) should be repealed, and all writings and bonds then sealed by the
King for observing the sam^, should be cancelled and made void. That the City
of London, ob suam Rebellionem, Rishanger.
for this her Rebellion should be deprived of all her ancient Privileges and
Liberties, and the Ringleaders of them, juxta voluntatem ipsius Regis plecti,
to suffer such punishment as his Majesty was pleased to inflict: Et ditiores
Civitatis in carcerem truderentur ( says Matthew. Westminster.) Pro eo quod Simoni, in
Regis contemptum, and etiam damnum Regni, fortiter adhaeserint: that the
wealthier Citizens should be cast in prison, because they had in contempt of
his Majesty, and great damage and mischief of the Realm assisted the Earl.
Furthermore it was there enacted that all such as had favored the Rebels (were
they now in prison, or at large) should forfeit all their estates.

Afterward the King marched with a great power to Windesore. resolving (as the
fame then went) to destroy the whole City of London: Many of the Rabble and
wild Commoners (says Fabian) were as resolved to defend the City against him:
but the wiser sort thought better to become humble petitioners for their pardon
of what was past, then to incense his Majesty any farther; and to that end,
drew up an humble Petition, and presented it to the King: but their late
rebellious carriage had so far provoked his Majesty's patience, that he would
not so much as admit of their Petition, or hearken to any that endeavored to
mediate for them.

Hereupon they were advised to draw up an Instrument or writing, whereby they
should yield themselves wholly, both bodies and goods to the Kings mercy, which
was done accordingly, and sealed with the Common Seal of the City.

His Majesty upon earnest suit unto him, accepted hereof, giving present
express command, that all the Chains and Posts which they had placed at every
street and lanes end, should be forthwith carried to the Tower, and that the
Mayor and forty of the chief Citizens should repair unto him the next day,
and confirm their said writing: this was done, and they all came accordingly;
but (contrary to their expectation, though not deserts) were all delivered into
the custody of the Constable of Windesore Castle, and shut up there in a large
Tower, where they had small cheer, and worse lodging. The next day toward
night, all (but five, whereof the Mayor was one) had their enlargement* Those
five, their bodies and goods, were as a boon bestowed on the Prince, the rest
were commanded to attend at Windesore for a long time after.

Sixty or seventy wealthy Citizens with all their Lands, goods; and Chattels,
did the King dispose to his household servants.

For the Government of this unruly City, the King appointed one Othon a
forreiner, or stranger, first Constable of the Tower, and then Custos, or
Warden of the City, to pull down their haughty rebellious spirits, and that
his Peace for the future might be surely kept, he required the best men's sons
in the City for Hostages. These he clapped up in the Tower, and caused them to be
there kept at the cost and charges of their Parents.

Daily suit was made unto his Majesty for his Pardon and favor, but in vain:
then they petition the King to know his gracious pleasure, what Fine he would
demand of the whole City, for their offenses against him. The King at length
signified unto them that the sum of fifty thousand Marks should be their
Fine. Whereto the Londoners return this humble answer. They had been of late,
by this unhappie War, so exceedingly impoverished, that a sum so great (as it
was in those times) could not possibly be raised amongst them; wherefore they
humbly beseeched his Princely compassion might be so far extended toward
them, as to require, and accept according to their abilities. At length, after
much suit and submission, and a fine of twenty thousand Marks, the King
received them to mercy, and sent them under his great Seal a general Pardon
(those only excepted, whose estates were already bestowed) granting and
allowing that their former Charter, and ancient Privileges should be restored
unto them, notwithstanding all the transgressions (they are the words of the
Pardon) and trespasses done to Us, to our Queen, to our noble brother, Richard
King of Almaine and the Prince, our first begotten son.

And here was the first pacification betwixt the King and the Londoners, for
whom we may say thus much, That their foul Rebellion against their Sovereign
was not more detestable, then their humble submission to their Sovereign was
commendable. And therefore in the Ordinance, called Dictum de Kenelworth, made
for the settling of the Kingdom, we find them (notwithstanding, all their
disloyalty) commended, as shall be seen in the ensuing Story.

After the proud stomach of this City was brought down, and all tumultuous
spirits quelled, the King calls his Parliament ( in festo Sancti Edvardi Regis)
to Westminster, wherein those that aided and assisted the Earl were all
(excepting the Londoners) attainted, and that all their Lands and goods were
forfeited.

But this Sentence (though it was less then they deserved) yet was more then
they would endure, and therefore the fire (that was not yet quenched, but
smothered) breaks forth again. Some fly into the Isle of Ely, and fortify
that. Some into the Isle of Axholme in Lincolnshire. Another party possess
themselves of Killingworth Castle. Another, under the command of the Lord
Ferrers, in the Northern parts. And amongst others, one Adam Gurdon lived as
an Outlaw in Hampshire; Rishanger.
tum rarus aut nullus locus in Anglia fuit tutus, eo quod terra erat
vespilionibus plena: Now scarce any place in England was free from plunderers.

To reduce these to obedience, the King undertakes Killingworth Castle. The
Prince was sent against Adam Gurdon. Lord Edmond the Prince's brother against
those in Axholme; And Lord Henry the King of Almaines son, against the Lord
This Lord Henry, the Kings Nephew, was a valiant Soldier, and having found out
the Lord Ferrers at Chesterfield, gave him battle, and overthrew him, and
because he had been pardoned once before, it was decreed that he should be
degraded, and deprived of his Earldom for ever, and fined fifty thousand
pounds.
Ferrers.

To the Rebels in Killingworth Castle the King sent first a gracious message,
willing them to desist, and to return to their obedience. But they, contrary
to all Law of Arms, contrary to natural civilitie, cut off the Messengers
hand, and sent him back with an uncivil answer. Then the King marched to
Killingworth, and sat down before it upon Midsummer Eve. During the siege
(which lasted six Months) Clerus and populus convocantur, and duod^^im
eliguntur de potentioribus Procerum, and prudentioribus Pralatorum, quibus
datur potestas ordinandi super Statutum exharedatorum, etc. The Clergy and
Laity are assembled, and out of the chiefest of the Peerage, and wisest of the
Prelates, were chosen twelve, to whom power was given to pronounce sentence
against the Rebels, and to settle the peace of the Kingdom; they, first taking
an oath, de utilibus ordinandis, to decree nothing, but what should be for the
good of the Commonweal.

Then the people take a solemn oath, Quod dictum ipsorum inviolabiliter
observarent; that they would stand to their Decree, which to this day, by our
Lawyers is called, Dictum de Kenelworth; a severe, yet a good and wholesome
course (without effusion of blood) to punish Rebellious Subjects.

The Decree was as follows.

Dictum de Kenelworth.
In nomine sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, Amen. Ad honorem and gloriam
Omnipotentis Dei Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, etc. Et ad honorem and
bonum prosperum and pacificum statum Christianissimi Principis Domini Henrici
Regis Angliae illustris, and totius Angliae Ecclesiae, Nos Willihelmus, etc. In
English thus.

In the name of the holy and individual Trinity Amen. For the honor and
glory of Almighty God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. And for the
honor, prosperity, and peace of the most Christian Prince, our Sovereign
Lord Henry the most renowned King of England, and of the whole Church of
England; We William Exon, William Bath and Wells, Henry Worcester, and T. St.
David's Bishops. Gilbert de Clare E. of Gloucester, Humphrey Earl of Hereford,
Philip Basset, John Bailof, Robert Wallop, Alan de la Souch, Roger de Somerie,
and Warren de Basingborn, providing for the welfare of the Land, etc. have
thought fit to order as follows.

1. That the Rebels be not wholly deprived of their estates, but shall have
liberty to redeem their lands by fines, in manner following.

1. That those that were in the fight at Chesterfield, against our Sovereign
Lord the King.

Item, All those that by force of Arms impiously kept Northampton against the
King.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Jews.

Item, Those that were taken prisoners at Kenelworth.

Item, Those that came to pillage Winchester, or were elsewhere against the
King, whom the King has not pardoned.

Item, Those that gave the King battle at Evesham.

Item, All those that freely, and voluntarily, and without any compulsion, have
contributed to the War against the King or Prince.

Item, The Officers and servants of the Earl of Leicester, that pillaged their
neighbors, or were the cause of any murders, firings, or other enormities;
that all these be fined five years revenues of all their Estates,
respectively; and that if they pay down their Fines presently, they may enjoy
their Lands presently: but if the Land must be sold for the payment of the
Fine, he, on whom the King bestowed it, shall have the refusal, if he will
give as much as any other. And if the original owner will pay down the whole
Fine, he shall have the whole Land; and likewise, if he will pay the moity or
third part, he shall have the moity, or thirds of the Land. And if at the end
and term appointed, the owner does not pay for the other moity, it shall be
clearly theirs on whom the King was pleased to bestow it.

And as soon as any one has paid down his whole Fine, such shall have liberty
to let, or set, or sell his land within the prefixed time.

Those that have woods, and would willingly make sale of them for the payment
of their Fines; He on whom the King bestowed, and the original owner shall
have each one his Bailiffe to see it sold: and those two Bailiffes shall (as
fast as the money is made) pay it to whom the Fine was given by our Sovereign
Lord the King: this payment must be made within three years at the farthest.

All Officers and Reformadoes that were known to be common plunderers, and
made it their business to plunder, if such have no lands, but only goods;
they shall be fined one moity of all their goods, and shall find sufficient
sureties, that they shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King for
the time to come. They that have nothing, shall be sworn upon the holy Gospel*
and find sufficient sureties, that they will keep the Kings peace for the time
forward, and shall make such satisfaction, and do such penance, as the holy
Church shall censure, excepting only banished persons, who are wholly left to
the will and pleasure of the King.

2. Moreover, as for Wards, or young Heirs (that were in actual Rebellion
against the King during their minority) their Guardians shall pay their Fines,
and the said Wards (when they come to age) shall pay back the same to their
Guardians within two or three years, so that the Guardians shall have the
Wardship and their marriages (without disparagement) even till they be come to
full age, and all Wards shall pay their fines after the same manner as those of
full age. Only the Kings own Wards shall be in the hands of those, to whom
the King shall give them until they come to years, and then they shall pay
down their Fines according to the same manner as those of full years;
Provided always that there be no waste made by the Guardians upon their
estates; If their be, then the Guardians to be punished according to Law.

3 If any that were for the King before, and since the battle at Jews, be now
fined for not assisting the Prince (when he was raising forces to rescue his
Father,) we leave him to the King to be censured or pardoned, as he shall
think fit.

4. That there be no sale or waste made of any woods by those on whom they were
bestowed, unless the Fine be not paid within the time limited. Only it is
allowed that they shall cut so much wood as is necessary to keep the houses in
reparations; and if they shall exceed this allowance, to be severely punished.

5. If any be thought to be dangerous persons, and that they are like to move
sedition, and to revive the wars; let the King secure their persons as he shall
think fit, either by sending them into foreign parts for a time, or what
other way shall be thought expedient; provided always, that if they be thereby
hindered from paying their Fines, they shall not forfet their estates.

6. That if any will not submit to this Ordinance, he be left to be censured at
the Kings-bench-bar, before the feast of St. Hillary next coming. All those
that live in foreign parts shall find sureties, (according to the Laws and
customs of those States) to live peaceably, otherwise that they shall not be
received in a peaceable manner.

7. Whereas the Kings Majesty is engaged to many that served him in his wars,
and faithfully stuck to him, whom he has not yet sufficiently rewarded, and
some have been rewarded above their deserts, we desire that the King take
special care, that out of Delinquents estates they may be all rewarded to the
full, lest otherwise a new war should be occasioned.

8. That the Kings Majesty be graciously pleased to make choice of twelve able
men that may be authorized to see this punctually and faithfully performed, and
that the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors take care that it be all
firmly observed and maintained, and to enquire into, and regulate, and see
duly executed, what shall be by the said twelve men ordered according to
reason and equity.

9. That all Farmers and Renters of Lands that were against the King, shall
lose their Farms for all the term or time of their leases that are to come,
(provided that the Landlords be no way endamaged) and when the term of their
Leases are out, then to return to the Landlords again.

10. As for Castles and Forts built by the Kings grant and allowance, upon any
Delinquents ground, contrary to the will of the said delinquent; We decree that
(after the owner of that land has paid his fine, which must be within three
years) for six years more the owner of that Land shall pay such custom as
was imposed by the King, or else accept of a reasonable exchange for the said
Land.

11. All Laymen who notoriously advanced the Earls designs, and assisted him
or his adherents, Attrahendo homines per mendacia and falsitates parti Comitis
and suorum, and detrahendo parti Regis and filii sui, by drawing people through
lies and falsities either to the Earl and his party, or from the King and his
party, it is ordained that they be fined as much as two years revenewes of
all their estates.

12. That all such as were pressed, or out of fear went to the Wars, but never
fought against the King, or did any mischief; also those that being not able
to go themselves, yet by force or fear were compelled to contribute toward
the Armies against the King or the Prince; also that those that were enforced
to be plunderers, or to aid and assist any plunder-masters, and yet did
return to their habitations as soon as conveniently they could, be all left In
misericordia Domini Regis.

13. That all those that wittingly bought any plundered goods, restore the value
of the goods, and be In misericordia Domini Regis; because they thereby have
offended against the Law, and done contrary to the Kings express command, set
for half a year before.

14. That all those that at the Earls command went into Northampton, yet never
gave the Rebels their assistance, or made any resistance, but as soon as they
perceived the King coming, took Sanctuary (provided that this be attested by
the oaths of good and lawful men) likewise that those that owed no suite or
service to the Earl, and yet came upon his command, be all fined half a years
revenue of every one respectively; but those that held of the Earl in Fee, let
them be only In Misericordia Domini Regis.

15 That impotent silly people, and all such as did no mischief, may enjoy
their Estates as formerly, and recover damages at the Kings Bench, against
those that shall wrong them.

16. That those that accuse any of their fellow subjects out of malice, be
punished at the Kings pleasure, and that his Majesty thence forward do not
easily give credit unto them. And we judge that they deserve the same
punishment as the accused, if the accusation were true, provided that they
loose not life, limb, or estate.

17. That all such as are accused upon mere malice, may still enjoy their
estates, and recover damage against their accusers in the Kings Bench, as
above said.

18 That all women enjoy their own inheritances and dowries. But those lands
that came by their husbands, who have been against the King, shall be redeemed
by a fine, according as his Majesty shall impose upon them, etc.

19 That all such as are acquitted (so it be by those that have authority to
acquit them) remain and stand in such a condition as they are put into; and
that all that have paid their fines, shall not be responsable for damages and
trespasses committed by them upon those, against whom they fought in the time
of the late troubles, but that all damages and trespasses be forgiven on both
sides, provided that the Church may have her dues.

20. That because it may be of dangerous consequence, that any Castles should
remain in the power of those, who were in actual Rebellion against the King,
we therefore decree, and ordain, that for the Castles of Hardley, Bytham, and
Chertley, there be given a reasonable exchange.

21 As for the Earl Simon Monfort his Countess, and his sons, we decree
nothing, because our Sovereign Lord the King has referred them, and their
offenses to the King of France.

22 As for the City of London (taking notice, it seems, of their humble
submission) we commend it, and do make this motion to our Sovereign Lord the
King, that by the advice of his Privy Council, he take order for reforming the
state of the City, and settle their Lands, Revenues, Buildings, and Liberties,
and that this Order be presently debated.

23 For the Lord Ferrers, we decree that he be fined seven years revenues of
all his estate.

24 That all that now keep Killingworth Castle be pardoned, except Henry
Hastings, and those that had any hand in cutting off the Kings Messengers hand,
all which shall be fined seven years revenues of all their estates, or else
submit themselves to the Kings mercy.

25 That all men whatsoever endeavor to keep the peace of the Kingdom, that
none presume to commit any outrages, firings, murders, robberies, or by any
other means break the Peace. Which if any shall be so hardy as not to observe,
and be thereof lawfully convicted, let him have sentence according to the Laws
of the Land.

26 Item, that all whom it may concern, take their oaths upon the holy Gospel
of God, that they will never take any revenge, be accessory, or consenting to
take any revenge, nor will suffer (as much as in them lies) that any revenge
should be taken against any one for any injury suffered in the late times of
trouble, and if any one shall presume to revenge himself, we decree that
punishment be inflicted upon him in the Kings Bench Court.

27 That the Holy Church receive full satisfaction from those that have injured
her.

28 But if there be any that will not submit to this Ordinance, or refuse to be
tried by their Peers before our Sovereign Lord the King, let them forfeit
their estates for ever. And if there be any that have gotten possession of the
Rebels Lands, and were himself a Rebel, he is thereby incapable of challenging
any right to the Land, or to have any title to the fine by the Kings Majesty's
gift.

29 Whosoever will not submit to this Ordinance, let him be accounted a professed
enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, and to his Sons, and to the whole Realm,
and let all the Laity and Clergy (as far as the Canon Laws and Common Laws
will reach) prosecute such an one as an enemy to the peace of Church and State.

30 Lastly* that all those that are imprisoned, or any way debarred of their
Liberty, upon reasonable and competent security shall have their enlargement,
by putting in Sureties, or such other way as the King has allowed.

Dated, and set forth from the Camp before Kenelworth, the last day of
September, in the year of our Lord God 1266. and of the Reign of the most
renowned King HENRY Third, 51.
Thus ends that Famous Ordinance called to this day About the end of October
the King assembled all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Knights of
Shires, to Northampton, where this decree was confirmed by Act of Parliament.
Dictum de Kenelworth; wherein are comprised the wisest rules, that the wisest
men of those times could possibly devise, to uphold, compose, and recover a
tottering, distracted, dying Kingdom.

The Barons of Cinque Ports seeing the King prosper, made their peace with the
King.
About two Months after the publication of this Ordinance, viz. upon Saint
Thomas Eve, the Castle was delivered up, upon conditions (too good for those
that had so barbarously used the Kings Messenger, contemned the King, and
impoverished the country) to march away with their goods, and to undergo no
fine for taking up Arms.

This Castle had the King bestowed upon the Earl of Leicester, in frank
marriage with his sister Elionor; but when the Earl by his Rebellon had
forfeited, and the King had now won it, he gave it to his own Son, Edmund
Earl of Lancaster, who by this time had reduced the Isle of Axholme, and all
those rude ignorant people, that flockt thither, pillaging and plundering the
Kings friends round about.

The Prince also met with Adam Gurdon, a famous sturdy Rebel, that lay lurking
in Aulton Wood in Hampshire, robbing and spoiling the adjacent parts, Pracipue
terras little qui parti Regiae adhaerebant; Rishanger.
the Prince upon his approach, hearing of his valor, sent him a Challenge for
a single Combat. Gurdon accepts it, and performed it so gallantly, that the
Prince assured him of his life and estate, if he would submit: which he did,
and was received into great favor with the Prince; but diverse of his men were
there executed.

But now the Isle of Ely was strongly fortified by a great multitude got
together, that refused to submit to the Ordinance of Kenelworth. Upon the
natural strength of this Isle, and the plenty of all provision therein,
seditious Rebels have often presumed, and from hence have molested more Kings
then one, as they did now the neighboring Counties, robbing, and pillaging
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, plundering the City of Norwich, and
carrying away the richest Citizens, made them redeem themselves: at length a
message was sent unto them, requiring them to submit to the Ordinance of
Killingworth, to leave off robbing their fellow subjects, and to return to
their alleigeance: Hereto they return this insolent answer, that they had taken
up arms to defend the good of Church and State, and therefore ought to be
restored to their lands without paying any fine. In brief they require
hostages into the Island, and that they might hold it five years peaceably,
till they saw how the King would perform his promises, (perfidious subjects
ever suspect their Princes fidelity) which high insolency of theirs (unheard of
till our times) so exasperates the King, that he resolves to try the utmost to
reduce them to their obedience; for that purpose marches with a mighty Army
against them, the Prince also joins with a considerable power; after many
assaults, at length (after they had held it above two years) by the help of
new made bridges and boats, they stormed it on every side that they were
forced to yield.

And now men thought that the fire was quite out. But there were yet some live
embers (which the Earl of Gloucester upon some distaste blowing) suddenly
flamed out again in London, where the Commons of the City forgetting their late
punishment, and as men (says mine author) without dread of God or the King:
drew up in Arms again, flock't to the Earl of Gloucester, Fabian.
plundered the well-affected to the King, sequestered their estates, brake the
Prisons, chose a new Mayor and Sheriffs, made Bulwarks and Barbicans, and
forfeited the City wonderously, and were so confident of their strength and
cause, that they durst bid the King battle, appointing Hou^sloe-heath for the
field.

The King by a speedy march came to the place at the time appointed; but they
instead of meeting his Majesty, ran about the City in a tumultuous manner.
Some to Westminster, and there plundered the Kings Palace, fenestras and ostia
fregerunt, (says Mat. Westminster.) vix manus a combustion^ totius Palatii
cohibentes; brake the doors and windows, hardly forbearing to set it all on
fire.

Then the King removed his camp to the other side of the City, and had his
headquarters at Straisord, three miles off the City, the rest of his Army lay
at Ham, a village hard by. The wiser Citizens foreseeing the danger that hung
over them, desired a treaty with the King, whereunto (though they were most
unworthy of so much clemency) His Majesty was graciously pleased to condescend,
and upon these easy terms they were vain received to mercy.

Imprimis, Salvo in omnibus aicto Killingworthi, that the ordinance of
Killingworth should be observed in all points; then that the fortifications
should be razed, and the trenches filled up; lastly, that 1000. Marks damages
should be paid down to the Kings brother, for his Manor of Isleworth, fi^^d
by them long before.

Also his Majesty for some years following cho^^ the Mayor and Sheriffs
himself: but toward the latter end of his Reign, being fully reconciled, he
restored them their (often forfeited) Then did the King, command, that Peace
should be proclaimed all the Kingdom over, which was received with joyful
acclamations.
Privileges.

Thus after the Almighty (whose judgments are unsearchable) had suffered
crafty seditious spirits to seduce a whole Nation, to trample upon his
Anointed, and to tread his Honor in the very dust for a time, yet at length,
all his enemies are clothed with shame, and upon himself his Crown flourishes
again.

And now after this furious dreadful Tempest, after so many storms and showers
of blood, began a joyful long-expected Calm, which that they might enjoy
without any intervening of more storms, and for the better settling and
quieting the Kingdom, the King gives express command for the razing of diverse
inland Castles; as Farnham, etc. That so if another Rebellion should be
begotten, it might no where find a Nurse, and then it could not be long lived.

Also, for the more quiet and secure traveling of his Subjects, he appoints a
Captain in every County, who with a Troop of Horse should always assist the
Sheriff, for the taking and punishing all straggling relics of the late
Armies, and highway robbers, wherewith the Kingdom did abound at that time, no
place free from them. In some places also, Ruricolae (says Rishanger) the
Country people would generally rise against them (as against Wolves or
Bears;) and at one time, they took and killed fifty of them, that were got
together near St. Albans in Hartfordshire.

Besides, the King Proclamari fecit contra pacem regni disturbantes, set forth
a Proclamation against all such as should any way disturb the quiet of the
Realm, by plundering or stealing, etc. And that if any man should presume to
steal but a Cow or a Sheep, vel aliquid aliud (says mine Author) he should
surely be put to death.

These were the petty devises of that Age, to pump and draine the huge sink of
the Kingdom, but the Staple Policy was, by a Foreign expedition (like a wide
^uce) to let out all the filth at once: for which purpose therefore (among
others) it was resolved upon, that a great Army should be raised under the
Command of the Prince, for a voyage to Palestine. And by this course especially
did his Majesty soon spend the insolences of his own, and the Rebels
Soldiers, So at a late Diet, or Parliament in Germany (after they had
undutifully strived with the Emperor, and wasted the Empire) it was concluded,
That all should be reduced to the same state as it was in the year 1618.
made Lawless by the late unavoidable Liberty of Civil Arms.

And here was an end of this wasting, groundless, unnatural War, wherein the
Subject having struggled and wrestled with Soveraigntie, till they had wasted
the Kingdom, and wearied themselves, at last are content to sit down by the
loss, to let the King have his own Rights again, and some of theirs, according
to the usual event and issue of such imbroylements.

A Postscript.
OUt of this brief Narration may be extracted somewhat for KING and Commons.

For the KING.

First, for preventing Seditions and Rebellions; then for settling a Kingdom
after the Rebellion suppressed.

For the first; That he beware how he entrust the Government of His Kingdom
to others. How he suffer His Favorites, and great Officers of State, to suck
him into necessities, and inthrall Him by indigency, and be thereby drawn, by
extraordinary illegal Impositions and Taxes, to vex and alienate the hearts
and affections of His Subjects, and then (as he must) be constrained to fly to
them for relief and counsel in Parliament; where (he may then be sure) he
must be Subject to his Subjects, and they will be kings over their King: where
He must be content to be less then he should be, and the Subject will be
more: where (he may be sure) they will make advantage of his necessity, and He
must undergo many hard censures, and be vexed with undutifull demands, before
they will relieve him. But whether they part with their money or not, let the
King take heed of ever parting with his Power.

Then after the heat and heart of a Rebellion be broken, not to be severe
against any, lest the rest grow desperate. Severity may blow up, never blow out
the flames of Rebellion.

Yet to show some acts of Justice and power as well as grace and mercy; not to
use the extremity of Justice, least he thereby renew the present rebellion; yet
to show some Justice to prevent a future.

By a sweet mixture of mercy and justice, the King shall at once both humble
and oblige his delinquent Subjects. By mercy, in not taking the rigor of the
Law; by Justice, in taking a part of the Law: by this, he shall humble them in
taking so much; by that, he shall oblige them in taking no more.

Next, to take special care in rewarding and cherishing, and countenancing,
and remembering (before others) all those that stuck close unto him, that by
their persons, or their purses, showed themselves really for him, and, without
all fallacy, loyal.

After this, to prepare speedily for some Foreign Expedition, wherein to
employ all the late Active Spirits, and working heads, who will quickly make
work again at home, if they have not work abroad.

Lastly, to place some one (as a Scavenger) in every County, to carry away the
dreggs that are left behind. Such as will not beyond. Sea, cannot work, and
are ashamed to beg.

For the People this.

First, that they suffer not themselves to be abused and misled into
disloyalty, by any ambitious, unquiet, cunning Spirits, upon what pretenses
soever, and when Liberty, Religion, or any public good is pretended, then
most of all to suspect their private ends.

Next, that the people never get by this course, but often loose their former
ancient Liberties and Privileges, according to that observable (though not
observed) Maxim, EVERY REBELLION SUPPRESSED MAKES THE KING MORE KING, AND THE
SUBJECT MORE SUBJECT.

Lastly, that taking Arms without Sovereign Authority, upon what pretenses
soever (be they never so fair* as for Religion, or Liberty; never so foolish,
as that it is not against the King, but for the King) is most abominable in the
eyes of God, and though it seem to prosper for a time, yet most surely and
severely is it punished in the end, ending commonly in a general
impoverishment (if not in the end) of the people, and some dreadful Judgment
upon the Contrivers.

Prove. 24. verse. 21.22.
My Son fear thou the LORD, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change?

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

FINIS.

