Certain reasons (by way of reply to some Objections generally urged and in
more particular to a paper styled the case of JOHN GIFFORD Gentleman, presented
to the Members of Parliament) why those Iron-works in the Forest of Deane
should be in honor and justice of the House, speedily demolisht, tendered by
the preservators of the said Forest of Deane.
1.IT is very remarkable that this Parliament in the first Remonstrance of the
grievances of this Nation, Dec. 15. 1641. amongst many others, did insist upon
this with much resentment that there was a general destruction of the Kings
timber, especially that of the Forest of Deane, sold to Papists, which they
then declared to be the best Storehouse in this Kingdom for the maintenance of
Shipping. Now after nine years sitting, when it pleases God to divolve the
Power and remedy thereof into their own hands, and after much contest and
serious debate, upon contrary objections, Petitions and overtures tendered to
them, did so positively vote, that the Iron-works within the Forest of Deane
should be demolisht, to keep them standing by another vote, will seem strange
to them who with infinite satisfaction and content perused and served them in
the votes of the 1. of Jan. last past.

2. It will be construed (with all submission nevertheless to better
judgments) an act of very great injustice, that when other works which were
built upon the inheritance of private Gentlemen, and none of them (Bishops-wood
furnace only excepted) comparably so consumptive to the Forest timber, that
they should be demolished, and those which were the works of the King and Sir
John Winter (built upon the Forest ground and without all contradiction
originally intended by the votes aforementioned) kept standing only, when
nothing of reason, but pretenses and allegations are offered to the Parliament
and Committee of Revenue, as in the scaning of Captain Giffords Paper will be
showed.

3. This work has been (by our Progenitors, who were men of public spirits)
intended and drove on for these 50. years and upwards, and in the Queens and
the two last Kings reign several hopes and overtures were granted, but by the
potency of the Court faction, or some eminent interest of private persons)
always crossed. But now (having order for the positive demolition, and the work
being in so good a forwardnes of perfection) to grant new orders for the
continuance thereof, will utterly and for ever dash the hopes, and hearty
resolutions of thousands who have been as zealous for, and, proportionably to
their estates, greater sufferers for the Parliament then Captain Gifford.

4. It is visible that what the Parliament has done or shall in altering their
resolutions is in a charitable gratification to the insinuations of a private
man; now if it shall be made appear that they are pretensions rather then
real truths, it is humbly desired they may be examined, before a report of
that nature be made, or the judgment of the House abused in procurement of a
contrary order; yet whether it may be said to be charitable or honorable, to
gratify the desires of one man for his profit or gain to the apparent loss of
the State, and disadvantage of so well deserving a People, is humbly submitted.

5. The Votes of the first of Jan. last past will be rendered of no consequence;
for whereas other works already demolisht are disputable whether or no they are
comprehended within the order; for these alone to stand, which are (past
dispute) clearly meant, will so much make for the Ironmasters, that it will be
construed, they now must be kept up by order of the House, But his reasons in
his Paper being truly answered, we hope all question of this matter will be
laid aside.

The Paper holds forth to consideration several reasons contained in these
particulars.
1. FIrst he acknowledges that in all his contracts, timber was excepted, and
the greater part of what he has coald was timber, as is proved by the
Commission returned in the Exchequer, whereby he has utterly made void the
Contract; and what hopes the state may have of his future dealing, is left to
judgment.

2. He said he has two thousand pounds worth of Coal made of the Forest
wood; it is humbly entreated that may be made appear as well as said; It will
be proved that this is a notable collusion, for while he seemingly begs of the
Parliament in humillity, he seemingly begs of the Parliament in humillity, he
brags in the Country of his policy, making daily contracts for more Coal and
wood of private men, while he keeps his small remainder of the Forest stock
unspent, because he will have something to say for himself, to make his cause
seem reasonable.

3. Whereas it is alleged his stock of five thousand pound will become wholly
useless; there is a two fold answer, first he has no such stock of the state,
and therefore they are no way obliged to suffer loss for another man's
bargains, secondly the assertion is untrue, for he may have money for his Wood,
Coal or sow-Iron to make him a saver, and for his Oar and Cynders he may have
the same vent for them which the Myners themselves have, either by water or the
works, of neighbors who usually do and will buy them.

4. He seems to take care that those works (which have been proved by long
experience, to the House, to be the ruin of shipping) shall continnue after the
stock spent, whereby it must follow that either, the Informations by Commission
or otherwise given to the Parliament have been false, or else the Votes of the
House were so ill grounded that they must, for his sake, admit of a
contradiction, and for the prizes of Foreign iron, there are those who will
undertake to serve this Nation with as good and as cheap iron as now they
have, without consumption of their own Timber.

5, For his giving security, that is found to be of no value, for when the
Contracts have always run that timber should be excepted, yet the goodliest
Trees in Europe have fallen to make Coal, and when complaint has been made,
it is a fallacy very usual to answer, you must prove who cut them, and we do
confidently aver, that as long as the works stand, those poor Families he
seems to pity (though they are the most invenomed and bitter enemies to the
Parliament, witness the several recruits of Sir Jo. Winters Garrisons) will
destroy the timber, which he knows to be true, even while we were acting in
the Commission, and if the Cause be not taken away, it is improbable the effect
should cease: and who shall the State sue when they cannot prove who cut down
their timber.

6, But for the sadness of his condition, and his and his friends being ruined,
and made prisoners, we say that this is a mere pretense, it will be proved by
as able men as Mr. Gifford, that he has gained many a thousand pound within
these few years, and how he should for the future be a loser, when he may be
made a saver by his pretended stock, would be inquired, and it is humbly and
earnestly entreated, that the truth of this may be looked into, and those who
stand barely for the good of the State may be heard herein, as well as he who
soly intends his own profit, and in this particular does providently account
that to be his loss, which he might by this means gain, though to the damage
and dishonor of the State.

7. And to join issue with him, it is humbly referred to every individual
Member of the House, what the progress of these insinuations may effect; For
first it is humbly entreated and granted, that the works may stand till March
25. next for a year, and then for ever, as is hinted in his Paper, and then
every thing return to its old and wonted way of destruction. The wise Spaniard
that knew before 88. that there was not so goodly a plot of shipping timber in
the known world, would a little admire at the policy of this Nation, to see it
now almost destroyed upon no other account then the enriching of a few papists
and private men, who by their power and pretenses have always been able to
produce reasons to destroy that Country; the consequence and nature whereof was
so much heretofore envied by the Mortal enemies of this Nation.

8 That Mr. Gifford might lose three thousand pounds at Cyrencester would be
controverted, though not denied, but if he has gained 6. thousand in the
Forest, we believe he is not so much to be pittyed as those who having lost an
hundred thousand in those parts, did never receive that pay which he and his
son has, and yet their losses are so far from being audited or stated, that
they are out of all hopes of reparation, though their hearty affections to the
Parliament were as eminent as his. Neither is it a good argument of his
affection to them, to insist so urgently upon the standing of those works,
which his private judgment must needs inform him, is so much inconsistent
with their profit or honor.

All which we most humbly submit to the House, and every Member thereof,
praying to God that they may so providently weigh and manage this business as
may be for their own safety, and the advantage of this Commonwealth. Jo.
Berrow, Jo. Wade, John Adeane, Henry Rudge, Preservators of the said Forest.


