THE CERTIFICATE Of the Deputy Lieutenants for County of Warwick,

Of their endeavors in execution of the MILITIA, with the cheerfulness and
obedience of the Trained Bands, and number of Volunteers. Together with the
PETITION Of the Deputy Lieutenants, Captains, Officers, and Soldiers of the
Trained Bands, and Volunteers of the said County, to the RIGHT HONORABLE,
ROBERT Lord BROOK, Lord Lieutenant of the said County:

To present their thankfulness for providing the Ordinance of the MILITIA, for
the safety of this Kingdom. With the LORDS Answer thereunto.

Sabbathi 9 Iulii, 1642.

Ordered that this be forthwith Printed and published: Ioh. Brown, Cler.
Parliamentorum.

London, Printed by Luke Norton and John Field, for Edward Husbands and John
Franck. July 11. 1642.

Honorable Sir,
WE whose Names are here underwritten being Deputy Lievtenants of the County of
Warwick, and City and County of Coventry, Do in all humility certify to this
honorable House, the success of our endeavors in the execution of the
Ordinance of the Militia, which was as follows:

The county of Warwick being divided into four hundreds, the Lord Lieutenant
for the ease thereof did appoint for each hundred, at several days, in
convenient places of meeting for their view and Training; The first was at
Stratford upon Avon the thirtieth of June, where appeared 400 Volunteers well
armed, and 200 unarmed; The second and third meeting was at Warwick the first
and second of July, where appeared 650 Volunteers well armed. The fourth
meeting was at Colshill the fourth day of July, and there appeared about 800
Volunteers, almost all well armed; The fifth meeting being at Coventry for the
city and county thereof, there appeared near 800 Volunteers, most of them well
armed: So as the total number of the Volunteers amounts unto 2850. And whereas
the Trained Bands of the county of Warwick, and city and county of Coventry,
are in the whole 600. there appeared of them at several times and places
aforesaid, 550. And besides the aforesaid appearances, the Earl of Northampton
being in the county, upon a report that he would oppose the said service, at
Colshill there was a ready and affectionate appearing of about 800 horse that
accompanied the Lord Lieutenant thither, for the securing of his person, and
advancing of the cause. And in these meetings and concourse of people, we found
the most free and clear expression of their affection to the King and
Parliament, and a general approbation and consent unto this enclosed Petition.
All which we humbly recommend to this honorable House, and rest your Lordships
servants:

Coventry, July 5. 1642. Ed. Peyton. William Come. John Temple, William
Purfrey. Peter Wentworth. John Barker. Godfrey Boswell. Thomas Basnet.


To the Right Honorable, Robert Lord Brook, Lord Lieutenant of the County OF
WARWICK:
The Petition of the Deputy Lieutenants, Captains, Officers, and Soldiers of
the Trained-Bands and Volunteers of the County aforesaid.
Humbly shows,
THat as it was no small comfort, and settling to the well-affected of the whole
Kingdom, when they understood that most excellent, necessary, seasonable
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament concerning the Militia; so in special
we of this county, who did most earnestly Petition for it, do desire to come
short of none in the expression of our unfeigned thankfulness to you for the
happy accomplishment thereof; as also for their respect to us in appointing
your Lordship our Lieutenant, our request to your Lordship is, That you will
present our most humble and hearty thanks to the Parliament, signifying our
readiness to obey His Majesty's Royal Authority, and his Parliaments happy
Ordinance for the Militia, and our resolution to adhere to His Majesty and
both Houses of Parliament, to the loss of the last drop of dearest blood, in
securing in it their Persons, and advancing their designs, which maliciously
traduced by some few malignant Persons, we rest most assured tend only to the
establishment of truth and peace to us, and our posterity, for the better
securing thereof, we humbly and heartily pray this Ordinance may be continued
till by some other effectual provision the peace of this Kingdom and the
security of our Laws be established, especially by putting the power and care
of the execution thereof in such hands as the Parliament and Kingdom may
confide in, which by the late violation of the Petition of Right we have cause
to reco^mend to the Parliament, as fearing the like miscarriage for the time to
come of whatsoever good Laws we can provide, without such some way of secutity.
And we further pray, that some speedy course may be taken to remove from His
Majesty's most Sacred Person, all pestilent troublers of this Church and State;
and for such men as leave the Great Council, and lean to the Malignant party,
our most humble and earnest desires are, that they may receive such condign
and speedy punishment, (the Kingdom groaning under so long delay) as shall be
thought fit by the wisdom and justice of this Parliament. One request more,
that concerns this County, we humbly present your Lordship, that the Magazin
which lies in the City and County of Coventry may be removed and laid up in
your Lordships Castle, as the safest place of the County, with a sufficient
Guard provided by the County for the securing of it.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

The Lords Answer.
MY Lords have taken your Petition into consideration, and receive much
contentment in the good affections you have expressed, thus seasonably and
necessarily, for the good of the King and Kingdom, and for their Lordships
encouragement in the performance of their duty; For which they give you hearty
thanks: And my Lords do assure you, That (God willing) they resolve to insist
in their former deelared Resolutions for the upholding the true Religion, the
Kings authority in the highest Court, which by sundry late Declarations and
practices to abuse the people, they find so much vilified and invaded, the
Privilege of Parliament, the free course of Justice, the Laws and peace of the
Kingdom, notwithstanding any dangers and hazards that for that cause befall
them.

That for the manifestation of their good affections, and their Lordships kind
acceptance thereof, they have commanded your Petition and this answer, to be
forthwith printed and published.

FINIS.

